EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2019)27:1–688 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0404-7 MEETING ABSTRACTS Abstracts from the 51st European Society of Human Genetics Conference: Posters ©EuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics2019 June 16–19, 2018, Fiera Milano Congressi, Milan Italy Sponsorship:Publication ofthis supplement was sponsored by theEuropean Society ofHuman Genetics. All content was reviewed and approved by the ESHG Scientiﬁc Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract selections. DisclosureInformationInordertohelpreadersformtheirownjudgmentsofpotential biasinpublishedabstracts,authors are asked to declare any competing ﬁnancial interests. 1234567890();,:1234567890();,: C“Monotdriebsut”ti.oCnsonotfriubputtioonEsUaRbo1v0e0E00U.R-(T10en0t0h0o.u-spaenrdyEeuarroasr,eorcoenqsuiidvearleednt“vSailguneiﬁincaknitn”d.)peryearpercompanyareconsidered P01 Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics 22q11.2DS were tested. This study was approved by the laboratoryIRB.Allsampleswerede-identiﬁedbeforestudy. P01.01A Results:Analyticalsensitivitywas96.00%(95%CI:80.46- Internal analytical veriﬁcation of a targeted microarray- 99.28) (24/25) and speciﬁcity was 99.76%(95%CI:98.67- based cell-free DNA test for 22q11.2 deletion 99.96)(422/423)notstatisticallydifferentfromthatreported in a previous clinical validation/veriﬁcation (OR 0.12;95% F. R.Grati, L. Marcato,B. Malvestiti,S. Crippa, L.Martinoni, CI:0.01-0.97 and OR 0.54;95%CI:0.07-4.31). The speciﬁ- V. Zanatta, S.Saragozza, B.Grimi, F. Maggi,G.Simoni city must be considered a lower-bound estimate as the sampleclassiﬁed as “false positives” may be a true positive TOMA, Advanced Biomedical Assays S.p.A., Busto Arsizio, from an undiagnosed mother or affected fetus. Italy Conclusions: We have veriﬁed the internal analytical performancesofatargetedmicroarray-basedcfDNAtestfor Objectives: Laboratories are required to verify their assays 22q11.2 deletions inside the typical 3Mb region in the determining that the test is being performed correctly, even decentralized laboratory match the performance speciﬁca- if kit/software are CE-IVD marked with suitable perfor- tionofthesourcelaboratory.ThelowFPR,below0.5%,for mance speciﬁcations or a new test is implemented using a this cfDNA test expansion is critical when testing low-risk technology that is already well established in a source/ population as it highly impacts PPV. reference laboratory. This study presents the internal ana- F.R. Grati: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers lytical veriﬁcation after the implementation of 22q11.2DS bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Roche. F. cfDNAtestbyatargetedmicroarray-basedtechnologyinan Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Roche. L. Marcato: independent decentralized European laboratory. None. B. Malvestiti: None. S. Crippa: None. L. Methods: Analytical sensitivity: 25 samples with Martinoni:None.V.Zanatta:None.S.Saragozza:None. 22q11.2DSweretested(2maternalplasmaand23simulated B. Grimi: None. F. Maggi: E. Ownership Interest (stock, pregnancy samples). Deletions spanned through the A-D stock options, patent or other intellectual property); 22q11.2 LCRs, sizes ranged from 2.37 and 2.89Mb and Signiﬁcant; TOMA Advanced Biomedical Assays S.p.A. simulated fetal fractions ranged from 7 to 39%. Analytical G. Simoni: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, speciﬁcity: 423 prospectively ascertained maternal plasma patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; TOMA samples with no known diagnosis of fetal/maternal Advanced Biomedical Assays S.p.A.2 J.delPicchia P01.013C Introduction: Spontaneous loss of pregnancy before the Potential role of ACKR3/CXCR7 duplication in pregnancy fetus reaches viability is the most frequent pregnancy loss complication. The term miscarriage includes all pregnancy losses from the time of conception until 20 weeks of I.Amarillo, V. Wesevich, M.Smith, D.Gray gestation. According to published data about 50% of ﬁrst- trimester pregnancy losses are the consequence of fetal Washington Univ School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, chromosomal abnormalities. Most of these abnormalities MO, United States are numerical (86%). Materials and Methods: A total of 570 spontaneous Introduction:Theatypicalchemokinereceptor3(ACKR3) miscarriage cases were collected between 2002 and 2017, is highly expressed in vascularized structures including the referred to our laboratory from all over the country. DNA placenta and umbilical cord. Aberrant expression of was extracted from placental or fetal tissue. Samples that ACKR3/ligands resulting in dysregulation of trophoblast- did not contain tissue, appropriate for DNA analysis (7%) endometrial interaction has been implicated in recurrent were excluded. QF-PCR focused on chromosomes 13, 18, pregnancy loss, intrauterine growth restriction, preterm 21, X and Y was performed on 530 samples. One hundred labor, and preeclampsia. Copy number variations (CNV’s) of them were additionally analyzed for aneuploidies overlappingwithACKR3havebeendocumentedinpatients involving chromosomes 15, 16 and 22. with variable ﬁndings including neurodevelopmental Results: Aneuploidy was found in 117 (22% of the defects (NDD’s), and in 0.01% of the healthy population cases). Thirty-ﬁve of them (29.9%) were with triploidy, 27 (DGV).NoCNV’sinvolvingACKR3havebeenreportedin (23%)-withtrisomy21,24(20%)-withmonosomyX,17 pregnancy loss. Here we present our novel data from our (14%) - with trisomy 13 and 14(11.9%) - with trisomy 18. retrospective chromosome microarray analysis (CMA) Additionally,trisomy15wasfoundin2cases,trisomy16- associating duplications of ACKR3 with spontaneous in 4 and trisomy 22 in 3 cases out from 100. abortions (SAB’s) and intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD). Conclusions: QF-PCR analysis, being rapid and cost- Materials and Methods: Retrospective CMA was efﬁcient proved to be useful for genetic analysis of performed from ~4,700 samples to identify CNV’s over- miscarriage samples. Although the vast majority of lapping with ACKR3 (aka CXCR7; 2q37.3), of which ~350 chromosomal aneuploidies in miscarriages are de novo, were products of conception (POC). such results provide valuable information for the clinicians Results: This study revealed 11 CNV’s overlapping with and genetic counselors and for the couple. ACKR3. Nine gains were detected from six SAB’s and three R. Raynova: None. S. Andonova: None. S. Bichev: IUFD (7 males, 2 females) ranging from small intervals None. I. Bradinova: None. V. Dimitrova: None. M. (n=4, 36.8-65.5 kb) to trisomy 2 (n=4) and tetrasomy 2 Tzankova: None. S. Savova: None. A. Savov: None. (n=1).Thesegainsaccountfor0.19%ofallCMAcasesand 2.6%ofallPOCcases.A610kbgainanda6.1Mblosswere P01.06B observed from blood samples of two patients with NDD’s. Clinicalimplementationofacustomoligonucleotidearray- Conclusions: This study is the ﬁrst to report rare CGH.ExperienceinthelargestcohortofSpanishprenatal duplications of ACKR3 in SAB’s and IUFD, providing samples (>3400 samples) Clinical implementation of a additional information to existing genomics data. Findings custom oligonucleotide array-CGH. Experience in the from this study may aid in enhanced understanding of largest cohort of Spanish prenatal samples ACKR3’s role in pregnancy, genetic counseling and (&gt3400 samples) management of pregnancy loss. I. Amarillo: None. V. Wesevich: None. M. Smith: O.Villa1,M. Viñas1, P.Muñoz1, L.Vila1,C. Hernando1,2, None. D. Gray: None. N.Fornés1,S. Cano1,A. Zurano1, M.García-Aragonés1, L. Pérez-Jurado1,3,4, L.Armengol1 P01.05A Aneuploidy rate in 530 miscarriage cases 1qGenomics Laboratory, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 2Laboratori Citogenètica Molecular. Servei de Medicina R. Raynova1,S. Andonova1,S. Bichev1,I.Bradinova1, Genètica i Molecular. Instituto Pediátrico de Enfermedades V. Dimitrova2,M. Tzankova2,S. Savova2,A. Savov1 Raras (IPER). Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 3Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Hospital del Mar - IMIM, and 1University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National CIBERdeEnfermedadesRaras(CIBERER),Barcelona,Spain, Genetic Laboratory, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital of 4Women’s and Children’s Health Network and University of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Adelaide, Adelaide, AustraliaAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 3 Introduction: The implementation of genomic array in L. Quteineh1,M.Guipponi1,2, A.Godhino3,E. Hammar1, prenatal routines, when accompanied by pre- and post-test T. Nouspikel1,L. Lemmens1,J. M.Pellegrinelli4, geneticcounselling,hasdemonstrateditsutilitybyfulﬁlling M.Abramowicz1, J.L. Blouin1,2,S.Fokstuen1 the longstanding need for a diagnostic test with a higher resolution and higher diagnostic yield than its predecessor, 1ServiceofGeneticMedicine,University HospitalsofGeneva, the conventional karyotype. Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Materials and methods: Array CGH was performed in Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3.438 prenatal samples (2.604 amniotic ﬂuids, 728 corions 3Gynecologyandobstetricprivateclinic,Geneva,Switzerland, and 106 fetal samples), using a custom 60K 4Department of gynecology and obstetrics, University oligonucleotide-based microarray (qChip® CM) designed Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland to maximize the detection of clinically relevant copy- number alterations, and minimize the detection of variants Introduction: Prenatal ultrasound allows the detection of ofunknownsigniﬁcance(VOUS).Asageneralrule,VOUS fetal malformation syndromes which often remain without with unclear phenotypic effect according to current knowl- conclusive diagnosis. In case ofa recurrentfetal phenotype edge, and some susceptibility variants are not reported. an autosomal recessive disorder is suspected. Results: We identiﬁed a total of 247 pathogenic or Materials and Methods: We report on 2 families with probably pathogenic alterations (detection rate: 7.18%) and recurrent fetal anomalies: 60 VOUS (1.74%). As expected, the greatest pathogenic detection rate (7.66%, 202/2637) was among fetuses with -Family A: Consanguineous couple from Afghanistan, ultrasound anomalies, while detection rate was 5.61% (45/ who experienced 2 terminated pregnancies due to severe 801)inecograﬁcallynormalgestations(2.24%,18/801only brain malformation with hydrocephalus and absence of withalteredmaternal serumscrening).Thevastmajorityof cerebellar vermis. the VOUS were inherited from a non-affected parent -Family B: Non-consanguineous couple from Kosovo (89.65%) and could be reclassiﬁed as most likely benign. who experienced 2 perinatal deaths after pregnancies Conclusions: Our series reinforces the clinical utility of marked by third trimester polyhydramnios and fetal prenatalmicroarray testing:itnearlydoublesthediagnostic akinesia. Both newborns presented at post-mortem yield of conventional karyotype (110/247 with variants examination distal joints ﬂexion contractures. <10Mb), with no signiﬁcant increase in the frequency of VOUS that could interfere in decision making. In our We performed on stored fetal DNA whole exome experience, we highlight the importance of implementing sequencing (WES) with targeted bioinformatic analysis. In aCGH in prenatal routines (for all gestations with an family A, we analyzed genes associated with brain indication of invasive fetal sampling). malformation and in family B genes known to cause O. Villa: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; arthrogryposis and fetal akinesia. qGenomics Laboratory. M. Viñas: None. P. Muñoz: A. Results: In family A, we found a novel nonsense Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; qGenomics homozygous mutation in LARGE1 causing a rare form of Laboratory. L. Vila: A. Employment (full or part-time); congenital muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy with Signiﬁcant; qGenomics Laboratory. C. Hernando: A. brain and eye anomalies (OMIM: 613154) and in family Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; qGenomics B a novel nonsense homozygous mutation in GLDN Laboratory. N. Fornés: A. Employment (full or part-time); causinglethalcongenitalcontracturesyndrome11(OMIM: Signiﬁcant; qGenomics Laboratory. S. Cano: A. Employ- 617194). In both families, Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;qGenomicsLaboratory. homozygosity in the proband and in the second affected A.Zurano:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; fetus, and also conﬁrmed carrier status in both parents. qGenomics Laboratory.M.García-Aragonés:A.Employ- Based on these results, we were able to offer invasive ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;qGenomicsLaboratory. prenatal testing for both families. L. Pérez-Jurado: A. Employment (full or part-time); Conclusions: Targeted WES is an effective tool for Signiﬁcant; qGenomics Laboratory. L. Armengol: A. mutation detection in rare autosomal recessive disorders Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; qGenomics causing recurrent undiagnosed fetal phenotypes, allowing Laboratory. accurate recurrence risk counseling and early prenatal diagnosis for future pregnancies. P01.07C L. Quteineh: None. M. Guipponi: None. A. Godhino: Targeted exome sequencing for mutation detection in rare None. E. Hammar: None. T. Nouspikel: None. L. autosomal recessive disorders in families with recurrent Lemmens: None. J.M. Pellegrinelli: None. M. Abramo- undiagnosed fetal anomalies wicz: None. J.L. Blouin: None. S. Fokstuen: None.4 J.delPicchia P01.08D C. Krausz: None. A. Riera-Escamilla: None. C. Whole exome sequencing in non-obstructive azoospermia Chianese:None.D.Moreno-Mendoza:None.O.Rajmil: allowstheidentiﬁcationofahigh-risksubgroupofinfertile None.M.Bogliolo:None.I.Blanco:None.E.Ars:None. men for undiagnosed Fanconi Anemia, a cancer-prone E. Ruiz-Castañé: None. J. Surrallés: None. disease P01.09A C. Krausz1,A.Riera-Escamilla2, C.Chianese2,D.Moreno- Antenatal presentation of Bardet-Biedl syndrome: the Mendoza2,O.Rajmil2,M.Bogliolo3,I.Blanco4,E.Ars2,E.Ruiz- question of phenotype-genotype correlations Castañé2,J. Surrallés3 L. Mary1, K.Chennen2,3, C.Stoetzel2,E. Alanio-Detton4, 1Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical C. Antal5,6, T.Attie-Bitach7,8, P.Bouvagnet9,R. Bouvier10, Sciences“MarioSerio”,CentreofExcellenceDeNo,Florence, A. Buenerd11,D.Carles12,A. Delezoide13,L. Devisme14, Italy, 2Andrology Department, Fundació Puigvert, Universitat B. Gilbert-Dussardier15, F.Guimiot13, P.Khau Van Kien16, Autònoma de Barcelona, Instituto de Investigaciones P. Loget17,J. Martinovic18, M.Perez19,F. Petit20,L. Pinson21, Biomédicas Sant Pau (IIB-Sant Pau), Barcelona, Spain, C. Rooryck-Thambo22,O.Poch3,H.Dollfus2,23,24, 3Genetics Department and Biomedical Reseach Institute, E. Schaefer2,23, J.Muller1,2 HospitaldeSantPau,CenterforBiomedicalResearchonRare Diseases (CIBERER), and Department of Genetics and 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Microbiology,UniversitatAutònomadeBarcelona,Barcelona, Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, Spain, 4Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain 2LaboratoiredeGénétiquemédicale,UMR_SINSERMU1112, IGMA,FacultédeMédecineFMTS,Université deStrasbourg, Background: The etiology ofnon-obstructive azoospermia Strasbourg, France, 3Complex Systems and Translational (NOA) remains unknown in about 40% of cases and a Bioinformatics, ICube, University of Strasbourg, CNRS, genetic origin is likely to be involved in idiopathic NOA. Illkirch, France, 4: Gynécologie-obstétrique, centre de GenesimplicatedinstemcellproliferationandDNA repair dépistage anténatal, hôpital Maison-Blanche, CHU de Reims, may cause isolated NOA or be responsible for syndromic Reims, France, 5Institut d'Histologie, Icube, UMR7357, diseases, such as Fanconi Anemia (FA). In about 10% of Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6Service de FA cases the diagnosis is delayed until adulthood when a Pathologie, UF6349 Fœtopathologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires malignant tumor is diagnosed. de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 7INSERM U1163, Institut Methods: Whole-Exome Sequencing (WES) in an IMAGINE, Paris, Paris, France, 8Service d'Histologie- idiopathic NOA patient (index case) with consanguineous Embryologie-Cytogénétique,HôpitalNecker-EnfantsMalades, parents. Sanger sequencing of the FANCA gene in the Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, brother of the index case and in 27 selected NOA patients. 9Laboratoire de Cardiogénétique, Malformations cardiaques DEB-induced chromosome breakage test. congénitales, Hôpitaux Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, Results: a rare pathogenic homozygous FANCA variant 10Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Hôpital Edouard (c.2639G>A) was identiﬁed in the index case, affected by Herriot, Hôpitaux Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, Sertoli Cell only syndrome. The patient’s brother (also with 11Départementdepathologie,centre hospitalierEst, Hôpitaux NOA) carried the same genotype. The two brothers did not Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 12Service d'Anatomie-Cytologie manifest overt anemia, though chromosomal breakage test Pathologique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bordeaux, conﬁrmed FA. In 27 selected NOA patients with similar Bordeaux, France, 13Service de Biologie du Développement, testicularphenotypeandborderline/mildhematologicalaltera- HôpitalRobertDebré,AssistancePublique-HôpitauxdeParis, tions revealed one additional SCOS patient with compound Paris, France, 14Service de Pathologie, Hôpital Jeanne de heterozygosis in FANCA (c.3788_3790delTCT;c.3913C>T). Flandres, Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Lille, Conclusions: we identiﬁed a speciﬁc subgroup of NOA Lille, France, 15Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre patients with mild or borderline hematological alterations HospitalierUniversitairedePoitiers,Poitiers,France,16Unité presenting high frequency of occult FA (7.1%). This de Génétique Médicale et Cytogénétique, Centre Hospitalier discovery have important clinical implications: the screen- Universitaire de Nîmes, Nîmes, France, 17Service d'Anatomie ing for FANCA mutations in such patients may allow the Pathologique, Hôpital Pontchaillou, Université Rennes 1, identiﬁcation of undiagnosed FA; it corroborates previous Rennes, France, 18Unité de Fœtopathologie, Hôpital Antoine epidemiological observations reporting a higher risk of Béclère, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Clamart, morbidity(includingcancer)andalowerlifeexpectancyin France, 19Unité de fœtopathologie, Service de Génétique infertile men in respect to fertile, normozoospermic men. Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier, Funding: Instituto Carlos III (FIS/FEDER-PI14/01250) Montpellier, France, 20Clinique de Génétique Guy Fontaine,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 5 Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Lille, Lille, Poch: None. H. Dollfus: None. E. Schaefer: None. J. France, 21Département de Génétique Médicale, Centre Muller: None. Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 22Laboratoire Maladies rares, génétique P01.10B etmétabolisme,CentreHospitalierUniversitairedeBordeaux, Different pattern of concordance rate in birth defects Bordeaux, France, 23Service de Génétique Médicale, IGMA, according to the zygosity in twins Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 24Centre des Affections Rares en Génétique Ophtalmologique, Y. Jung1,S. Lee1,S.Oh2,C. Park1,J.Park1,J. Jun1 FSMR SENSGENE, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France 1SeoulNationalUniversityCollegeofMedicine,Seoul,Korea, Republic of, 2Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National Introduction: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an emble- UniversityBoramaeMedicalCenter,Seoul,Korea,Republicof matic ciliopathy associating retinal dystrophy, obesity, postaxial polydactyly, learning disabilities and renal dys- Objective: The pathogenesis of birth defects is multi- function. Before birth, enlarged/cystic kidneys as well as factorial, and comparing the concordance rate of birth polydactylyrevealedbyultrasound(US)aretheusualhints defects according to zygosity in the twin can help to to consider this diagnosis in absence of familial history. understand the genetic and environmental impacts of the However, these symptoms are not speciﬁc of BBS, raising occurrenceof birthdefects.The objectiveofthis study was the problem of differential diagnoses and prognosis. todeterminetheconcordancerateofbirthdefectsincentral Molecular diagnosis during pregnancies remains a timely nervous system (CNS) and cardiovascular system (CV), challenge for this heterogeneous disease (21 known BBS according to the zygosity. genes). We report a large cohort of BBS fetuses to better Method: Twins born at Seoul National University characterize antenatal phenotype-genotype correlations. Hospital were examined. Zygosity was conﬁrmed by sex, Materials and Methods: Prenatal US and/or autopsic chorionicity, and DNA analysis of umbilical cord blood. data from 74 interrupted fetuses with putative BBS PCR ampliﬁed short tandem repeat (STR analysis) was diagnosis were collected. conducted with the DNA of cord blood. Results: Using targeted Next Generation Sequencing, we Result: The risk of birth defects in CNS and CV of the establishedamoleculardiagnosticin52casesmainlyinBBS secondtwin(F2)wasincreasedwhenbirthdefectswaspresent genes(47 cases)following theclassicalgenedistribution,but in the ﬁrst twin (F1) (table). However, higher concordance alsoinotherciliopathygenes(5cases).Polydactyly(81%,of rates of CNS birth defects were observed in MZ than in DZ postaxial localization only) and renal cysts (72%) were the [probandwise concordance rate (%, 95% CI): 50.00 (15.70- most prevalent symptoms in BBS-mutated fetuses. However, 84.30)inMZvs.0.00(0.00-23.16)inDZ,p<0.01],whereas autopsyrevealed polydactylymissed by US in44% of cases. the concordance rate of CV birth defects was not different Hydrometrocolpos, evocative of BBS, was found in 3 cases. [probandwise concordance rate (%, 95% CI): 26.67 (14.60- Ductal plate anomalies, hepatic portal ﬁbrosis, cardiovascular 41.94) in MZ vs. 20.29 (11.56-31.69) in DZ, p=NS] or central nervous system anomalies were rare (6, 4 and 6 Conclusion: The concordance rate according to the cases respectively). zygosity was different between CNS and CV birth defects. Conclusion: Polydactyly and renal anomalies are con- It may be speculated that CNS birth defects are highly ﬁrmed as major prenatal manifestations for BBS. Poly- genetically affected, whereas CV birth defects are affected dactyly must be carefully controlled in case of apparent by the environment. isolated renal anomalies. The use of prenatal “fast track” NGS in case of enlarged/cystic kidneys and/or polydactyly Birthdefectsinthe2ndtwin has a high utility for diagnosis and prognosis for improved Birthdefectsin Birthdefectsin p-value parental information. the1sttwin(-) the1sttwin(+) L. Mary: None. K. Chennen: None. C. Stoetzel: None. Centralnervoussystem 0.5%(12/2375) 25%(2/8) <0.05 E.Alanio-Detton:None.C.Antal:None.T.Attie-Bitach: -Monozygotic 0.4%(3/681) 66.7%(2/3) <0.001 None. P. Bouvagnet: None. R. Bouvier: None. A. -Dizygotic 0.5%(9/1694) 0%(0/5) NS Cardiovascularsystem 1.9%(45/2327) 23.2%(13/56) <0.001 Buenerd: None. D. Carles: None. A. Delezoide: None. -Monozygotic 2.4%(16/661) 26.1%(6/23) <0.001 L. Devisme: None. B. Gilbert-Dussardier: None. F. -Dizygotic 1.7%(29/1666) 21.2%(7/33) <0.001 Guimiot: None. P. Khau Van Kien: None. P. Loget: None. J. Martinovic: None. M. Perez: None. F. Petit: None. L. Pinson: None. C. Rooryck-Thambo: None. O. Y. Jung: None. S. Lee: None. S. Oh: None. C. Park: None. J. Park: None. J. Jun: None.6 J.delPicchia P01.11C F.Vogel,K.Brüsehafer,S.Kishore,K.Kandaswamy,M.Weiss, Dizygoticsex-discordantIVF/ICSItwinswithbloodbutnot G.Oprea,A. Rolfs,P. Bauer tissue chimerism Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany S. Andonova1, S.Hadjidekova2,3,R.Staneva2,3,M.Mihova3, B. Zaharova1,A. Savov1 Introduction: Carrier screening is a genetic test used to determine if a healthy person is a carrier of a recessive 1National Genetic Laboratory, UHOG "Maichin dom", Soﬁa, genetic disease. The goal of carrier screening is to help Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical individuals understand their risks of having a child with a University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Woman Health Hospital geneticdisorderandreviewtherangeofoptionsavailableto "Nadezhda", Soﬁa, Bulgaria guide pregnancy and family planning. Method & test design rationale: Autosomal and X- Introduction: Blood-chimerism in dizigotic twins is very linked recessive disorders were selected based on the rare condition with presence oftwogenetically distinct cell following criteria: Early onset and high-severity disorders, lines in one individual that are derived from two separate high carrier frequency, availability of treatment and effect zygotes. It can occur through intrauterine transfer of onqualityoflife.Basedonthis,aNGSpanelof331genes hematopoietic cells between the fetuses via vascular ana- was designed assessing CCDS +/-20 bases and relevant stomoses. Here we present a case of IVF/ICSI pregnancy deep intronic mutations from HGMD® and Centogene’s initially deﬁned as monozygotic; during second trimester a proprietary variant database CentoMD®. An in-house sex-discordance between twins was noted. developed pipeline provides CNV calling on NGS data. Materials and Methods: Cytogenetic analysis of whole Technically challenging but relevant risk genes (FMR1, bloodlymphocyteswasperformedtwice-afterdeliveryand SMN1,CYP21A2)areanalyzedbyadditionalassaysbased at age of 6 months of the children. DNA was subsequently onddPCR,RPAandSanger.Adult-onsetconditionsandX- extracted from buccal cells and from suspensions of linked genes in males are not analyzed. cultivated lymphocytes used for karyotyping. DNA proﬁl- Results: Routine NGS processing covers ≥99% of ing was performed with a special attention on markers targeted bases at ≥20 reads. For a comprehensive carrier located on X and Y-chromosomes. evaluation, ”pathogenic”, ”likely pathogenic” and strong Results: A demonstrable blood chimerism was detected VUS (class 3.1)are reported. Couples are offered complete by karioyping and DNA analysis after birth in both twins. screening for partner one and check for partner two genes Karyotypes for twin1 (healthyfemale) and twin 2 (healthy with actionable variants. ® male) at time of birth were chi46,XY[78]/46,XX[22] and Conclusions: CentoScreen offers a comprehensive chi46,XY[69]/46,XX[31], respectively. After 6 months the carrier screening to accurately determine genetic risks. It karyotypes detected were chi46,XY[87]/46,XX[13] and can be especially used in couples from regions with high chi46,XY[86]/46,XX[14], respectively. DNA data from consanguinity as well as ethnicities with high incidence of cultivated lymphocytes was in accordance with the certain genetic diseases even without any family history of cytogenetic results and conﬁned the blood chimerism. This genetic disease to understand their genetic risks. phenomenon was not detected by DNA analysis of buccal F.Vogel:A.Employment (fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant; cells of both twins. Centogene AG. K. Brüsehafer: A. Employment (full or Conclusions: An efﬁcient use of both cytogenetic and part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. S. Kishore: A. molecular analysis techniques in this case of blood but not Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. buccal cells chimerism was demonstrated. When XX/XY K. Kandaswamy: A. Employment (full or part-time); chimerismisdetectedinbloodcells,acarefulmonitoringof Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. M. Weiss: A. Employment reproductive organs of the twins is recommended. In this (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. G. Oprea: case no genital anomalies are detected up to now. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene S. Andonova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. R. AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-time); Staneva: None. M. Mihova: None. B. Zaharova: None. Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. P. Bauer: A. Employment A. Savov: None. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. P01.12D P01.13A Comprehensive Carrier Screening using a combination of CarrierTest - one year experience with expanded NGS panel, ddPCR and RPA preconception carrier screeningAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 7 L. Dohnalová, F.Lhota,Z. Vilímová, F. Zembol, I.Soldatova, We report on three brothers and one sister born to non- M.Bittóová, M.Koudová,D.Stejskal consanguineous parents. The sister and two of the brothers suffer from hearing loss. In addition, the affected brothers, Centre for Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine but not the sister, are infertile. Although semen analyses GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic yielded normal sperm concentrations, motility, and mor- phology(=normozoospermia), thesperm failed tofertilize We have designed a NGS (next-generation sequencing) the oocytes in vitro. However, both brothers conceived a amplicon-basedpaneltesting835keymutationsof77genes child after ICSI. The sister and the unaffected brother each which can inﬂuence reproductive health of prospective conceived children spontaneously. Conventional chromo- parents or can cause recessive disorders in offspring. We somal analysis of the affected brothers demonstrated have developed a bioinformatic pipeline using local instal- apparentlynormalkaryotypes,whereasarray-CGHrevealed lation of Ensembl genomic database for annotation and ahomozygouslossofapproximately45kbonchromosome SQL server variant database for data handling and clinical 15q15.3. Homozygous microdeletions in 15q15.3 lead to reporting. To replace MLPA and fragmentation analysis the deafness-infertility syndrome (OMIM 611102) that is methods we developed coverage analysis-based CNV characterized by prelingual hearing loss and infertility in detection of frequent large deletions of SMN1 and CFTR males but not in females. This homozygous loss was also genes. A software tool developed for the application gen- demonstrated in the sister. Both parents were heterozygous erates report semi-automatically. Results are grouped for this deletion. The deletion encompasses the genes according to clinical impact: (1) mutations in genes asso- CKMT1B, STRC and CATSPER2. CKMT1B is translated ciated with severe recessive disorders in offspring (e.g. to a mitochondrial creatine kinase. STRC encodes stereo- SMN1, CFTR, GJB2 genes), (2) mutations in set of genes cilin, a protein required for the function ofthe outer hair predisposing to blood hypercoagulation- trombophilic pro- cells in the inner ear. CATSPER2 encodes a subunit of the ﬁle (F2, F5, MTHFR, ANXA5- M2 haplotype), (3) ovarian sperm-speciﬁc CatSper Ca2+-channel complex. CatSper response to FSH (FSHR polymorphism). controls the intracellular Ca2+ concentration and, thereby, We analysed 3238 samples In the year 2017: 1296 the swimming behavior of sperm. Functional analysis of couples in IVF programme (2592 individuals), 354 gamete spermfromoneoftheaffectedbrothersdemonstratedalack donors (F 339, M 15) and 141 individuals with a of functional CatSper channels - this deﬁcit explains the reproductive disorder without compatibility testing (F 88, infertility and IVF failure (Brenker et al., 2018 https://doi. M 53). The most frequent occurrence of carriers was org/10.1073/pnas.1717929115). This work was carried out recorded in the commonly investigated genes (SMN1, within the frame of the DFG Clinical Research Unit ‘Male CFTR, GJB2), but also in other genes (e.g. BTD, MEFV, Germ Cells: from Genes to Function‘ (CRU 326). ABCA4, SERPINA1, ACADS, DHCR7, PAH, AR). 28 A. Röpke: None. C. Brenker: None. M. Hoffmann: couples with reproductive risks were identiﬁed, who were None. C. Krallmann: None. S. Kliesch: None. T. offered preimplantation genetic testing of monogenic Strünker: None. F. Tüttelmann: None. diseases (PGT-M). So far we have done IVF with PGT-M in four cases (AR, ABCA4, CFTR genes) and invasive P01.15C prenatal diagnosis in two cases after a spontaneous Positivepredictivevalue(PPV)estimatesforcell-freeDNA conception (SERPINA1 and PAH genes). based screening and choice of conﬁrmatory invasive L. Dohnalová: None. F. Lhota: None. Z. Vilímová: procedure: experience of a large Italian referral prenatal None.F.Zembol:None.I.Soldatova:None.M.Bittóová: diagnostic laboratory None. M. Koudová: None. D. Stejskal: None. F.R.Grati1,B.Grimi1,L.Branca1,L.Marcato1,B.Malvestiti1, P01.14B K. Bajaj2,S. J.Gross3,J. C.P. B. Ferreira4,5,6, G.Simoni1, Male infertility and deafness caused by homozygous F. Maggi1 deletion of CATSPER2 and STRC on 15q15.3 1TOMA, Advanced Biomedical Assays S.p.A, Busto Arsizio, A. Röpke1,C. Brenker2,M.Hoffmann1, C.Krallmann2, Italy,2DepartmentofObstetrics&Gynecology,NYCHealth+ S. Kliesch2,T. Strünker2,F. Tüttelmann1 Hospitals/Jacobi,Bronx,NY,NY,UnitedStates,3IcahnSchool of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,University ofMünster,Münster, 4GenomedSA,Warsaw,Poland,5HospitalCentraldeMaputo, Germany, 2Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology Maputo, Mozambique, 6Faculdade de Medicina da (CeRA), University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany Universidade Eduardo Mondlane, Maputo, Mozambique8 J.delPicchia Introduction:TheaimofthisstudyistodeterminethePPV Introduction: Conventional cell-free fetal DNA (cfDNA)- for common trisomies and SCAs using cfDNA screening, based non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) focuses on based on karyotype results obtained following a high-risk detection of common aneuploidies, leaving a gap of ~17% cfDNA testing result. ofclinicallyrelevantchromosomalabnormalitiesthatwould Materials and Methods: Initial CfDNA screening was go undetected. Genome-wide NIPT would greatly expand ordered by the referring physicians and performed by a therangeofchromosomalrearrangementsdetectable.Inthis variety of technologies. One-hundreds and eighteen con- study, we expanded conventional cfDNA-based NIPT to ﬁrmatorysamplesweresenttoourlabfollowingahighrisk cover the entire genome in a large general population of cfDNA test result. PPV stratiﬁed by maternal age was pregnant women, in order to assess the incidence of chro- calculated for maternal age-dependent aneuploidies. mosomal abnormalities not detectable by traditional NIPT. Results: PPV for T13, T18, T21 was 23.1%, 66.7%, Method:38.095 pregnant women undergoing genome- 91.9%, respectively. PPV for SCAs was 7.7% for 45,X, wide cfDNA-based NIPT were enrolled in the study. 50% for 47,XXX, 30.8% for 47,XXY and 50% for 47, Sequencing data were analyzed using algorithms for XYY.Inwomen<35yand≥35ythePPVforT21,T18and common fetal aneuploidies, aneuploidies and subchromo- T13 was, 92%(81,97)*, 57%(25,84)*, 33.3%(12,65)*, and somal aberrations. Clinical outcomes were obtained in 90(60,98)*, 100%(34,100)*, 0%(0,49)*, respectively. Most 37.804 pregnancies. of prenatal conﬁrmations were performed on amniocytes Results:Clinically relevant chromosomal abnormalities (81/116;69.8%);thistrendwasmoreevidentwhenthehigh- were detected in 630 (1.7%) pregnancies, 560 (1.6%) of risk result involved a SCA (28/33;84.8%) versus a trisomy which were conﬁrmed by invasive prenatal diagnosis. In (54/84;64.3%) (OR: 3.1111;95%CI: 1.1-8.9). However, 500/560casescommonaneuploidieswereinvolved,30/560 CVS shows a higher PPV (28/30,93.3%) for non-mosaic were rare autosomal trisomies (RAT) and 30/560 were trisomies than AF (37/54,68.5%) (OR: 6.43;95%CI: 1.4- segmental imbalances. 60 fetal conditions would have 30.2). otherwisebeenoverlookedifonlyaconventionalNIPThad Conclusions: The higher rate of conﬁrmatory AF after a been performed. The speciﬁcity for common aneuploidy, SCA high-risk result probably indicates that referring RATandsegmentalaneuploidieswas99.92%,99.98%,and clinicians are aware of the proneness of sex chromosomes 99.98%, respectively; the sensitivity was 100%. togenerateconﬁnedplacentalmosaicism,thereforecausing Conclusion:The results of this study demonstrate that a decreased PPV when using CVS for SCAs. A possible genome-wide cfDNA analysis represents an enhanced hypothesis for the higher PPV of CVS for non-mosaic screening tool for prenatal detection of chromosomal trisomies might be the performance of an ultrasound-scan abnormalities, allowing identiﬁcation of clinically relevant before the choice of conﬁrmatory invasive procedure, imbalances that are not detectable by conventional cfDNA whereby amniocentesis is preferred when no ultrasound testing. This screening provides improved detection rate as anomalies are identiﬁed. * 95th% CI compared to conventional NIPT, with no appreciable F.R.Grati:None.B.Grimi:None.L.Branca:None.L. decrease in speciﬁcity. These ﬁndings provide substantial Marcato:None.B.Malvestiti:None.K.Bajaj:None.S.J. evidence for the feasibility of introducing genome-wide Gross: None. J.C.P.B. Ferreira: None. G. Simoni: E. NIPT into routine prenatal diagnosis practice. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other F. Fiorentino: None. S. Bono: None. F. Pizzuti: None. intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; TOMA Advanced Bio- A. Polverari: None. S. Duca: None. M. Faieta: None. M. medical Assays S.p.A. F. Maggi: E. Ownership Interest Baldi: None. M. Sessa: None. L. Diano: None. F. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Spinella: None. Signiﬁcant; TOMA, Avanced Biomedical Assays, S.p.A. P01.17A P01.16D Microarray analysis in fetuses with a high risk combined Genome-widecell-freefetalDNAscreeninginroutinenon- test invasive prenatal testing practice: a prospective study on over 38.000 clinical cases L.Ronzoni1,N.Persico2,A.Sajeva1,R.Silipigni3,S.Guerneri3, D.Alberico2,S.Boito2,I.Fabietti2,M.Disegni3, F.Lalatta1 F. Fiorentino, S.Bono,F. Pizzuti,A. Polverari, S.Duca, M.Faieta, M.Baldi, M.Sessa,L. Diano,F. Spinella 1Clinical Genetic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Genoma Group, Rome, Italy Obstetrics and Gynaecology 'L. Mangiagalli', Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 9 Italy,3LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics,FondazioneIRCCSCa' Objectives: To establish the frequency of pathogenic sub- Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy microscopicchromosomeaberrationsinfetuses thatarenot at increased risk for unbalanced structural chromosome Introduction: to investigate the incremental yield of aberrations, a systematic literature search was performed. detecting submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities by The aim was to determine whether high resolution testing genomic microarray compared to karyotyping in high risk for submicroscopic aberrations is beneﬁcial in a general fetuses after combined testing. pregnant population. Materials and Methods: A total of 250 fetuses, with a Methods: On 3rd June 2016 Embase and PubMed high risk after combined test, were tested by conventional databases were systematically searched for all relevant CVS karyotyping. If the short-term cytogenetic analysis articles on prevalence of pathogenic submicroscopic CNVs appeared to be normal, women were informed about CGH- in fetuses tested due to advanced maternal age or parental array analysis. If the woman refused the CGH-array, a anxiety.Relevantfulltextarticleswereanalyzedandbased karyotype analysis was carried out using the long-term on the extracted data the prevalence of submicroscopic culture method. CNVs was calculated. Results: chromosomal abnormalities were detected in 58 Results:Metaanalysiswasconductedinapooledcohort fetuses (23%), particularly in pregnancies complicated by of10,614 fetuses based onthe10 largest studies(N >300) ultrasound abnormalities. In 192 fetuses (77%), the of a total of 19 relevant studies. In 0.84%, 95%CI [0.55%, karyotype, after short-term analysis, was normal. All these 1.30%] of fetuses a submicroscopic pathogenic aberration womenwerecounselled:74%agreedtoproceedwithCGH- was detected prenatally. The onset/penetrance of the array analysis while26% refused. In these cases, karyotyp- submicroscopic ﬁndings was studied in 10,314 fetuses out ing was completed with long-term culture methods of 8 papers that presented aberrant cases with all necessary conﬁrming the chromosomal normality. Only 19% of the details. The prevalence of early onset syndromic disorders women with a fetus with an increased NT (> 3.5 mm) or due to a submicroscopic aberration was calculated to be ultrasound abnormalities, but with a normal karyotype, 1:270,basedon0.37%,95%CI[0.27%,0.52%]caseswhere refused CGH-array compared to 28% of the women with a aberrations were speciﬁed. high risk after combined test principally due to altered Conclusions: This systematic review shows that a biochemistry. Submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities signiﬁcant proportion of fetuses in a general pregnant were detected only in two cases (1.5%). One was an population carry a submicroscopic pathogenic CNV. Based incidental ﬁnding with the detection of a microdeletion on these ﬁgures all women should be informed on their causativeofdystrophinopathyinafemalefetus.Intheother individual risk for all pathogenic chromosome aberrations case, it was a pathogenic 22q11.21 microduplication in a and not only for common trisomies. fetus with a NT < 3.5 mm. M.I. Srebniak: None. M. Joosten: None. M.F.C.M. Conclusions:CGH-arrayanalysis,performedonlyaftera Knapen: None. L.R. Arends: None. M. Polak: None. S. multidisciplinary counselling, should also be part of the van Veen: None. A.T.J.I. Go: None. D. Van investigation in fetuses with biochemical high risk after a Opstal: None. combined test. L. Ronzoni: None. N. Persico: None. A. Sajeva: None. P01.20D R.Silipigni:None.S.Guerneri:None.D.Alberico:None. Chromothriptic events in healthy people: pay attention to S. Boito: None. I. Fabietti: None. M. Disegni: None. F. ''innocent'' insertional translocations Lalatta: None. N.E. KURTAS1,L. Zumerle2,L. Leonardelli2,U.Giussani3, P01.18B A. Pansa3,L. Cardarelli4, V.Bertini5,E. Errichiello1, Prevalence of submicroscopic chromosome aberrations in M.Delledonne2,O.Zuffardi1 pregnancies without increased risk for structural chromosome aberrations - a systematic review of the 1Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, literature Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Biotechnologies, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 3Laboratorio di Genetica, Ospedali M.I.Srebniak1, M.Joosten1,M.F. C.M. Knapen1, L.R. Riuniti di Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy, 4Laboratorio Analisi Arends1,M.Polak2,S.vanVeen1,A.T.J.I.Go1,D.VanOpstal1 CITOTEST, Padova, Italy, 5Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, S. Chiara 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus University, Hospital, Pisa, Italy Rotterdam, Netherlands10 J.delPicchia Chromothripsis is characterized by extensive genomic 6Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reinier de Graaf rearrangements consisting in multiple deletions and dis- Gasthuis, Delft, Netherlands, 7Department of Gynecology, orderedorientationoftherearrangedportionsofoneorfew Albert Schweitzer Hospital Dordrecht, Dordrecht, chromosomes. By whole genome sequencing (WGS) in Netherlands, 8Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, threeunrelatedfamilies,wedemonstratedthatinoneparent Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands of each family a balanced chromothripsis was present causingagenomicimbalanceintheindexcaseconsistingin Introduction: Prenatal diagnostics has been impacted by a deletion and a non-contiguousduplication within 3q22.1- technological changes in the past decade, which have q26.31incase1,asimpletwo-wayreciprocaltranslocation affected the diagnostic yield. The aim of this study was to t(6;14) in case 2, and a complex rearrangement involving evaluatetheimpactofSNParrayandnon-invasiveprenatal chromosomes 6, 7 and 15 in case 3. It is noteworthy that a testing (NIPT) on the diagnostic yield and the number of parental chromothripsis at the origin of the proband’s invasive tests in our center. imbalancewasfarfrompredictableintwoofthem,inwhich Material and Methods: The frequency of pathogenic the proband’s rearrangement was at ﬁrst interpreted as de fetal unbalanced chromosome aberrations was studied in novo in case 1 and consisting in a simple translocation in 6811 high risk pregnancies without ultrasound anomalies case 2. In all parents-of-origin a small size fragment of the referred for prenatal testing in 2009-2015 due to advanced shattered chromosome was inserted into an additional maternal age, abnormal ﬁrst trimester screening results chromosome. Our ﬁndings strongly indicate that (i) both (with nuchal translucency < 3.5mm) or recurrence risk for simpleandcomplexunbalancedrearrangements,caninfact chromosome aberration. Chromosomal SNP microarray be recombinant chromosomes derived by a balanced chro- analysis replaced karyotyping in in 2012 and since 2014 a mothripsis present in one healthy parent; (ii) WGS inves- choice between NIPT and diagnostic testing with micro- tigations in the parent may reveal unexpected genomic array was offered to women with an increased risk for complexity that are impossible to foresee by conventional common aneuploidy (as a part of a national TRIDENT and molecular cytogenetic approaches; (iii) insertional study). translocations cannot anymore be considered three break- Results: The introduction of microarray led to an points events but rather are the spy of more complex rear- additionalyieldofsubmicroscopicpathogenicchromosome rangements. Our partially novel and partially conﬁrmatory aberrationsin1.9%infetuseswithoutultrasoundanomalies. data call for WGS as ﬁrst tier genomic analysis in order to TheintroductionofNIPTledtoadecreaseofinvasivetests, properly evaluate any possible risk for chromosome but also of the diagnostic yield. imbalances at following pregnancies. Conclusions:Since33%ofpathogenicfetalchromosome N.E.Kurtas:None.L.Zumerle:None.L.Leonardelli: aberrations were different from the common aneuploidies None.U.Giussani:None.A.Pansa:None.L.Cardarelli: and triploidy, whole genome analysis should be offered None. V. Bertini: None. E. Errichiello: None. M. after invasive sampling. Because NIPT (as a second Delledonne: None. O. Zuffardi: None. screening) has resulted in a decreased diagnostic yield it should be accompanied by an appropriate pre-test counsel- P01.21A ing in high risk pregnancies. TheinﬂuenceofchromosomalmicroarrayandNIPTonthe M.I. Srebniak: None. M.F.C.M. Knapen: None. M. diagnostic yield in 6811high risk pregnancies without The Polak: None.M.Joosten:None.K.E.M.Diderich:None. inﬂuence of chromosomal microarray and NIPT on the W.F.J. van IJcken: None. R. Heydanus: None. A. diagnostic yield in 6811 high risk pregnancies without Dijkman: None. T. Toolenaar: None. F.A.T. de Vries: ultrasound anomalies None. J. Knijnenburg: None. A.T.J.I. Go: None. R.H. Galjaard: None. D. Van Opstal: None. M.I.Srebniak1,M.F.C.M.Knapen2,M.Polak3,M.Joosten1, K. E.M. Diderich1,W.F. J.van IJcken4,R.Heydanus5, P01.22B A.Dijkman6,T.Toolenaar7,F.A.T.deVries1,J.Knijnenburg1, Chromosomal microarray analysis in fetuses with double A. T.J. I.Go8,R. H.Galjaard1,D.VanOpstal1 renal collecting system 1Erasmus MC, Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands, A. Singer1,I.Maya2,A.Frumkin3,S.Zeligson4, R.Berger5, 2Erasmus MC, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, S. BenShachar6,C.Vinkler7, L.Sagi-Dain8 Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Institute of Psychology, Erasmus UniversityRotterdam,Rotterdam,Netherlands,4ErasmusMC, 1Community Genetics, Public Health Services, Ministry of Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Obstetrics and Health, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Recanati Genetics Institute, Gynecology, Amphia Hospital, Breda, Netherlands, Beilinson Hospital, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 11 Israel, 3. Department of Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, Theﬁbroussheathisauniquecytoskeletalstructurelocated Hadassah, Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, intheprinciplepieceofthespermﬂagellumwithmorethan Israel, 4Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical 13 protein components. AKAP4 is the most abundant pro- Center,Jerusalem,Israel,5MaccabiHealthServices,Rehovot, tein in the ﬁbrous sheath, which interacts with at least 3 Israel,6.GeneticsInstitute,SoraskyMedicalCenter,TelAviv, other proteins. The molecular structure and functionality of Israel, 7Genetic Institute, "Wolfson", Holon, Israel, 8Genetics the ﬁbrous sheath are largely unknown. We collected a Institute, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel clinic sample of sperms featured by dysplasia of ﬁbrous sheath(DFS),leadingtoafailureofnaturalconception.The Duplicationoftherenalcollectingsystemisoneofthemost sperm donor is an offspring of consanguineous family, and commonvariantsofurinarytractanatomywithanestimated we identiﬁed an inherited homozygous truncating mutation incidence of about 1% . This condition is characterized by in his genome by whole-exome sequencing. The affected two pelvicalyceal units draining a single kidney. It can be proteinisoneofthecomponentsofﬁbroussheath,andthis eithercompleteorpartial.Theobjectiveofourstudywasto mutation caused a shortened protein which lost part of the examine the rate for chromosomal aberrations in isolated original functions. The mice model with this mutation prenatal sonographic ﬁnding. Data from all chromosomal introduced by CRISPR-Cas9 technique showed similar microarray analyses (CMA) reported to the Ministry of phenotype to the human, with sperms of reduced number Health between January 2013 and December 2016 were andlowermotilityduetoﬂagellummalfunction.Strikingly, retrospectively obtained from a computerized database. All we observed that, unlike AKAP4 knock-out mice model, pregnancies with sonographic diagnosis of isolated duplex the knock-out mice model we constructed for the novel renal collecting system and documentation of CMA result gene exerted major effect on testis, manifested by sig- were included. Rate of abnormal CMA ﬁndings in these niﬁcant size/weight reduction and azoospermia. Micro- cases was compared to that of the general population risk, scopic observation of testis slices and in-situ hybridization based on a systematic review encompassing 9272 cases showed abnormal cross-section of the seminal vesicles and with normal ultrasound, and a local data of 5541 pregnan- disorganized progression from spermatogonia tospermatid, cies undergoing CMA due to maternal request. One whencomparingtheknock-outmicemodelwiththecontrol pathogenic CMA ﬁnding was found amongst 98 pregnan- ones. Therefore, we concluded that this gene is of critical cies with double collecting system (1.02%), not sig- importance to normal spermatogenesis and testis niﬁcantly different from the risk for abnormalCMAresults development. in the general population. In addition, two variants of L. Sun: None. L. Huang: None. Z. Chen: None. N. unknown signiﬁcance were demonstrated (2.04%). This is Li: None. the ﬁrst report describing the rate of chromosomal anoma- lies in pregnancies with isolated duplex renal collecting P01.24D system.Itissuggestedthatroutineinvasiveprenataltesting Use of prenatal exome sequencing in fetuses with with CMA analysis in such cases is no more useful than in ultrasound anomalies the general population. Prospective larger studies are nee- ded to guide the optimal management of pregnancies with M.Segura-Puimedon, B.Rodríguez-Santiago, A.Vallmajó, isolated duplex renal collecting system. M.Codina-Solà, B.Campos, D.Datta,I. Banchs,H.Mattlin, A.Singer:None.I.Maya:None.A.Frumkin:None.S. Y.Sarria,O.Abad,J.Rodríguez,L.Pérez-Jurado,L.Armengol Zeligson:None.R.Berger:None.S.BenShachar:None. C. Vinkler: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None. Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain P01.23C A component of sperm ﬁbrous sheath has major effect on Introduction:Wholeexomesequencingisadiagnostictool testis morphology and functionality inpostnatalsettingsforindividualswithasuspectedgenetic condition. Recently, its application in prenatal settings has L. Sun1,L. Huang2,Z. Chen3, N. Li2 increased and is sporadically used as a diagnostic tool. We present here our experience using this approach in a pre- 1Department of Reproductive Medicine,Guangzhou Women natal setting. and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou, China, Material and Methods: Exome sequencing was per- 2Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics,Guangzhou Women and formed in 42 fetal samples carrying different ultrasound Children'sMedicalCenter,Guangzhou,China,3Departmentof anomalies.30sampleswerefromevolutivepregnanciesand Reproductive Medicine,Guangzhou Women and Children's 12 were from legal pregnancy interruptions. In 10 of the Medical Center, Guangzhou, China, Guangzhou, China samples previous prenatal CGH-array was performed with12 J.delPicchia negativeresult.Segregationstudieswereperformedincases Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, with a candidate variant when possible. qGenomics. Results: Common reasons for referral were skeletal anomalies, polymalformated fetuses, cerebral anomalies or P01.26B monogenic disorder suspicion (Noonan syndrome). Patho- Challenges and opportunities in variant interpretation in genic variants were identiﬁed in n=8 (19%) of samples, NGS-based expanded carrier screening. First results from being previously described or de novo in theindex case. In an Argentinian cohort n=9 (21%) cases, variants of unknown signiﬁcance were identiﬁed, and in two of them inheritance was consistent S. Menazzi,M.Fabbro, D.Lorenzi, M.Bilinski, C.Fernandez, withexpectedpattern.Inmorethanhalfofthecases(52%) M.Galain, P. Nicotra, V.Chekherdemian, F. Nodar,S. Papier we were not able to identify any candidate variant. Diagnostic yield was highest in fetuses with skeletal NOVAGEN, Buenos Aires, Argentina anomalies, where pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in (n=6) 60% of cases, and in fetuses with clinical suspicion Introduction: In the past decade, NGS-based technologies ofNoonansyndrome,whereapathogenicvariantwasfound have been disruptive in many areas of clinical genetics, in 75% of the samples. No pathogenic variants were found mainly related to the diagnosis of known entities. Repro- in polymalformated fetuses or fetuses with cerebral ductive medicine has not been excluded from these anomalies. advances, and expanded carrier screening (ECS) has Conclusion: Exome sequencing is a valuable diagnostic become increasingly used, both for couples at risk and tool in fetuses with ultrasound anomalies, especially when general population.Here we describe challenges and skeletal anomalies are present or Noonan syndrome is opportunities of an NGS-based ECS panel for recessive suspected. disorders.Material and Methods: After variant calling of M. Segura-Puimedon: A. Employment (full or part- 120 cases using an in-house developed pipeline for pro- time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Labora- cessing data of 483 genes sequenced on a Nextseq 550 tories, qGenomics, Barcelona, Spain. B. Rodríguez-San- platform, variants were classiﬁed according to ACMG tiago: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; guidelines and our clinical geneticists’ and molecular biol- Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics. ogists’criteria.Results:39.2%ofthepatientswerefoundto A. Vallmajó: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- be carriers for at least one pathogenic/likely pathogenic cant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, qGe- variant for 48 different diseases. A pathogenic variant por nomics. M. Codina-Solà: A. Employment (full or part- G6PD (X-linked haemolytic anemia) was found in an time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine Labora- apparently healthy man. 91 unique variants of uncertain tories, qGenomics. B. Campos: A. Employment (full or signiﬁcance (39 classiﬁed as “Conﬂict of interpretation” in part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine ClinVar) were found in a homozygous/hemizygous state, Laboratories, qGenomics. D. Datta: A. Employment (full which when present in genes related to recessive full- or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine penetrance and early-onset disease were deemed likely Laboratories, qGenomics. I. Banchs: A. Employment (full benign.Conclusions:NGS-basedECSrepresentsanunique or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine opportunity to identify couples at risk of having children Laboratories,qGenomics.H.Mattlin:A.Employment(full with recessive conditions but also to calculate variant fre- or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine quencies from countries underrepresented in global con- Laboratories, qGenomics. Y. Sarria: A. Employment (full sortiums, diagnose individuals with low-penetrance or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine disorders and classify homozygous/hemizygous variants of Laboratories, qGenomics. O. Abad: A. Employment (full uncertain signiﬁcance as benign. ACMG guidelines are or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic Medicine mainly focused on diagnosis of affected individuals, but Laboratories, qGenomics. J. Rodríguez: A. Employment variant classiﬁcation for ECS must be based on data not (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic related to the phenotype. Medicine Laboratories, qGenomics. L. Pérez-Jurado: E. S. Menazzi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other niﬁcant; NOVAGEN. M. Fabbro: A. Employment (full or intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Quantitative Genomic part-time); Signiﬁcant; NOVAGEN. D. Lorenzi: A. MedicineLaboratories,qGenomics.F.Consultant/Advisory Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NOVAGEN. Board;Signiﬁcant;QuantitativeGenomicMedicineLabora- M.Bilinski:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; tories, qGenomics. L. Armengol: E. Ownership Interest NOVAGEN. C. Fernandez: A. Employment (full or part- (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); time); Signiﬁcant; NOVAGEN. M. Galain: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NOVAGEN. P.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 13 Nicotra: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; P01.28D NOVAGEN. V. Chekherdemian: A. Employment (full or Molecular autopsy is an important tool in the diagnosis of part-time);Signiﬁcant;NOVAGEN.F.Nodar:A.Employ- lethal fetal disorders and structural anomalies ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NOVAGEN. S. Papier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; A. Yeung1,2,3,M. Regan1,4,M.Hunter1,3 NOVAGEN. 1Monash Genetics, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia, P01.27C 2Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's NGSexpandedcarrierscreeningintheNetherlands:initial Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 3Department of implementation results Paediatrics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 4Family Cancer and Genetics, Melbourne Health, Parkville, K.M.Abbott,T.Dijkhuizen,M.Veldhuis,J.Schuurmans,I.van Australia Langen, R.J. Sinke Introduction: Genomic sequencing is emerging as an University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, important tool in the diagnosis of lethal fetal disorders and Netherlands structural malformations. We sought to determine the clin- icalutilityofgenomicsequencingasanadjuncttostandard Introduction: Expanded carrier screening (ECS) has antenatalimagingandfetalautopsy,aswellastheimpactof broadened in recent years from high risk population- molecular diagnosis on clinical care. targeted testing to general public screening. and the main Materials and Methods: We performed a retrospective challenge now is choosing the most applicable test design review of perinatal cases referred to the Monash Genetics for the intended population. Here we describe the ECS test Unit between 2015 and 2017 in the setting of structural developed at our department of Genetics and our initial malformations or fetal-death-in-utero. 19 fetuses were results. identiﬁed in whom genomic testing had been performed Materials and Methods: Based on focus group discus- following a normal microarray and ﬁndings on antenatal sions, we designed and implemented a couple-based ECS imaging and autopsy suggestive of an underlying mono- multi-genetestfor70rare,earlyonsetandseriousrecessive genicdisorder.Testingcomprisedeitheratargetedpanelor MendelianconditionsusingNGStechnologies.Concentrat- whole exome sequencing in a clinically accredited ing on couple-based screening, emphasis was on the laboratory. combined risk for having affected children. The a priori Results:Adiagnosiswasestablishedin9/19cases(47%) riskofbeingacarriercoupleisapproximately1in150and on the basis of likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants increases for those referred for medical reasons (e.g. detected in genes with a concordant Mendelian phenotype: consanguinity). Only results with high predictive value RIT1, RAF1, L1CAM, AGRN, MTM1, CHRNB1, CEP290, regarding affected offspring were reported in the combined COL1A1, and PKHD1. Variants of unknown signiﬁcance result. were detected in 2/19. A signiﬁcant impact on clinical Results: A total of 169 couples were tested, 52 potential management was noted in the families who received a high-risk couples and 117 general public couples as part of molecular diagnosis: 2/9 families were informed that a an population-based implementation study. Five couples, causative variant was de novo, restoring reproductive referred for diagnostic reasons, shared carriership of one of conﬁdence; 3/9 patients were counselled regarding the diseases tested. All remaining couples tested normal. increased recurrence risk and proceeded to prenatal Reporting times averaged at 38 days, and in some cases diagnosis in subsequent pregnancies, and 3/9 couples were even within 2 weeks. referred to an IVF service for preimplantation genetic Conclusions: Our combined approach for ECS testing diagnosis. allowsforafast,simpliﬁedproceduretoreportacombined Conclusion: Genomic sequencing enhances the diagnos- risk to couples, forestalling the burden of individual tic yield of standard fetal imaging and autopsy and ﬁndings. Broader implementation (e.g. general public via improves patient care. their GP) seems warranted, and is supported by these ﬁrst A. Yeung: None. M. Regan: None. M. Hunter: None. results. Future international discussions will guide further development of such important screening tests. P01.29A K.M. Abbott: None. T. Dijkhuizen: None. M. Veld- NGSstudiesinstructurallyabnormalfetuseswithanormal huis: None. J. Schuurmans: None. I. van Langen: None. chromosomal microarray analysis. Clinical experience R.J. Sinke: None.14 J.delPicchia A.Borrell1,M.Pauta1,V.Borobio1,B.Marquès1,C.Badenas2, Methods: 77 unrelated fetal samples underwent exome M.Milà2 sequencing between 2012-2017. Indications, turnaround time, diagnostic rates, and pregnancy outcomes were 1BCNatal.Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, analyzed. Spain,2CDB.HospitalClínicBarcelona,Barcelona,Catalonia, Results: The most common indication for fetal exome Spain sequencing was multiple malformations (21/77, 27%), followed by isolated brain malformations (15/77, 19%). Objective: The elective genetic testing for structurally Twelve fetuses (15%) were referred for isolated increased abnormal fetuses is chromosomal microarray analysis nuchaltranslucency(IINT).Exomeanalysiswasdiagnostic (CMA). We investigated the value of next generation for 16 fetuses (21%); when sub-classiﬁed to fetal mal- sequencing(NGS)studiesinfetuseswithselectedstructural formationsvs.IINTitbecameclearthatexomeanalysisdid anomalies and normal CMA. not reveal any known or probable pathogenic variants in Methods: During a 30-month period, NGS studies were IINT whereas among the remaining fetuses, a molecular performed on fetal DNA extracted from amniocytes or diagnosis was reached in 16/65 (25%). Proband-only cases chorionic villi in 25 structurally abnormal fetuses with a received a diagnosis more often than trio exomes. normal CMA. NGS studies included a single gene analysis Conclusion: Exome sequencing has the potential to (n=6), gene panel (n=14), or clinical exome sequencing provide molecular diagnoses in cases where conventional (n=5). Single gene analysis was performed in suspected prenatal cytogenetic testing is negative. A referral bias of syndromes caused by a single candidate gene (thanatopho- consanguineouscasescouldaccountforthehighdiagnostic ric dysplasia, CHARGE, Mowat-Wilson...) and when a rate for proband-only sequencing. Syndrome-speciﬁc prog- panel or exome was not available in our center (Noonan, nostic information enables parents to make informed lissencephaly). A gene panel was used when for a speciﬁc decisions, whereas challenges include time limitations and fetalsyndromeorsignhavemultiplecandidategenes(large variant interpretation in the setting of non-speciﬁc fetal echogenickidneys,Noonansyndrome,craneosynostosis⋯). ﬁndings. As we report only established disease-gene Finally, clinical exome sequencing was performed in associations, further segregation and functional studies in recurrent or multisystem anomalies with no speciﬁc a research setting are expected to signiﬁcantly increase the syndrome suspicion. diagnostic yield. Results: In 40% (10/25) of the cases, NGS provided H. Daum: None. V. Meiner: None. O. Elpeleg: None. deﬁnitivediagnoses.Itwasprovidedin1/6(17%)ofsingle T. Harel: None. gene analyses (thanatophoric dysplasia), in 8/14 (57%) of gene panels (4 by CAKUT panel, 2 by Noonan, one by a P01.31C craniosynostosis and one by skeletal dysplasia panels), and Low fetal fraction and digynic triploidy: products-of- in2/5(40%)ofclinical exomes(primarymicrocephalyand conception testing supports Fetal-Fraction-Based Risk Bohring-Opitz syndrome). model for non-invasive prenatal testing Conclusion:NGSprovidesadeﬁnitivediagnosisin40% of fetuses with selected structural anomalies and normal S. Krinshpun,W.DiNonno, T.McKanna, A. Ryan,K.Martin CMA results. The most frequent diagnoses were speciﬁc skeletal dysplasias, Noonan syndrome in persistent nuchal Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States fold+/-hydrops,andautosomalrecessive renaldiseasesin large echogenic kidneys. Introduction: Pregnancies receiving a ‘no result’ on non- A. Borrell: None. M. Pauta: None. V. Borobio: None. invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) due to low fetal fraction B. Marquès: None. C. Badenas: None. M. Milà: None. (‘no result’ LFF) are at increased risk for trisomies 18 and 13 (T18, T13) and digynic triploidy (DT). The Fetal- P01.30B Fraction–Based Risk (FFBR) method has recently been Fetal exome sequencing: yield and limitations in a single validated to assess SNP-based NIPT ‘no result’ LFF preg- tertiary center nancies given fetal fraction, maternal weight, and gesta- tional age. This method demonstrated high sensitivity for H.Daum,V. Meiner, O.Elpeleg, T. Harel pregnanciesaffectedbyT18,T13,andDT(highrisk,≥1%). The objectiveofthis study was to retrospectively apply the Hadassah, Jerusalem, Israel FFBRmodeltoSNP-basedNIPT‘noresult’LFFcasesthat later had products-of-conception (POC) testing. Objective: To explore the indications and diagnostic out- Materials and Methods: Over 30,000 consecutive POC comes of fetal exomes in a single referral center. samples submitted January 2014-December 2017 wereAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 15 reviewed. Pregnancies with both SNP-based NIPT ‘no 5.88%forgroups1,2and3,respectively(P=0.0042).The result’ LFF and SNP-based POC results, which included buccal smear also exhibited physiological pattern of a low- parent of origin, were selected for application of the level mosaicism, however, the level of mosaicism was FFBR model. statistically insigniﬁcant in different age groups and, on Results: A total of 338 POC cases also had NIPT average,was4.01%(P=0.530).Itisshownthatmosaicism performed. Of these cases, 48 (14.2%) had ‘no result’ LFF inbuccalsmearisrepresentedbytwocelllines:oneiswith (expected given its association with pregnancy loss). The disomy and another one includes monosomy on prevalence of chromosome abnormalities in the ‘no result’ chromosome X. LFF cases was 66.7% (32/48); DT was the most common Conclusion:Theobtaineddatacanbeareferenceforthe (43.8% [14/32]). All DT cases (100%) received a high evaluation of low-level mosaicism in fertile women. FFBR score. A. Tarlycheva: None. Z. Markova: None. T. Volkova: Conclusion:DTwasasigniﬁcantsourceofchromosome None. N. Shilova: None. abnormalitiesamongpregnancylossesthatpreviouslyhada SNP-basedNIPT‘noresult’LFF.Retrospectiveapplication P01.34B of FFBR demonstrated that these cases could have been Exome sequencing reveals novel IGSF10 variation in identiﬁed as at-risk at time of SNP-based NIPT, allowing patients with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism for a more informed genetic counseling and prenatal management. R.Colombo1,2,A.Jolly3,Y.Bayram3,E.Karaca3,N.DiSimone4, S. Krinshpun: A. Employment (full or part-time); G.Scambia4,T. Tos5, S.Jhangiani6, Z.C. Akdemir6,J.E. Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. W. DiNonno: A. Employment Posey3,J. R.Lupski3,6,7 (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. T. McKanna: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. 1Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, A. Ryan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Catholic University and Policlinico Agostino Gemelli, Rome, Natera,Inc.K.Martin:A.Employment (fullorpart-time); Italy, 2Center for the Study of Rare Hereditary Diseases, Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. Niguarda Ca' Granda Metropolitan Hospital, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor P01.33A CollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX,UnitedStates,4Department Age-dependent gonosomal mosaicism in fertile women of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University and Policlinico Agostino Gemelli, Rome, Italy, A. Tarlycheva1, Z.Markova1,T. Volkova2,N.Shilova1 5Department of Medical Genetics, Sami Ulus Children’s Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 6Human Genome Sequencing 1Federal Budgetary State Institution "Research Centre for Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United Medical Genetics", Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Clinic States,7DepartmentofPediatrics,BaylorCollegeofMedicine, "Moja sem'ja", Moscow, Russian Federation Houston, TX, United States Introduction: One of the most signiﬁcant features of the Introduction: Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) is human genome is high variability. Genomic variations characterized by hypogonadism due to an impaired occur during ontogenesis in various tissues and organs response of the gonads to gonadotropins (Gn) and a sec- leading to the tissue-speciﬁc mosaicism. However, phe- ondary lack of sex steroid production and elevated Gn nomenon and mechanisms of a low-level gonosomal levels. HH can be caused by environmental factors and mosaicism in women of reproductive age have not been congenital disorders that affect ovarian development and properly described and clariﬁed. function, as well as syndromic and non-syndromic single MaterialsandMethods:preparationsfrombuccalsmear gene disorders. However, in most cases of gonadal dys- (34) and peripheral venous blood (32) each woman had at function the molecular etiology remains an enigma. least one healthy child. Three groups were formed that Subjects and Methods: To identify novel molecular included woman of different ages: 20-29 years (1), 30-39 causes in HH we applied whole exome sequencing (WES) years (2) and 40-49 years (3). FISH-analysis with to33affectedfemaleindividualsfrom30unrelatedfamilies centromeric probes on chromosomes X and 18 in including 22 with parental consanguinity. accordance with the standard protocol. Results: WES revealed likely pathogenic variants in Results: The study found that in the blood of healthy known HH-associated genes in 7/30 families (23%) women there isaphysiological low-levelmosaicism with a including AR, NOBOX, MCM8, PADI6, PSMC3IP, and clear trend in increased proportion of abnormal cells TG. In seven unrelated families, we identiﬁed likely associated with the increasing age to 1.83%, 2.23% and pathogenic variants in candidate disease genes. In three of16 J.delPicchia these families, each with one apparently sporadic case, informed about phenomena of germinal mosaicism in biallelic variation in IGSF10 was found. Two of the three gonadal DNA. families had reported parental consanguinity. IGSF10 In this case, NIFTY test could not identify the encodesa2623-amino-acidmemberoftheimmunoglobulin abnormality.Furtherstudiesareneededtoassesssensitivity superfamily that is likely involved in controlling early of NIPT in the cases of Down syndrome, not caused by migration of neurons expressing gonadotropin-releasing simple trisomy 21. hormone. All three missense IGSF10 variants affect We conclude that invasive prenatal diagnosis should be conserved amino acid residues, were predicted to be proposed in all pregnancies with increased trisomy risk, deleterious by several SNV scoring algorithms, and are even if NIPT results are negative. High resolution present in genomic databases with a frequency <2x10-5. microarray testing can be helpful in identiﬁcation of Conclusions:AWESapproachenabledtheidentiﬁcation microdeletions in patients with idic 21 and could delineate of novel IGSF10 mutations in females with HH, thus genotype -phenotype correlations. expanding the spectrum of genes involved in impaired J.Pietrzak:None.C.Wleczyk:None.K.Bernatowicz: ovarian response to Gn. None.A.Kashyap:None.E.Studniak:None.W.Bonda: R. Colombo: None. A. Jolly: None. Y. Bayram: None. None. M. Kossowski: None. M. Ryłów: None. M. E. Karaca: None. N. Di Simone: None. G. Scambia: Bryśkiewicz: None. S. Zajączek: None. None. T. Tos: None. S. Jhangiani: None. Z.C. Akdemir: None. J.E. Posey: None. J.R. Lupski: None. P01.36D De novo mutations in idiopathic male infertility P01.35C AcaseofDownsyndromewithisodicentricchromosome21 A. Hodić1,A. Maver1,B.Zorn2,D.Plaseska-Karanﬁlska3, misdiagnosed by noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) M.Ristanović4,I. Novaković4,B. Peterlin1 J.Pietrzak1,C. Wleczyk1,K.Bernatowicz2,A. Kashyap2, 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical E. Studniak1,W.Bonda1, M.Kossowski1,M.Ryłów1, Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Andrology Unit, M.Bryśkiewicz1, S.Zajączek2 ReproductiveUnit,DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 1Cytogenetic Unit, Department of Laboratory Diagnostics, 3ResearchCentreforGeneticEngineeringandBiotechnology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2DepartmentofGeneticsandPathology,PomeranianMedical 4Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of University, Szczecin, Poland Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia Isodicentric chromosome 21 is an extremely rare chromo- Introduction: Infertility affects about 5% of adult human somal aberration. Only several cases have been reported males and despite efforts in understanding genetic basis of worldwide. The phenotype of patients with 46,idic(21) male infertility, a large number of cases still remain to be (q22.3)karyotypeisgenerallyconcordantwithpatientswho explained. Previous methods of detecting disease-related have simple trisomy 21. genes included large family studies. In disorders, such as Wereportagirlbornin38-thweekfromﬁrstpregnancy; infertility, natural selection prevents transmission of muta- prenatal screening (USG and a double test) performed in tions, and therefore many genes whose mutations cause 13-th week of gestation predicted a 6-fold increased risk of infertility are not yet known. Down syndrome. Noninvasive prenatal testing using MaterialsandMethods:Inordertoinvestigatepotential cffDNA from mother's blood did not show increased risk rolesofdenovomutationsinmaleinfertilityweperformed of trisomy 21 in fetus. Invasive prenatal testing was not trio whole exome re-sequencing in 13 infertile males and performed. After birth, phenotypic features of trisomy 21 their parents. All infertile males were diagnosed with were observed in the child. idiopathic azoospermia. For all subjects library preparation Cytogenetic testing performed from the periferal blood was performed with Nextera Coding Exome Capture Kit revealed an unbalanced karyotype 46,XX,idic(21)(q22.3). (Illumina, San Diego, CA), with subsequent sequencing on The result were conﬁrmed using Methods: FISH, and Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. MLPA. Microarray additionally revealed a terminal micro- Results: We identiﬁed de novo mutations in three deletion sized 11.2 kbp on chromosome 21. Both parents infertile males. Among genes with de novo mutations, were tested and conﬁrmed negative for any chromosomal two (NEURL4, BRD2) were previously implicated in aberration from blood and ﬁbroblasts and they have been reproduction in animal models. Previous studies have shown that NEURL4 contributes to germ cell formation inAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 17 Drosophila, while the BRD2 is essential for chromatin O.Lobel, S.Zeligson, M. BarMeir,R. Michaelson-cohen, remodelingduringspermatogenesisinmice.Thethirdgene S. Koka,P. Schwed, A. Samueloff,O.Weiss, M.BenUziyahu, with de novo mutation (SEMA5A) has not yet been E. Levy-Lahad,R. Segel implicatedinreproduction,butitshowsexpressionintestis. Conclusions: We identiﬁed potentially new genes and Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel mechanismsinvolvedinthepathogenesisofmaleinfertility. A. Hodić: None. A. Maver: None. B. Zorn: None. D. Background: 30-50% of clinically recognized pregnancies Plaseska-Karanﬁlska: None. M. Ristanović: None. I. end in intra-uterine fetal death (IUFD), 20% within the Novaković: None. B. Peterlin: None. second and the third trimester, 25-60% without determined cause. Genetic work-up may lower the uncertainty, P01.37A acknowledge the recurrence risks and enable wiser man- InterphaseChromosomeProﬂing(ICP)asarapid,sensitive agement of future pregnancies. Microarray technology andcost-effectivediagnostictoolforPrenatalandPostnatal (CMA)playsamajorroleinidentifyinggeneticetiologyof settings prenatal and postnatal pathologies, raising detection rate compared with karyotyping. An advantage of CMA in S. K.Bhattacharya, V.Lal IUFDworkup,isusageofdirectlyextractedDNAwithouta culture, therefore without viability issues. The CMA chip Dr. Lal PathLabs Ltd., New Delhi, India includes copy number and singe nucleotide polymorphism probes, enabling identiﬁcation of small copy number Karyotypinghasanimportantroleinthegeneticwork-upof changes, mosaicism and homozygous regions throughout POC specimens, since approximately one half of mis- the genome. We charachterized CMA ﬁndings in IUFD carriages are due to chromosomal imbalances. The three cases in the Israeli population to ﬁnd: - the characteristics primary methods used to obtain karyotype are 1) Classical and frequency of the chromosomal aberrations in IUFD cytogenetics2)TargetedFISHand3)aCGH.Eachofthese comparedtolivebirths.-Domaternalandfetaldeterminants methods has its advantages and disadvantages. Addition- have impact on chromosomal aberration prevalence in ally,theTATissigniﬁcantlylong.ThetargetedFISH,only IUFD cases? - Can ﬁnding of higher percentage of homo- covers5-7chromosomesandthereforeprovidesincomplete zygous regions in IUFD explain the etiology? information. It cannot detect any structural abnormalities. Methods: We performed CMA on placental tissue of Prenatal diagnosis by karyotype determination is done IUFD, gathered information regarding mothers and fetuses mostly to provide assurance, since majority of the preg- charachteristics, and compared with information of women nancieswouldhaveanormalkaryotype.Therefore,fastand who underwent prenatal diagnosis during the same period. accurate information is highly critical for management of Results:CMAﬁndingwasanindependentpredictorwith the pregnancy. However, the same limitations mentioned higher prevalence in IUFD than in live-born pregnancies. for POC also apply to prenatal diagnosis. To overcome The chance of ﬁnding a pathogenic aberration in in IUFD thesechallenges,werecentlyvalidatedandadaptedanovel with congenital anomalies was higher than other women. cytogenetic technology ‘Interphase Chromosome Proﬁling Homozygosity analysis had no advantage over CNV (ICP) (InteGen LLC, USA) to assess the molecular kar- analysis. yotype of 200 miscarriage material and 80 amniotic ﬂuid Conclusions: CMA resolves more IUFD cases and samplesusinginterphasenuclei.ForPOCandAFsamples, therefore should be implicated in such cases. using ICP probes, all numerical, most balanced and unba- O.Lobel:None.S.Zeligson:None.M.BarMeir:None. lanced structural aberrations, and all Robertsonian translo- R.Michaelson-cohen:None.S.Koka:None.P.Schwed: cations can be detected. Using ICP, we obtained results None. A. Samueloff: None. O. Weiss: None. M. Ben from all (100%) samples and the TAT was signiﬁcantly Uziyahu: None. E. Levy-Lahad: None. R. Segel: None. reduced to less than 1 day. However, with a proper work- ﬂow, results can be delivered in less than 2 hours. P01.39C S.K. Bhattacharya: A. Employment (full or part-time); Extended genetic analyses in infertile men with non- Signiﬁcant; Dr. Lal PathLabs Ltd. V. Lal: A. Employment obstructive azoospermia (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Dr. Lal PathLabs Ltd.. F. Tüttelmann1,C. Krallmann2,Y. Stratis1,M.Hoffmann1, P01.38B L. Hankamp1, S.Burkhardt1, C.Dreier1, C.Ruckert1, The impact of chromosomal microarray analysis on J.Gromoll2,P. F. Wieacker1, S.Kliesch2,A. Röpke1 resolvingintra-utrinefetaldeathcasesinIsraelipopulation18 J.delPicchia 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,University ofMünster,Münster, 1Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Germany, 2Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Andrology Centre, Tartu (CeRA), University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia Male infertility is a clinically and genetically highly het- Introduction: Infertility affects 5-7% of men. The current erogeneous disease, mostly caused by spermatogenetic pipeline at the andrology clinic is able to assign a deﬁnite failure. The most severe form is non-obstructive azoos- causefor40%ofpatients,includinggeneticerrorsin8%of permia (NOA). In the majority of NOA cases, a genetic cases, whereas 60% of them remain idiopathic (Punab M origin is suspected but current genetic testing, comprising et al. 2017 Hum Reprod). Considering the complexity of cytogenetic analysis and AZF deletion screening, only spermatogenesis, it is likely that a substantial proportion of discovers the cause in about 17%. this uncharacterised aetiology may be explained by Recently,weexpandedouranalysesofNOApatientsthat unknown genetic factors. Currently, the role of genomic attended the Centre of Reproductive Medicine and copynumbervariants(CNVs)inmaleinfertilityisnotwell Andrology (CeRA). First, the routine chromosomal and deﬁned. We aimed to characterise genome-wide proﬁle of AZF analyses were performed. In a second step, sequence CNVs among Estonian men with idiopathic infertility. analysis of three genes was carried out. Material and Methods: All patients (n=211) and Chromosomalanalyseswereperformedin399patientsof controls (n=100) were recruited and clinically character- whom60(15.0%)wereidentiﬁedwithnumerical(47,XXY; ized at the Andrology Centre, Tartu University Hospital. 47,XYY) or structural aberrations (46,XX; aberrant Y Casescomprisedofidiopathicnon-obstructiveazoospermia chromosomes; translocations; inversions). AZF deletions or oligozoospermia patients. Controls represented partners were found in 1.8% (6 of 335). of pregnant women. CNV calling utilized genome-wide The coding sequence of TEX11, NR5A1 and DMRT1 SNP data (HumanOmniExpress-24 BeadChip) and was was analysed in 123 patients. Potentially pathogenic performed using alternative CNV prediction algorithms in variants were identiﬁed in 6 patients (4.9%). One mutation parallel. CNVs were validated with TaqMan (speciﬁc loci) inTEX11(c.450C>T)andoneinNR5A1(c.712G>A)were or aCGH (microdeletions/duplications). already published, whereas novel mutations were detected Results: Infertility patients and fertile men did not differ in NR5A1 (1x c.1079C>T) and in DMRT1 (2x c.308A>G, in their overall CNV load. However, an enrichment of 1x c.436C>G). asymptomatic carriers of known microdeletions and micro- In conclusion, the basic genetic analyses in men with duplications was observed among patients. Additionally, a NOA by conventional cytogenetic analysis and AZF novelrecurrentCNVoverlappinganuncharacterizedtestis- screening revealed the expected number of aberrations. speciﬁc gene, was detected solely in seven infertility cases. Through sequencing of three genes, which have been Replication analysis for its association with male infertility conﬁrmed as responsible for spermatogenetic failure, an is ongoing in a larger Estonian cohort. additional5%ofmencarryingpossiblypathogenicvariants Conclusions: Diagnostic yield for the patients with were identiﬁed. impairedspermatogenesismaybeincreasedviaintroducing This work was carried out within the frame of the DFG proﬁling of genome-wide genomic rearrangements into Clinical Research Unit ‘Male Germ Cells: from Genes to clinical routine. Function‘ (CRU 326). Grants: IUT34-12, Happy Pregnancy project. F.Tüttelmann:None.C.Krallmann:None.Y.Stratis: A.Punab:None.L.Kasak:None.M.Punab:None.E. None. M. Hoffmann: None. L. Hankamp: None. S. Laasik: None. A. Valdner: None. M. Laan: None. Burkhardt:None.C.Dreier:None.C.Ruckert:None.J. Gromoll: None. P.F. Wieacker: None. S. Kliesch: None. P01.41A A. Röpke: None. Two novel CEP290 pathological variants prenatally identiﬁed by targeted next-generation sequencing using a P01.40D custom Meckel-Gruber gene panel Proﬁle of copy number variants in Estonian men with impaired spermatogenesis M.AlamedaGarcia1, E.Del NuevoMartinez1,S. Garcia Gomez1,M.LabradorRanz1,S.IzquierdoAlvarez2,A.Rodríguez A. Punab1,L. Kasak1,M. Punab2,E. Laasik1,A. Valdner1, Valle2,M.MiramarGallart2,A.SestoYague1,J.Puente-Prieto1 M.Laan1 1LabGenetics, San Sebastian de los Reyes, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, SpainAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 19 Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a lethal autosomal one year was included in the study. Plasma samples were recessivedisordercharacterizedbyaclassicultrasoundtriad takenfromnewborns.Allnewborn’sphysicalexaminations ofoccipitalencephalocele,polycystickidneysandpostaxial were performed and enrolled. The total microRNA isolated polydactyly. anomalies of the central nervous system, dys- from plasma samples was reverse transcribed into the plasias and malformations. The mortality is 100%.. In this cDNA. Quantitative real time -PCR was performed with case report, a prenatal sample from a fetus with MKS speciﬁcprimersformiR-16referencegeneandmiR-17,21, clinical features wasscreenedfor 21genesusinga targeted 23,92,141,145,191,483targetgenes.RESTsoftwarewas next-generationsequencingpanelusingaIonPGMSystem used for the normalization of relative expression values. (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). The plasma levels of the target miRNA molecules were Two novel pathological variants, both resulting in stop showed comparable difference between control and ART codons, p.Ser1198* (c.3593C>A) and p.Ser1648* groups. All three target miRNA molecule were displayed (c.4943C>G),werefoundintheCEP290genewhichcodes signiﬁcantlyhigherlevelsofexpressioninARTbabiesthan for acentrosomal proteinof 290 kDa involved inearly and controls. In our preliminary results signed that infertility- late steps of cilia formation. Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed causing miRNAs in parents might be cause of congenital the carrier status of the parents. anomalies in newborns. Project code:TTU-2016-1709 Our results show that our Meckel-Gruber targeted next- B. Gozum: None. A. Toylu: None. B. Nur: None. M. generationsequencing21-genepanelisaneffectivetoolfor Sakinci:None.M.Özekinci:None.O.A.Clark:None.E. the identiﬁcation of pathological variants involved in this Mihci: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- syndrome and conﬁrms the possibility of obtaining a faster borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants and accurate prenatal genetic diagnosis. alreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;AkdenizUniversityScientiﬁc M.AlamedaGarcia:Other;Signiﬁcant;LabGenetics.E. Research Projects Foundation. Del Nuevo Martinez: Other; Signiﬁcant; LabGenetics. S. Garcia Gomez: Other; Signiﬁcant; LabGenetics. M. P01.44D Labrador Ranz: Other; Signiﬁcant; LabGenetics. S. Feasibility and concerns of preimplantation genetic Izquierdo Alvarez: None. A. Rodríguez Valle: None. diagnosis for mitochondrial DNA disorders M. Miramar Gallart: None. A. Sesto Yague: Other; Signiﬁcant; LabGenetics. J. Puente-Prieto: Other; Signiﬁ- J.Steffann1,S.Monnot1, N.Gigarel1, A.Rotig2,M.Rio1, cant; LabGenetics. N.Frydman3,L. Hesters3, A.Munnich1,J.Bonnefont1 P01.43C 1Paris Descartes University and Necker Hospital, Paris, ComparisonofmicroRNAproﬁlesininfantsbornwithand France,2INSERMUMR1163ImagineInstitute,Paris,France, without assisted reproduction techniques 3Paris-Sud and Paris-Saclay University, Antoine-Béclère Hospital, Clamart, France B. Gozum,A.Toylu, B.Nur,M. Sakinci,M. Özekinci, O.A. Clark, E.Mihci Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is an alternative procedure to prenatal diagnosis for couples at-risk to have Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey children affected with a severe genetic disease, such as a mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) disorder. PGD relies on the The incidence of congenital anomalies in ART babies is geneticanalysisofoneorafewcellssampledfromin-vitro higherthanthatofbabiesbornwithspontaneouspregnancy. fertilized embryos, between day 3 and day 5 of develop- The cause of this situation is unknown. Three mechanisms ment.InthecaseofmtDNAdisorders,quantiﬁcationofthe are known to cause congenital anomalies in ART preg- mutant load on these cells is performed in order to assess nancies:pointmutation,chromosomal disorders, epigenetic the risk for the embryo to develop a severe mitochondrial abnormalities. An important factor in epigenetics is micro- disease, either in utero or in childhood. Our 15-year RNA. Studies have shown microRNAs are associated with experience supports the reliability of such procedure. fertility and development.The aim of this study to demon- Overall15heteroplasmicpatientswereincludedinourPGD strate whether infertility-related miRNAs are different in program. A total of 26 cycles were started, 25 oocytes children born with spontaneous pregnancy compared to retrievals and 16 embryo transfers were performed, result- those born with ART. The other aim of the study to show ing in 3 pregnancies and birth of 3 children. The mutant whether miRNAs are associated with anomalies and dys- load assessed on a single blastomere sampled from 94 morphic ﬁndings in patients. A total of 38 term newborns embryoswasveryclosetothemutantloadoftheremaining included the study. In Akdeniz University Hospital, a baby cell/embryo, for all mutations tested: m.8344A>G, born with 21 ART and 17 spontaneous pregnancies within m.3243A>G, m.8993T>G, m.8993T>C, m.9185T>C,20 J.delPicchia m.10197G>A. Most of the transferred embryos (17/25) howeverahigh-level mosaicism of trisomy 21was missed. were heteroplasmic, and 2/3 neonates carried the maternal In the future, we need to learn more about placental mtDNA mutation, questioning the long-term prognosis of mosaicism in general and in particular the comparability these patients. PGD remains a cumbersome procedure with between the detection rates of the new non-invasive alowsuccessrate,whichcannotbeappliedtohomoplasmic methods. or critically homoplasmic patients. There is therefore a I. Lund: None. E. Vestergaard: None. N. Becher: strong need to develop alternative procedures such as None. D. Lildballe: None. P. Schelde: A. Employment nuclear transfer. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Arcedi Biotech Aps. L. J.Steffann:None.S.Monnot:None.N.Gigarel:None. Hatt: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; A. Rotig: None. M. Rio: None. N. Frydman: None. L. Arcedi Biotech Aps. R. Singh: A. Employment (full or Hesters: None. A. Munnich: None. J. Bonnefont: None. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Arcedi Biotech Aps. O. Petersen: None. N. Uldbjerg: None. I. Vogel: None. P01.45A Detectingconﬁnedplacentalandfetalmosaicismusingcell- P01.46B free DNA sequencing on maternal plasma A homozygous donor splice-site mutation in the meiotic gene MSH4 causes primary ovarian insufﬁciency I.Lund1,2,3,E.Vestergaard1,2,3, N.Becher1,2,3,D.Lildballe1,2, P. Schelde4,L. Hatt4,R. Singh4,O.Petersen5,2, N.Uldbjerg5, C.Carlosama1,M.Elzaiat2,L.C.Patiño1,H.E.Mateus1,R.A. I.Vogel1,2,3 Veitia2, P.Laissue1 1AarhusUniversityHospital,DepartmentofClinicalGenetics, 1Center For Research in Genetics and Genomics-CIGGUR, Aarhus N., Denmark, 2Center for Fetal Diagnostics, Aarhus GENIUROS Research Group, School of Medicine and Health University, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N., Denmark, Sciences,UniversidaddelRosario,Bogota,Colombia,2Institut 3Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus N., Jacques Monod, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France Denmark, 4Arcedi Biotech Aps, Vejle, Denmark, 5Aarhus University Hospital, Department of Gynecology and Premature ovarian insufﬁciency (POI) is a pathology Obstetrics, Aarhus N., Denmark affecting women under 40years of age characterized by an early cessation of menses and high FSH levels. Despite Introduction: Mosaicism is characterized by a normal and recent progresses in molecular diagnosis, the etiology of an abnormal cell-line. Test results on cell-free DNA POI remains idiopathic in most cases. Whole-exome (cfDNA) in maternal plasma can be compromised as the sequencing of members of a Colombian family affected fractionofabnormalcellsmaybetoolowfordetection.We by POI allowed us to identify a novel homozygous donor wanted to explore the detection rate of both conﬁned pla- splice-site mutation in the meiotic gene MSH4 (MutS cental and fetal mosaicism using cfDNA sequencing on Homolog 4). The variant followed a strict mendelian seg- maternal plasma. regationwithinthefamilyandwasabsentinacohortof135 Methods and Material: We retrieved data on invasive women over 50years of age without history of infertility, samples from mosaic pregnancies obtained from 2014 to from the same geographical region as the affected family. 2017. On maternal plasma, we retrospectively performed Exon trapping experiments showed that the splice-site cfDNA testing by genome-wide massive parallel sequen- mutationinducedskippingofexon17.Attheproteinlevel, cing and VeriSeq-NIPT analysis software. the mutation p.Ile743_Lys785del is predictedto lead to the Results: CfDNA detected placental mosaicism in 59% ablation of the highly conserved Walker B motif of the (n=16). The false negative rate of placental mosaicism ATP-binding domain, thus inactivating MSH4. Our study using cfDNA testing was 41% (n=11). The mean level of describes the ﬁrst MSH4 mutation associated with POI and mosaicism in the invasive samples was 72.0% in the increases the number of meiotic/DNA mismatch repair detected cases and 20% in the false negative cases genes formally implicated as being responsible for this (p<0.05). Fetal mosaicism, conﬁrmed by amniocentesis, condition. was detected by cfDNA sequencing in 63% (5/8 cases). A This work was supported by the Universidad del mosaictrisomy21casewhichwasconﬁrmedbothbyCVS Rosario grant: [CS/ABN062/GENIUROS 017] and by (84% T21 cells) and AC was missed by cfDNA. the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale grant: Conclusion: CfDNA sequencing is capable of detecting [DEQ20150331757]. C.C. and M.E. on the one hand, and placental mosaicism in 59% of the cases. It seems that the R.A.V. and P.L. on the other hand contributed equally to levelofmosaicismintheinvasivesamplespredictswhether this work. ornotcfDNAtestingisabletodetecttheabnormalcell-line;Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 21 C. Carlosama: None. M. Elzaiat: None. L.C. Patiño: A. Marichal,B. Grisart,J. Billard, S.Brohée, D.Feret, None. H.E. Mateus: None. R.A. Veitia: None. P. C. Hougardy,S. Mary,S. Rombout, P. Hilbert,C. Meunier, Laissue: None. N.Simonis,K. Dahan P01.47C Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium Clinical application of paired-end MPSS for cfDNA screening of common aneuploidies SinceJuly2017reimbursementofNIPTisentirelycovered during pregnancy for all pregnant women in Belgium. In V. Cirigliano,E. Ordoñez,L. Rueda,S. Nicolas,M. Grau, ourinstituteweprocessedmore than 12000samples overa I.Castilla, C. Puertollano, M.Lechuga, M.Cañadas 6 month period. Our in house NIPT workﬂow allows the identiﬁcation of trisomies involving chromosome 13, 18 Synlab, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain and 21 butalso trisomies affecting other autosomes as well as sex chromosomes aneuploidies. Intrachromosomal rear- Paired-endMPSSallowsdigitalcountingofplasmacfDNA rangements are also investigated using a 1 Mb sliding while also measuring fragments length. cfDNA size dif- window approach. This allowed us to identify fetal rear- ferencescanbeusedtodeterminefetal fraction (FF)andto rangements in a number of cases but also maternal rear- improve sensitivity by additionally applying counting sta- rangements with an unpreceded power. Indeed given the tistics on short (fetal) fragments. prevalence of maternal cfDNA in puriﬁed cfDNA prepared NeoBona is the ﬁrst test using such approach, we from the blood of pregnant mothers, some rather small evaluated its performance by screening a large cohort of rearrangements can be pin-pointed quite reliably. Interest- consecutive average risk gestations. ingly, some unusually large maternal rearrangements (>1 Prospective study of 19151 pregnancies (575 twins) Mb) have also been observed. Maternal CNVs can usually screenedforcommontrisomies,includingXYaneuploidies bedistinguishedfromfetalonesbythelevelofsigniﬁcance in 57% of cases. of the intrachromosomal Z-score. Some of these CNVs NeoBona test was used to determine the likelihood of were futher conﬁrmed by CGH arrays using maternal con- aneuploidy (Tscore) based on FF, counting statistics and stitutional DNA. The majority of these CNVs are duplica- cfDNA size distribution where cut-offs were applied to tions (68 duplications and 43 deletions) some of which classify normal and aneuploid cases. overlapsyndromicgenes. Some correspond tolargeknown Test resultswereprovidedin 99.2% gestations,288 T21, CNVs.However,somelargeCNVsrangingfrom1to5Mb 63 T18 and 27 T13, in 23 cases detected with FF between seem to be rare familial deletions or duplications probably 0.8 and 3%. Invasive procedures were performed in 99% not associated with any pathogenic phenotype. Indirect riskpregnancies,5falsepositiveswereobservedforT21,2 screening of the whole maternal population using NIPT T18 and 3 for T13 (FPR 0.03%, 0.01% and 0.02%); 1 T21 offers a unique opportunity to identify large probably wasmissed(DR99.7%).XYaneuploidieswerereportedin benign CNVs. A map of these rare familial CNVs char- 39cases,follow-upavailablefor14with4FPresults(FPR acterized by CGH will presented. 0.13%). Vanishing twins of discrepant sex were suspected A.Marichal:None.B.Grisart:None.J.Billard:None. in 5 cases and 4 maternal X aneuploidies were identiﬁed. S.Brohée:None.D.Feret:None.C.Hougardy:None.S. Paired-end MPSS and the bioinformatics approach of Mary: None. S. Rombout: None. P. Hilbert: None. C. NeoBona allowed detecting aneuploidies even at fetal Meunier: None. N. Simonis: None. K. Dahan: None. fractions below 1% while reducing FPR. Removing the need of a lower FF limit allowed cfDNA analysis to be P01.49A successful on a high proportion of clinical cases extending External assessment of the quality of cell free fetal DNA the beneﬁts of cfDNA screening to a larger population of non-invasive prenatal testing for aneuploidies pregnancies. V. Cirigliano: None. E. Ordoñez: None. L. Rueda: Z. C.Deans1,F. Khawaja1,R. Hastings2,K. Rack2,S. Patton3, None. S. Nicolas: None. M. Grau: None. I. Castilla: W.Gutowska-Ding3,L. Jenkins4,S. Allen5, L.S. Chitty6, None. C. Puertollano: None. M. Lechuga: None. M. E. Sistermans7 Cañadas: None. 1UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, Edinburgh, United P01.48D Kingdom, 2CEQAS, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3EMQN, Map of maternal copy number variation highlighted by Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Great Ormond Street NHS NIPT analysis Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5Birmingham Women’s and Childrens NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham,22 J.delPicchia UnitedKingdom,6UCLGreatOrmondStreetInstituteofChild Introduction: Currentlyusedapproachesfor determination Health, London, United Kingdom, 7VUmc medical Center of fetal sex in noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) have Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands shown limitations in correct prediction of fetal sex in cases of twin pregnancies. According to recent information only Introduction: To deliver a high standard of laboratory SNP based tests of NIPT category are able to determine testing, external quality assessment (EQA) is required to fetal sex for each of the twin. provide important information for clinicians, laboratories Aim: To test the feasibility and to validate the new and patients, demonstrating that accurate testing is being bioinformaticalgorithmcalledSCARtopredictsexofboth performed and reported. Providing an EQA for cell free fetuses in twin pregnancies with utilisation of whole fetal DNA (cffDNA) testing is challenging as sample genome coverage genomic scan of circulating DNA from acquisition (availability and scalability) is a limiting factor. pregnant plasma. The delivery and results of a large international pilot EQA Materials and Methods: Low coverage whole genome for laboratory NIPT for aneuploidy using maternal plasma sequencinganalysiswasperformedonMiSeqandNextSeq samples is described. platforms on circulating DNA of 76 pregnant women with Materials and Methods: Eighty-six maternal plasma twins according to previously published protocol. For each samplesfrompregnancieswithknownoutcomes(low/high- of the fetuses sex determination algorithm SCAR predicted risk for common aneuploidy) were obtained from the themostprobablecombinationoftwinsexes:girl-girl;girl- RAPID sample bank. Three EQA providers (CEQAS, boy or boy-boy according to fetal fraction counted from EMQN, and UKNEQAS for Molecular Genetics) delivered fragmentlengths and reads mapped on Y chromosome. All the pilot assessing NIPT and reporting The submitted predictions were veriﬁed after delivery. reports were assessed and feedback provided for genotyp- Results: Among 76 twin pregnancies, 70 were identiﬁed ing, interpretation and clerical accuracy. correctly and 6 cases were found as uninformative. All of Results: Ninety-ﬁve laboratories from 30 countries 6 samples fell to the group with fetal fraction lower participated. The use of maternal plasma allowed any than 10%. testing methods to be applied. Two critical errors were Conclusion: Novel algorithm SCAR predicted correctly reported; one false positive and an incorrect high-risk 92% cases however fetal fraction under 10% critically trisomy 18 result. Reports lacked details of methods, affected reliable sex determination in boy-girl and boy-boy limitations, and many formats made it difﬁcult to identify pregnancies. key clinical recommendations. M. Hýblová: None. J. Budiš: None. F. Ďuri: None. M. Conclusions: Growing international demand for partici- Kucharík: None. G. Minarik: None. T. Szemes: None. pation demonstrates the clinical need for an independent evaluation of NIPT practice. This pilot EQA has demon- P01.52D strated that the use of real maternal samples distributed at Chromosomal microarray coupled to genome-wide non- ambient temperature has enabled global participation with invasiveprenataltesting(NIPT)tominimizethenumberof verylowsamplefailurerate(2%).Thegenotypingaccuracy unnecessary invasive procedures was good but review of the large number of reports submitted highlighted the need for further standardisation B. Oneda,P. Sirleto, R. Baldinger, M.Taralczak, P. Joset, and guidance on NIPT reporting. M.Zweier,D.Niedrist,S.Azzarello-Burri,K.Steindl,A.Rauch Z.C. Deans: None. F. Khawaja: None. R. Hastings: None. K. Rack: None. S. Patton: None. W. Gutowska- Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Ding: None. L. Jenkins: None. S. Allen: None. L.S. Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, Zurich, Switzerland Chitty: None. E. Sistermans: None. Prospective clinical results on genome-wide NIPT are still P01.50B few and there is little follow up and little data available on ValidationofnovelbioinformaticalgorithmSCARforfetal test accuracy. We received 1921 samples including 108 sex determination in twin pregnancies twin pregnancies for NIPT. 93.6% of the cases were ana- lyzed genome-wide. Additionally, in order to assess test M.Hýblová1,J.Budiš2,F. Ďuri3,M. Kucharík2,G.Minarik1, limitations, we performed NIPT retrospectively in 90 cases T. Szemes2 with a variety of segmental aberrations. In the prospective cohort, 176 samples showed chromosomal abnormalities, 1Medirex,Bratislava,Slovakia,2Geneton,Bratislava,Slovakia, 144ofsmall size.Inthelatter, we performed chromosomal 3CVTI, Bratislava, Slovakia microarray analysis on maternal DNA obtained from the NIPT tube and suggested invasive testing only forAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 23 aberrations not of maternal origin. We found maternal analyzed using a proprietary statistical analysis pipeline CNVs in 7.8% of the total cases which were surprisingly developed to test for deletions in each of the syndromes. large in several instances. We detected and conﬁrmed Results: The assay was able to correctly classify all pathologicchromosomalabnormalitiesin32samples,sixof abnormalandnormal samples resultingin100% speciﬁcity which would not have been detected if NIPT had been and speciﬁcity. restricted to common trisomies. The positive predictive Conclusions: Using a proprietary target capture enrich- value for the common trisomies was 100% and a retro- ment technology and novel multi-engine copy number spective questionnaire for quality control showed no evi- detection pipeline we accurately detected all normal and dence for a false negative result. The positive predictive abnormal samples. This novel microdeletion NIPT method valuefornon-maternalsegmentalanomalieswas50%.Thus overcomes the limitations of other methodologies and the number of ‘’unnecessary’’ invasive procedures pro- increases the number of diseases that can be reliably voked by genome wide NIPT was as low as 0.3%. We detected by NIPT, thus offering more choices to couples correctly detected all chromosomal aberrations bigger than towards an informed management of their pregnancy. 6.3 Mb in size in the retrospective cohort. Altogether, we K. Tsangaras: A. Employment (full or part-time); demonstrate that genome wide NIPT does not lead to a Signiﬁcant;NIPD Genetics.P.Mina: A.Employment(full signiﬁcant loss of speciﬁcity, if in cases with segmental orpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics.M.Ioannides:A. abnormalities, maternal chromosomal microarray testing is Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. performed prior to invasive testing. C.Loizides:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; B.Oneda:None.P.Sirleto:None.R.Baldinger:None. NIPDGenetics.A.Achilleos:A.Employment(fullorpart- M. Taralczak: None. P. Joset: None. M. Zweier: None. time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. E. Kypri: A. Employ- D. Niedrist: None. S. Azzarello-Burri: None. K. Steindl: ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. G. None. A. Rauch: None. Koumbaris: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- cant;NIPDGenetics.P.C.Patsalis:A.Employment(fullor P01.53A part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. Non-invasive prenatal testing of microdeletion syndromes P01.54B K.Tsangaras,P.Mina,M.Ioannides,C.Loizides,A.Achilleos, Developmentofanovelnoninvasiveprenataltest(NIPT)of E. Kypri,G.Koumbaris, P. C.Patsalis fetal aneuploidies, microdeletions and 50 single gene diseases NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus M.Nicolaou,C.Loizides,M.Ioannides,K.Tsangaras,P.Mina, Introduction:ThediscoveryofcffDNAinmaternalplasma A. Achilleos,E. Kypri, G.Koumbaris,P. C. Patsalis has greatly facilitated the development of NIPT of fetal aneuploidies. However, sub-chromosomal copy number NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus change detection still remains a challenge. Towards this goal, we employed a proprietary hybrid capture-based Introduction: We hereby present a novel NIPT of major technology and novel bioinformatics pipeline for the aneuploidies, microdeletions and 50 monogenic diseases detection of microdeletion syndromes. By leveraging the with moderate and severe phenotypes, including Hemato- inherenthighenrichmentuniformityandhighreaddepthof logical, Kidney, Opthalmological, Neurological, Inherited this in-solution hybridization NIPT method we achieved Metabolic Diseases, such as Thalassaemia, Cystic Fibrosis, accurate non-invasive detection of fetal microdeletion syn- Phenylketonuria and Tay-Sachs. dromes. The assay combines multiple depth of coverage- Methods: cfDNA was obtained from 300 pregnancies based and fragment size-based ploidy detection engines to referred for NIPT at 10th-15th week of gestation for detect 1p36, DiGeorge, Wolf-Hirschhorn, and Smith- identiﬁcation of 651 causative mutations in 50 disease Magenis microdeletion syndromes with high sensitivity associated genes. A study including another 1000 pregnan- and speciﬁcity. ciesusingcfDNAandpaternalDNAisongoingforNIPTof MaterialsandMethods:cfDNAwasextractedfrom752 major aneuploidies, microdeletions and 50 monogenic unaffected ﬁrst trimesterpregnancyplasma samples and 29 diseases. An enriched sequencing library was prepared affectedprenatal and synthetic samples. Enrichmentprobes using custom TArget Capture Sequences (TACS) as were designed to span the syndromes’ critical regions previously described. TACS were designed based on avoiding low copy repeats and repetitive elements. All genomic locations of known causative mutations for samples were enriched using hybrid capture technology as monogenetic diseases under investigation. Enriched previously described. Enriched sequencing libraries were24 J.delPicchia products were sequenced using NGS and the data was Werecentlyidentiﬁedapossiblemalignancyina25-year processed using a custom bioinformatics pipeline. old women. The chromosome proﬁle resembles aberrations Results: For the initial 300 samples, a high number of previously seen in patients with colon carcinoma (loss of causative mutations was identiﬁed and a selection of those 8p, gain of 8q and 20). During subsequent colonoscopy, a was conﬁrmed using Sanger sequencing. For the ongoing possible precursor adenomatous polyps was removed. 1000 samples, causative mutations were identiﬁed and the Follow-up is ongoing. Also, some well-known (maternal) fetal risk for aneuploidies, microdeletions and monogenic CNVs havebeenidentiﬁed, suchasHereditaryNeuropathy disorders was determined. with liability to Pressure Palsies (HNPP) deletions Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst time that NIPT is made (OMIM162500). Furthermore, several deletions and dupli- availableforahighnumberofsinglegenediseasestogether cations with unknown clinical signiﬁcance have been with aneuploidies and microdeletions, opening a new detected that affected the chromosomal Z-scores of the chapter in prenatal screening. The cumulative risk for the NIPT analysis. In ﬁve cases thus far, the presence of an fetusisestimatedtobeashighas1/125.ThisnovelNIPTis extraX-chromosomeinthemotherwaspresent,these were expandable to hundreds of single gene diseases and can be communicated. takenpotentiallybyallpregnantwomenasearlyasthe10th With the plummeting costs of NGS on the one hand and week of gestation the advent of better bio-informatic tools for analysis on the M. Nicolaou: A. Employment (full or part-time); otherhand,guidelinesareclearlyneededtoguideusinthis Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. C. Loizides: A. Employment new genetic, healthcare landscape of secondary ﬁndings. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. M. Ioan- M. Baetens: None. T. Sante: None. S. Vergult: None. nides:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPD M. De Smet: None. S. Janssens: None. O. Vanakker: Genetics. K. Tsangaras: A. Employment (full or part- None. B. Callewaert: None. B. Poppe: None. A. time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. P. Mina: A. Employ- Dheedene: None. B. Menten: None. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. A. Achilleos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; P01.56D NIPD Genetics. E. Kypri: A. Employment (full or part- Clinical experience with noninvasive prenatal testing time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. G. Koumbaris: A. (NIPT) for rare autosomal trisomies Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. P.C. Patsalis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- F. M.Liao1,D.Huynh1,S. Kim2, V.Corey2, K.Curnow2, niﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. W.Seltzer1,S. Beruti2, S.Bhatt2 P01.55C 1Illumina, Inc, Redwood City, CA, United States, 2Illumina, Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT): how to handle Inc, San Diego, CA, United States secondaryﬁndingsofmaternalchromosomalabnormalities Objective: Using a whole-genome sequencing NIPT M.Baetens, T. Sante, S. Vergult,M. DeSmet, S.Janssens, approach, our laboratory began offering screening for rare O.Vanakker,B.Callewaert,B.Poppe,A.Dheedene,B.Menten autosomal trisomies (RATs) in 2017. This study presents our initial clinical experience. Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent, Belgium Method: Maternal blood samples from over 10,000 sin- gleton pregnancies were analyzed in the CLIA-certiﬁed NIPT has become a widely implemented screening test for Illumina Laboratory (Redwood City, CA) by the Veriﬁ™ the detection of fetal trisomy 13, 18 and 21. Over 8000 Plus Prenatal Test. Sequencing data was computationally NIPT analyses have been performed thus far at the Center processed with chromosome-speciﬁc quantitative scores for Medical Genetics Ghent, using shallow whole genome determined using sequence coverage and fetal fraction. sequencing (sWGS) protocol. Around 0,6% samples Classiﬁcationthresholdsforeachchromosomewerederived showed an increased risk for trisomy 13, 18 or 21. Also in to maximize speciﬁcity while accounting for differences in 0,6% analyses, we reported another chromosomal abnorm- prevalence for each RAT. ality, including other fetal aneuploidies but also several Results: 43 cases (0.4%) were reported as RAT screen clinically relevant maternal CNVs. The detection and dis- positive.ThemostcommonRATidentiﬁedwastrisomy22, closure of these (secondary) maternal aberrations poses followed by trisomies 7 and 9. The average maternal age ethical dilemmas. Aberrations such as the unfortunate (35.0 years) and gestational age (12.4 weeks) of the screen detection of a (predisposition to) malignancy or other positive cohort were similar to the whole study cohort. incidental ﬁndings are not always straightforward to However, some high-risk indications, abnormal ultrasound disclose. (1.8x) and history suggestive of increased risk forAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 25 aneuploidy(5.5x),weremorefrequentlylistedinthescreen triploidy was 23.3% (7/30). Maternal neoplasm was found positive cohort than in the whole study cohort. Clinical in 26.7% (8/30) cases. outcome was available in 8 cases (18.6%): 2 conﬁrmed Conclusions: Thispost hoc analysis of SNP-basedNIPT positives (1 full trisomy 9; 1 segmental 9p duplication), 2 datarevealedaPPVof23.3%forpregnanciesdeterminedto false positives, 3 miscarriages, and 1 elective termination be at high risk for DT. An additional and unexpected without conﬁrmatory testing; >99% of pregnancies are ﬁndingwasthesimilarnumberofmaternalneoplasmcases. ongoing. While a small cohort, these results suggest that maternal Conclusions: Our 0.4% screen-positive frequency is neoplasmshouldbeincludedinthedifferentialdiagnosisof consistent with previous studies, though some differences high risk DT results on SNP-based NIPT. were noted in the relative RAT prevalence.1,2 Results Table. Outcomes from suspected DT pregnancies obtained through NIPT early in pregnancy can be valuable determined via SNP-based NIPT for clinical management. Ongoing outcome collection will Outcomes,n(%) Cases(N=30) provide more insight into the biological aspects of RATs. F.M. Liao: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- Normalfetalandmaternaloutcome 12(40.0) cant; Illumina, Inc. D. Huynh: None. S. Kim: A. Employ- Maternalneoplasma 8(26.7) ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. V. Triploidysuspectedbyultrasound 4(13.3) Corey: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Conﬁrmedtriploidy 3(10.0) Illumina, Inc. K. Curnow: A. Employment (full or part- Completemolarpregnancy 1(3.3) time);Signiﬁcant;Illumina,Inc.W.Seltzer:F.Consultant/ Earlyfetaldemise 1(3.3) Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. S. Beruti: A. Ongoingearlygestation 1(3.3) Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. a 4 lymphoma, 1 colon cancer, 1 Stage IV cholangiocarcinoma S. Bhatt: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; diagnosedayearafterdelivery,1ovarianteratoma,and1unspeciﬁed. Illumina, Inc. P01.57A T. McKanna: A. Employment (full or part-time); Outcome of high risk for digynic triploidy results on SNP- Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. J. Chaperon: A. Employment based non-invasive prenatal testing (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. A. Ryan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. S. T.McKanna1,J.Chaperon1,A.Ryan1,S.Leonard1,K.Martin1, Leonard: None. K. Martin: None. H. Hedriana: F. H.Hedriana2 Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Natera, Inc. 1Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States, 2University of P01.58B California, Davis, CA, United States Widespread use of Non Invasive Prenatal Testing(NIPT) : experience of a Belgian genetic Center Introduction: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)- basednon-invasiveprenataltesting(NIPT)isuniquelyable B. Grisart,J.Billard, S.Brohée,A. Marichal, D.Feret, toidentifytheextrahaplotypeandparentaloriginintriploid C. Hougardy,S. Mary,S. Rombout, P. Hilbert,C. Meunier, pregnancies. The objective of this study was to establish a N.Simonis,K. Dahan positivepredictivevalue(PPV)forpregnanciessuspectedto be at high risk for digynic (maternal) triploidy (DT) via Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de SNP-basedNIPT.Forapparentfalsepositivecases,possible Génétique, Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium maternally-derived causes were investigated. Materials and Methods: Retrospective outcome data Non Invasive Prenatal Testing was developed in our insti- were collected for SNP-based NIPTs performed between tutein2014usinganinhousewholegenomeapproach.For January1,2015andDecember31,2017andcodedashigh more than 3 years, this test was open for all pregnant riskforDT.IRB-approvedoutcomescomprised:numberof women at their own expense. During this period we tested fetuses, ultrasound ﬁndings, results of cytogenetic testing 7041 maternal blood with a positive screening rate for includingparentalorigin oftriploidy,and maternal medical chromosome 13, 18 and 21 of 0,10%, 0,20% and 1,3% ﬁndings. respectively. Since July 2017NIPT hasbeenreimbursedin Results: A total of 39 cases with suspected DT were Belgium for all pregnant women. This resulted in a sharp identiﬁed and outcome data were obtained for 30 (77%) increaseinactivityasin6monthsmorethan12000samples cases (see Table). The PPV for conﬁrmed or suspected wereprocessed.Theratesoftrisomy13,18and21overthis period were 0.05%, 0.06% and 0.4% respectively. Beside26 J.delPicchia these common trisomies other trisomies involving chro- P01.60D mosomes 4, 6, 7, 8, 14, 15, 16, 20 and 22 were identiﬁed, Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of single gene most of them (>94%) were not conﬁrmed on invasive disorders by relative haplotype dosage (RHDO): review of samples.Incaseoftrisomyforchromosome6,7,11,14,15 18 months of clinical service and 20, uniparental disomy was evaluated in the normal fetus. Intrachromosome analysis using a 1 Mb sliding E. C.Young1,B. Bowns1,A. Gerrish1,M. Parks2,S.Court1, window approach, allowed to identify some micro rear- S. Clokie1,C. Mashayamombe-Wolfgarten1,J.Hewitt1, rangements affecting the fetus. These ones ranged from a D.Williams1, T.Cole1,M. Grifﬁths1,S. Allen1 few megabases to several tenth of megabases and were conﬁrmed by CGH on amniocytes. Sex chromosome 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, aneuploidies could be technically identiﬁed but a Belgian United Kingdom, 2Nonacus Ltd., Birmingham, United prenatalconsortium(www.BeSHG.be)decidednottoreport Kingdom thesesexchromosomesaneuploidies.Indeedgeneralization ofNIPTwouldscreenalmostthewholepopulationforthese Introduction: We have developed and implemented a sex aneuploidies as well as for susceptibility loci. This relativehaplotypedosage(RHDO)-basedmethodforNIPD raised ethical questions which have to be addressed. of multiple single gene disorders (SGD), including spinal B.Grisart:None.J.Billard:None.S.Brohée:None.A. muscular atrophy (SMA), Duchenne and Becker muscular Marichal: None. D. Feret: None. C. Hougardy: None. S. dystrophies (DMD/BMD), cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) and con- Mary: None. S. Rombout: None. P. Hilbert: None. C. genital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). Diagnostic services for Meunier: None. N. Simonis: None. K. Dahan: None. SMA and DMD/BMD were launched in September 2016, followed by the launch of a CF service in December 2017. P01.59C Materials and Methods: The test involves targeted Making NIPT available to all pregnant women enrichment of thousands of SNPs across multiple genomic regionsandmassivelyparallelsequencing(IlluminaMiSeq) Å. JanfalkCarlsson of cfDNA followed by RHDO analysis. Maternal, paternal and proband genomic DNA samples are tested alongside Vanadis Diagnostics – a PerkinElmer company, Sollentuna, cfDNAforhaplotypephasingandtomeasurefetalfraction. Sweden Ourmethodcantest2-3pregnanciesonasingleMiSeqrun, thus centralising testing and decreasing costs. The devel- Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) is increasing in opment of an automated analysis pipeline has increased interest for detection of aneuploidies due to these tests capacityfurther.Thereisnorequirementtoconﬁrmpositive giving a more reliable result than obtained from traditional results. ﬁrst trimester screening. NIPT should notonlybe available Results: To date, we have performed NIPD for 48 to high-risk pregnancies but for all women. With Vanadis referrals(UKandinternational)andreported16normal,18 NIPT, the aim was to fulﬁll this criterium, making NIPT unaffectedcarrierand10affected pregnancies.For4cases, available for all women by creating a fully automated a complete result could not be issued due to persistent low methodwithsimplepreparationneedandminimalhands-on fetal fraction, a recombination event or lack of informative time and thereby reducing both complexity and cost. SNPs. Of the 48 diagnostic tests, we have so far received Vanadis NIPT is a sequencing and PCR free, probe-based postnatal conﬁrmation of 15 results, with no discrepancies. technology usedtolabel targetsonchromosome13,18,21 Conclusions:NIPDbyRHDOisarobustassay,whichis and Y, thereby allowing for trisomy screening (13, 18 and feasibletoprovideinaclinicalsettingforbothX-linkedand 21)aswellassexdetermination.Theassayconsistsoffour autosomalrecessivedisorders.Theassaycouldbeextended enzymatic steps resulting in Rolling Circle Ampliﬁcation to increase the availability of NIPD for many monogenic Products (RCPs) for each of these four chromosomes. The disorders. RCPs are labeled with four different dyes, one for each E.C.Young:None.B.Bowns:None.A.Gerrish:None. chromosome, and deposited onto a nano-pore ﬁlter from M. Parks: None. S. Court: None. S. Clokie: None. C. where the labeled objects are counted by imaging. We will Mashayamombe-Wolfgarten: None. J. Hewitt: None. D. present performance characteristics for the Vanadis NIPT Williams: None. T. Cole: None. M. Grifﬁths: None. S. assay, including data for real clinical samples, to show the Allen: None. analytical precision and clinical feasibility to correctly identify trisomy 13, 18 and 21 as well as the sex of P01.62B the fetus. Predicting fetoplacental chromosomal mosaicism during Å. Janfalk Carlsson: None. non-invasive prenatal testingAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 27 N.Brison1,M.Neofytou1,L. Dehaspe1, B.Bayindir1, K.Van translucency but normal karyotype and CMA: impact on Den Bogaert1,L. Dardour2,H.Peeters1, H.VanEsch1, G.Van the counselling and need for further genetic investigations Buggenhout1,A.Vogels1,J.Breckpot1,T.deRavel1,E.Legius1, K. Devriendt1,J. R.Vermeesch1 R. Ficarella1, M.Mucciolo2,C.Votino1,F. R. Lepri2,M.F. Antonucci1,A. L.Buonadonna1,V.Lanari2,P. Volpe1, 1Centre for Human Genetics - UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, M.Gentile1, A.Novelli2 2DepartmentofHumanGenetics,FacultyofMedicine“IbnAl Jazzar”, Sousse, Tunisia 1ASL Bari, Bari, Italy, 2Bambino Gesù Paediatric Hospital, Roma, Italy Objective:Non-invasiveprenataldetectionoftrisomies21, 18 and 13 can be achieved with high accuracy through Objectives: To investigate the outcome for fetuses with sequencing of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) found in maternal nuchal translucency (NT) ≥3.5mm but normal karyotype/ blood. Using a genome-wide approach, fetal aneuploidies CMA. other than the common trisomies can also be detected. Methods: All patients were referred toour institutionfor Fetoplacental mosaicism is the main cause for false posi- NT≥3.5mmfrom2012to2016.Wefollowedprenatallyall tive/negative NIPT results. We further improved the ana- patients until delivery and pregnancy outcome was lytical power of genome-wide cfDNA screening by recorded. Targeted Resequencing was performed using a enabling the detection of fetoplacental mosaicism. panel including 15 RASopathies genes. Method: Aneuploidy detection was combined with fetal Results: We identiﬁed 74 fetuses. An adverse perinatal fraction estimation to enable the detection of placental outcome was observed in 27% of cases. US follow-up chromosomal mosaicism. This pipeline was applied to showed 10 cases with cardiac malformations (major in 6/ whole genome sequencing data derived from ~20.000 10);diaphragmatichernia(1);DandyWalkerMalformation maternal plasma samples. Following an abnormal NIPT, plus skeletal dysplasia (1); pyelectasis (1), and IUGR (1 testresultswerevalidatedbyconventionalinvasiveprenatal monochorionic twins). 54% of these cases (40/74) were or postnatal genetic testing. analyzed using our customized panel of RASopathies Results:Thenewanalysispipelineidentiﬁed134,24and genes. Four variants were identiﬁed, the aminoacid 7 non-mosaic trisomies 21, 18 and 13 respectively. All for substitutions Val1432Phe and Arg2452Cys, in the NF1 whomfollow-upinformationwasavailablewereconﬁrmed gene, and a Thr7Arg and Thr159Pro, in the LZTR1 gene. upon invasive testing. The incidence of other, rare Fouradditionalintronicvariantswerealsoidentiﬁed,butno autosomal trisomies (RATs) was ~0.3%, with trisomy 7 one altered the splice site according to the prediction tools. and 16 being the most prevalent. Three of these RATs, Thirty additional fetuses with NT ≥ 3.5 mm had been predictedasfulltrisomiesintheplacenta,werefoundtobe previously analyzed, leading to the identiﬁcation of two mosaic in the fetus; 25 other RATs were predicted to be variants, the Gln506Pro in the PTPN11 gene, and the mosaic,8ofwhichhavebeenconﬁrmedinplacentaltissue. Glu63Lys in the KRAS gene. The new pipeline also correctly predicted twin pregnancies Conclusion: Even with normal karyotype/CMA, a with discordant fetal sex. NT>99th centile is associated with an adverse pregnancy Conclusions:Thisimprovedanalysispipelinepermitsthe outcome,asinonethirdofcasesacongenitalmalformation detection of autosomal aneuploidies and pinpoints preg- and/or a miscarriage was observed. More interestingly our nancies at risk of fetoplacental mosaicism. This knowledge studydemonstrateaRASopathygenevariantin4/10(10%) can inﬂuence estimation of the risk for miscarriage, aid in fetuses, in the absence of ultrasound markers that could genetic counselling and improve prenatal management. address the diagnostic suspicion. N. Brison: None. M. Neofytou: None. L. Dehaspe: R. Ficarella: None. M. Mucciolo: None. C. Votino: None.B.Bayindir:None.K.VanDenBogaert:None.L. None. F.R. Lepri: None. M.F. Antonucci: None. A.L. Dardour: None. H. Peeters: None. H. Van Esch: None. Buonadonna: None. V. Lanari: None. P. Volpe: None. G. Van Buggenhout: None. A. Vogels: None. J. Breck- M. Gentile: None. A. Novelli: None. pot: None. T. de Ravel: None. E. Legius: None. K. Devriendt: None. J.R. Vermeesch: E. Ownership Interest P01.64D (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Novel pathogenic splice variant in PALB2 gene causing Modest; Cartagenia. Other; Modest; Collaboration with anemia Fanconi identiﬁed by transcriptomic analysis Cartagenia. I.Viakhireva1, E.Musatova1,2,E. Pomerantseva3, P01.63C Y. Shcherbatyuk4,S. Korobkov4,S.Zhikriveckaya2, Pregnancy outcome for fetuses with increased nuchal F. Konovalov5,M. Skoblov1,628 J.delPicchia 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Federation, 2Center of Genetics and Reproductive Medicine Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department for Reproductive "Genetico", LLC, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Center of Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium Genetics and Reproductive Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Hospital Lapino, MD Medical Group, Moscow, Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for chromosomal Russian Federation, 5Genomed, Ltd, Moscow, Russian rearrangementsisusedtoavoidthetransferofembryoswith Federation, 6Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, genomic aberrations to the uterus and hence to improve Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation implantation rate and avoid miscarriage or the birth of children with congenital anomalies. Currently, genomic Fanconi anemia is rare congenital disease caused by muta- microarrays are predominantly used for the detection of tionsingenesresponsibleforDNArepairandexpressingin unbalanced structural abnormalities and aneuploidies in chromosomal instability. Although the main symptom is embryos from parents at risk. There are however several anemia, clinical pattern differs in parents with mutations in limitations to the use of microarrays such as constraints on genes according to different complementation group. The resolution and throughput. With the advent of massive most severe clinical pattern is described in cases with parallel sequencing (MPS), we investigated the use of PALB2 gene mutations. These children develop severe shallow whole genome sequencing for PGD (CNVseq) on anemia and early onset of different oncological diseases trophectodermbiopsiesinourclinicaldiagnosticworkﬂow. such as medulloblastoma, Wilms tumor, different leuke- PGDwasperformedonembryosoftranslocationcarriersin mias.WereportclinicalcaseofachildwithFanconianemia combinationwithvitriﬁcationandfrozenembryotransferin died because of medulloblastoma at the age 4 years non-stimulated cycles. Data were collected from January 10 months. The disease was caused by frameshifting 2016 onwards. mutation in PALB2 gene c. 172_175del inherited from In total 45 PGD cycles have been performed for mother and novel intronic deletion NC_000016.9:g. reciprocal (n=39) and Robertsonian (n=5) translocation 23625423delAAAAATA inherited from father. Frameshift and inversion (n=1) carriers (total number of embryos=- mutation was identiﬁed by exome sequencing of the 185). Almost 60% of the analysed embryos showed affected child. The deletion was identiﬁed in father’s blood chromosomal aberrations, which is in line with our earlier by transcriptomic analysis. Functional analysis of mutation results with microarrays (Christodoulou et al., Fertilty&S- in minigene system conﬁrmed its pathogenicity. As the terility, 2017). The CNVseq protocol shows especially for family was interested in having a healthy child, under- small chromosomal segments better results than micro- standing of molecular causes of disease in this family arrays,andaresolutionof~5Mbisachieved.Furthermore, allowed to perform preimplantation genetic testing for many samples can be processed in batch leading to higher monogenic disease (PGT-M). One IVF cycle was per- throughput. Besides abnormalities due to the parental formed and 10 embryos were biopsied for PGT-M. rearrangement, also other chromosome abnormalities were According to the PGT-M results, it was determined that 3 detected in our cohort. embryoshadbothvariantsinheterozygosestage,1embryo We describe the successful implementation of CNVseq inherited only c. 172_175del variant, 4 embryos inherited on blastocysts in patients with a chromosomal rearrange- onlyNC_000016.9:g.23625423delAAAAATAvariantand ment to identify euploid embryos for transfer. 2 embryos did not inherit either of two variants. Pre- A. Dheedene: None. I. De Croo: None. E. Van den implantation testing for aneuploidies was performed for Abbeel:None.P.DeSutter:None.K.Tilleman:None.B. these two embryos and they deﬁned as euploid and were Menten: None. recommended for transfer. I. Viakhireva: None. E. Musatova: None. E. Pomer- P01.67C antseva: None. Y. Shcherbatyuk: None. S. Korobkov: Whole-exomesequencingidentiﬁesnovelcausativevariants None. S. Zhikriveckaya: None. F. Konovalov: None. M. and expands the phenotypic spectrum of PLK4-related Skoblov: None. primary microcephaly P01.66B P.Boonsawat1,R.Asadollahi1,D.Niedrist1,P.Joset1,J.Wisser2, Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for chromosomal H.Budka3, P.K. Bode4,H.Sticht5,K. Steindl1, A.Rauch1 rearrangementsusingshallowwholegenomesequencingat the blastocyst stage 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland, 2Department of Obstetrics, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Institute of A. Dheedene1,I.De Croo2,E. VandenAbbeel2, P.De Sutter2, Neuropathology, Zurich, Switzerland, 4Institute of Pathology K. Tilleman2, B.Menten1Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 29 and Molecular Pathology, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Institute of Introduction: Approximately 5% of pregnancies suffer Biochemistry, Erlangen, Germany frompre-eclampsia(PE)and3%ofcouplesareaffectedby recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). Loss-of-functionvariantsinPLK4,encodingakeyregulator Aims: To identify mechanisms affecting gene expression of centriole duplication, cause autosomal recessive micro- in common pregnancy complications PE and RPL. cephaly and chorioretinopathy 2 (MCCRP2). Currently, Methods: We sequenced transcriptomes and miRNomes only 13 cases from six families have been reported har- from term placental samples from normal (n=8) and PE boring four recessive variants. Following whole-exome (n=8) pregnancies and 1st trimester samples from 2 RPL sequencing analysis in 61 microcephalic cases, we identi- cases and electively terminated pregnancies (ETP; n=8). ﬁed novel causative PLK4 variants in two aborted sib Differential expression was tested using DESeq and fetusesandanadditionalunrelatedchild.Inthetwofetuses, DESeq2. g:Proﬁler was used for enrichment analysis. we found a nonsense variant and a serine substitution in Results: In placentas of RPL cases, we detected 195 compound heterozygous (CH) state, which the latter likely transcriptswithalteredexpressioninRPLcomparedtoETP creates an additional phosphorylation site in the phospho- (1). Over 60% of genes with altered expression in RPL degron element of PLK4, leading to reduced protein level possess binding sites for E2F transcription factors. E2F viaacceleratedautodestruction.Autopsyexaminationofthe regulates the cell cycle and coordinates the mammalian fetuses revealed white matter neuronal heterotopia and endocycle and placental development. cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in one, and absence of corpus Expressionof215geneswasalteredinPE(2).Promoters callosum in the other, apart from facial dysmorphism and ofdown-regulated genes(n=173)exhibitedstrongenrich- microcephaly. Additional physical anomalies included 2- ment for binding sites for transcription factors AP2, SP1 lobedrightlungandaccessoryspleen,whichhavenotbeen and LRF. Promoters of 77 genes (44.5%) contain potential previously reported in MCCRP2. Furthermore, we identi- response elements for all three transcription factors. ﬁed (likely) pathogenic CH variants in the unrelated child, Correlation analysis between microRNA and gene presenting with primary microcephaly, facial dysmorphism expression identiﬁed an extensive network of coordinated and moderate speech delay. Brain MRI showed simpliﬁed expression involving multiple transcripts and microRNAs. cortical gyri, dysplastic corpus callosum, and novel ﬁnding Conclusions: The E2F family of transcription factors of large cerebellum-brain stem relative to thesupratentorial represents a potential central coordinator of the shut-down region. Considering our cases and those previously repor- of nuclear and cellular functions leading to fetal demise. ted, we consistently observed simpliﬁed gyri, abnormal Inadequate AP2, SP1 and LRF activity along with altered corpus callosum and neuronal heterotopia, suggesting the microRNA levels may drive gene expression changes in importance of PLK4 in the regulation of neuronal migra- pre-eclampsia. tion. Moreover, we report a novel MRI ﬁnding as well as (1)Sõber et al. SciRep (2016): 38439. additional organ anomalies in MCCRP2, and describe the (2)Sõber et al. SciRep (2015): 13336. ﬁrst deleterious missense variant located in the phospho- Grants: IUT34-12 (Estonian Research Agency), Happy degron element outside the main PLK4 domains. Pregnancy (SA Archimedes). P.Boonsawat:None.R.Asadollahi:None.D.Niedrist: S. Sõber: None. M. Reiman: None. K. Rull: None. M. None. P. Joset: None. J. Wisser: None. H. Budka: None. Laan: None. P.K. Bode: None. H. Sticht: None. K. Steindl: None. A. Rauch: None. P01.69A Preimplantation genetic testing for cystic ﬁbrosis and P01.68D aneuploidy in clinical practice Evidence for key roles of transcription factors and microRNAs in orchestrating placental gene expression J.Diblík, I.Soldátova, M.Sekowská patterns in common pregnancy complications GENNET s.r.o., Praha, Czech Republic S. Sõber1, M.Reiman1,K. Rull1,2,3, M.Laan1 Introduction: Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) due to mutations in the 1Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, CFTR gene is the most frequent reason for preimplantation UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,2DepartmentofObstetrics genetic testing of monogenic disorders (PGT-M). Many and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, women requiring PGD for CF are at advanced age that is a 3Women’s Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia limiting factor of IVF success. Materials and methods: We have performed PGT for CFin81IVFcyclesfor51couplesbetweentheyears200730 J.delPicchia and 2017. The total number of examined embryos is 438. Results: All samples were correctly classiﬁed and all We have examined 317 samples of blastomeres from abnormalities were detected including numerical and cleavage stage embryos and 121 samples of trophectoderm structural rearrangements. Results obtained were in agree- from blastocysts. The PGT-M for was performed by ment with array CGH. haplotyping using whole genome ampliﬁcation (WGA) Conclusions: Targeted sequencing is the preferred and multiplex ﬂuorescence PCR analysis of short tandem method for applications requiring high read depth. This repeat polymorphisms (STR markers) linked to the CFTR assay in combination with a novel bioinformatics pipeline gene. We have recently added the aneuploidy detection can be used for the genome-wide screening of fertilized (PGT-A)byNGSusingIonTorrentProtonasasecondstep embryos (PGS/PGD). It can also be used in cases where in the evaluation of trophectoderm samples. limitednumberofcellsfromaffectedtissues/individualsare Results: We have ampliﬁed the DNA from 295 out of available. 317 single blastomeres (93%) and 104 out of 121 M. Ioannides: A. Employment (full or part-time); trophectodermsamples(86%).Wehavefound246embryos Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. A. Achilleos: A. Employment not affected by CF (62%) or other abnormalities of (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. K. Tsan- chromosome 7 (monosomy, trisomy) using the haplotype garas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; analysis.WehavefurtheranalysedtheampliﬁedDNAfrom NIPD Genetics. C. Loizides: A. Employment (full or part- 72 trophectoderm samples and detected aneuploidy in 31 time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. P. Mina: A. Employ- out of them (43 %). ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. E. Conclusions: We have successfully used trophectoderm Kypri: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; biopsy and whole genome ampliﬁcation to combine the NIPD Genetics. C. Sismani: None. G. Koumbaris: A. preimplantation genetic testing of a monogenic disorder Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. (PGT-M) with aneuploidy detection (PGT-A) in clinical P.C. Patsalis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- practice. niﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. J. Diblík: None. I. Soldátova: None. M. Sekowská: None. P01.71C Various approaches to preimplantation genetic testing - P01.70B experience from seven monogenic disorders Implementationoftargetcaptureenrichmentonsingleand few cells for the robust detection of embryo abnormalities R. Staneva1,2,S. Hadjidekova1,2,S. Andonova3,A. Savov3, S. Bitchev3,S. Yaneva2,M. Pancheva4,M.Seraﬁmova2, M.Ioannides1,A. Achilleos1,K. Tsangaras1,C. Loizides1, T. Chaushev2,K. Nikolova2,D.Toncheva1,G.Stamenov2 P.Mina1,E.Kypri1,C.Sismani2,G.Koumbaris1,P.C.Patsalis1 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,MedicalUniversityofSoﬁa, 1NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Institute of Soﬁa,Bulgaria,2Women'sHealthHospital"Nadezhda",Soﬁa, Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus Bulgaria, 3National Genetic Laboratory, UHOG “Maichin dom”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Women's Health Hospital, Soﬁa, Introduction: High throughput non-invasive prenatal test- Bulgaria ing (NIPT) technologies have demonstrated safe, accurate and reliable results for the detection of fetal abnormalities, Background: In the last decade preimplantation genetic relying onthedetectionandanalysisofcellfreefetal DNA testing (PGT) for severe genetic diseases emerged as a (cffDNA) in maternal plasma. However, such analysis is viable alternative to prenatal testing and termination of often limited by the low abundance of DNA, as in the case pregnancy for couples where one or both partners is a offertilizedembryos. Therefore,thedevelopmentofnovel, carrier or suffering from a debilitating genetic condition. sensitiveapproacheswhichcanprovidereliableresultsfrom Materials & Methods: 7 couples opted for IVF-PGT single/few cells is necessary. after extensive genetic counseling. Indications were beta- Materials and Methods: Ampliﬁed DNA isolated from thalassemia, epidermolysis bullosa, myotonic dystrophy seven and 17 embryos was obtained from 3-day and 5-day type 1, Huntingtion disease, Fragile-X syndrome, hemo- biopsy cases. TArget Capture Sequences (TACS) were philiaAandDuchennemusculardystrophy.Trophectoderm designed at a median resolution of 1Mb spanning all biopsy of 32 5-day embryos was performed. DNA chromosomes and were used to perform in-solution ampliﬁcation was achieved by Repli-g (Qiagen). For all hybridization capture enrichment as previously described1. trinucleotide repeat disorders allele size was determined by Novel bioinformatics algorithms were also developed to fragment length analysis (TNR Diagnostics). RT-PCR was determine the ploidy status of the samples. applied for epidermolysis bullosa and beta-thalassemiaAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 31 (Microsynth),SangersequencingforhaemophiliaAandsex after ﬁve treatment cycles. The clinical pregnancy rate and determinationbyaCGHforDMD.Allprotocolsweretested live birth delivery rate was signiﬁcantly lower for couples in advance on donated unviable embryos. withthemalepartneraffectedwithADPKDcomparedwith Results:DNAfrom31embryoswasavailablefortesting couples with the female partner affected with ADPKD. after ampliﬁcation (96,9%). DNA analysis was successful However, female age was the only variable signiﬁcantly for all 31 embryos (100%). There were 21 unaffected associated with live birth delivery rate. embryos and 3 females (for the DMD case). Four of the Conclusions: This study shows that PGT for PKD couples (57,1%) achieved pregnancy after the ﬁrst transfer, performed in our centre offers good reproductive outcomes 2 couples (28,6%) after the second and only one (14,3%) frombothfreshandfrozenembryotransfers.Malesaffected did not get pregnant after three transfers, giving a 85,7% with ADPKDwho sufferfrom infertility should be advised success rate of the IVF-PGT procedure. Except one to seek treatment on time to improve their chances of pregnancy that has not yet reached time for prenatal conceiving a child. conﬁrmation, all PGT results were conﬁrmed by DNA V.Berckmoes:None.P.Verdyck:None.P.DeBecker: testing of CVS samples, 6 healthy babies were delivered. None. A. De Vos: None. G. Verheyen: None. P. Van der Conclusion:IVF-PGTisavalidoptionforcouplesatrisk Niepen:None.W.Verpoest:None.I.Liebaers:None.M. to have a child with severe genetic condition. Bonduelle: None. M. De Rycke: None. R. Staneva: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. S. Ando- nova: None. A. Savov: None. S. Bitchev: None. S. P01.73A Yaneva: None. M. Pancheva: None. M. Seraﬁmova: DNA copy number variations in a cohort of 216 Italian None. T. Chaushev: None. K. Nikolova: None. D. women with premature ovarian failure Toncheva: None. G. Stamenov: None. K. Teearu1,O.ilina1, O. Tšuiko1,2,A.Marozzi3,P. Finelli3,4, P01.72D I.Bestetti3,4, D.Toniolo5,A.Salumets2,6,A. Kurg1 Preimplantation genetic testing for polycystic kidney disease is an option for affected families 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Competence Center on Health Technologies, V. Berckmoes1,P. Verdyck1,P. De Becker1,A. DeVos2, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Medical Biotechnology and G.Verheyen2,P. Vander Niepen3,W.Verpoest2,I. Liebaers1, Translational Medicine Università degli Studi di Milano, M.Bonduelle1,M.De Rycke1 Milan, Italy, 4Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Lab, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Brussel, Belgium, 2Centre for 5GeneticsofCommonDisorders,DivisionofGeneticsandCell Reproductive Medicine, Brussel, Belgium, 3Nephrology & Biology, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 6Chair Hypertension Department, Brussel, Belgium of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia Introduction: In thisstudy,preimplantationgenetictesting (PGT) datafor polycystickidneydisease(PKD) from2005 Premature ovarian failure (POF) is considered as a multi- until 2016 are reported. As males affected with autosomal factorial and heterogeneous condition affecting approxi- dominant PKD (ADPKD) may present with reproductive mately 1% women of reproductive age. Despite the system abnormalities and infertility, the clinical outcome extensive research, the considerably complex pathogenesis was compared between couples with the female partner of POF is still not well understood. POF can develop as affected with ADPKD and couples with the male partner result of a broad spectrum of pathogenic mechanisms affected with ADPKD. including genetic, autoimmune and iatrogenic causes that MaterialsandMethods:Sixteensingle-cellclinicaltests leads to follicular dysfunction or depletion. In recent years, for PKD based on multiplex PCR of STR markers were many research studies are trying to ﬁnd out the genetic applied for 91 PGT cycles for 43 couples. componentofthediseasebyusingdifferenthigh-resolution Results: A diagnosis was obtained for 93.3% of the methods. We have performed a case-control genetic asso- analysed embryos of which 36.8% were genetically ciation study, using high-resolution SNP microarrays to transferable. Transfer of 74 embryos in 53 fresh cycles investigate DNA copy number variations (CNVs) of 216 and transfer of 34 cryopreserved embryos in 33 frozen- Italian women presenting POF phenotype and 240 women warmed embryo transfer cycles resulted in a live birth from the Italian general population as a control. All patient delivery rate of 38.4% per transfer with 31 singleton live and control samples were collected at the Division of births, 2 twin live births and 1 ongoing pregnancy. The GeneticsandCell Biology,SanRaffaeleScientiﬁcInstitute observed cumulative delivery rate was 57.8% per couple and University of Milan, Italy and genotyped by Illumina32 J.delPicchia PsychArray BeadChips at the Estonian Genome Center identiﬁedin30.3%ofcases,apossiblediagnosisin33.3%, University of Tartu Genotyping core in Tartu, Estonia. onlyacandidategenewasreportedin6.1%,and30.3%had Microarray data, analyzed using different algorithms, no reportable variants. revealedboth,genomicregionscontaininggenespreviously Conclusion: Although interpretive and ethical issues associated with POF (e.g. 26.8Mb 1q41-q44 duplication remain a concern in the prenatal setting, ES may identify affecting FMN2 gene) and novel potentially clinically sig- genetic variants responsible for fetal anomalies and impact niﬁcant CNVs (e.g. 11p15.2 microdeletion). In addition to prognosis, medical management, and recurrence risks. autosomalCNVs,weidentiﬁedseveralPOFcriticalregions A. Telegraﬁ: A. Employment (full or part-time); on the X chromosome. The currently known POF genes Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. C. Yates: A. Employment (full or only account for a small proportion of patients, while the part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. K.G. Monaghan: A. majority remain without a genetic diagnosis. Using whole- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. E. genomeDNAmicroarrays,thepresentstudyprovidesnovel Ryan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; insight into the implications of CNVs in genetic aetiology GeneDx.B. Friedman: A.Employment (full orpart-time); of POF. Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. H. Sroka: A. Employment (full or K. Teearu: None. O. ilina: None. O. Tšuiko: None. A. part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. R. Willaert: A. Employ- Marozzi: None. P. Finelli: None. I. Bestetti: None. D. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. R. Chikar- Toniolo: None. A. Salumets: None. A. Kurg: None. mane: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. J. Juusola: A. Employment (full or part-time); P01.74B Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. The diagnostic yield of exome sequencing in the prenatal setting: A clinical laboratory experience P01.76D Prenatal array CGH: comparison of 400kb and 3Mb A.Telegraﬁ,C.Yates,K.G.Monaghan,E.Ryan,B.Friedman, resolution H.Sroka, R.Willaert, R. Chikarmane,J.Juusola K. Mann,J.Ahn,S. Bint,C. Brown,C. Mackie Ogilvie GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States Guy’sandStThomas’NHSFoundationTrust,London,United Introduction:Fetalultrasoundabnormalitiesposeaunique Kingdom diagnostic challenge. In order to help increase the diag- nostic yield of underlying genetic etiologies exome There is currently no clear consensus on the cost-beneﬁt of sequencing (ES) is gaining use in the prenatal setting. detailed genome-wide copy-number analysis for pregnan- Methods:WeretrospectivelyanalyzedESresultson233 cies with ultrasound anomalies. Decisions regarding test deceased fetuses and 33 ongoing pregnancies with ultra- resolution should consider evidence concerning diagnostic sound anomalies. yield,cost(technicalandanalytical),reportingtimesandthe Results:Ofthe233deceasedfetuses,76%oftestingwas number of uncertain and incidental ﬁndings. From 2012 to performed as proband-parent trios. Fifty-six percent were 2017 we investigated pregnancies with ultrasound anoma- male and 44% female. Most cases had multiple congenital lies using a prenatal array testing strategy designed to anomalies (MCA) (78%). The most common ultrasound minimise uncertain results and incidental ﬁndings whilst ﬁndings were central nervous system (CNS) anomalies identifying clinically signiﬁcant abnormalities; a 3Mb (51%), hydrops (33%), skeletal abnormalities (30%), backboneresolutionwassupplementedwithhighresolution cardiovascular defects (28%), neuromuscular ﬁndings analysis of 23 regions known to be associated with severe, (26%), and genitourinary anomalies (24%). A deﬁnitive fully penetrant syndromes. Review of 480 of these cases molecular diagnosis was identiﬁed in 28% of cases, a (after anonymization) at an average of 120kb resolution possible diagnosis in 36%, only a candidate gene was found no severe, fully penetrant imbalance had been mis- reported in 10%, and 26% of cases had no reportable sed. European guidelines now recommend a genome-wide variants. We also analyzed 33 prenatal specimens from resolution of at least 400kb (the evidence base for this ongoing pregnancies. All cases were trios and had non- guideline is unclear). To comply with this, in 2017 we diagnostic standard genetic testing prior to ES. Seventy- introduced a 400kb analysis strategy, with high resolution three percent were male and 27% female. Most cases had analysis of 25 syndrome regions; only ﬁndings associated MCA (79%). Common ultrasound ﬁndings included with the ultrasound anomalies and actionable or severe, cardiovascular anomalies (33%), genitourinary abnormal- early-onset incidental ﬁndings were reported. Of 201 pre- ities(33%),CNSdefects(30%),andhydrops(30%).Forall natal samples tested, 22 were reported as abnormal, ongoing pregnancies, a deﬁnitive molecular diagnosis was including one incidental ﬁnding, 178 as normal and oneAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 33 failed. Onlyonecase (0.5% ofsamples),adenovo1.6Mb T. Harasim: None. A. Wagner: None. U. Heinrich: 15q25 deletion (OMIM 614294) would not have been None.E.Krimmel:None.M.Delius:None.I.Rost:None. identiﬁed using our previous analysis strategy. Fourteen H. Klein: None. unique imbalances (7% of samples) were not reported fol- lowing detailed variant classiﬁcation; in addition, four P01.78B susceptibility loci (class 4 variants) were not disclosed. A Rapid whole exome sequencing; implementation in the cost-beneﬁt comparison of these strategies will be prenatal setting discussed. K. Mann: None. J. Ahn: None. S. Bint: None. C. I.Feenstra1, Y.Arens2, S.deMunnik1,A. C. Deden1, A.C. J. Brown: None. C. Mackie Ogilvie: None. Gijsbers1,V. vander Schoot2,W.vanZelst-Stams1,E. Sikkel1, D.Smeets1,K.Neveling1,M.Nelen1,H.Yntema1 P01.77A Case report: Gonosomal placental mosaicism leads to a 1Radboud university medical centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, false-positive NIPT result 2Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands T. Harasim1,A. Wagner1, U.Heinrich1, E.Krimmel1, M.Delius2, I.Rost1,H. Klein1 The introduction of whole exome sequencing (WES) in genome diagnostics has dramatically changed the current 1Center forHumanGeneticsandLaboratoryDiagnostics,Dr. practice in clinical genetics. It is expected that WES and Klein, Dr. Rost and Colleagues, Martinsried, Germany, ultimately whole genome sequencing will replace current 2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics of the hospital of routineclinicalpractice(arraybasedtechnologies),notonly the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany after birth but also during pregnancy. The implementation of WES in a prenatal setting for genetic analysis of fetuses Introduction:A37yearsoldpregnantwomanwithnofetal with multiple congenital abnormalities has the potential to ultrasound abnormalities received a NIPT result at early increase the diagnostic yield and thereby improving prog- gestationalageindicatingamonosomyX.Forconﬁrmatory nostic information for professionals and expectant parents. purpose,amniocentesisincludingaCGHwasperformed:the However,thereareanumberoffactorsthatneedtobetaken fetal karyotype was reported to be normal, male (46,XY) into account before WES could be part of the prenatal instead of the expected 45,X. Perinatally, another NIPT diagnostic workup. These include technical and practical with high sequencing depth was requested (Prenatalis®, aspects like long turn-around-times (TATs), costs, difﬁcul- MVZ Martinsried) in concert with postpartal FISH of pla- ties in interpreting variants and limited possibilities to cental villi to shed light into these discordant results. determine the fetal phenotype. Intensive collaboration Method: Prenatalis® was performed with ~ 21 million within a multi-disciplinary team consisting of a molecular readsusedfordetectionofaneuploidy13,18,21,XandY. laboratory specialist, a clinical geneticist and a fetal medi- Postpartal FISH analysis was done on nuclei of placental cine specialist is required. Furthermore, the possibility of villi by using the centromere speciﬁc DXZ1-, DYZ3- and detecting variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VOUS) or D18Z- probes (Cytocell, Cambridge, UK). incidental ﬁndings (IF) may lead to ethical dilemmas and Results: Prenatalis® conﬁrmed the initial monosomy X demands careful pre- and post-test counselling. result at a fetal fraction of 39% (GA:36+6). FISH-analysis Until now, rapid WES with short TATs has been revealed placental mosaicism with a dominant X0-cell line performed on a case-by-case basis in our centre in a small (86% of all nuclei) in combination with a XY cell line number of pregnancies in the second or third trimester. We (10%).4%ofnucleishowedtwoX-chromosomes,probably will provide an overview of the workﬂow, the challenges a contamination of maternal cells. The patient delivered a and the difﬁculties encountered. To warrant an accurate, phenotypicallynormal,malebaby,whowasnotkaryotyped more widespread implementation of prenatal WES, there is further. a strong need for clear criteria, data-sharing and an (inter) Conclusion: The results presented above describe con- national guideline. ﬁned placental mosaicism of a dominant monosomy X cell I. Feenstra: None. Y. Arens: None. S. de Munnik: line in concert with a low level XY-cell line. It can be None. A.C. Deden: None. A.C.J. Gijsbers: None. V. van deduced from the NIPT results, that the placenta released der Schoot: None. W. van Zelst-Stams: None. E. Sikkel: cfDNA exclusively from 45,X loci, since y-chromosomal None. D. Smeets: None. K. Neveling: None. M. Nelen: cfDNA could not be detected during NIPT. Since placental None. H. Yntema: None. cfDNAonlyservesasaproxyforthefetus,conﬁrmationof positive NIPT results are highly recommended.34 J.delPicchia P01.79C I.Bestetti1,2, C.Barbieri3,A. Sironi1,2, C.Castronovo1, MultilevelregressionmodelingimprovesSTRclassiﬁcation C.Caslini2,R.Rossetti4,A.Pistocchi2,A.Rajkovic5,6,7,C.Sala3, in QF-PCR analysis for common fetal chromosomal D.Toniolo3,L. Persani4,8,A. Marozzi2,P. Finelli1,2 aneuploidies 1Lab.ofMedicalCytogeneticsandMolecularGenetics,IRCCS P. Noveski, M.Terzic, M.Vujovic, M. Kuzmanovska, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, Milan, Italy, E. SukarovaStefanovska, D.Plaseska-Karanﬁlska 2Dep. of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Division of Genetics and Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Cell Biology, San Raffaele Research Institute and Vita Salute “Georgi D. Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and University, Milan, Italy, 4Lab. of Endocrine and Metabolic Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Research and Division of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, Milan, Thequantitativeﬂuorescentpolymerasechainreaction(QF- Italy, 5Dep. of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive PCR) has proven to be a reliable method for detection of Sciences, Magee-Womens Research Institute, University of common fetal chromosomal aneuploidies, with advantages Pittsburgh,Pittsburgh,PA,UnitedStates,6Dep.ofPathology, over conventional karyotyping such as cost-effectiveness, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 7Dep. reliability and requirement of only small amount of mate- of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, rial. However, there are some technical shortcomings, United States, 8Dep. of Clinical Sciences and Community involving the necessity to perform two or more multiplex Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy PCR reactions simultaneously for a given sample or the uncertainty of aneuploidy determination when the STR POI is a heterogeneous group of disorders that affect (short tandem repeats) height ratio is unusual due to large women fertility whose genetic origin has been clariﬁed in size difference between alleles. Here, we present an in- less than 30% of cases. To unveil new causative genes house one-tube multiplex QF-PCR method including 20 essential for ovarian function we searched for rare high- PCR markers (14 STR markers and 6 ﬁxed size) for rapid penetranceCopyNumberVariants(CNVs)inacohortof67 prenatal diagnosis of chromosome 13, 18, 21, X and Y 46,XX patients affected by the most severe phenotype aneuploidies. In order to improve the aneuploidy classiﬁ- (primary amenorrhea). High-resolution array-CGH analysis cation of a given diallelic STR marker, we used a total of detected 72 rare CNVs according to the Database of 7630 diallelic genotypes (88 trisomic and 7542 normal) Genomic Variants in 49 patients. CNVs gene content ana- from 871 samples to employ multilevel logistic regression lysis and disease prioritization selected 37 CNVs involving analysis using "height ratio" and "allele size difference" as 2 POI-associated genes and 42 putative candidate genes ﬁxed effects and "marker" as random effect. We employed (e.g. TP63, VLDLR). The research of this CNVs in an ad- tworegressionmodels,oneforthe2:1heightratio(n=47) hoc cohort of 134 control women supported their actual and second for the 1:2 height ratio (n=41) of the trisomic rarity. Despite the presence of ovary genes also in the ad- diallelic markers. Both models achieved 100% speciﬁcity hoc cohort, chi-q and Wilcoxon tests showed in patients a for marker aneuploidy classiﬁcation on training data as signiﬁcant enrichment of ovary-related CNVs/genes compared to 98.3% (2:1 ratio) and 97.9% (1:2 ratio) spe- (P=0.0132/P=0.0126)supportingarray-CGHasavaluable ciﬁcity when using only height ratio for classiﬁcation. In toolinidentifyingnovelPOImoleculardefects.Array-CGH conclusion, adjusting for the allele size difference and genes identiﬁed together with their predicted interactors, marker type improves the STR classiﬁcation, eliminates and other known ovary/POI-related genes (n=226) were sample re-testing and reinforces the robustness of the QF- then screenedinatargeted-WESanalysisof102secondary PCR method for prenatal testing. amenorrhea patients. After ﬁltering variants (MAF<0.005; P.Noveski:None.M.Terzic:None.M.Vujovic:None. LoF SNVs inclusion) a total of 375 possibly pathogenic M. Kuzmanovska: None. E. Sukarova Stefanovska: SNVs were found in 31 array-genes, 12 interactor-genes, None. D. Plaseska-Karanﬁlska: None. and83ovary/POI-relatedgenes.Burdentestanalysisversus 1000G_EUR control women conﬁrmed a statistical sig- P01.80D niﬁcance for 1 interactor-TP63 gene (P=1.65E-07) and 2 High-resolution array-CGH analysis and Targeted Whole ovary/POI-related genes (FSHR, P=1.66E-05;FOXO3, Exome Sequencing on patients affected by Primary P=7.31E-05).Thiscombined approachallowedtoincrease Ovarian Insufﬁciency (POI) identiﬁed new genes involved the knowledge about POI pathogenesis and will probably in oocyte grow and differentiation provide the basis for a more accurate genetic diagnosis of POI patients.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 35 I. Bestetti: None. C. Barbieri: None. A. Sironi: None. L. Lovrečić: None. N. Pereza: None. H. Jaklič: None. C. Castronovo: None. C. Caslini: None. R. Rossetti: S. Ostojić: None. B. Peterlin: None. None. A. Pistocchi: None. A. Rajkovic: None. C. Sala: None. D. Toniolo: None. L. Persani: None. A. Marozzi: P01.82B None. P. Finelli: None. Telomere shortening as the main indicator of non-viable fetus elimination P01.81A Genetic analysis of products of conception of couples with I.Tkach1,N.Huleyuk1,D.Zastavna1,2,M. Tyrka2 recurrent miscarriage using QF-PCR and array-CGH testing strategy 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine, 2Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, L. Lovrečić1,N.Pereza2, H.Jaklič1,S. Ostojić2,B.Peterlin1 Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Rzeszow, Poland 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical CenterLjubljana,DepartmentofGynaecologyandObstetrics, Background: Telomeres are transcriptionally inactive Ljubljana,Slovenia,2Facultyofmedicine,UniversityofRijeka, genomic areas, which, if shortened, are associated with Department of biology and medical genetics, Rijeka, Croatia pathological processes, unsuccessful fertilization, aging, and death. Telomere dysfunction has also been linked to Introduction: Although previous studies have shown that chromosomal rearrangements and genomic instability. The embryonic chromosome aberrations are the most common role of telomeres in postnatal life has been extensively cause of recurrent miscarriage (RM), the comprehensive studied and discussed both in physiological as well as in genetic evaluation using the combination of quantitative pathological processes. However, the role of telomere ﬂuorescence-polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) and length in prenatal development is still poorly understood, array-comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) was not and mainly concerns the preimplantation stage. The aim of usedsystematicallyfortheirdetectionintheclinicalsetting. this study was to estimate relative telomere length in We aimed to investigate the frequency and type of chro- spontaneously eliminated human embryos between 5th and mosome aberrations in POCs of couples with at least one 12th week of gestation. previous miscarriage using the QF-PCR and a-CGH Results: Relative telomere length was measured from strategy. total genomic DNA using a real-time polymerase chain Materials and Methods: This retrospective study was reaction approach. In this study, we examined relative conducted on 73 ﬁrst-trimester POCs (September 2014- telomere length in 80 spontaneously eliminated embryos February 2017). The POCs were collected from 73 women and in 25 embryos eliminated due to induced abortions. with at least one previous miscarriage and analysed for Relative telomere length in spontaneous abortions was chromosomal anomalies using QF-PCR and aCGH as part signiﬁcantlylower(P=0.000001)comparedtotheinduced of the routine clinical evaluation. abortions.Spontaneousabortionswithaneuploidanomalies Results:Chromosomeaberrationsweredetectedin52/73 (monosomy X, trisomy 21, trisomy 16 and triploidy) were POCs(71.2%),ofwhich41(56.2%)wereidentiﬁedbyQF- characterized by shorter telomeres, compared to sponta- PCR and an additional 11 (15.1%) by aCGH. Numerical neousabortions,subgroupwitheuploid(46,XN)karyotype. aberrations constituted the majority (92.3%) of abnormal- Conclusion: Spontaneously lost pregnancies are char- ities, with trisomies as the most common subtype (72.9%). acterized by shortened telomeres, especially in embryos Causativestructuralaberrationswerefoundinthreesamples with aneuploidies. We hypothesize that the shortening of (5.8%) and variant of unknown signiﬁcance in one sample. telomeres is involved in the processes leading to sponta- The frequency of chromosome aberrations was not neous abortions. dependentonthenumberofpreviousmiscarriages,whereas I.Tkach:None.N.Huleyuk:None.D.Zastavna:None. it signiﬁcantly increased with advanced maternal age. M. Tyrka: None. Conclusions: The results of our comprehensive genetic analyses of POCs of RM couples conﬁrm the QF-PCR and P01.83C aCGH combination as an effective diagnostic strategy. Targeted cfDNA Analysis Using DANSR assays for Consideringthehighfrequencyofchromosomeaberrations, Determination of Fetal RHD Status a routine genetic analysis of POCs should be considered, which could improve the clinical approach to couples with S. Saini1,R. Foley1,C. Kingsley1,E. Wang1,M.Schmid1, miscarriage. P. Bogard1,A. Ramos236 J.delPicchia 1AriosaDiagnosticsInc.,RocheSequencingSolutionsInc.,San 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Unidade de Jose, CA, United States, 2Roche Sequencing Solutions, San Citogenética,Lisboa,Portugal,2HospitalCentraldoFunchal, Jose, CA, United States ServiçodePediatria,Funchal,Portugal,3HospitalCentraldo Funchal, Serviço de Obstetrícia, Funchal, Portugal Objectives: To develop a targeted cell-free (cfDNA) test, the Harmony® prenatal test, enhancement that allows Ring chromosomes are rare cytogenetic ﬁndings (prenatal determination of fetal RhD status in RhD-negative frequency ~ 0.0075%) often associated with an abnormal pregnant women. phenotype, depending of the chromosomal origin, genetic Method: 12 simulated pregnancy plasma samples with content and the presence of a mosaic. Supernumerary ring known RHD genotype were prepared by titrating non- chromosome 16 [r(16)] is rarely observed and mosaicism pregnant, RHD-positive cfDNA (fetal source) into non- makes the genotype/phenotype correlation difﬁcult. pregnant, female RHD-negative cfDNA (maternal source) We report a de novo mosaic r(16) detected after prenatal to simulate fetal fractions of 5%, 10% and 15%. A 0% diagnosis in a woman referred for advanced maternal age. sample served as a negative control. Digital Analysis of Multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) SelectedRegions(DANSR)assaystargetingexons2,3,4,5 for aneuploidy testing of chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and X and 7 of the RHD gene were added to existing DANSR was normal. Karyotype was 47,XX,+r[10]/46,XX[15]. assaysandthegeneratedDANSRproductswerehybridized Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) on DNA ontoacustomDNAmicroarrayforanalysisoffetalfraction obtainedfromlong-termculturedamniocytesdidnotdetect and determination of fetal RHD status using the fetal any alterations. MLPA with a pericentromeric probe kit on fraction optimized algorithm FORTE. an uncultured sample showed a chromosome 16 gain, Results: In all 12 simulated pregnancy samples, RHD encompassing 16p11.2 and 16q11.2 regions, including sequences were detected. The RHD signal in each case TGFB1I1, AHSP, VPS35 and ORC6 genes, leading to correlated with fetal fraction and was therefore consistent partialcharacterizationofther(16).Althoughnophenotype with anRHD-positivefetal source on thebackgroundofan hasbeencorrelated with overexpressionof these genes, the RHD-negative maternal source. As expected, no RHD 16p11.2 region is associated with neurodevelopmental sequencesweredetectedforsampleswith0%fetalfraction. disorders. Nevertheless individuals with microduplication Conclusion: Targeted cfDNA testing using DANSR of 16p11.2 and normal development have been described. assays has the potential to determine fetal RHD status and Thelackofaprecisedeﬁnitionofgeneticcontentofther be used as a noninvasive screening method to identify (16) and its mosaic form leads to uncertain prognosis of pregnancies at increased risk for RhD immunization. clinical outcome. S. Saini: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Aftergeneticcounselingthecoupleoptedtocontinuethe Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequencing Solutions Inc. pregnancy.Atbirthnomajormalformationswereobserved R. Foley: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; and a lower level of mosaic r(16) was observed in Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequencing Solutions Inc. peripheral blood. C. Kingsley: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- The mosaicism, as well as limitations of CMA in those cant; Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequencing Solutions cases, prevent a reﬁned characterization of these genomic Inc. E. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); imbalances and pose a challenge in genetic counseling. Signiﬁcant; Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequencing F. Brito: None. M. Silva: None. C. Alves: None. C. Solutions Inc. M. Schmid: A. Employment (full or part- Ferreira: None. S. Seraﬁm: None. L. Simão: None. B. time); Signiﬁcant; Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequen- Marques: None. S. Pedro: None. A. Tarelho: None. J. cing Solutions Inc. P. Bogard: A. Employment (full or Furtado: None. P. Lopes: None. N. Silva: None. M. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Viegas:None.A.Fernandes:None.F.Teixeira:None.S. Sequencing Solutions Inc. A. Ramos: None. Gomes: None. H. Correia: None. P01.84D P01.85A Prenatal diagnosis of mosaic ring chromosome 16 - a rare A novel partial deletion of the NR5A1 gene in a female event with uncertain prognosis patient with 46, XY disorder of sex development F. Brito1,M. Silva1,C. Alves1,C. Ferreira1, S.Seraﬁm1, O.Nagy1,J. Kárteszi2,M. Hartwig2,M.Tihanyi2,É. Erhardt3, L. Simão1,B. Marques1,S. Pedro1,A. Tarelho1,J.Furtado1, A. Patócs4,A.Ujfalusi1 P. Lopes1,N.Silva1, M.Viegas1,A. Fernandes2, F.Teixeira2, S. Gomes3,H.Correia1 1Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 37 Debrecen, Hungary, 2Hospital of Zala County, Zalaegerszeg, processing. The disease affects 1 out of 6000 newborns, Hungary,3DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityofPécs,Pécs, while about 1 out of 50 individuals are carriers. Hungary, 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Endocrin SMN1 has a paralog SMN2, which differs in coding Genetics Laboratory, Semmelweis University, Budapest, sequence by just 1 base. SMN2 produces a functional Hungary protein though less efﬁciently than SMN1. These genes are located 500 kb apart on chromosome 5, which permits NR5A1 (Steroidogenic factor 1, SF-1) is a transcriptional frequent recombination events that result in deletions, regulator of genes required for normal adrenal and gonadal duplications or chimeras. Evolution has selected for multi- development and function. Mutations in NR5A1 have been ple copies of SMN2 since having several copies can identiﬁed in patients with various forms ofdisorders of sex partially compensate for a non-functional SMN1 gene. development (DSD), including gonadal dysgenesis with or Because of the severity of SMA, carrier and newborn without adrenal insufﬁciency. To date microdeletion or screening is important. To be utilized in carrier screening, partial deletion involving the NR5A1 gene have been an assay has to detect one copy of SMN1 with 100% reported in only a few of cases with DSD.We present a sensitivity, which necessitates distinguishing every SMN1 patient with female external genitalia, clitoromegaly, bilat- copy from SMN2. eral ingiunal hernia containing testicles, mixed internal An NGS assay was developed to detect one copy of genitalia (uterus, Fallopian tube, epididymis), minor facial SMN1 and the number of SMN2 copies in SMA carriers in dysmorphism, normal adrenal function, low testosterone, an easy and scalable protocol suitable for automatization. highFSHlevels.Familyhistoryisnegativefordisordersof The assay is performed in one tube, using a ligation-free sexdevelopmentorprematureovarianfailure.Chromosome method. Testing of clinical research samples with known analysis revealed a 46,XY karyotype. Array CGH did not numbers of SMN1 and SMN2 has demonstrated the detect pathogenic copy number variations. Next generation precision of the assay to detect the number of SMN copies. sequencing of the most common DSD genes did not iden- The protocol can also be easily expanded to include all tify pathogenic variants. Genomic DNA was screened for SMN1 mutations and/or be combined with assays to detect small deletion/duplication of genes commonly affected in variants in other known carrier-screening genes for future DSDusingtheSALSAIntersexMLPAkit(MRC-Holland) clinical research. accordingtomanufacturer’sprotocol.Weidentiﬁedanovel Research use only. Not for diagnostic use. partial deletion encompassing the exons 5 and 6 of the R. Hrdlickova: None. J. Nehyba: None. C. Clear: NR5A1 gene leading to haploinsufﬁciency of the gene, that None. D. Fox: None. A. Kothandaraman: None. is alone sufﬁcient to cause the patient’s abnormal sexual development.This report expands upon the range of muta- P01.88D tionsassociatedwithNR5A1gene,furtherconﬁrmstherole A new candidate biomarker in Spermatogonial Stem Cell of NR5A1 deletions in 46,XY DSD and emphasises the maturation : Dynamin 2 utilityofMLPAasagenomicscreeningtoolintheworkup of DSDs of unclear etiology.This study was supported by Y. YUKSELTEN1,O.S.AYDOS1,A. SUNGUROGLU1, Ministry of National Economy, Hungary GINOP-2.3.2-15- K. AYDOS2 2016-00039 O. Nagy: None. J. Kárteszi: None. M. Hartwig: None. 1Ankara University, School of Medicine, Department of M. Tihanyi: None. É. Erhardt: None. A. Patócs: None. Medical Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara University, School A. Ujfalusi: None. of Medicine, Department of Urology, Ankara, Turkey P01.87C Dynamin 2 (DNM2) belongs to the GTPase superfamily. Anovelnextgenerationsequencingassayforthedetection Beside having important roles in the regulation of mem- of SMA carrier status and the number of copies of SMN2 brane ﬁssion and fusion events dynamins induce differ- entiation of germ cells in spermatogenesis. R.Hrdlickova,J.Nehyba,C.Clear,D.Fox,A.Kothandaraman In this study, our aim was to investigate dynamin 2 gene expressionandtherelationshipbetweenthisbiomarkerwith Bioo Scientiﬁc, Austin, TX, United States impaired spermatogenesis in non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA)andobstructiveazoospermia(OA)ascontrolgroup. Spinalmusculardystrophy(SMA)isaninheritedautosomal NOA group consisted of 20 hypospermatogenesis (HS), 20 recessive neuromuscular disease caused by a defective maturation arrest (MA), 20 Sertoli Cell Only syndrome SMN1 gene. SMN1 codes for a protein involved in RNA (SCO) patients. The biomarker was analyzed by RT- PCR array.38 J.delPicchia When compared with the control group, DNM2 gene patients. We believe that the curative protocols which will expressioninHP,MAandSCOgroupsshowed1.60±0.30 be developed against the effects of these markers in sper- (p>0.05),0.28±0.05(p<0.001)and0.86±0.18(p>0.05) matogenic defects will be very valuable in terms of human fold changes, respectively. reproductive health. The dynamin family of proteins has important regulatory S.O. Aydos: None. Y. Yukselten: None. A. Sungur- roles in membrane remodelling and endocytosis. By this oglu: None. K. Aydos: None. waytheyalsoaffectsthecellviability.Thus,thedecreasein DNM2 gene expression in MA group suggests that P01.90B clinically DNM2 expression deﬁciency may cause matura- Robust preimplantation genetic diagnosis of spinal tionarrest.DNM2 isthoughttobeanimportantmarkerfor muscular atrophy combining triplex SMN1 detection with the understanding theetiology of male infertility and inthe multi-microsatellite haplotyping development of treatment protocols for azoospermic patients with MA. S. S.Chong1,2,3, M.Zhao1,M. Lian2,F. S.H.Cheah2 Y. Yukselten: None. O.S. Aydos: None. A. Sungur- oglu: None. K. Aydos: None. 1DepartmentofPaediatrics,YongLooLinSchoolofMedicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, P01.89A 2Khoo Teck Puat - National University Children's Medical Expression proﬁles of Spermatogonial Stem Cells’ marker Institute, National University Health System, Singapore, genes in azoospermic patients with different pathologies Singapore, 3Department of Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore S. O.AYDOS1, Y.YUKSELTEN1,A. SUNGUROGLU1, K. AYDOS2 Background: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is vulnerable to mis- 1Ankara University, School of Medicine, Department of diagnosis arising from allele drop-out or exogenous DNA Medical Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara University, School contamination. We describe a PGD strategy that detects of Medicine, Department of Urology, Ankara, Turkey SMA with high diagnostic conﬁdence and accuracy. Methods: A triplex PCR-minisequencing assay was Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) have major roles on developed for reliable detection of SMN1 and SMN2. A spermatogenesis and male fertility. Identiﬁcation of SSCs single-tube assay was developed to simultaneously amplify and determination of their effects on impaired spermato- 13 highly polymorphic microsatellite markers located genesisareveryimportantforelucidationoftheetiologyof within 0.5 Mb of the 1.7 Mb duplicated SMN region on male infertility. In this study, our aim was to investigate chromosome15q13.2.Singlecellsweresubjected towhole CD90, CD29, CD49f and POU5F1 genes expressions and genome ampliﬁcation, and separate aliquots were used for the relationship between these biomarkers with impaired triplexSMN1/2detectionandfortridecaplexmicrosatellite- spermatogenesis in non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) based haplotyping. The strategy was validated on 24 single and obstructive azoospermia (OA) as control group. NOA cells isolated from cell lines of an SMA case-parent trio. group consisted of 20 hypospermatogenesis (HS), 20 Results: Triplex SMN1/2 PCR-minisequencing reliably maturation arrest (MA), 20 Sertoli Cell Only syndrome detected single-copy SMN1 even in the presence of ﬁve (SCO)patients.ThebiomarkerswereanalyzedbyRT-PCR SMN2copies.OnlySMN2wasdetectedinallSMA-affected array. All groups were compared with the control group. samples. Observed heterozygosities of the 13 ﬂanking CD29andCD49fgeneexpressionsshowed0.08±0.01and microsatellite markers ranged from 0.56 to 0.8, and 98.4% 0.65±0.15folddecreases(p<0.05),intheHSgroup,while of genotyped individuals were heterozygous for 2 or more CD90 and POU5F1 genes showed 1.20±0.21 and 0.83 markers on either side of SMN1. Triplex SMN1/2 PCR- ±0.24 fold changes, respectively (p> 0.05). In the MA minisequencing results were completely correlated with group, CD90, CD49f and POU5F1 gene expressions observed marker diplotypes in all tested samples. showed 0.40±0.05, 0.22±0.03 and 0.16±0.02 fold Conclusion: Triplex detection of SMN1 and SMN2, decrease (p <0.05) respectively, while CD29 gene showed combined with linked multi-marker diplotyping, improves 0.85±0.10 fold change (p>0.05). In the SCO group, diagnostic conﬁdence for SMA PGD. The highly poly- CD90, CD29 and POU5F1 gene expressions showed 4.73 morphic tridecaplex microsatellite panel can potentially be ±1.03,2.10±0.47and3.56±0.68foldincreases,(p<0.05) informative in most if not all at-risk couples. respectively, while CD49f gene expression showed 1.67 S.S.Chong:None.M.Zhao:None.M.Lian:None.F.S. ±0.37foldchange(p>0.05).Asaconclusion,itwasfound H. Cheah: None. that SSCs biomarkers exhibit different proﬁles in NOAAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 39 P01.91C preimplantation genetic diagnosis with transfer of unaf- Numerical and structural genomic aberrations in fected embryos or the use of donor gametes might be spontaneous abortions, detected by array CGH analysis considered for therapy. Acknowledgment: SNSF grant No IZ73Z0_152454. K.Belemezova1,2,M.Rizov1,M.Hristova-Savova1,E.Nikolova1, K. Belemezova: None. M. Rizov: None. M. Hristova- T. Timeva3,4,T. Milachich3,M.Yunakova3,P. Andreeva3,5, Savova: None. E. Nikolova: None. T. Timeva: None. T. P. Chaveeva3,A. Shterev3,V. Djonov6,I.Dimova1,7 Milachich: None. M. Yunakova: None. P. Andreeva: None.P. Chaveeva: None.A. Shterev: None. V.Djonov: 1Genetic Laboratory, SAGBAL „DrShterev“, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, None. I. Dimova: None. 2Clinical Immunology Laboratory, St Ivan Rilski Hospital, Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3SAGBAL „Dr P01.92D Shterev“, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4"Angel Kanchev" University of Phenotype variability of NR5A1 (SF1) gene mutations in Ruse, Ruse, Bulgaria, 5South-West University "Neoﬁt Rilski", DSD patients Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria, 6Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern,Bern,Switzerland,7LaboratoryofGenomicdiagnostics, V. B.Chernykh1, N.Y. Raygorodskaya2,N.V.Bolotova2, J.V. Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Paltseva3 Background: Chromosomal abnormality in the product of 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian conception is the reason for 50-70% of abortions. Chro- Federation, 2Saratov State Medical University, Saratov, mosomal microarray analysis of fetal tissue has been pro- Russian Federation, 3Clinical Hospital of Medical University posed as a technique to evaluate the cause of isolated and named SR Mirotvortsev, Saratov, Russian Federation recurrent early pregnancy loss (miscarriages) and later pregnancy loss (intrauterine fetal demise). Background: NR5A1(Steroidogenic Factor 1, SF1) gene Materials and Methods: In this study, we applied array mutations result in various forms of disorders of sex CGH method for analysis of chromosomal imbalances at a development (DSD), adrenal insufﬁciency, primary hypo- high resolution in 24 samples of spontaneous abortions. gonadism, male and female infertility. Results: The Aim: To evaluate the clinical variability of ambiguous phenotypes and the gender assignment in DSD Genomicaberration % patients with SF1 mutations. Trisomy22 8 MaterialsandMethods:Clinicalexamination,hormonal Trisomy16 8 tests, ultrasound, laparoscopy, standard cytogenetic exam- MonosomyХ 8 ination, and DNA analyses, including Sanger and next- Trisomy18 4 generation sequencing. Trisomy19 4 Results:Case1.A46,XYfemalepatient,aged18months Trisomy20 4 with clitorophallus. A small testis was detected in the right Trisomy21 4 labioscrotal fold. Hormonal tests showed LH - 0.25 IU/l, Trisomy15 4 FSH - 12.9 IU/l, and testosterone after hCG stimulation - 0.3nmol/l.Pelvicultrasonographyandlaparoscopyshowed Doubletrisomy18and19 4 Duplication7р 4 theuterus,fallopian tubes anddysgeneticabdominal gonad Tetrasomy9р 4 on the left side. DNA analysis detected the heterozygous nonsense mutation c.256delA of the NR5A1 gene. Case 2. Chromotripsis 8 A 46,XY boy, aged 5 months, with undermasculinized Euploid 36 PraderIIIgenitalia,perinealhypospadiasandsmalltestesin biﬁd scrotum. Uterus was not found. Hormonal tests Conclusion: In 15 of 24 spontaneous abortions (64%), showed testosterone - 5.6 nmol/l, LH - 2.2 IU/l, FSH - genomicanomalieswerediscoveredbyarrayCGHanalysis. 5.0 IU/l, and AMH - 43.8 ng/ml. DNA analysis found Two thirds of them could be detected by the rapid DNA heterozygous p.R313C mutation of the NR5A1 gene. analysis(offeredinourcountryasarapidQF-PCRanalysis Conclusions: The 46,XY patients with heterozygous foraneuploidies13,15,16,18,21,22,XandY).Numerical NR5A1mutationspresentedvariousphenotypesofgonadal anomalies were detected in 73% of aberrant cases, and in development.Thepatientwithnonsensemutationpresented 27% - structural aberrations/chromothripsis were revealed. female phenotype with gonadal dysgenesis and Müllerian Forcoupleswithrecurrentpregnancylossandevidenceofa derivates.ThemalepatientwithNR5A1missensemutation structural genetic abnormality in one of the parents, developed genitalia ambiguous with moderated40 J.delPicchia undermasculinization and no Müllerian structures, that is C. Lapucci: None. D. Morano: None. S. Berto: None. characteristic for partial 46,XY gonadal (testicular) L.WalczerBaldinazzo:None.D.Prandstraller:None.F. dysgenesis. Cro': None. A. Farina: None. V.B. Chernykh: None. N.Y. Raygorodskaya: None. N. V. Bolotova: None. J.V. Paltseva: None. P01.94B Genetics ofsex hormone-binding globulin and testosterone P01.93A levels in fertile and infertile men of reproductive age HigherlevelsofcirculatingmRNAforTenascinX(TNXB) gene in maternal plasma at the second trimester of M.Grigorova1, M.Punab2, O.Poolamets2,M. Adler1,2, pregnancy in isolated congenital ventricular septal defects V. Vihljajev2, M.Laan1 C. Lapucci1,D.Morano2,S. Berto1, L.Walczer Baldinazzo1, 1Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, D.Prandstraller3,F. Cro'1,A. Farina4 University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Andrology Unit, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia 1Geneticdepartment,SynlabItaly,Castenedolo,Brescia,Italy, 2Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Introduction: Testosterone (T) is a central androgenic Medicine,SectionofObstetricsandGynecology,Universityof hormone. Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) mod- Ferrara, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria S.Anna, Cona, ulates T bioactivity. The current understanding of genetic Ferrara, Italy, 3Pediatric Cardiology and Adult Congenital variation contributing to male reproductive hormone levels Unit,Sant'OrsolaMalpighiHospital,Bologna,Italy,4Division is moderate. We aimed to conﬁrm or reject genetic asso- of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medicine, DIMEC Sant'Orsola ciations of top-loci (SHBG, GCKR, SLCO1B1, JMJD1C) Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy from GWA-studies for SHBG and T, and uncover addi- tional genetic effects on male fertility-related parameters (J Introduction: Maternal plasma is a source of circulating Endocr Soc. 2017 1(6): 560-576). placental nucleic acids; therefore it is a powerful tool for Material and Methods: Study groups: young men prenatal screening for congenital heart diseases (CHD). (n=540; 19.3±1.8 years), severe idiopathic male inferti- Previousstudiesshowedthattheidentiﬁcationofcirculating lity patients (n=641; 31.6±6.0 years), male partners of mRNAs of MAPK1, IQGAP1 and Visfatin in maternal pregnant women (n=324; 31.9±6.6 years). Recruitment: plasma had different gene expressions between CHD foe- Andrology Unit, Tartu University Hospital, Estonia. tuses and control foetuses. This method allowed us to fur- Analysis:geneticassociationswithreproductiveparameters therinvestigatetheexpressionofTenascinXgene(TNXB) (linear regression, meta-analysis). publishedasinvolvedinCHD.LevelsofcirculatingmRNA Results. Robust associations with SHBG for SHBG for the TNXB were investigated in pregnancies with ven- rs1799941 (meta-analysis: P=3.7x10-14; beta=4.67(0.62) tricular septal defects during 2nd trimester of pregnancy. nmol/L),SHBGrs727428(P=7.3x10-11;-3.74(0.57),SHBG Materials and Methods: The circulating mRNA assay Pro185Leu (rs6258; P=1.2x10-4, -12.2(3.17) and GCKR was isolated from blood samples collected in several Pro446Leu (rs1260326; P=1.5x10-4; -2.2(0.59). Total T Institutes in Italy from March 2016 to July 2017. TNXB correlates with genetically modulated SHBG levels geneexpressionwasinvestigatedbyRT-PCRin10women (r=0.48-0.74, P<0.0001), guaranteeing stable availability carrying foetus with ventricular septal defects and 31 of free T. Among infertile men, SHBG Pro185Leu shows controls at 19-24 weeks of gestation. downstream effect on LH (P=5.1x10-5; -1.66(0.57) IU/L) Results: RT-PCR showed that TNXB gene expression and FSH (P=3.4x10-3; -2.48(1.23) IU/L). No associations washigherinfoetuseswithventricularseptaldefectswitha for SHBG Asp327Asn (rs6259), SLCO1B1 Val174Ala 2-ΔΔCT value of 4.38 ± 3.01 vs 1.00 ± 0.80 in controls. (rs4149056), JMJD1C rs7910927. CSH was used as housekeeping gene which expression Conclusions. We replicated previously reported associa- 2 value was normalised based on several gestational ages. tions and detected additional effects for four of seven Conclusions: The data conﬁrmed a link between analysed GWAS hits. These variants are promising circulating mRNA and CHD; ventricular septal defects candidates for the future studies of hypotestosteronemia in could be associated with abnormal level of TNXB mRNA aging men, as well as promising pharmacogenetic targets during the 2nd trimester of pregnancy. In future, the for hormone replacement therapy in males with fertility variationofTNXBgeneexpressionwillbeusedtoidentify problems. thefoetuseswithCHD,howeverthismolecularmarkerwill Funding: European Union through the European Regio- be assessed throughout prospective studies in a wider nal Development Fund (project Happy Pregnancy, population.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 41 3.2.0701.12-0047) andEstonianResearch Council(IUT34- S. Duenwald1,D.Vavrek2,K. Meier2,C. Deciu2,M.Garcia- 12, ETF9030, PUT181). Ransom3,M.Halks-Miller4 M. Grigorova: None. M. Punab: None. O. Poolamets: None. M. Adler: None. V. Vihljajev: None. M. 1Illumina, Inc., San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Illumina, Laan: None. Inc., San Diego, CA, United States, 3N/A, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Grail, San Francisco, CA, United States P01.95C Evaluationofanin-house-developedHRMbasedapproach Objectives: To develop and evaluate performance of a for Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of beta thalassaemia novel and highly automated, paired-end sequencing-based noninvasive prenatal test (NIPT) for fetal chromosomal M.Karapanou, M.Vlahou,A. Floratos,A. Balassopoulou, aneuploidies on chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X, and Y. E. Boutou Methods: We developed a PCR-free, paired-end sequen- cing-based NIPT, the VeriSeq™ NIPT Solution, that Laiko Hospital, Athens, Greece estimates fetal fraction (FF) and screens for fetal chromo- somal aneuploidies in maternal plasma samples. Perfor- Introduction: Thalassaemias are the most common mono- mance of VeriSeq NIPT Solution was determined by genicdisordersworldwide.Inthemajorityofcasesprenatal analyzing 3057 frozen maternal plasma samples that had diagnosis of embryos at risk is performed through an beentestedpreviouslyusingasingle-endsequencing-based invasiveprocedurethathas1-2%probabilityofmiscarriage. NIPT (Veriﬁ™ PrenatalTest, Illumina, Inc.);samples were We have previously developed a non-invasive prenatal blinded prior to reanalysis. Clinical outcomes (cytogenetic testing (NIPT) approach, based on analyzing free fetal analysis or newborn physical examination) were available DNA. Here, we present the results of 32 cases where the for all cases used to determine assay sensitivity and parental beta globin gene mutations are inherited by the speciﬁcity. fetus. Our method is based on High Resolution Melting Results: At a sequencing depth of 8M reads on a (HRM) analysis and covers all possible combinations of NextSeq™500or550,thelimitofdetectionwasbelow3% fetal inheritance. FF for each chromosome-of-interest. Test performance was Materials and Methods: ffDNA is isolated from 2ml determined using 3107 samples, of which 21 (0.7%) were maternal plasma and screened for the presence of β globin not reported because of QC failure on the only plasma gene parental mutations based on an in-house developed aliquot available. Sensitivity was 98.9% (90/91), 90.0% HRM approach. Previously described SNPs in the vicinity (18/20), and 100% (8/8) for trisomy 21, trisomy 18, and of β globin gene, for which parents presented distinct trisomy 13, respectively. Speciﬁcities were ≥99.9% for all haplotypes,werealsodeterminedandusedforidentiﬁcation three trisomies; there were 8 false-positive results (one of the fetal fraction. Sex determination was also helpful in trisomy 21, three trisomy 18, and four trisomy 13). case of male embryos. Concordance for sex chromosome aneuploidies ranged Results:Ourhithertoresults(32cases)coverallpossible from 80.0-100%. combinations like male or female embryos that inherited Conclusions: VeriSeq NIPT Solution showed good test eitherthepaternalorthematernalmutationandcaseswhere performance for the detection of fetal chromosomal the embryo has inherited both parental mutations. Our aneuploidies, even at low fetal fractions. This paired-end results succeeded in obtaining the same diagnosis with the sequencing-based NIPT assay detects fetal chromosomal preceded analysis of corresponding chorionic villus sam- aneuploidies with high sensitivities and speciﬁcities and a pling, showing up to now 100% diagnostic capacity. low assay failure rate. Conclusions: The described approach, after further S. Duenwald: A. Employment (full or part-time); evaluation,mayallowitsapplicationatthediagnosticlevel Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, as a primary or secondary method for NIPT for beta stockoptions,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest; thalassaemia and if accordingly adopted it may be used for Illumina, Inc. D. Vavrek: A. Employment (full or part- other monogenic diseases as well. time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. E. Ownership Interest M. Karapanou: None. M. Vlahou: None. A. Floratos: (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); None. A. Balassopoulou: None. E. Boutou: None. Modest; Illumina, Inc. K. Meier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. E. Ownership Interest P01.96D (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); PerformanceoftheVeriSeqNIPTSolution-anovelPCR- Modest; Illumina, Inc. C. Deciu: A. Employment (full or free, paired-end sequencing-based noninvasive prenatal part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. E. Ownership Interest screening test (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);42 J.delPicchia Modest; Illumina, Inc. M. Garcia-Ransom: E. Ownership E.Musatova:None.A.Tveleneva:None.Z.Markova: Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual None. N. Shilova: None. property); Modest; Illumina, Inc. M. Halks-Miller: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other P01.98B intellectual property); Modest; Illumina, Inc. RaremosaicismwithringXchromosomeinfemalepatient with Turner syndrome and normal fertility: a case report P01.97A The compare results of different whole genome S. D.Teoﬁlov,T. P.Ostojic, M.R. Bulatovic, J.D.Jovanovic, ampliﬁcation methods for purposes of cell-based O.V. Miljanovic noninvasive prenatal diagnosis Clinical Center of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro E. Musatova,A. Tveleneva, Z. Markova,N.Shilova Introduction: Turner syndrome (TS) is a chromosomal FEDERALSTATEBUDGETARYINSTITUTION«RESEARCH conditionthataffectsdevelopmentinfemales,causedbythe CENTRE FOR MEDICAL GENETICS», Moscow, Russian loss of an X-chromosome or X-structural abnormalities in Federation the X-chromosome.This condition occurs in about 1 in 2,500 newborn girls. The most frequent constitutional kar- Introduction: Trophoblast cells in blood of pregnant yotypeofTSpatientsis45,X.Smallpercentageindividuals women are a potential target for non-invasive prenatal with TS also have another cell line with 46 chromosomes testing, but the number of trophoblasts is very low. due to presence of a ring chromosome X instead of normal Obtaining the quantity and quality of DNA sufﬁcient for X chromosome subsequent analysis is key point in the possibility of MaterialsandMethods:Wepresentacaseofa37-year- studying the genetic material of single cells. To compare old TS women who had normal fertility and three three different methods of whole genome ampliﬁcation in documented pregnancies. Cytogenetic analysis were based model experiment was performed. on the analysis of 200 metaphases. According to standard MaterialsandMethods:Therewereused10samplesof procedures, metaphase chromosomes were obtained from artiﬁcially created mixtures. The artiﬁcial mixtures were phytohaemagglutinin stimulated lymphocyte cultures from prepared by mixing samples of peripheral venous blood of peripheral blood. The chromosomes were analyzed by adult with cells’ samples of chorionic villus with known Giemsa banding and karyotype according to the Use of the karyotype. There was used ﬁltration through polycarbonate InternationalSystemforHumanCytogeneticNomenclature. ﬁlters to isolate trophoblasts from artiﬁcial mixtures. Results:FemalepatientwithaphenotypeofTScontacted Isolated cells were ﬁxed with paraformaldehyde during a genetic counselor after two lost pregnancy. The result of sample preparation. Detection of trophoblasts on the ﬁlters cytogenetic analysis: 45,X[188]/46,X,r(X)(p22.1q28)[12]. was carried out by immunocytochemical staining with Afterafewmonths,thepatientcamepregnantandprenatal monoclonal antibodies to cytokeratin 7. Isolation of single diagnosis was conducted. The third pregnancy was cytokeratin7-positive cells was performed by laser micro- successfully completed by the birth of a healthy boy. dissection. WGA performed by three different Methods: Conclusions:TS women typically experience gonadal linker adapter PCR (LA-PCR), degenerate oligonucleotide dysfunction that results in amenorrhea and sterility. Most primed PCR (DOP-PCR) and multiple displacement likely, an ovum with the ring X chromosome can be fertile ampliﬁcation (MDA). Analysis of molecular karyotype of and can produce a viable zygote.TS associated with an X WGA products was performed by comparative genomic ringchromosome,r(X),israreandthisviewisourcountry hybridization. Lengths and concentrations of WGA pro- ﬁrstcasereportonnormalpregnancyinTSwith45,X/46,X, ducts and results of comparative genomic hybridization r(X) mosaicism. results were compared. S.D. Teoﬁlov: None. T.P. Ostojic: None. M.R. Bula- Results: LA-PCR showed the highest sensitivity, speci- tovic: None. J.D. Jovanovic: None. O.V. ﬁcity and uniformity of ampliﬁcation in comparison with Miljanovic: None. other methods. Conclusion: The results of model experiment show that not all the WGA methods used are applicable for the P02 Sensory disorders (eye, ear, pain) analysisofsingletrophoblastcells,isolatedbyﬁltrationand ﬁxed with paraformaldehyde in the process of sample P02.02A preparation. Coding and non-coding structural variants of ABCA4Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 43 contributetothemissingheritabilityinStargardtdisease,a P02.03B prevalent inherited retinal disease Two novel homozygous splicing mutations in ARL2BP cause autosomal recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa M.Bauwens1,S. Naessens1, C.Van Cauwenbergh1,2, T.Van Laethem1, S.De Jaegere1,I.Balikova2,Y. Sznajer3,J.De A. Fiorentino1,J.Yu2, G.Arno1,3, N.Pontikos1,S.Halford2, Zaeytijd2,B. P.Leroy2,4,E. DeBaere1 S. Broadgate2,M.Michaelides3,1,K. J.Carss4,5, F.L. Raymond5,6,M.E.Cheetham1,A.R.Webster1,3,S.M.Downes7, 1CenterforMedicalGeneticsGhent,GhentUniversity,Ghent, A. J.Hardcastle1,NIHR-BioResource RareDiseases Belgium, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Consortium, UK Inherited Retinal Dystrophy Consortium and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Centre de Génétique Humaine, Cliniques universitaires St. Luc, 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, UniversitécatholiquedeLouvain,Brussels,Belgium,4Division 2University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Moorﬁelds of Ophthalmology and Center for Cellular & Molecular Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Therapeutics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Philadelphia, PA, United States Kingdom, 5Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Department of Medical Stargardt disease (STGD1) is a prevalent autosomal reces- Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United sive inherited retinal disease (IRD), hallmarked by a large Kingdom, 7Oxford Eye Hospital, John Radcliffe Hospital, proportion of mono-allelic cases with one coding ABCA4 Oxford, United Kingdom mutation, representing an interesting cohort to elucidate missing heritability. We aimed to ﬁnd the second patho- Introduction: Retinitis pigmentosa is the most common genicalleleinelevenmono-allelicSTGD1patientswithout inherited retinal dystrophy, affecting approximately 1 in pathogenic coding or non-coding sequence variant after 4,000 individuals. Mutations in ARL2BP, encoding ADP- ABCA4 locus resequencing. Targeted copy number variant ribosylation factor-like 2 binding protein, have recently (CNV) analysis using a customized platform (arrEYE) been implicated as a cause of autosomal recessive retinitis interrogating coding and non-coding regions of IRD genes, pigmentosa(arRP)with3homozygousvariantsidentiﬁedto revealed four novel ABCA4 CNVs in unrelated STGD1 date(c.101-1G>C,c.134T>G[p.Met45Arg],c.207+1G>T) patients. A 10 kb deletion spanning ABCA4 exons 10-11 in cases of Arab-Muslim, European and Moroccan origin. was identiﬁed in one patient. An out-of-frame deletion of Materials and Methods: Whole-genome sequencing exon 40-50 (19.112 bp) was identiﬁed in another patient (WGS) or whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed andeliminatesthe3’UTRofthegene,mostlikelyrendering in 1051 unrelated individuals recruited to the UK Inherited the resulting transcript unstable and prone to nonsense- Retinal Disease Consortium and NIHR-BioResource Rare mediated decay. An in-frame tandem duplication (exons 2- Diseases research studies. Sanger sequencing was used to 6) of26 kb was identiﬁed inanother patient. Anon-coding validate the next generation sequencing data, and RT-PCR intronic tandem duplicationof7kb wasidentiﬁedinintron analysiswasperformedonRNAextractedfrombloodfrom 1,occurringintranswithamildmutation.Wehypothesize affected individuals to test for altered splicing of ARL2BP. a regulatory or splicing effect as a consequence of the Results: Homozygous variants in ARL2BP duplication.AllCNVsweredelineatedandinvestigatedvia (NM_012106.3) were identiﬁed in two unrelated indivi- bioinformatics analyses, pointing to a replicative-based duals with RP. The variants, c.207+1G>A and c.390 mechanism for three out of the four CNVs and to non- +5G>A, at conserved splice donor sites for intron 3 and homologous end joining for one CNV. These ﬁndings add intron5respectively,werepredictedtoalterthepre-mRNA to the ABCA4 mutational spectrum, characterized by a splicing of ARL2BP. RT-PCR spanning the affected exon/ paucity of CNVs, with eight deletions reported so far. intron boundaries showed both variants caused abnormal Finally, we highlight the importance of investigating non- splicing of ARL2BP in samples from affected individuals coding regions of ABCA4 in mono-allelic STGD1 patients. compared to controls. M. Bauwens: None. S. Naessens: None. C. Van Conclusions:Ourstudyidentiﬁed2homozygousvariants Cauwenbergh: None. T. Van Laethem: None. S. De in ARL2BP as a rare cause of arRP. Further studies are Jaegere: None. I. Balikova: None. Y. Sznajer: None. J. required to deﬁne the underlying disease mechanism De Zaeytijd: None. B.P. Leroy: None. E. De causing retinal degeneration as a result of mutations in Baere: None. ARL2BP. A. Fiorentino: None. J. Yu: None. G. Arno: None. N. Pontikos: None. S. Halford: None. S. Broadgate: None. M.Michaelides:None.K.J.Carss:None.F.L.Raymond:44 J.delPicchia None.M.E.Cheetham:None.A.R.Webster:None.S.M. Spain), La Marató TV3 (project 201417.30), SGR2014- Downes: None. A.J. Hardcastle: None. 0932 (Generalitat de Catalunya). V. Toulis: None. M. Costa: None. G. Marfany: None. P02.04C ATXN3inretina:fromataxiatocandidategeneforretinal P02.05D dystrophies First audiological characteristics of autosomal dominant hearing loss caused by a novel TBC1D24 gene alteration V. Toulis1, M.Costa2,G.Marfany1,3,4 D.Oziębło1,2,G.Tacikowska3, K.Kochanek4,H.Skarżyński5, 1Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística, M.Ołdak1 Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Neurology, Medical School, University 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Institut de PathologyofHearing,Warsaw,Poland,2PostgraduateSchool Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Barcelona,Spain,4CentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédicaenRed Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Otoneurology, Institute of deEnfermedadesRaras(CIBERER),InstitutodeSaludCarlos Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, III, Barcelona, Spain 4Department of Experimental Audiology, Institute of PhysiologyandPathologyofHearing,Warsaw,Poland,5Oto- Introduction: An expanded CAG repeat on the ATXN3 Rhino-LaryngologySurgeryClinic,InstituteofPhysiologyand gene, encoding the deubiquitinating enzyme ATXN3, cau- Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland ses Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 3 (SCA3), a late onset autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder. The phy- Background: To date different genetic variants in siologicalroleofthewild-typeATXN3protein,however,is TBC1D24 gene were causally involved in the development notcompletelyunderstood.Sincedeubiquitinationseemsto ofneurologicalsyndromesandprofoundprelingualhearing play a crucial role in photoreceptor development and dif- loss (HL) inherited in a recessive manner (DFNB86). In ferentiation, we aimed to deﬁne the function of ATXN3 in 2014 the ﬁrst and so far only TBC1D24 pathogenic variant retinal formation combining animal and cell models. has been linked with postlingual autosomal dominant HL Methods: Functional analysis in Atxn3 murine models (DFNA65). was performed and the retinal phenotype was studied by Material and methods: Five-generation Polish family immunoﬂuorescence detection, transmission electron participatedinthestudy.Clinicalexomesequencingonthe microscopy and photoreceptor isolation for a more detailed proband’s DNA and family segregation analysis of the description. A cell model of ATXN3 knockdown was identiﬁed variants were performed. Audiological assess- generatedusingRNAiinhumanARPE-19cells,whichwas ment included pure tone audiometry (PTA), impedance analyzed by western-blot and immunoﬂuorescence audiometry, transient evoked otoacoustic emissions detection. (TEOAE) and auditory brainstem responses (ABRs). Results: The Atxn3 knockout mouse retinas showed a Vestibular system function was evaluated using ocular signiﬁcantelongationofthephotoreceptors,mislocalization and cervical vestibular evoked myogenic potentials of cone-speciﬁc phototransduction proteins, with concomi- (oVEMP, cVEMP). Temporal bone computed tomography tant elongation of the connecting cilium -the gate through was also performed. whichtheproteinsaretransportedtothephotoreceptorouter Results: Genetic testing revealed a novel probably segment-,anddiminishedphagocytosisofthephotoreceptor pathogenic c.553G>A (p.Asp185Asn) TBC1D24 variant, outer segments by the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE). which fully segregated with HL in the studied family. These results were also conﬁrmed in vitro in ARPE- Clinically, progressive HL involving mainly high frequen- 19 cells. cies was observed. No TEOAE were recorded in the study Conclusions:OurworksupportsthekeyroleofATXN3 subjects and no or increased threshold of the stapedial in retinal development and maintenance, particularly in the muscle reﬂex was found. Function of the vestibulocochlear ciliogenesis and protein trafﬁcking in photoreceptors, nerve measured by ABR was normal. No vestibular thereby highlighting ATXN3 as a good candidate gene for dysfunction and anatomical abnormalities of cochleoves- inherited retinal dystrophies. tibular system were detected. Grants:V.T.isinreceiptofaFPIfellowship(BES-2014- Conclusions: Our results represent the ﬁrst independent 068639, MINECO). Work is supported by SAF2013- conﬁrmation of TBC1D24 involvement in the development 49069-C2-1-R (Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, of autosomal dominant HL and the ﬁrst thorough clinical characteristics of TBC1D24-induced autosomal dominantAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 45 HL. The identiﬁed TBC1D24 variant affects the cochlear miRNAs to become clinically applicable biomarkers and component of the auditory system and results in a high therapeutic targets. frequency HL usually observed in the third decade of life. Acknowledgements: This work was funded by Serbian Supported by: 2016/22/E/NZ5/00470 Ministry of Education, Science and Technological devel- D. Oziębło: None. G. Tacikowska: None. K. Kocha- opment Grant OI175085. nek: None. H. Skarżyński: None. M. Ołdak: None. I. Jovanovic: None. T. Djuric: None. M. Zivkovic: None. S. Jesic: None. A. Stankovic: None. P02.06A Integrative identiﬁcation of miRNA regulatory hubs as P02.07B candidate molecular discriminators of chronic otitis media Astudyofthegeneticsofcholesteatomathroughsystematic pathologies review and whole exome sequencing I.Jovanovic1,T.Djuric1,M.Zivkovic1,S.Jesic2,3,A.Stankovic1 B. A.Jennings1,C.Philpott1,M. F.Bhutta2,D.Swan3, G.Willis4, J.Woods5, P.Prinsley5 1Laboratory for Radiobiology and Molecular Genetics, Vinca InstituteofNuclearSciences,UniversityofBelgrade,Belgrade, 1UEA, Norwich, United Kingdom, 2Brighton and Sussex Serbia, 2Medical Faculty, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, University NHS Trust, Brighton, United Kingdom, 3NCIMB, Serbia, 3Clinic for Otorhinolaryngology and Maxillofacial Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 4Norfolk and Norwich University Surgery, Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia Hospital, Norwich, United Kingdom, 5James Paget University Hospital, Great Yarmouth, United Kingdom Introduction: Chronic otitis media is followed by irrever- sible tissue damage and destruction of the middle ear Introduction A cholesteatoma is a mass of keratinising structures. Cholesteatoma is an expanding, destructive epi- epitheliuminthemiddleear.Itisararedisorder,associated thelial lesion within the middle ear, commonly associated withsigniﬁcantmorbidity.ItsOMIMentry(#604183)cites withchronicotitismedia.Molecularmechanismsofchronic minimal evidence for Mendelian inheritance, but we have otitis media with cholesteatoma (COMch) and without observed31multiplyaffectedfamiliesinNorfolk;including cholesteatoma (COM) are challenging subject in research. individuals with bilateral disease, suggesting a genetic The aim of this study was to perform transcriptome proﬁl- component for its aetiology. ing of tissue from COMch and COM, and subsequent net- Methods We conducted a systematic literature review workanalysis,toidentifycandidatemiRNAregulatoryhubs (SR)toidentifyanypublishedstudiesaboutthegeneticsof that can potentially serve as molecular discriminators of cholesteatoma and established a national biobank for these two pathologies. subsequent whole exome sequencing (WES) studies of Materials and Methods: Transcriptome data were familialdisease.Wehavealsocompletedapilotsequencing obtained from COMch (n=2 patients) and COM tissue study to identify candidate variants that segregate with the (n=4 patients), by employing Illumina iScan microarray disease phenotype (using NimbleGen exome capture; and technology. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were the Illumina HiSeq4000 platform). identiﬁedusingR/Bioconductorlimmapackage.Functional Results In our SR, we identiﬁed 8 case-series with analysisofDEGsanddeterminationofnetworkmiRNAsby multiply-affected families and associations with congenital reverse mapping of target DEGs was done using miRNet malformationsyndromes.DNAandclinical datahavebeen software. Nonspeciﬁc miRNAs were excluded. collected from 42 participants (from 9 multiply affected Results: Transcriptome analysis identiﬁed 169 DEGs. Norfolk families) to date. In 2018, participants will also be Signiﬁcant biological processes involving DEGs covered recruited from 10 additional UK centres. Our pilot WES epithelial cell and keratinocyte differentiation and extra- study of 16 participants from 4 families identiﬁed 95,437 cellular structure organization. miRNet determined hsa- variants. Variant ﬁltering, using pedigree analysis, has miR-8485,hsa-miR-24-3p,hsa-miR-34a-5p,hsa-miR-9-5p, identiﬁed430candidategenesforfurtherﬁlteringusingthe hsa-miR-375, hsa-miR-145-5p, hsa-miR-21-5p as top hub Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor. miRNas with centrality degree ≥8. ConclusionWehavecompletedourSR(seePROSPERO Conclusions: The identiﬁed hub miRNAs should be the register CRD42015023579) and established the ﬁrst guide mark for future studies on mechanisms of miRNA biobank to explore the genetics-of-cholesteatoma. A WES activity in chronic otitis media pathologies. Also, hub strategyandbioinformaticspipelinehavebeendevelopedin miRNAs should be evaluated for their utilization in the pilot study; and preliminary ﬁltering has identiﬁed prevention and therapy, based on the growing potential of candidate variants that could have an impact on TGF β signalling and inﬂammatory processes.46 J.delPicchia B.A.Jennings:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator, polymorphism was higher at tympanoplasty and ossiculo- collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as plastypatientsasawholecomparedtocontrols.Thelevelof grants already received); Modest; The Bernice Bibby OPGatinnerearswabstakenfromtubaEustachiopeningat Research Trust. C. Philpott: B. Research Grant (principal nasopharynx was increased at tympanoplasty group. investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants S. Keskin: None. P. Ata: None. B. Erkal: None. T. aswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;RosetreesTrust Dogan: None. A. Eren: None. A. Tatlipinar: None. (A1136),TheBerniceBibbyResearchTrust.M.F.Bhutta: None. D. Swan: None. G. Willis: None. J. Woods: None. P02.09D P. Prinsley: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, CIB2 gene in the pathogenesis of hearing loss - results of collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as pooled DNA high throughput sequencing grants already received); Modest; Royal College of Surgeons, The Bernice Bibby Research Trust. A.Pollak1,J.Gzik1,A.Jacoszek2,3,U.Lechowicz1,P.Stawiński1, R. Ploski2,H. Skarżynski1,M.Oldak1 P02.08C The relationship between defects at the middle ear bone 1Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, chain and NLRP3 and OPG gene polymorphisms at Poland., Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, chronic otitis media patients Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland,3PostgraduateSchoolofMolecularMedicine,Warsaw S. Keskin1,P. Ata2,B. Erkal2,T. Dogan2,A. Eren3, Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland A. Tatlipinar4 Hearing loss (HI) is a highly heterogenic and frequent dis- 1Fatih Sultan Mehmet Research and Training Hospital, ability that affects human senses. Calcium- and integrin- Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University School of Medicine, bindingprotein2(CIB2)isoneofthegenesinvolvedinHI Istanbul, Turkey, 3Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Okan pathogenesis. The CIB2 protein is responsible for main- University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey taining Ca2+ homeostasis in cells and interacting with integrins. The aim of presented study was to establish the Introduction:Thepurposeofthisresearchistoinvestigate frequency of CIB2-related hearing impairment based on the relation between osteoprotogerin, NLRP3 inﬂamma- pooled DNA sequencing. DNA samples derived from 900 some gene polymorphisms and ossicular chain defects. patients with HI were pooled and 180 pools were obtained Materials and Methods: There were 96 participants, (5DNAsamples/pool).ThewholeCIB2codingregionwas composed of 30 patients with type 1 tympanoplasty due to ampliﬁed in the DNA pools and sequenced on MiSeq chronicotitismediabetween01/06//2013-01/06/2016,had apparatus (Illumina). Ten novel, potentially pathogenic intact ossicular chain; 20 patients who had ossiculoplasty variants were identiﬁed within the pools. DNA samples becauseofossicularchainerosion,and46healthycontrols. derived from pools with detected variants were separately DNA was isolated from peripheral blood using Puregene resequenced via direct sequencing to conﬁrm the presence Qiagen kit. OPG and NLRP3 were analyzed at real-time of the variants as well as to assign the variants to a parti- PCR reaction with melting curve analysis. Also inner ear cular sample. Five of the primarily detected variants were swabs were used for RNA isolation and OPG and NLRP3 conﬁrmedintheheterozygousform,whichwasinlinewith expression were analyzed with Real-time quantitativePCR. the NGS results, the following ﬁve variants are currently Results: There were 37 males (38.5%) and 59 females beingveriﬁed.Thus,ourresultsconﬁrmedthatpool-seqisa (61.5%)withanagerangeof15-70years,Theaverageage cost and time effective approach that can be used for was 35.05±14.43 years. There was no statistically screening of causative HI variants in a large group of signiﬁcant difference between three groups according to patients. This study was supported by National Science OPG c.226A>C (p.Thr76Pro) and NLRP3 c.592G>A (p. Centre grant 2011/03/D/NZ5/05592. Val198Met) polymorphisms. But when analyzed between A.Pollak: None.J. Gzik: None. A.Jacoszek:None.U. the controls and patient group as a whole there was a Lechowicz: None. P. Stawiński: None. R. Ploski: None. signiﬁcant difference of OPG c.226A>C (p.Thr76Pro) H. Skarżynski: None. M. Oldak: None. polymorphism. The expression level of OPG was higher at the tympanoplasty group compared to P02.10A ossiculoplasty group PAX6 sequence variants affecting splicingcause сongenital Conclusion: There was no statistically signiﬁcant differ- aniridia enceofOPGandNLRP3genepolymorphismsamongthree groups. But TNFRSF11B (OPG) c.226A>C (p.Thr76Pro)Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 47 A. Filatova1,T. Vasilyeva1,M. Skoblov1,2, A.Marakhonov1,2, V. Martínez-Montoya4,M.G.Tovar-Ayala2,L. M.Gonzalez- A. Voskresenskaya3, R.Zinchenko1,4 Huerta2,S.A. Cuevas-Covarrubias5 1Research Centre of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian 1Oftalmologia, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Federation, 2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology Mexico, 2Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, (State University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation, Mexico, 3Gentica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, 3CheboksarybranchofS.FyodorovEyeMicrosurgeryFederal Mexico, 4Genética, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, State Institution, Cheboksary, Russian Federation, 4Pirogov Mexico, 5Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Medicina,UniversidadNacionalAutonomadeMexico,Mexico Russian Federation DF, Mexico Introduction: Aniridia is a rare autosomal dominant Cataracts are one important cause of blindness around the panoculardisordercausedbymutationsinthePAX6geneor world. Primary congenital cataract has several patterns of chromosome 11p13 rearrangements. inheritanceandcanbesyndromicandnon-syndromic.More MaterialsandMethods:DNAsamplesforanalysiswere than100locihavebeenassociatedwithprimary congenital obtainedfrompatientswithcongenitalaniridia(110patients cataract; autosomal dominant is the principal form of from84unrelatedfamilies).Thesearchformutationsinthe inheritance.Cataractisduetoopacitiesofthelensresulting PAX6 gene was carried out by Sanger sequencing, MLPA in defects of the refractive index. This produces alterations and analysis of heterozygosity loss (LOH) in proband. To in the lens structure resulting in light scattering with a determine the effects of identiﬁed SNVs on PAX6 pre- signiﬁcant concentration of high-molecular-weight protein mRNA splicing we used in vitro minigene assay. aggregates. The aim of the present study was to analyze, Results: Molecular analysis of a large cohort of aniridia through exome sequencing, a sample of Mexican patients patientsfromRussiaconductedearlierrevealedasigniﬁcant with non-familial primary congenital cataract. Genomic proportion of PAX6 mutations affecting splicing (14 from DNA was extracted through conventional methods and 81 mutations). We focused on 8 SNVs affected slicing: 6 analyzed through exome sequencing; Sanger direct deep-intronic and 2 exonic. These variants were classiﬁed sequencing was performed to conﬁrm the exome results. asvariant ofunknownsigniﬁcance (VUS),benignorlikely Molecular analysis identiﬁed defects in the HSF4, BFSP1, pathogenic according to ACMG recommendations. Human GCNT2, GJA8, BFSP1, NHS and MAF genes. These Splicing Finder and IntSplice on-line tools analysis predict alterations were not found in healthy members of the them todisruptPAX6pre-mRNAsplicing.Tovalidate this families and 100 normal controls. This study allowed to hypothesis we used a minigene system and showed that all describe the genes associated with primary congenital cat- investigated sequence variants except one affect splicing. aract in a sample of Mexican patients and enriched the These variants result in open reading frame shifting, spectrum of these molecular defects associated with her- premature termination codon formation following by RNA editary cataract. degradation by nonsense-mediated decay. Thus, investi- O.M. Messina-Baas: None. C. Leon-Oviedo: None. J. gated SNVs produce a null allele and haploinsufﬁciency of M. Valdes-Miranda: None. M.R. Rivera-Vega: None.R. the PAX6-function. So putative mutations were reclassiﬁed Vega-Gama: None. N. Xilotl-DeJesus: None. V. Martí- as loss of function. nez-Montoya: None. M.G. Tovar-Ayala: None. L.M. Conclusions: Using functional in vitro analysis we Gonzalez-Huerta: None. S.A. Cuevas- conﬁrmed the pathogenicity of 7 PAX6 mutations affecting Covarrubias: None. splicing. Our results emphasized the necessity of such analysis and advanced search for PAX6 mutations. This P02.12C work is supported by RFBR grant 17-04-00475. Evaluation of genetic variants associated with congenital A. Filatova: None. T. Vasilyeva: None. M. Skoblov: stationary night blindness 2 (CSNB2) None.A.Marakhonov:None.A.Voskresenskaya:None. R. Zinchenko: None. A. Mihalich1, G.Cammarata2,E. Ponti1,G.Tremolada2, S. BianchiMarzoli2,A. DiBlasio1 P02.11B Analysis through exome sequencing in patients with non 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Lab. of Medical Genetics, familial primary congenital cataract Milano, Italy, 2Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Dept. of Neurophthalmology and Electrophysiology, Milano, Italy O.M.Messina-Baas1,C.Leon-Oviedo2,J.M.Valdes-Miranda3, M.R. Rivera-Vega2,R.Vega-Gama2,N.Xilotl-DeJesus2,48 J.delPicchia Introduction: CSNB2 is a non-progressive retinal disorder HereditaryHearingLoss(HHL)isacommontraitaffecting with clinical features that include reduced visual acuity, 1 in 2000 new born children. The presence of over 100 nystagmus and variable myopia or hypermetropia. Char- different genes involved in HHL, lead us to go on board acteristic abnormalities are detected upon electro- with Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) in order to search retinography, autoﬂuorescence and infrared imaging. The for the causative mutations. The main objective of this results of these tests indicate that vision impairment in project was to diagnose Argentinean deaf families and CSNB2 patients may derive from a decreased synaptic discover novel mutations or new genes involved in transmission between photoreceptor and second-order neu- pathology. We designed a ﬂowchart to exclude all the rons. The Cav1.4 channel is involved in this process and spurious variations obtained and target for few candidates. CACNA1F gene encodes the pore-forming subunit α1. To approach this, we ﬁltered results from WES, and can- Since CACNA1F is located on the X chromosome, Cav1.4 didate variations were segregated throughout family mem- channelopathies are typically affecting male patients. bers. Variations positively selected, were analyzed using Materials and Methods: We performed NGS of 32 bioinformatic predictors and tracked in public databases. known retinal disease genes on DNA of 3 male patients Additionally, conservation studies, structure and functional with CSNB2anddifferentsymptomsofthedisease.Intwo domain analysis in proteins, and in-vivo studies were per- patients CACNA1F mRNA was also studied in peripheral formed. Using this strategy we analysed 15 WES results. lymphocytes. We identiﬁed 16 causative mutations in 12 families with Results: We have identiﬁed 3 unreported CACNA1F syndromicandnon-syndromichearingloss(11missense,4 variants:inexon4c.425dupC,inexon43c.G5123Candin frameshift and 1 splicing site mutations). Six were novel exon48c.5800delG. Theﬁrstvariantcauses insertionofa and functional studies of some of the identiﬁed mutations, stop codon that could determine mRNA degradation by usingZebraﬁshmodels,areunder way.Intheremaining3 Nonsense Mediated Decay (NMD). However, mRNA families, variables of uncertain signiﬁcance were detected evaluation revealed that the transcript was present. The (Vous).ToourknowledgethisistheﬁrststudyusingWES second variant is located in a splicing site and skipping of to diagnose deaf patients in Argentina. We show in the exon43wasdemonstratedbymRNAsequencing.Thethird present study that our ﬂowchart is advantageous and note- variantdeterminatesaframeshift.InthispatientmRNAwas worthy for large-scale molecular analysis in deaf patients. not available. These ﬁndings clearly highlight the importance of genetic Conclusions: These results conﬁrm that, in CSNB2 studiesfollowedbyin-sílicoandin-vivovalidationtobetter patients, variants in the same gene may be associated with understand the genetic basis of Hereditary Hearing loss. different phenotypic characteristics. Moreover, they high- P.I.Buonﬁglio:None.C.D.Bruque:None.V.Lotersz- light the importance of studying gene expression and tein:None.E.Goldschmidt:None.A.B.Elgoyhen:None. protein function to assess the biological signiﬁcance of the V.K. Dalamón: None. variants detected. A. Mihalich: None. G. Cammarata: None. E. Ponti: P02.14A None.G.Tremolada:None.S.BianchiMarzoli:None.A. Personalized stem cell therapy to correct corneal defects Di Blasio: None. due to a unique homozygous-heterozygous mosaicism of Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal dysplasia-Clefting syndrome P02.13D Large-scalemolecularanalysisofHereditaryHearingLoss P. Nespeca1, V.Barbaro2,A. Nasti1,P. Raffa1,A.Migliorati1, genesinArgentineandeafpatients:lookingforaneedleina S. Ferrari2,E. Palumbo3,M. Bertolin2,C. Breda2,F. Miceli4, haystack A.Russo3,L.Caenazzo1,D.Ponzin2,G.Palù1,C.Parolin1,E.Di Iorio1 P. I.Buonﬁglio1, C.D.Bruque2,V. Lotersztein3, E. Goldschmidt4,A.B. Elgoyhen1,V. K.Dalamón1 1Departments of Molecular Medicine, Padova, Italy, 2Fondazione Banca degli Occhi, Venezia, Italy, 3Departments 1InstitutodeInvestigacionesenIngenieríaGenéticayBiología of Biology, Padova, Italy, 4Departments of Neuroscience, Molecular “Dr. Héctor Torres” - INGEBI/CONICET, CABA, Napoli, Italy Argentina, 2Centro Nacional de Genética Médica A.N.L.I.S. Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán, CABA, Argentina, 3Servicio de Introduction: Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal dysplasia-Clefting Genética del Hospital Militar Central Cirujano Mayor Dr. syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disease caused by Cosme Argerich, CABA, Argentina, 4Servicio de Genética del mutations in the p63 gene. To date, approximately 40 dif- Hospital General de Agudos Dr. Juan A. Fernández, CABA, ferentp63mutationshavebeenidentiﬁed,allheterozygous. Argentina No deﬁnitive treatments are available to counteract andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 49 resolve the progressive corneal degeneration due to a pre- Toulouse,France, 7West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics mature aging of limbal epithelial stem cells. Here, we Service and Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham describe a unique case of a young EEC patient, who was, Women’sandChildren’sNHSFoundationTrust,Birmingham, surprisingly, homozygous for a novel and de novo R311K United Kingdom missense mutation in the p63 gene. Materialand Methods:Genetic analysis was performed Defects in eye morphogenesis can lead to a spectrum of inp63genetoidentifythedisease-causingmutation.FISH, structural ocular disorders, including anophthalmia, micro- qRT-PCR and SNPs assay were executed to discover an phthalmia and coloboma (AMC). These conditions, affect- additional alteration in p63. From oral biopsy, the ing approximately 6-13 per 100,000 individuals, are heterozygousmutantcellswereexpandedperformingclonal clinically and genetically heterogeneous. The number of analysis. genesknowntobeinvolvedinAMCisrapidlygrowing,yet Results:Theanalysisofthedegreeofsomaticmosaicism only approximately 25% of patients receive a genetic in leukocytes and oral mucosal epithelial stem cells diagnosis. Following whole-exome sequencing of 53 indi- (OMESCs)showedthat the80% were homozygousmutant viduals with developmental eye anomalies, we identiﬁed cells and 20% were heterozygous. Cytogenetic and one patient with bilateral microphthalmia and polydactyly molecular analyses excluded genomic alterations, thus carryingadenovononsynonymousvariant(NM_012300.2: suggesting a de novo mutation followed by an allelic gene c.1087C>T, p.[Arg363Trp]) in FBXW11. This gene codes conversion of the wild-type allele by de novo mutant allele for an F-box protein involved in the regulation of cyto- as a possible mechanism to explain the homozygous plasmiclevelsofβ-cateninandthereforeplaysanimportant condition.The R311K-p63 OMESCs were able to generate role in the Wnt signalling, a fundamental growth-control well-organized and stratiﬁed epithelia in vitro, resembling pathway also implicated in eye and limb development. the features of healthy tissues. Screening of FBXW11 in a further 252 patients with Conclusion: This study supports the rationale for the developmental eye anomalies identiﬁed three previously development of cultured autologous oral mucosalepithelial unreported 3’ untranslated region (UTR) variants in three stemcellsheetsobtained byselectedheterozygous R311K- unrelated individuals. In situ hybridisation experiments p63 stem cells, as an effective and personalized therapyfor showed FBXW11 expression in developing human eye and this unique case of EEC syndrome, thus bypassing gene brain, including the retinal neuroepithelium, telencephalon therapy approaches. and the cerebellum. We also demonstrated that zebraﬁsh P. Nespeca: None. V. Barbaro: None. A. Nasti: None. models with reduced expression of the FBXW11 ortholo- P.Raffa:None.A.Migliorati:None.S.Ferrari:None.E. gues fbxw11a and fbxw11b display smaller, misshapen and Palumbo: None. M. Bertolin: None. C. Breda: None. F. underdeveloped eyes, and abnormal pectoral ﬁn and jaw Miceli: None. A. Russo: None. L. Caenazzo: None. D. development. Ponzin: None. G. Palù: None. C. Parolin: None. E. Di Our results support the role of FBXW11 in eye and limb Iorio: None. development, likely via modulation of the Wnt pathway, and therefore this gene represents an important candidate P02.15B for human developmental disorders. Mutations in F-Box and WD40 Domain Protein 11 F. Ceroni: None. R.M. Young: None. R.J. Holt: None. (FBXW11)areassociatedwithdevelopmentaleyeanddigit B. Crespo: None. N. Chassaing: None. D.A. Bax: None. anomalies C.ZazoSeco: None.P.Calvas: None.D.Gerrelli:None. S.W. Wilson: None. N.K. Ragge: None. F. Ceroni1,R. M.Young2, R.J. Holt1, B.Crespo3, N.Chassaing4,5,D.A. Bax1,C. ZazoSeco6,P. Calvas4,5, P02.16C D.Gerrelli3,S.W. Wilson2,N.K. Ragge1,7 Molecular diagnosis in paediatric retinal dystrophies 1Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes M.Borregán University,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,2DepartmentofCelland Developmental Biology, University College London, London, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain United Kingdom, 3Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health,UniversityCollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom, Introduction: Hereditary retinal dystrophies (HRD) are a 4Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU group of conditions with a great clinical and genetic het- Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 5UMR 1056 Inserm - Université erogeneity; more than 300 responsible genes have been de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 6UDEAR, Université de identiﬁed. The most prevalent HRD is retinitis pigmentosa Toulouse, UMRS 1056 INSERM-Université Paul Sabatier, (RP) (1: 4000).50 J.delPicchia MaterialsandMethods: Prospectivestudy that includes genes were included). The causal variants on both alleles 98 patients were evaluated in a tertiary hospital from 2010 werefoundin35%ofpatients(32of90).Themostfrequent to 2017. The clinical diagnosis was made through clinical causes of HL detected in the Czech population were bial- exploration: visual acuity, biomicroscopy, fundus explora- lelic probably pathogenic variants in following genes tion and electrophysiological tests. According to the STRC, MYO15A, CDH23 and OTOG. Detection rate for patient's collaboration, computerized campimetry, wide- each panel testing was different, namely 34%, 40% and ﬁeld retinography, optical coherence tomography and 12.5%.Intheﬁrsttwopanelsmostpatientswithatleastone microperimetry were performed. For the genetic diagnosis, affected sibling were included. On the contrary only acustomizedpanelof155genes(IRD150)wasdesignedby patients with sporadic HL were included in the last panel. next generation sequencing and applied to children with Possibleexplanationforlowerdetectionrateisthatpatients clinical diagnosis of HRD. with acquired or autosomal dominant inherited HL were Results: Identiﬁcation of the causative variant was includedin thelast panel. Supported- byMH CR AZV 16- achieved in 70% of cases. In our cohort, mutations in 31173A ABCA4 gene were the most frequent, followed by the D. Safka Brozkova: None. S. Poisson Markova: None. BEST1gene(Best'sdisease)andRPGR(X-linkedRP).33% P. Seeman: None. of molecular ﬁndings have not been previously described. Variant segregation within families was performed in order P02.18A to increase evidence of pathogenicity. Adequate genetic HARS2 sequence variants identiﬁed in young individuals counselling was offered in all cases. Regarding therapeutic with severe sensorineural hearing impairment options, 5 families with a diagnosis of ACL and mutations in RPE65 that could be candidates for gene therapy have H.Karstensen1,N.Rendtorff1,L. Hindhede1,A. Stein2, been identiﬁed. In 97% of cases molecular diagnosis was R. Hartmann-Petersen2, K.Lindorff-Larsen2, A.Højland3,4, concordant with clinical diagnostic orientation. M.Petersen3,4,L. Tranebjærg1,5 Conclusion: The identiﬁcation of the molecular cause in HRD is essential for diagnosis and genetic counselling to 1Kennedy Centre, Clinical Genetics Clinic, Copenhagen thepatientandthefamily.Insomecases,avisualprognosis University hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 2The Linderstrøm- and potential treatment could be provided. Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology, M. Borregán: None. University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,AalborgUniversityhospital, P02.17D Aalborg,Denmark,4DepartmentofClinicalMedicine,Aalborg TheimprovedDNAdiagnosticsandgeneticcausesofearly University hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 5Department of onset hereditary hearing loss in the Czech Republic ClinicalMedicine,PanumInstitute,UniversityofCopenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark D.SafkaBrozkova, S. PoissonMarkova, P.Seeman The genetics of hearing impairment (HI) is complex and 2nd Medical School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, highly heterogeneous, and variation in the same gene may Czech Republic;, Prague 5, Czech Republic be associated with different types of both syndromic and non-syndromicHI.HerewefocusonHI,inassociationwith Hereditary hearing loss (HL) is the most common sensory the HARS2 gene, where biallelic missense variants pre- deﬁcit.About60%ofcaseshavegeneticorigin.Thelargest viouslyhavebeenassociatedwithPerraultsyndromeintwo group of HL patients shows autosomal recessive inheri- studies.ThepublishedHARS2variantswereallidentiﬁedin tance.Upto40%ofHLintheCzechRepubliciscausedby patients, ascertained clinically because of the combination biallelicmutationsintheGJB2gene.Wehaveenlargedthe of HI and gonadal dysgenesis, the clinical hallmarks of diagnostics for the second most frequent type of HL - Perrault syndrome. We have investigated the presence of DFNB16. We use a simple and fast quantitative compara- HARS2sequencevariantsin79cases(42females;meanage tive ﬂuorescent PCR and MLPA for detection of deletions 23 ± 21.5 years) with HI. Using Next Generation or CNVs of the STRC gene. For patients who are not Sequencing we have identiﬁed three potential pathogenic homozygous for the STRC deletion we use masivelly par- missense variants. In a family with three affected siblings allel sequencing (MPS) of panel of all genes already asso- (twogirlsage12and15,andoneboyage19),weidentiﬁed ciated with autosomal recessive and X -linked types of compound heterozygosity for the variants: p.Lys58Glu and NSHL. HaloPlex or SureSelect technology was used for p.Arg150Cys, and in a 6 year-old girl we identiﬁed com- library preparation.Overall 90 patients were tested by 3 pound heterozygosity for the variants: p.Arg150Cys and p. consecutively updated gene panel versions (62, 67 and 70 Arg327Gln. Supporting evidence for the functional defectsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 51 of the variants were obtained using in silico modeling of negative patients, a diagnostic yield comparable to other HARS2 variants identiﬁed in this and previous studies, by reports. In remaining patients, molecular diagnosis could predictingboththechangeinproteinstability(ΔΔG)andof not be achieved, where ﬁve patients were carrying one potential loss of function using a co-variation-based ana- likely causative variant in genes associated with autosomal lysis of multiple HARS2 sequence alignments. The three recessive HL. Identiﬁcation of genetic cause delivers an female patients with HARS2 variants, compatible with important information for the genetic counseling and to autosomal recessive inheritance, are young for determining some extend enables HL clinical prediction and verbal signs of ovarian dysgenesis, but will be followed carefully. communication improvement with cochlear implants. The present study raises the possibility for non-syndromic 1Battellino Int Adv Otol 2011;7:372-378 HI being the only phenotypic effect of biallelic HARS2 2Battelino J Laryngol Otol 2012;126:763-9 variation. K. Trebušak Podkrajšek: None. T. Obreza: None. J. H. Karstensen: None. N. Rendtorff: None. L. Hind- Kovač: None. S. Bertok: None. T. Battelino: None. S. hede: None. A. Stein: None. R. Hartmann-Petersen: Battelino: None. None. K. Lindorff-Larsen: None. A. Højland: None. M. Petersen: None. L. Tranebjærg: None. P02.20C Evidence against TMPRSS3/GJB2 digenic inheritance of P02.19B hearing loss - practical lesson learned in the era of high Genetic testing of hearing loss related genes in Slovene throughput sequencing patients with next generation sequencing M.Oldak1,U.Lechowicz1, A.Pollak1,D.Oziębło1,2, K. TrebušakPodkrajšek1,2, T.Obreza1,J.Kovač1, S.Bertok1, H.Skarżyński3 T. Battelino1,2, S.Battelino3,2 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and 1University Medical Centre Ljubljana, University Children´s PathologyofHearing,Warsaw,Poland,2PostgraduateSchool Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University of Ljubljana, of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University Medical Warsaw, Poland, 3Oto-Rhino-Laryngology Surgery Clinic, Centre Ljubljana, Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Cervicofacial Surgery, Ljubljana, Slovenia Poland Introduction:Hereditaryhearingloss(HL)ischaracterized Background: Hearing loss (HL) is the most common dis- by a vast phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity. Up to date ability of human senses and genetic factors signiﬁcantly it was associated to 119 genes; 73 with non-syndromic and contribute to its development. For some HL genes digenic 46 with syndromic HL (Hereditary Hearing Loss Home- inheritance has been documented. Recently it has been page, http://hereditaryhearingloss.org, February 2018). In proposed for TMPRSS3 and GJB2 recessive pathogenic Slovenians, 26.6% of congenitally deaf patients1 and 11% variants. As the data were not convincing, we aimed to of progressive HL patients2 had biallelic GJB2 mutations, verify the hypothesis. where other genetic causes were limitedly exploited so far. Materialandmethods:FromourgeneticdatabaseofHL Material and Methods: 58 HL patients (12 congenital, patients with at least one TMPRSS3 pathogenic variants 46 progressive HL) with negative GJB2 and GJB6 testing (n=42) we have selected individuals with additional were subjected totargetedNGSwith TruSightOne Sequen- pathogenic variants in the GJB2 gene (n=3) and recruited cingPanelontheMiSeqplatformfollowedbyinterpretation for the study all of the available family members. of variants in selected 111 HL associated genes and Segregation analysis of the respective TMPRSS3 and subsequentSangersequencingconﬁrmation.Novelvariants GJB2 pathogenic variants within the families was per- were evaluated with in silico prediction tools (Mutation formed on genomic DNA by Sanger sequencing. Taster, CADD). Results: The strategy has allowed to identify four Results: Causative variants were detected in 33 patients individuals who were double heterozygous for pathogenic in 16 genes (COL2A1, DIAPH3, ILDR, MYH14, MYO15A, TMPRSS3 and GJB2 variants. Two individuals from two MYO6, MYO7A, PDZD7, POU4F3, SLC17A8, TBC1D24, different families had GJB2 c.35delG and TMPRSS3 TCOF1, TECTA, USH2A, WFS1, TMPRSS3), most fre- c.208delC and in two other individuals from one family quently in USH2A (19%), TMPRSS3 (16%) and SLC17A8 GJB2 c.35delG together with TMPRSS3 c.1343T>C (9,7%). Six variants were not reported so far. variants were found. None of these subjects has ever Conclusions: Causative variants explaining clinical reported hearing problems and their hearing status was presentation were detected in 28(48,3%) of GJB2/GJB6 normal.52 J.delPicchia Conclusions: Access to a large genetic database of HL R.Teek:None.H. Roomere: None. S. Pajusalu:None. patients allowed us to identify as many as four individuals K. Õunap: None. with concomitant pathogenic variants in TMPRSS3 and GJB2 genes and without HL. Our data provide evidence P02.22A againstTMPRSS3/GJB2digenicinheritanceofHL.Ashigh TargetedRe-Sequencing(TRS)andhighdensitySNParray throughput sequencing is increasingly used for genetic for the molecular characterisation of Hereditary Hearing testing, particular caution should be taken to not over- Loss (HHL) interpret the ﬁndings. Supported by: 2011/03/D/NZ5/05592 S. Lenarduzzi1,A. Morgan2,S.Cappellani1, V.Pecile1, M.Oldak:None.U.Lechowicz:None.A.Pollak:None. M.Morgutti1, E.Orzan1, U.Ambrosetti3,M.La Bianca1, D. Oziębło: None. H. Skarżyński: None. F. Faletra1, E.Grosso4,F. Sirchia1,A. Sensi5, C.Graziano6, M.Seri6,P. Gasparini1,2,G.Girotto1,2 P02.21D Molecular Diagnostics of Hereditary Hearing Loss using 1IRCSS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2University of Trieste, Next-generation sequencing (NGS) in Estonian patients Trieste, Italy, 3Univ. Milano U.O.C. Audiologia/Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, R. Teek1,H.Roomere1, S.Pajusalu1,2,K. Õunap1,2 Italy, 4Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, 10126, Torino, Italy, 5Department of 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu Clinical Pathology, Medical Genetics Unit, Pievesestina, University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Clinical 47522, Cesena, Italy, 6Unit of Medical Genetics, S. Orsola- Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy Tartu, Estonia Introduction: HHL is characterized by a high genetic Introduction: Hearing loss (HL) is the most common heterogeneity hampering accurate molecular diagnosis that sensorydisorderworldwide. Despite this,DNA diagnostics isessentialfor aproper genetic counsellingand therapeutic of HL is complicated due to the heterogeneity of the dis- options. ease.Themostcommoncauseforautosomal-recessivenon- Methods: 166 Italian HHL cases (46 familial and syndromic HL in the Caucasian population is mutations in 120 sporadic) were screened with a TRS panel of 96 the GJB2 gene. We know from our previous study that the deafness genes, using Ion Torrent PGM™. Annotated most frequent mutations found among Estonian children variantswereﬁlteredaccordingtothepatternofinheritance, with early onset HL were c.35delG and p.M34T (36%) in frequency, and pathogenicity. In negative cases, HD-SNPs GJB2 gene. Still, other genes causing HL are rarely inves- arrays were used to identify CNVs using Genome Studio tigatedinEstonianpatientswithHL.Studygroupconsistof software for allele detection and genotype calling followed 60 probands with HL as main complaint or one of the the by PennCNV analysis. clinicalfeaturesandwhoreferredtogeneticistduring2015- Results: Approximately 40% of cases (66/166) were 2017. In patients with isolated HL mutations in the GJB2 positive for GJB2 mutations, In the remaining 100 cases, gene were excluded by GJB2 gene sequencing. Among 60 TRS and SNPs array led to the characterization of cases in46 patients HL was the main complaint and in rest approximately 30% of cases (30/100). In particular, we of 14 cases HL was one of the symptoms in addition to identiﬁed:1)theﬁrstcaseofUPDinvolvingLOXHD1,with other clinical symptoms. the presence of both a small isodisomy segment spanning Methods:theNGSsubpanelofgenesassociatedwithHL LOXHD1 and a heterodisomy on the remaining parts of was performed (107 genes, Illumina TruSightOne panel) in Chr18, suggesting that the UPD is the result of a non- 46 cases. For the other 14 cases with non-isolated HL only disjunctioninmeiosisI,followedbytrisomyrescue,2)two selected gene analysis or different subpanels were done. large deletions in OTOA and STRC, 3) four patients (13%) Results: we found that the mutated genes were most with mutations in TECTA which is thus the second major commonlyassociatedwithUsher,WaardenburgandAlport playerintheItalianpopulation(inbothautosomalrecessive syndrome. There were some mutations in genes related to and dominant families), followed by TMPRSS3 (3/ non-syndromic hearing loss: MYO15A, TECTA, MAR- 100,10%),MYO6,MYO7A,MYO15A,PDZD7,andACTG1 VELD2, MYO6 and STRC gene. (2/100,7% each). Conclusion: The using of NGS gene subpanel analysis Conclusions: Thanks to this approach approximately for HL is valuable and increased the detection of genetic 58% (96/166) of cases were characterized conﬁrming the etiology of HL for 33% (20 patients). large mutation’s spectrum of HHL genes, as well as theAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 53 efﬁcacyofTRSandHD-SNPsarraysinhelpinganaccurate genetic testing in Pakistani families to minimize the risk of molecular diagnosis. recessive disorders. S.Lenarduzzi:None.A.Morgan:None.S.Cappellani: Z.Ravesh:None.B.Wissinger:None.M.Ansar:None. None. V. Pecile: None. M. Morgutti: None. E. Orzan: None. U. Ambrosetti: None. M. La Bianca: None. F. P02.24C Faletra: None. E. Grosso: None. F. Sirchia: None. A. Variants in the FLRT3 and SLC35E2B identiﬁed using Sensi: None. C. Graziano: None. M. Seri: None. P. whole-exome sequencing in seven high myopia families Gasparini: None. G. Girotto: None. from Central Europe P02.23B J.Swierkowska1,J.A.Karolak1,2,T.Gambin3,4,M.Rydzanicz5, Genetic analysis of Pakistani families with hereditary A. Frajdenberg6,M.Mrugacz7, M.Podﬁgurna-Musielak8, retinal dystrophies P. Stankiewicz9,J. R.Lupski10,11,12,M.Gajecka1,2 Z. Ravesh1,2,B. Wissinger2, M.Ansar1 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 1DepartmentofBiochemistry,LabofGenomics,Quaid-i-Azam Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Computer Science, Warsaw University, Islamabad, Pakistan, 2Institute for Ophthalmic UniversityofTechnology,Warsaw,Poland,4BaylorCollegeof Research, Tübingen, Germany Medicine, Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Houston, TX, United States, 5Medical University of Warsaw, Introduction: Hereditary retinal dystrophies (RD) are a Warsaw, Poland, 6Linköping University, Linkoping, Sweden, group of heterogeneous disorders caused by mutations in 7Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland, 8Medical over 200 genes. RDs can be subdivided into different Centre Vigor Med, Leszno, Poland, 9Baylor College of groups based on the primary degeneration of rod or cone Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 10Baylor College of photoreceptorcells.Thisstudywasconductedtoinvestigate Medicine, Department of Molecular & Human Genetics and the underlying RD genes and mutation in consanguineous Department of Pediatrics, Houston, TX, United States, families from Pakistan. 11Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Material and Methods: Families were recruited after Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 12Texas Children's informed consent. Peripheral blood was collected and Hospital, Houston, TX, United States genomic DNA was extracted according to standard procedures. Homozygosity mapping was performed using Objectives: High myopia is an eye disorder with a refrac- AffymetrixGeneChipHumanMapping250K-NspIarrays. tive error greater than -6 diopters (D) with both environ- The data were analyzed using Homozygosity Mapper mentaland genetic factors involved. Although a number of software. Primers for amplifying all exons and intron highmyopialocihavebeenidentiﬁed,thepathogenicgenes boundaries were designed with Primer3plus software in the general population have not been determined. The followed by PCR and Sanger sequencing. Minigene aimofthestudywastoidentifysequencevariantscausative splicing assay and DNA walking were performed on for high myopia in families from Central Europe. respective samples. Methods: Seventeen individuals from seven unrelated Results: Homozygosity mapping identiﬁeda novel locus Central European families with hereditary high myopia in family A, one novel gene (C8ORF37) in family B and a were assessed using whole-exome sequencing analyses. large novel genomic deletion of the (LCA5) gene in Selected variants were further evaluated using Sanger family C. sequencing and the segregation analyses in other family Conclusion: Our study indicates the heterogeneous members. nature of retinal dystrophies in Pakistan. Although earlier Results:Outofatotalof72variantsidentiﬁed,twonovel studies explored number of RD families, but underlying missense variants c.1642G>C in FLRT3 and c.938C>T in genes are still unknown for signiﬁcant proportion of SLC35E2B segregate with high myopia in the HM-78 Pakistani families. Theoretically the traditional screening family. methodsweresuccessful, howevergenome wide scan were Conclusions: FLRT3 and/or SLC35E2B could represent furtherimplementedtoimprovethedetectionofunderlying disease candidate genes and may be potentially responsible variations in Retinal Dystrophies. Therefore the amalgama- forhighmyopiaintheHM-78family.Ourdatasuggestthat tion of traditional and modern molecular techniques is there are different genetic backgrounds of high myopia in required for accurate identiﬁcation of mutations. It is each multiplex family, indicating the complex genetic anticipated that these ﬁndings will contribute to future causes of high myopia. This study was supported by National Science Centre in Poland, (Doctoral Scholarship54 J.delPicchia Etiuda2013/08/T/NZ5/00754),andMinistryofScienceand therefore challenge the hypothesis that null mutations Higher Education of Poland (27/GM/2017) and United underlie the most severe end of the phenotypic spectrum. States National Institutes of Health, National Human Overall, RetNet-WES analysis revealed an underlying GenomeResearch Institute/National HeartLungand Blood genetic defect in 55% of a Belgian IRD cohort, expanding Institute (UM1HG0067542). their disease associations (RAX2), supporting their role in J. Swierkowska: None. J.A. Karolak: None. T. IRD (ARL3), and providing new insights into phenotypic Gambin: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. A. Frajdenberg: consequences of bi-allelic loss-of-function alleles None. M. Mrugacz: None. M. Podﬁgurna-Musielak: (CEP164). None. P. Stankiewicz: None. J.R. Lupski: None. M. Funding: BOF15/GOA/011; 01D04716; AUGE/13/ Gajecka: None. 023; FWO. S.VandeSompele:None.K.VanSchil:None.C.Van P02.25D Cauwenbergh: None. T. Rosseel: None. S. De Jaegere: Exome-based RetNet panel analysis in a Belgian cohort None. T. Van Laethem: None. I. Balikova: None. B.P. with inherited retinal disease(IRD) expandsthe molecular Leroy: None. F. Coppieters: None. E. De Baere: None. and phenotypic spectrum of recently identiﬁed IRD genes P02.26A S. VandeSompele1,K. VanSchil1,C. VanCauwenbergh1,2, Diagnostics of inherited retinal disorders: Slovenian T.Rosseel1,S.DeJaegere1,T.VanLaethem1,I.Balikova2,B.P. experience using clinical exome sequencing Leroy1,2,3,F. Coppieters1,E. DeBaere1 M.Volk1,A. Maver1, A.Fakin2, H.Jaklic1,M. Hawlina2, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent B. Peterlin1 University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and Ghent University 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Division of Ophthalmology, The Ljubljana,Slovenia,2EyeHospital,UMCLjubljana,Ljubljana, Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,United Slovenia States Introduction: Inherited retinal disorders are diagnostically Inherited retinal diseases (IRD) are a major cause of early- challenging group of clinically and genetically hetero- onsetblindness,causedbymutationsin>250diseasegenes. geneousdiseasesthatmayaffecttheentireretinaormaybe We investigated the currently known IRD genes (RetNet restricted to the macula. In addition, they may also be an panel,https://sph.uth.edu/retnet)in253IRDprobandsusing ophthalmicmanifestationofasystemiccondition.Thereare whole-exome sequencing (WES). approximately 261 genes associated with inherited retinal We identiﬁed (likely) causative variants in 55% of IRD degeneration (https://sph.uth.edu/retnet/). We present our probands, in frequently as well as rarely mutated RetNet experiencesusingclinicalexomesequencingfordiagnostics genes. Speciﬁcally, two unrelated probands with simplex of inherited retinal disorders. retinitis pigmentosa (RP) were homozygous for a novel Materials and Methods: 40 Slovenian patients with frameshift variant in RAX2, in which so far only mono- referral of suspected inherited retinal disorder were allelicmutationshavebeendescribedindominantcone-rod submittedtoourinstitution.Weperformedtargetedanalysis dystrophy and macular dystrophy, suggesting a novel of retinopathy-associated genes in the exome sequencing disease association to a known IRD gene. Secondly, data. Mitochondrial sequence was also analysed based on ARL3 was recently proposed as a novel disease gene for the off-target exome reads. Filtered variants were analysed autosomal dominant RP (ADRP). Interestingly, we identi- according to population frequency, characterization in ﬁedthesameARL3variantinanADRPfamily,aswellasa ClinVar database, putative impact of the variant and novel missensevariantin a simplex RP patient, corroborat- predicted pathogenicity. ing its involvement in ADRP. Lastly, in a proband Results: Causative pathogenic variants were detected in diagnosed with non-syndromic IRD, bi-allelic truncating 25 patients (63%). Of these, we conﬁrmed the referral variants in CEP164 were identiﬁed. Previous observations diagnosis in 23 cases, and reclassiﬁed initial diagnosis in suggest a strong genotype-phenotype correlation of two cases, one to mitochondriopathy and one to 16q11.2 CEP164-disease, with truncating mutations causing early- microdeletion syndrome. In addition, we found variants of onsetphenotypesofdysplasiaandmalformationindifferent unknownclinicalsigniﬁcance(VUS)in6casesand9cases organs, and hypomorphic alleles causing late-onset degen- with negative results. Altogether, we identiﬁed 19 known erative phenotypes including IRD. Our observations pathogenic and 12 novel pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants, 11 VUS and a microdeletion.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 55 Conclusion: Our results demonstrate high diagnostic mutations. Our approach to discover the second mutant yield using clinical exome sequencing in diagnostics of alleleinpatientswithmono-allelicmutations,togetherwith inherited retinal disorders. Clinical exome sequencing our reliable CNVs detection algorithm, marks a step should be a ﬁrst-tier investigation not only because of forward to increase diagnosis rate of IRDs. genetic heterogeneity but also because of the potential to Funding: PI15-01648 (ISCIII and European Union identify novel ﬁndings. ERDF/ESF, “Investing in your future”), ER17P1AC702/ M. Volk: None. A. Maver: None. A. Fakin: None. H. 2018 (CIBERER), CTS-1664 (Government of Andalusia). Jaklic: None. M. Hawlina: None. B. Peterlin: None. M. Martín-Sánchez: None. M. González-del Pozo: None. N. Bravo-Gil: None. C. Méndez-Vidal: None. E. P02.27B Rodríguez-de la Rúa: None. S. Borrego: None. G. Whole-gene panel sequencing in patients with inherited Antiñolo: None. retinal dystrophies and mono-allelic variants: contribution of deep-intronic mutations and CNVs P02.28C Clinical exome sequencing as a genomic approach for the M.Martín-Sánchez1,M.González-del Pozo1,2,N.Bravo-Gil1,2, diagnosisofunsolvedcases ofinheritedretinaldystrophies C. Méndez-Vidal1,E. Rodríguez-de laRúa3,4,S. Borrego1,2, G.Antiñolo1,2 N.Bravo-Gil1,2,M. Martín-Sánchez1,M. González-del Pozo1,2, C. Méndez-Vidal1,2,S. Borrego1,2,G.Antiñolo1,2 1Department of Maternofetal Medicine, Genetics and Reproduction, Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, University 1Department of Maternofetal Medicine, Genetics and Hospital Virgen del Rocio/CSIC/University of Seville, Seville, Reproduction, Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, University Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Hospital Virgen del Rocio/CSIC/University of Seville, Seville, Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Seville, Spain, 3Department Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Virgen Macarena, Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Seville, Spain Seville, Spain, 4Retics Patologia Ocular. OFTARED. Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain Introduction: Genomic approaches based on the analysis of previously disease-associated genes have shown a high Introduction: Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRDs) are a diagnostic efﬁciency in Inherited Retinal Dystrophies group of rare disorders characterized by photoreceptors (IRD). However, around 40-50% of cases remain unsolved degeneration.Phenotypicandgeneticheterogeneityhamper after their application. the diagnosis of IRDs. Although NGS technologies have Materials andMethods: Targeted enrichment ofaround shown to be helpful in this endeavor, some cases remain 5000 clinically relevant genes (SureSelect Focused Exome, unsolved even after analyzing the whole exome. Remark- Agilent) and Illumina HiSeq 3000 sequencing, were used ably,anumberofpatientscarryonlyonemutatedalleleina for the molecular diagnosis of 12 unsolved IRD cases recessive gene, suggesting that screening non-coding previously analyzed by a retinal gene panel. regions could improve the diagnosis. Results: Application of our data analysis pipeline Materials and Methods: We performed a targeted allowed the identiﬁcation of causal mutations in 4 out of sequencing study of 29 patients, 25 harboring mono- the 12 cases. Three of these cases carried variants in IRD- allelic mutations. The design comprised the entire genomic associated genes not initially included in the panel sequenceofthreegenes(USH2A,ABCA4andCEP290),the (FAM161A, MFRP and RP1L1) and 1 harbored a mutation codingexonsandﬂankingintronicbasesof76IRDsrelated in the orf15 of RPGR that, although it was included in the genes and two disease-associated intronic regions. panel, represents a highly repetitive region technically Results:Thirty-twomutations(8novel)wereidentiﬁedin difﬁcult to capture. Furthermore, in 2 other families, we 18probands(diagnosticrate:62.07%).Amongthevariants, found candidate mutations in genes not previously asso- twowereCNVsinUSH2A,comprisingonedeletion(exons ciated with IRD for which segregation and/or additional 22-55) and one duplication (exons 46-47) in two different studies are currently pending. patients. No deep-intronic mutations were detected. Conclusions: These results allowed us to improve the Conclusions: Sequencing entire genes represents an efﬁciency of our retinal panel and suggest that most of intermediate strategy between exon-targeted and whole- unsolved cases could carry understudied mutations in IRD genome sequencing, while reducing costs, time and effort. genes (deep intronic or large rearrangements) or variants in In our cohort, deep-intronic mutations may not play a genesnotyetassociatedwithanyphenotype.Inthisregard, signiﬁcant role in the etiopathogenesis of IRDs in contrast it will be increasingly difﬁcult to identify new genotype- to CNVs, which account for about 10% of the total phenotype correlations of already known genes. Therefore,56 J.delPicchia in our experience, genome sequencing would be the most demonstrated only for two variants and it was relatively appropriate approach for these cases. weak (P<0.05). Summarizing, ISVS strategy and ISVS Funding: PI15-01648 (ISCIII and European Union Simulator are useful for detection of genetic variants caus- ERDF/ESF, “Investing in your future”), CIBERER, CTS- ing AR diseases. 1664 (Andalusian Government). Research was supported by the grants 2011/03/D/NZ5/ N. Bravo-Gil: None. M. Martín-Sánchez: None. M. 05592 and 2014/13/B/NZ2/01248. González-del Pozo: None. C. Méndez-Vidal: None. S. U. Lechowicz: None. T. Gambin: None. A. Pollak: Borrego: None. G. Antiñolo: None. None. A. Podgorska: None. P. Stawinski: None. A. Franke:None.B. Petersen: None.M. Firczuk: None. M. P02.29D Oldak: None. H. Skarzynski: None. R. Ploski: None. Iterative Sequencing and Variant Screening (ISVS) as a novel pathogenic mutations search strategy P02.30A Multiple differentially methylated regions speciﬁc to U.Lechowicz1,T. Gambin2,3,A. Pollak1, A.Podgorska1, keratoconus overlap known keratoconus linkage loci P.Stawinski1,A.Franke4,B.Petersen4,M.Firczuk5,M.Oldak1, H.Skarzynski6,R. Ploski7 M.Gajecka1,2,J.A.Karolak1,2,M.Rydzanicz3,P.Gasperowicz3, R. Ploski3,J. P. Szaﬂik4, M.Kabza1 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and PathologyofHearing,Warsaw,Poland,2InstituteofComputer 1Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, Science, Warsaw University of Technology,, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Poznan, Poland, 3Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Child at Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 4Institute of Clinical Poland, 4Medical University of Warsaw, Warsawa, Poland Molecular Biology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany, 5DepartmentofImmunology,CenterofBiostructureResearch, Keratoconus (KTCN) is a complex degenerative eye dis- Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 6Oto-Rhino- orderinwhichdevelopmentbothgeneticandenvironmental Laryngology Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and orbehavioralcomponentsareinvolved.Inordertoverifyif Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 7Department of DNA methylation may also play a role in KTCN etiology, Medical Genetics, Centre of Biostructure, Medical University reduced representation bisulﬁte sequencing (RRBS) of of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland human corneas obtained from ﬁve KTCN and ﬁve non- KTCN individuals was performed. Multiple differentially Autosomal recessive diseases (ARD) are typically caused methylated regions (DMRs) speciﬁc to KTCN were detec- by a limited number of mutations whose identiﬁcation is ted and many of them overlap previously identiﬁed KTCN challenged by their low prevalence. Our purpose was to linkageloci(3p14.3,15q24.1,20p13,5q35.2,13q32.3)and develop a novel approach allowing an efﬁcient search for chromosomearms(2q,4q,5p,9p,14q,and17q).Formany mutations causing ARD and evaluation of their pathogeni- of these regions candidate genes and variants were never city without a control group. We developed Iterative identiﬁed and our results may allow for signiﬁcant nar- Sequencing and Variant Screening (ISVS) approach based rowingofthegenomicregionsofinterestandreducethelist on iterative cycles of gene sequencing and mutation ofputativeKTCNgenes.Wealsoreanalyzedthepreviously screening, and ISVS Simulator software (http://zsibio.ii.pw. describedRNA-Seqdatasetof25KTCNand25non-KTCN edu.pl/shiny/isvs/) for assessment of detected variants’ human corneas and found that 12 genes downregulated in signiﬁcance. As shown by simulations, ISVS efﬁciently KTCN (IQGAP2, SYNJ2, CYP1B1, MYO1G, WNT5A, identiﬁes and correctly classiﬁes pathogenic mutations PARVB, MGLL, CDC25B, PSG3, FHL2, CAMK1D, and except for cases where the gene of interest has extremely THEMIS) and six upregulated genes (WNT3, RB1, high number of low frequency nonpathogenic variants. By AC098617.1,RPS6KA2,PELI2,andPLXNA4)overlapped applyingISVS,wefound4knownand9novel(p.C73Y,p. orwerelocatedinthenearvicinityoftheidentiﬁedDMRs. S124L, p.C194Mfs*17, c.782+2T>A, c.953-5A>G, p. Particularly interesting were the DNA methylation changes L325Q, p.D334Mfs*24, p.R436G, p.M448T) TMPRSS3 in two genes encoding Wnt ligands (Wnt3 and Wnt5A), as variants among deaf patients. For 3 known and 5 novel they provide a potential explanation for the Wnt signaling variants the disease association was supported by ISVS pathway deregulation observed in KTCN. Supported by Simulator odds >90:1. Pathogenicity of 6 novel mutations National Science Centre in Poland, 2012/05/E/NZ5/02127. has been supported by in-silico predictions of variants’ M.Gajecka:None.J.A.Karolak:None.M.Rydzanicz: deleteriousness. By directly comparing variant prevalence None. P. Gasperowicz: None. R. Ploski: None. J.P. in patients and controls, disease association was Szaﬂik: None. M. Kabza: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 57 P02.31B stability. Functional analysis in cultured cells over- Mutations in TUBB4B cause a distinctive sensorineural expressingFLAG-taggedwild-typeormutantTUBB4Band disease in patient skin-derived ﬁbroblasts showed that the mutant TUBB4Bswereabletofold,form αβ-heterodimersandco- S. Méchaussier1,R. Luscan2,A. Paul2,G.Tian3, X.Gérard1, assemble into the endogenous MT lattice. However, the S. Defoort-Dhellemmes4,N.Loudon5, I.Audo6,S. Bonin7, dynamics of growing MTs were consistently altered, J.LeGargasson8, J.Dumont9,N.Goudin10,M. Garfa-Traore10, showing that the mutations have a signiﬁcant dampening M.Bras11,A. Pouliet12,B. Bessières13, N.Boddaert14, impact on normal MT growth. Our ﬁndings provide a link S. Lyonnet2,N.J. Cowan3,J. Rozet1, S.Marlin2,I.Perrault1 between sensorineural disease and anomalies in MT beha- vior, and describe a syndromic LCA unrelated to ciliary 1Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), dysfunction. INSERMU1163 INSTITUT IMAGINE, Paris Descartes Acknowledgements: We are grateful to the families for University, Paris, France, 2Laboratory of Embryology and theirparticipationinthestudy.Thisworkwassupportedby genetics of human malformation, INSERMU1163 INSTITUT “S’entendre”, by grants from the Retina France to IP, IMAGINE, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, UNADEV- AVIESAN ITMO MNP to JMR, FRM 3Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Pharmacology, (DEQ20160334869) to JD, and by a grant (GM097376) NYU Langone Medical Center., New York NY 10016, NY, from the NIH to NJC. United States, 4Service d'Exploration de la Vision et Neuro- S. Méchaussier: None. R. Luscan: None. A. Paul: ophtalmologie. Pôle d'Imagerie et Explorations None. G. Tian: None. X. Gérard: None. S. Defoort- Fonctionnelles,CHRUdeLille,HôpitalRogerSalengro,Lille, Dhellemmes: None. N. Loudon: None. I. Audo: None. S. France, 5Pediatric ENT Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Bonin: None. J. LeGargasson: None. J. Dumont: None. Malades, APHP and Paris Descartes University, Paris, N. Goudin: None. M. Garfa-Traore: None. M. Bras: France, 6Centre Hospitalier National d'Ophtalmologie des None.A.Pouliet:None.B.Bessières:None.N.Boddaert: Quinze-Vingts, Paris, France, 7Ophthalmology Department, None. S. Lyonnet: None. N.J. Cowan: None. J. Rozet: Hôpital Lariboisière, APHP and Paris Diderot University, None. S. Marlin: None. I. Perrault: None. Paris, France, 8Visual Exploration Department, Hôpital Lariboisière,APHP,Paris,DiderotUniversity, Paris,France, P02.32C 9Cell Division and Reproduction. Institut Jacques Monod, Progressive shrinking of the eye and visual impairment CNRS,UniversityParisDiderot,Paris,France,10CellImaging caused by biallelic variants in the MARK3 gene CoreFacilityoftheStructureFédérativedeRechercheNecker INSERMUS24/CNRSUMS3633ImagineandParisDescartes E. Ranza1,H.Chung2,3,M.Ansar4,Y. M.Waryah5, University, Paris, France, 11Bioinformatics Platform, Imagine P. Makrythanasis4,6,E.Falconnet4,M.Guipponi1,A.K. and Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 12Genomics Narsani7,F. A. Santoni4,8,A.M. Waryah5,H.Bellen2,3,9,S.E. Platform, Imagine and Paris Descartes University, Paris, Antonarakis4 France, 13Unité d'Embryo-foetopathologie, Hôpital Necker- Enfants Malades, APHP and Paris Descartes University, 1ServiceofGeneticMedicine,University HospitalsofGeneva, Paris, France, 14Department of Pediatric Radiology, Hôpital Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Molecular and Human Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, Descartes University, Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United Paris, France States,3JanandDanDuncanNeurologicalResearchInstitute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a neurodegenerative 4DepartmentofGeneticMedicineandDevelopment,University disease of photoreceptor cells that causes blindness within of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Molecular Biology and the ﬁrst year of life. It occasionally occurs in syndromic Genetics Department, Medical Research Center, Liaquat metabolic diseases and plurisystemic ciliopathies. Using University of Medical and Health Sciences, Jamshoro, exome sequencing ina multiplex family and three sporadic Pakistan,6BiomedicalResearchFoundationoftheAcademyof cases with an atypical association of LCA with early-onset Athens, Athens, Greece, 7Institute of Ophthalmology, Liaquat hearing loss, we identiﬁed two heterozygous mutations University of Medical and Health Sciences, Jamshoro, affectingArg391intheβ-tubulin4Bisotype-encodinggene Pakistan, 8Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and (TUBB4B). Inspection of the atomic structure of the Metabolism, University Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, microtubule (MT) protoﬁlament reveals that the β-tubulin Switzerland,9HowardHughesMedicalInstitute,Houston,TX, Arg391 residue contributes to a binding pocket that inter- United States acts with α-tubulin contained in the longitudinally adjacent αβ-heterodimer, consistent with a role in maintaining MT58 J.delPicchia Developmental eye birth defects often severely reduce Introduction:ThegeneticarchitectureinMeniere’sdisease vision. We studied a cohort of more than 150 Pakistani (MD), an inner ear disorder deﬁned by episodic vertigo, consanguineousfamilieswitheyebirthdefectswithatleast sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) and tinnitus, is not two affected individuals. Families were analyzed by a known. A panel of 69 hearing loss genes have been combination of exome sequencing and homozygosity sequenced targeting rare variants in MD. mapping. In one family (F105) three affected individuals Materials and Methods: Nine hundred thirty DNA were reported with progressive eye phthisis and visual samples(890casesand40controls)werepooled(eachpool impairment, and we identiﬁed a non-synonymous homo- = 10 samples) and libraries were generated by HaloPlex zygous variant (NM_001128918.2:c.1708C>G:p.Arg570- PCR target enrichment system. Paired-end sequencing was Gly)inMARK3.GiventhatMARK3ishighlyconservedin performed in a Nextseq500 instrument. BWA and GATK ﬂies (I: 55%; S: 67%) the ﬂy homologue, par1, was wereusedforalignmentandqualitycontrol.Variantcalling knockeddownintheeyeduringdevelopment.Thisresulted was made through VarScan2. The estimated minor allelic toasigniﬁcantreductionineyesizeandreducedamplitude frequencies (MAF) were compared with public references of the electroretinograms, suggesting an impairment in values in multiple populations, including Spanish variant visual transduction. Overexpression of the wild type Par1 server database. protein in the developing eye caused a mild defect in eye Results: An enrichment of certain rare variants in cases morphology and a mild reduction in ERG amplitude. was observed in genes such as MARVELD2. Some intronic Expression of the Par1 Arg792Gly mutation, the corre- variants with unknown signiﬁcance showed a higher MAF sponding mutation observed in the patients, induced compared with available data from Spanish population, severely reduced eye size that are rough, and cause a near including SLC12A2, TRIOBP, KCNQ1 and KCNE3 genes. completelossoftheamplitudeoftheERG.Ourdatainﬂies Prioritizingpathogenicitypredictiontoolssuggestthatsome and human indicate that theMARK3 variants correspondto ofthemshouldbeconsiderasMDcandidatevariants.So,a a loss of function variant in human and ﬂies, although the novel synonymous variant in MARVELD2 gene in 3 precise nature of the allele remains to be determined. unrelated individuals was found and validated by Sanger GeneMatcher search did not detect additional cases. sequencing. MARK3 is also known to interact with Mitf, which causes Conclusions: Spanish population has a speciﬁc enrich- the COMMAD syndrome (MIM 617306) that includes ment of rare variants in some hearing loss genes. The severemicrophthalmia.WeconcludethatMARK3isanovel involvement of MARVELD2 variant in MD has to be candidate for visual impairment with affected ocular investigated.Thefunctionalroleoftherestofthevariantsin anatomy. SNHL and MD remains to be established. E.Ranza:None.H.Chung:None.M.Ansar:None.Y. Acknowledgments: Funded by 2016-Target sequencing M. Waryah: None. P. Makrythanasis: None. E. Falcon- from the Meniere Society, UK and Luxembourg National net:None.M.Guipponi:None.A.K.Narsani:None.F.A. Research Fund (INTER/Mobility/17/11772209). Santoni:None.A.M.Waryah:None.H.Bellen:None.S. A. Gallego-Martinez: None. T. Requena: None. P. E. Antonarakis: None. Román-Naranjo:None.D.Bobbili:None.P.May:None. J. Dopazo: None. J. Lopez-Escamez: None. P02.33D Spanish rare variants with unknown signiﬁcance in P02.34A candidate hearing loss genes for Meniere disease in Spain Novel and ultrarare allelic variants in DIABLO and SLC7A8 genes in familial Meniere’s disease A. Gallego-Martinez1,T. Requena1,P. Román-Naranjo1, D.Bobbili2, P.May2,J.Dopazo3,J.Lopez-Escamez1,2,4 P. Roman-Naranjo1,A. Gallego-Martinez1,M.C. Moleon- Gonzalez2,D.R.Bobbili3,T.Requena-Navarro1,P.May3,J.A. 1CentroPﬁzer-UniversidaddeGranada-JuntadeAndalucíade Lopez-Escamez1,2,3 Genómica e Investigación Oncológica (GENYO), Granada, Spain, 2Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), 1Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, Department of Université du Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg, Genomic Medicine, Centre for Genomics and Oncological 3ClinicalBioinformaticsResearchArea,FundaciónProgresoy Research - Pﬁzer/University of Granada/Andalusian Regional Salud,Hospital Virgendel Rocío,Sevilla, Spain, 4Department Government (GENYO), Granada, Spain, 2Department of of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs. Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs. GRANADA, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, GRANADA, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain Granada,Spain,3LuxembourgCentreforSystemsBiomedicineAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 59 (LCSB), University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, recently proposed hypothesis suggests the involvement of Luxembourg the gastrointestinal (gut) microbiome in (obesity-related) knee Osteoarthritis pain, through a low grade systemic Introduction: Meniere’s disease (MD), an inner ear dis- inﬂammationmediatedbybacterialendotoxinsfromthegut order characterized by vertigo, sensorineural hearing loss microbiome. and tinnitus, involves 7.5 cases in 100.000 people. MD MaterialsandMethods:Gutmicrobialcompositionwas showsfamilialaggregationandwehavefoundrarevariants determined by 16S ribosomal RNA-sequencing (n=1,427, inFAM136A,DTNA,PRKCBandSEMA3Dgenesinsingle Rotterdam Study population). Association analysis were families, showing genetic heterogeneity. We present a new done in MaAs. We used the relative abundancy of gut family with autosomal dominant MD segregating novel microbiome taxonomies, adjusted for age, sex, technical variants for this condition. covariates,andBMI.Kneejointpainmeasuresarebasedon Materials and Methods: A Spanish family including 3 the standardised pain questionnaires(WOMAC) pain score. affected women with MD, suggestive of an autosomal- Results: We ﬁnd four highly signiﬁcant associations dominant pattern of inheritance, was diagnosed. DNA was (FDR<0.05) with knee joint pain on different taxonomic isolated from blood samples to perform whole-exome levels (Class-Order-Family-Genus) leading to the bacterial sequencing in the 3 cases. Single nucleotide variants genus of Streptococcus (FDR= 1.96E-05,). Additional (SNVs) and insertions/deletions (indels) were identiﬁed adjustment for BMI didnotaffect theidentiﬁedassociation and annotated by GATK and Scalpel after quality controls. Also, the relative abundancy of Streptococcus in the gut is These variants were ﬁltered by exome data from 1579 signiﬁcantly associated with amount of effusion (assessed Spanish controls and the cut-off for minor allele frequency by MRI), a measure for knee joint inﬂammation (MAF) was 0.001. Variants were prioritized according to (FDR=1.1E-2, n=373). pathogenicity by multiple bioinformatics tools. Conclusions:Weidentiﬁedasigniﬁcantpositiveassocia- Results: A total of 2822 rare SNPs and 779 rare indels tion between Streptococcus abundance and knee joint pain segregated the phenotype. We identiﬁed 7 candidate and inﬂammation in the knee. This association seems variants with a MAF lower than 0.001. A novel non- independent of BMI. Streptococcus species are known to synonymous SNV in DIABLO gene (c.C353G;p.T118R) potentially cause osteomyelitis and rheumatic fever, an and a non-synonymous SNV in SLC7A8 gene inﬂammatory joint disease affecting the heart and articular (rs146946494) were the two best rated variants. joints, indicating that Streptococcus itself or released Conclusions: Familial MD shows genetic heterogeneity. components (such as membrane vescicles), can directly Thisstudyisthebasisforaforthcomingfunctionalstudyto target the joint. evaluate how these variants are involved in MD. C.G. Boer: None. D. Radjabzeh: None. C. Medina- Acknowledgments: Funded by 2016-Target sequencing Gomez: None. D. Schiphof: None. P. Arp: None. F. from the Meniere Society, UK and Luxembourg National Rivadeneira: None. A.G. Uitterlinden: None. J.P. Hays: Research Fund (INTER/Mobility/17/11772209). None. R. Kraaij: None. J.B.J. van Meurs: None. P.Roman-Naranjo:None.A.Gallego-Martinez:None. M.C. Moleon-Gonzalez: None. D.R. Bobbili: None. T. P02.36C Requena-Navarro: None. P. May: None. J.A. Lopez- Mutation screening and tissue expression patterns Escamez: None. implicate SRY-box 14 (SOX14) in human eye and brain developmental anomalies P02.35B The role of the gut microbiome in osteoarthritis and R. J.Holt1,D.GoldDiaz2,N.Chassaing3,4, L.E. Valdivia2,5, joint pain A. W.Wyatt6,J. Plaisancié2,D.Bourgeois4,C. Vincent- Delorme7,R.Osborne8,D.A.Bax1,C.Santos2,S.Broadgate9,1, C. G.Boer,D.Radjabzeh,C. Medina-Gomez, D.Schiphof, L. Cooper-Charles10,L. E. Allen10,D.McMullan10,S.W. P.Arp,F.Rivadeneira,A.G.Uitterlinden,J.P.Hays,R.Kraaij, Wilson2, D.Gerrelli2,P. Calvas4,3,N.K. Ragge1,11 J.B. J.van Meurs 1Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands 2University College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 4Hôpital Purpan, Introduction: Osteoarthritis a degenerative joint disease is Toulouse, France, 5Universidad Mayor, Santiago, Chile, predominantlythoughttobeduetomechanicalandgenetic 6University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, factors. However, also chronic inﬂammation plays a causal 7Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 8Wellcome Trust roleinOsteoarthritisandOsteoarthritisrelatedjointpain.A Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 9University of60 J.delPicchia Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10Birmingham Women’s 1Divison of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 11West Midlands Medicine, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Department of Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham Health Ophthalmology, Zuyderland-Eyescan, Sittard-Geleen, Partners Birmingham Women’s and Children’s Hospital NHS Netherlands Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom Introduction:Rareinterchangehaplotypesinexon3ofthe Anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma (AMC) are OPN1LW and OPN1MW opsin genes cause X-linked developmentaleyeanomalieswhichoccurinapproximately myopia, color vision defect, and cone dysfunction. The 3 in 10,000 births. They are a genetically heterogeneous severity of the disease varies on a broad scale from non- group of conditions, with over 300 genes having been syndromic high myopia to blue cone monochromatism. identiﬁed as underlying them. However, only approxi- Here, we describe a new genotype-phenotype correlation mately 25% of patients receive a genetic diagnosis, attributed to rare exon 3 interchange haplotypes simulta- depending on phenotype. The most frequent genetic cause neously present in the long- and middle-wavelength sensi- of severe AMC are alterations in SOX2, a member of the tive opsin genes (L- and M-opsin genes). SOXB family of transcription factors which have important Materials and Methods: A multigenerational family functions in early central nervous system development. with X-linked high myopia and cone dystrophy was Both SOX2 and SOX14 bind the same transcription factor investigated by clinical exome sequencing. binding site, acting as enhancers and repressors, respec- Results: Affected male patients had infantile onset tively.Therefore,SOX14maymediateSOX2targetedgene myopia with normal visual acuity and color vision until transcription and so be a candidate for AMC. We screened their forties. Visual acuity decreased thereafter, along with SOX14 in 306 individuals with developmental eye anoma- the development of severe protan and deutan color vision liesandidentiﬁedfourfamiliescarryingvariants:adenovo defects.Amild decrease inelectroretinographyresponseof heterozygous c.242G>T (p.Arg81Leu), a maternally inher- cone photoreceptors was detected in childhood, which ited frameshift c.722delA, a de novo deletion of 7.78Mb furtherdeterioratedinmiddle-agedpatients.Rodswerealso including SOX14, and a paternally inherited SOX14 dupli- affected, however, to a lesser extent than cones. Clinical cation. However, the link between the identiﬁed variations exome sequencing revealed the LVAVA and MVAVA and the ocular phenotype still remain to be demonstrated. toxic haplotypes in the OPN1LW and OPN1MW opsin Furthermore,insituhybridisationexperimentsusinghuman genes, respectively. embryonic tissue demonstrated that SOX14 is expressed in Conclusions: Here, we show that LVAVA haplotype of theeyeandregionsofthebrain,includingthehindbrainand the OPN1LW gene and MVAVA haplotype of the diencephalon. Although, we developed a zebraﬁsh model OPN1MW gene cause apparently nonsyndromic high carrying CRISPR-induced mutations of sox14, these ﬁsh myopia in young patients but lead to progressive cone showed no alterations in eye development or gross anato- dystrophywithdeuteranopiaandprotanopiainmiddle-aged mical abnormalities. We consider SOX14 to be a likely patients corresponding to a previously unknown disease important candidate in mammalian nervous system devel- course.Tothebestofourknowledge,thisistheﬁrstreport opment and should be considered a candidate for AMC onthejointeffectofthesetoxichaplotypesinthetwoopsin disorders. genes on chromosome X. Supported by Ministry of R.J. Holt: None. D. Gold Diaz: None. N. Chassaing: NationalEconomy,HungaryGINOP-2.3.2-15-2016-00039. None. L.E. Valdivia: None. A.W. Wyatt: None. J. O. Orosz: None. I. Balogh: None. G. Losonczy: None. Plaisancié: None. D. Bourgeois: None. C. Vincent- Delorme: None. R. Osborne: None. D.A. Bax: None. C. P02.38A Santos: None. S. Broadgate: None. L. Cooper-Charles: ArecurrentintergenicvariantupstreamofPRDM13causes None. L.E. Allen: None. D. McMullan: None. S.W. autosomal dominant progressive bifocal chorioretinal Wilson: None. D. Gerrelli: None. P. Calvas: None. N.K. atrophy in two unrelated pedigrees Ragge: None. G.Arno1,2,R. S.Silva1,2,N.Pontikos1,2,V. Cipriani1,2, P02.37 S. Defoort-Dhellemmes3,A.Kalhoro1,2, K.J. Carss4,5,F.L. Dmyopia and late-onset progressive cone dystrophy Raymond4,6,V. vanHeyningen1,A. T. Moore1,2,7,B. Puech3, associate to LVAVA/MVAVA exon 3 interchange A. R.Webster1,2 haplotypes of opsin genes on chromosome 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, O.Orosz1,I.Balogh1,G.Losonczy2 2Moorﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Exploration de la Vision et Neuro-Ophtalmologie, CentreAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 61 Hospitalier Universitaire, Lille, France, 4NIHR Bioresource – P02.39B Rare Diseases, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Recurrence of the SLC22A4 p.C113Y deafness-causing Foundation Trust, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, mutation in North Africans Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, NHS Blood and Transplant Centre, C. Chiereghin1, M.Robusto2,L. Mauri3,P. Primignani3, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Department of Medical P. Castorina4,U.Ambrosetti4,S. Duga1,2,R. Asselta1,2, Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, G.Soldà1,2 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7Ophthalmology Department, UCSF School of Medicine, San 1Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Italy, Francisco, CA, United States 2Humanitas University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Pieve Emanuele, Italy, 3S.S. Genetica Medica, ASST Grande Background: Progressive bifocal chorioretinal atrophy Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milano, Italy, (PBCRA) is characterised by macular (and subsequent 4Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e di Comunità, Università nasal)chorioretinalatrophiclesionsevidentduringinfancy. degli Studi di Milano and Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Prior genetic linkage pinpointed the disease locus to chro- Ospedale MaggiorePoliclinico, UOAudiologia, Milano,Italy mosome6q14-16.2overlappingtheNorthCarolinaMacular Dystrophy (NCMD) locus (MCDR1), a non-progressive Introduction: Nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss developmental macular dystrophy in which mutations (NSHL)isoneofthemostcommoncongenitaldisordersin upstream of PRDM13 have been implicated. humans and is characterized by a high genetic hetero- Methods: Whole genome sequencing was performed to geneity. Recently, an homozygous missense variant interrogate structural and single nucleotide variants in 5 (NM_003059.2:c.338G>A:p.C113Y) in the SLC22A4 gene PBCRA affected individuals from 2 unrelated families, (DNFB60 locus on chromosome 5), which encodes the including the 6q14-16.2 linked family (family 1) to gain organic cation transporter OCTN1, has been described in insight into the cause of PBCRA. two Tunisian families affected by autosomal Results: Seven novel variants were identiﬁed on the recessive NSHL. disease haplotype (chr6:98117898-103695199) in 3 indivi- Materials and Methods: Genome-wide linkage analysis duals from family 1. Eleven novel variants were shared withOmniExpressExome-8v1.4BeadChiparray(Illumina) between the 2 affected individuals of family 2 at the same was performed on a large consanguineous NSHL family of locus. A single variant (chr6:100046804T>C), 7.8kb Moroccan origin to highlight the genomic loci most likely upstream of the PRDM13 gene, was identiﬁed in both to be involved in the disease. Whole-exome sequencing families,haplotypeanalysisconﬁrmedthatthevariantarose (WES) was then carried out on two affected siblings. independently. Results: Genome-wide linkage analysis on the pedigree Discussion: We report the likely pathogenic variant in pointedtoauniquestronglinkagesignalpeak(LOD>3.5) two unrelated PBCRA families and expand the non-coding in an interval of about 3Mb on chromosome 5q23.3-q31.1, variantspectrumupstreamofPRDM13;thePBCRAvariant encompassing the SLC22A4 gene, delimited by markers lies5.7kbclosertoPRDM13 thanthe3variantspreviously rs11241999 and rs2237060. Moreover, WES analysis implicatedinNCMD.DuplicationsencompassingPRDM13 identiﬁed the presence, at the homozygous state, of the have also been implicated in NCMD. previously described p.C113Y mutation in both affected Taken together this suggests altered spatio-temporal siblings.Finally,Sangersequencingconﬁrmedthepresence expression of PRDM13 is a candidate disease mechanism of the p.C113Y variant in all 6 affected relatives, and one in the phenotypically distinct NCMD and PBCRA. Since unaffected sibling. The entire SLC22A4 gene was screened both disorders affect the macula at birth, exploring the in additional 7 NSHL patients coming from North African functionaldistinctionsbetweenthesevariantswillbekeyto countries, but no likely pathogenic variants were found. understanding the disease mechanisms and the importance Conclusion:Thisrepresentstheﬁrstindependentreplica- of PRDM13 in the context of normal retinal development. tionoftheinvolvementofSLC22A4inautosomalrecessive G.Arno:None.R.S.Silva:None.N.Pontikos:None.V. NSHL,highlightingtheimportanceofthisgene,andofthe Cipriani: None. S. Defoort-Dhellemmes: None. A. p.C113Y variant, at least in the North African population. Kalhoro:None.K.J.Carss:None.F.L.Raymond:None. This study was supported by Fondazione Cariplo V. van Heyningen: None. A.T. Moore: None. B. Puech: (grant#2013-0825). None. A.R. Webster: None. C. Chiereghin: None. M. Robusto: None. L. Mauri: None. P. Primignani: None. P. Castorina: None. U. Ambrosetti: None. S. Duga: None. R. Asselta: None. G. Soldà: None.62 J.delPicchia P02.41D P02.42A Autosomal dominant nystagmus in a large family Functional study of a PAX6 non-stop mutation causing associated to a novel mutation in the PAX6 gene autosomal dominant Retinitis Pigmentosa R. Vega-Gama1, L.M. Gonzalez-Huerta2,M. R.Rivera-Vega2, W.Lin1,C. Liu1,L.Hu1,C.Chung1,J. Chien2,M.Lin1, J.M. Valdes-Miranda2,N.Xilotl-DeJesus2,V. Martínez- S. Huang1, Y.Ching1 Montoya2,M.Tovar-Ayala2,S. A.Cuevas-Covarrubias3 1Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan, 2National Tsinghua 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 2Genetica, University, Hsinchu, Taiwan Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, 3Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Medicina, Introduction: Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a group of Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico DF, genetically heterogeneous conditions of retinal dystrophies. Mexico PAX6 is a highly conserved transcription factor expressing in the eyes and controls the development of eyes. Null Introduction: Congenital nystagmus is the most common mousemutationofPax6exhibitSmalleye(Sey)phenotype, eye movement disorder, with bilateral and involuntary similar to the heterozygous mutations of Cad, a gene oscillations of the eye, visual alteration and erroneous involved in de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis and tightly postures of the head. Nystagmus has been related to regulated during the cell cycle. In our previous study alterations in different genes with several patterns of demonstrated that PAX6 regulated transcription of Cad. inheritance. Apparently, X-linked inheritance pattern is the Functional studies of PAX6 mutations were largely most common. Nystagmus can be a syndromic or non- unknown,ourstudyistoinvestigatewhetherthePAX6non- syndromic entity. The PAX6 gene has been associated with stop mutation affects the gene expression of CAD asa way different eye diseases such as optic nerve/eye colobomas, of functional analysis. aniridia, anterior dysgenesis, cataract with corneal dystro- Materials and Methods: Structural modeling was used phy,fovealhypoplasia,keratitisandopticnervehypoplasia. to predict the inﬂuence of the non-stop mutation. In vitro The PAX6 gene is also involved in congenital nystagmus luciferasepromoter assayandinvivozebraﬁshknockdown with photophobia, posterior embryoxoton and foveal and rescue experiments wereperformed to testthe function hypoplasia. of PAX6 mutation. Objective: In this study, we described a large Mexican Results: The non-stop mutation we identiﬁed from a family of four generations with idiopathic congenital human RP family were predicted to have additional 36 a.a. nystagmus and no other alterations of the structures of the forming an α-helical structure. We hypothesized that the eye and a novel PAX6 gene mutation. mutation would lead to improper binding of PAX6 to the Material and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted CAD promoter and lose transactivation ability. The from peripheral blood of 15 members of a Mexican family luciferase promoter assay, PAX6 non-stop mutation abol- and 100 normal controls. They were analyzed through ished CAD promoter activity. The in vivo zebraﬁsh exome sequencing. morpholino knockdown with overexpressing the non-stop Results: It was detected in PAX6 gene the mutation mutation PAX6 developed retinal abnormalities. c.382C>T. This mutation was not found in healthy Conclusions: Our studies suggest that the non-stop members of the family, normal controls and world mutation in PAX6 may reduce the expression of CAD databases. leading to an insufﬁcient development of the retina. Conclusion:Theresultincludeamutationnotpreviously W. Lin: None. C. Liu: None. L. Hu: None. C. Chung: reported in the literature. This mutation involves the PAX6 None.J.Chien:None.M.Lin:None.S.Huang:None.Y. geneassociatedtonystagmuscongenitalwithanautosomal Ching: None. dominant pattern and no other clinical manifestations. This is of great relevance for the genetic diagnosis of idiopathic P02.43B congenital nystagmus associated to PAX6 gene. Perrault-like phenotypes may account for some of the R. Vega-Gama: None. L.M. Gonzalez-Huerta: None. genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity within Perrault M.R. Rivera-Vega: None. J.M. Valdes-Miranda: None. syndrome N. Xilotl-DeJesus: None. V. Martínez-Montoya: None. M.Tovar-Ayala:None.S.A.Cuevas-Covarrubias:None. L. A.M. Demain1,2,D.Antunes3,A.Heiberg4,J.O’Sullivan1,2, S. S.Bhaskhar1,2, R.T. O’Keefe5,W. G.Newman1,2Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 63 1Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, Faculty of J.Lenk1,J.Porrmann2,A.Kahlert2, M.Smitka3,I.Eger4, Biology, Medicine and Health, School of Biological Sciences, E. Schröck2,K. Hackmann2,R. Herber1, F.Raiskup1, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, A. Tzschach2 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United 1Department of Ophthalmology, Universitätsklinikum Carl Kingdom, 3Medical Genetics Department, Hospital de Dona Gustav Carus, Dresden, Germany, 2Technische Universität Estefânia, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Dresden, Institute of Clinical Genetics, Dresden, Germany, Portugal, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University 3Children´s hospital,Universitätsklinikum Carl GustavCarus, Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Division of Cellular & Molecular Dresden, Germany, 4Department of Neuropediatrics, Function,FacultyofBiology,MedicineandHealth,University Städtisches Klinikum Görlitz, Görlitz, Germany of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom Posterior amorphous corneal dystrophy (PACD) (OMIM Perraultsyndromeisararerecessiveconditioncharacterised 612868) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder character- by sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) and primary ovarian ized by partial or complete posterior lamellar corneal opa- insufﬁciency (POI). Additional phenotypes, most com- ciﬁcation, decreased corneal thickness and ﬂattening of the monlyneurological,mayalsopresent.Perraultsyndromeis cornealcurvature.Onsetofthediseaseisintheﬁrstyearsof clinically and genetically heterogeneous. Six causative life. PACD is associated with heterozygous deletions in geneshavebeenidentiﬁedtodate,ﬁveofwhichfunctionin chromosome band 12q21.33-q22 harbouring the genes mitochondrial homeostasis. In a number of cases no cau- DCN(Decorin,OMIM125255),KERA(Keratocan,OMIM sative variants have been identiﬁed in known Perrault 603288), LUM (Lumican, OMIM 600616) and EPYC syndrome genes. Perrault syndrome may be difﬁcult to (Epiphycan, OMIM 601657) which encode small leucine- clinically distinguish from overlapping phenotypes such as richproteoglycans.Onlyfourfamilieswithdeletionsofthis mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 7, which causes region have been published to date. We report on a 7-year- SNHL, POI and severe neurological dysfunction. We oldmalepatientwithPACDinwhomaninterstitialdeletion identiﬁed two cases of apparent Perrault syndrome due to in12q21.33was detected by array CGH.SubsequentFISH variants in genes associated with other conditions. We analyses in the parents revealed a balanced insertional identiﬁedahomozygousknownpathogenicvariantRMND1 translocationofthis12q21.33segmentintothelongarmof c.713A>G, p.(Asn238Ser) in a proband with SNHL, POI onechromosome13inthemother.Thisfamilycorroborates and renal acidosis. RMND1 is essential for mitochondrial the association of 12q21.33 deletions with PACD and translation and recessive variants in RMND1 have been constitutes the ﬁrst example of the involvement of a associated with renal defects, neurological phenotypes and balanced chromosome aberration that predisposes to this SNHL.Inaproband withSNHL,POI andmild intellectual rare disorder. disability we identiﬁed compound heterozygous rare var- J. Lenk: None. J. Porrmann: None. A. Kahlert: None. iants in XPNPEP3; c.263A>G, p.Gln88Arg and M. Smitka: None. I. Eger: None. E. Schröck: None. K. c.1261C>G, p.His421Asp as the likely cause of the phe- Hackmann: None. R. Herber: None. F. Raiskup: None. notype. XPNENP3 is involved in mitochondrial protein A. Tzschach: None. processing. Homozygous loss of function variants in XPNENP3havebeenlinkedtonephronophthisiswithsome P02.45D individuals also affected by SNHL. POI has not been First independent conﬁrmation of the PTPRQ gene reportedsecondarytovariantsinRMND1orXPNENP3and involvement in autosomal dominant hearing loss reﬂects the later onset and sex-limited nature of this phe- notype.Overlappingphenotypessuchasthosereportedhere D.Oziębło1,2,A. Adamiok1, A.Sarosiak1,2,H.Skarżyński3, may account for some of the genotypic and phenotypic M.Ołdak1 variation seen in Perrault syndrome. L.A.M.Demain:None.D.Antunes:None.A.Heiberg: 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and None. J. O’Sullivan: None. S.S. Bhaskhar: None. R.T. PathologyofHearing,Warsaw,Poland,2PostgraduateSchool O’Keefe: None. W.G. Newman: None. of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Oto-Rhino-Laryngology Surgery Clinic, P02.44C Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, 12q21.33 deletion in a patient with posterior amorphous Poland corneal dystrophy Background: Hearing loss (HL) is the most common birth defect affecting about 1-6/1000 births and the most64 J.delPicchia commondisabilityofhumansenses.Geneticfactorsplayan Material and Methods: This research has been con- importantroleinthedevelopmentofHL.ThePTPRQgene ducted using the UK Biobank (UKBB) resources and two has been previously reported in the context of autosomal sets of clinically ascertained RRD cases (close to 1000 recessive HL and in 2017 for the ﬁrst time in the devel- genotyped cases). A discovery genome-wide association opment of autosomal dominant HL. study was carried out for retinal detachment using the Material and methods: A ﬁve-generation Polish family largest dataset, UKBB, using BOLT-lmm which allows with progressive, high frequency autosomal dominant HL rapid analysis of large (N> 5000) datasets. Associated was recruited for the study. Genomic DNA was isolated conditions, high myopia and cataract, were analysed in fromperipheralbloodsamplesorbuccalswabsofavailable UKBB, to evaluate the amount of common genetic familymembers.Clinicalexomesequencingwasconducted underpinning. RRD associations were replicated using the in the proband’s DNA sample. Family segregation analysis datasets of clinically ascertained cases and controls. of the identiﬁed variants was performed using Sanger Results: Discovery GWAS was performed using sequencing. N=3977 self reported or hospital record linked retinal Results: Molecular genetic testing showed the presence detachment cases and revealed three genome-wide sig- ofprobablypathogenicc.6881G>A(p.Trp2294*)variantin niﬁcant signals as well as a low but signiﬁcant heritability, thePTPRQgene,whichfullysegregatedwithHLobserved 24% on the liability scale. High myopia showed substan- in the family. The identiﬁed variant is located in the last tially higher heritability, with, potentially mechanistically codingexonofthePTPRQgeneandintroducesapremature interesting,somebutnotallthetopsignalsalsoinﬂuencing stop codon. The c.6881G>A transition has not been retinal detachment. Two of the three genome-wide reported in population databases. To date, the PTPRQ signiﬁcant retinal detachment associations seem speciﬁc to variant has been described in one family worldwide and is this phenotype with no association with high myopia, the only PTPRQ genetic variant causally involved in cataract, nor any phenotypes from publicly available autosomal dominant HL. PheWAS databases. One of those hits, in the FAT3 gene, Conclusions: Identiﬁcation of the c.6881G>A variant was replicated in the clinically ascertained datasets. provides an independent conﬁrmation of the PTPRQ Conclusions. Biobank resources especially linkage to involvement in autosomal dominant HL, which is progres- health records are a very promising complement to studies sive,affectshighfrequenciesandisusuallydiagnosedinthe of well ascertained cases. ﬁrst decade of life. T.S.Boutin:None.D.G.Charteris:None.A.Chandra: Supported by: 2016/22/E/NZ5/00470 None. D. Mitry: None. V. Vitart: None. D. Oziębło: None. A. Adamiok: None. A. Sarosiak: None. H. Skarżyński: None. M. Ołdak: None. P02.47B WholeexomesequencingofacohortofPolishpatientswith P02.46A retinal disorders - NeuStemGen project Using UK Biobank for common conditions of poorly characterised genetic aetiology: the example of retinal R. Szymańczak1,P. Łyszkiewicz1,A.Wąsowska1, detachment E. Matczyńska1,W.Krysa1,K. Kamińska1,E. EwaSuchecka1, J.Kosakowski1,M.Jurkowska1,A.Pałucha1,M.Jędrzejowska1, T. S.Boutin1, D.G.Charteris2,A. Chandra3, D.Mitry4, S. Teper2,E. Wylęgała2,E. Pius-Sadowska3,A. Machalińska3, V. Vitart1 A. M.Boguszewska-Chachulska1 1MRC HGU, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular 1Genomed SA, Warsaw, Poland, 2Chair and Ophthalmology Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Moorﬁelds Eye Department, II School of Medicine with the Division of Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Southend University Dentistry in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Hospital, Westcliff-on-Sea, United Kingdom, 4Department of Poland, 3Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland Ophthalmology, Royal Free NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom The goal of the NeuStemGen project is to identify novel biomarkers, which may serve as diagnostic and prevention Introduction: Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) targets in degenerative disorders. Identiﬁcation of recurrent is a common cause of emergency ophthalmic intervention. pathogenic variants will allow to develop new therapies, There is some evidence for a genetic contribution to idio- such as genome editing and gene therapy, for patients with pathic RRD but studies have been limited. Here we eval- progressive, untreatable retinal dystrophies and uated the use of the UK Biobank Resource to increase degenerations. insight into RRD genetic aetiology.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 65 The speciﬁc approach adopted, based on WES, served to Physiology, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and identify not only pathogenic variants in genes associated Alcoholism, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Unit on retinal disorders but also in novel genes. Neural Circuits, National Institute of Neurological Disorders WES was performed for the cohort of 94 patients with andStroke,NIH,Rockville,MD,UnitedStates,5Laboratoryof clinical symptoms of retinal dystrophies while the POL- Immunology, National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, GENOMgenomicdatabaseoflong-livedPoleswasusedas United States, 6Section of Molecular Mechanisms of the control group. An in-house bioinformatic pipeline was Glaucoma, Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental applied to analyse SNVs and InDels. Further analysis Biology National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United involved Gemini, enabling an analysis of the full set of States, 7School of Life Sciences, University of Science and samples in search for rare pathogenic variants in the whole Technology of China, Hafei, China, 8Institute of Biomedical exome. CNVs were identiﬁed using XHMM, these results and Genetic Engineering (IBGE), Islamabad, Pakistan, were validated using aCGH arrays (180K), showing 9University College London, Institute of Ophthalmology, conformity for larger structural variants. London, United Kingdom, 10Faculty of Science, COMSATS Pathogenic variants were identiﬁed predominantly in Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, genesalreadyknowntocauseretinaldegenerations(suchas 11Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor ABCA4, USH2A, EYS, RHO) although variants in novel CollegeofMedicine,Huston,TX,UnitedStates,12Department genes, previously reported as single cases, were also ofHumanGenetics,DondersInstituteforBrain,Cognitionand uncovered. A gain of chr 8 was identiﬁed as a possible Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, cause of retinal dystrophy in one patient. Netherlands, 13Faculty of Medicine, University of The results of this analysis will support further develop- Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 14National mentofthetargetedretinalpanelcoveringmostpathogenic Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the variantsoccurringinthePolishpopulationandallowingfor Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, 15Allama Iqbal Medical College, a fast, low-cost genetic analysis, preceding selection of a University of Health Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan, 16National personalised therapy. Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States Supported by NCBiR, Project No.STRATEGMED1/ 234261/2/NCBR/2014. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is an inherited eye disease char- R. Szymańczak: None. P. Łyszkiewicz: None. A. acterised by photoreceptor death and retinal degeneration, Wąsowska: None. E. Matczyńska: None. W. Krysa: resulting in vision loss. This condition affects ~1:4000 None. K. Kamińska: None. E. Ewa Suchecka: None. J. individuals worldwide and is highly clinically and geneti- Kosakowski: None. M. Jurkowska: None. A. Pałucha: cally heterogeneous, presenting with variable symptoms None. M. Jędrzejowska: None. S. Teper: None. E. and inheritance patterns. We identiﬁed a homozygous Wylęgała: None. E. Pius-Sadowska: None. A. Macha- missensealteration(c.75C>A,p.D25E)intheCLCC1gene, lińska: None. A.M. Boguszewska-Chachulska: None. which encodes a presumptive intracellular chloride channel highly expressed in the retina, associated with autosomal P02.48C recessive RP in eight consanguineous families from Pakis- Mutation in the intracellular chloride channel CLCC1 tani and the UK. The p.D25E alteration decreased CLCC1 associated with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa channel function accompanied by accumulation of mutant protein in granules within the ER lumen. In keeping with I.D'Atri1,L.Li2,X. Jiao2,F. Ono3,R. Nelson4,C. Chan5, these ﬁndings, Clcc1+/- KO mice displayed depressed N.Nakaya6, Z.Ma2,Y.Ma2,X. Cai7,L. Zhang7,S. Lin1, electroretinogram and photoreceptor number. Together A. Hameed8,B. A. Chioza1,H.Hardy1, G.Arno9,S.Hull9, these ﬁndings deﬁne a single founder gene mutation as a M.Khan10,J.Fasham1,G.V.Harlalka1,M.Michaelides9,A.T. cause of RP in families of Pakistani descent, and strongly Moore9,Z. Akdemir11,S.Jhangiani12,J.R. Lupski11,F.P.M. suggest that CLCC1 function is crucial for maintaining Cremers12,R. Qamar10,A. Salman13,J. K.Chilton1,J. Self13, retinal integrity and function. This work was supported by F. Kabir14,M.Naeem14,M.Ali14,J.Akram15,P. A. Sieving16, National Eye Institute Grant R01EY021237-01 (SAR), S. Riazuddin14,S. Riazuddin14,J. Hejtmancik2,E. L. Baple1, National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI)/ A. H.Crosby1 National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) to the Baylor Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics (UM1 1RILDWellcomeWolfsonCentre,RoyalDevon&ExeterNHS HG006542, JRL), Medical Research Council UK Foundation Trust, University of Exeter, Exeter, United (G1002279),theNewlifeFoundationforDisabledChildren Kingdom, 2Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, (SG/15-16/12),FightForSight(Ref2027),WellcomeTrust National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 209083/Z/17/Z. 3SectiononModelSynapticSystems,LaboratoryofMolecular66 J.delPicchia I. D'Atri: None. L. Li: None. X. Jiao: None. F. Ono: therefore subjected to the second-step analysis, which None. R. Nelson: None. C. Chan: None. N. Nakaya: reportedanumberofvariants.Atthemoment,theresulting None. Z. Ma: None. Y. Ma: None. X. Cai: None. L. variants are under investigation and validation. Zhang: None. S. Lin: None. A. Hameed: None. B.A. Conclusion: the present study highlights a major burden Chioza:None.H. Hardy: None.G. Arno: None. S. Hull: of genes other than RHO associated with the disease in the None.M.Khan:None.J.Fasham:None.G.V.Harlalka: Italianpopulation.GiventhegeneticheterogeneityofRP,it None. M. Michaelides: None. A.T. Moore: None. Z. would be highly helpful and faster to perform a large-scale Akdemir: None. S. Jhangiani: None. J.R. Lupski: None. screening of genes compared to the slower and labor- F.P.M. Cremers: None. R. Qamar: None. A. Salman: intensive traditional approaches. None.J.K.Chilton:None.J.Self:None.F.Kabir:None. V. Errichiello: None. S. Carboni: None. G. Pagliaroli: M. Naeem: None. M. Ali: None. J. Akram: None. P.A. None.V.Caputo:None.C.Strafella: None.G.Campoli: Sieving: None. S. Riazuddin: None. S. Riazuddin: None. None. C. Peconi: None. F. Sangiuolo: None. G. Novelli: J. Hejtmancik: None. E.L. Baple: None. A.H. None. R. Cascella: None. E. Giardina: None. Crosby: None. P02.50A P02.49D Haplotypes constructed by Whole exome sequencing to Genetic screening for Italians patients affected with mapandidentifyanoveldisease-causingRP2genevariant Retinitis Pigmentosa from a recessive X linked Retinities Pigmentosa family V. Errichiello1, S.Carboni2,G.Pagliaroli2,V.Caputo1, Y. Ching1,W.Fan2,W.Lin1,W.Tsai1,L.Hu1,S.Huang1, C. Strafella1,3,G.Campoli2,C.Peconi2,F. Sangiuolo1, R. Chung3 G.Novelli1,R. Cascella1,4, E.Giardina1,2 1Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Hualien, Taiwan, 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, “Tor Vergata” 2Whole-Genome Research Core Laboratory of Human University, Roma, Italy, 2Laboratory of Genomic Medicine Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan, UILDM, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Roma, Italy, 3National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan 3EmotestLaboratory,Pozzuoli,Italy,4DepartmentofChemical Pharmaceutical and Biomolecular Technologies, Catholic Introduction: Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a genetically University “Our Lady of Good Counsel” Laprakë, Rruga heterogeneous withmore than 70 RP loci currently known. Dritan Hoxha, Tirana, Albania Athree-generationRPfamily exhibiting Xlinkedrecessive pattern were studied. Introduction: Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP, OMIM #268000) Materials and Methods: Linkage analysis was per- is a degenerative disorder affecting peripheral retina which formed using 18 microsatellite markers. Whole exome is caused by a progressive loss of photoreceptors. The sequencing was used for mutational analysis. genetics of RP is highly heterogeneous, with several asso- Results:Polymorphicmicrosatellitemarkerswereusedto ciated genes mainly implicated in the phototransduction map the disease interval to a 48 Mb region on the X cascade. RP shows autosomal dominant, autosomal reces- chromosomebetweenthemarkersDXS1068andDXS1196. sive, X-linked and mitochondrial inheritance patterns. One Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed on a ofthemostinvestigatedgeneassociatedwithautosomalRP selected sib-pair within the family. Total 1973 SNPs were is RHO (3q21-q24), which encodes for Rodopsin and is foundtobelocatedwithinthecriticalinterval.Amongthese essential for vision in low-light conditions. In this context, SNPs, 139 were shared between the obligated carrier and thegeneticsofRPwasstudiedconsideringthescreeningof the affected male offspring but not the phenotypically RHO as a ﬁrst-level analysis and a panel of 24 putative normalmaleoffspring.WealsoutilizedtheWESidentiﬁed genes as second-level step. polymorphic SNPs mapped within the critical disease Matherial and Methods: 100 Italian RP patients were interval to construct detailed haplotype for the sib-pair. analyzed by this two steps-analysis, through direct sequen- Additional crossing-over evens were revealed on and the cing and NGS on IonTorrent S5 (Thermo Fisher). disease interval were mapped into two intervals: chrx: Concerning NGS analysis, a 20X coverage was ﬁxed as 38,911,177-68890047;andchrX:69,155,432-69,261,818). minimum depth of coverage. The causative mutation (RP2 c.102G>A; Lys34Lys, a RP2 Results: the ﬁrst-step analysis identiﬁed a variant in the splicing donor site mutation) was then identiﬁed. fourth exon of RHO gene, namely c.G760T. The variant Conclusion: We have combined the positional informa- wasfoundin1patient,whiletheremaining99patientswere tion obtained from the linkage and haplotype analysis to negative for this level of analysis. These patients were identify the genetic intervals harboring the disease-causingAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 67 gene,andalsoutilizedDNApolymorphismsidentiﬁedfrom J. Känsäkoski: None. S. Tuupanen: A. Employment WES as additional genetic markers to further mapped the (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. crossing-over evens as a creative strategy for positional Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; cloning. Blueprint Genetics. P. Siivonen: A. Employment (full or MOST: 104-2311-B-320 -001 - part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Kämpjärvi: Y. Ching: None. W. Fan: None. W. Lin: None. W. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Tsai: None. L. Hu: None. S. Huang: None. R. Genetics. M. Mehine: A. Employment (full or part-time); Chung: None. Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.M.Valori:A.Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P. P02.51B Salmenperä: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- Improved genetic diagnostics of RPGR ORF15-associated cant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila: F. Consultant/ retinal dystrophy AdvisoryBoard;Modest;BlueprintGenetics.E.Salminen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint J.Känsäkoski1, S.Tuupanen1, J.Sistonen1,P. Siivonen1, Genetics. S. Myllykangas: E. Ownership Interest (stock, K. Kämpjärvi1,M. Mehine1,M.Valori1,P. Salmenperä1, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); E. Sankila2, E.Salminen1, S.Myllykangas1,T. Alastalo1,J. W. Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: E. Ownership Koskenvuo1 Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J.W. Kosken- 1Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Helsinki University vuo: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland other intellectual property);Signiﬁcant; BlueprintGenetics. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the most common form of P02.52C inherited retinal degeneration affecting around 1:3,000 SVAF retrotransposon insertion in BBS1 gene, leading to individuals worldwide. Classical RP is characterized by Bardet- Biedl Syndrome progressive rod-cone dysfunction. Patients initially present with night blindness and tunnel vision, followed by E. Tavares1,A. Vig1,2, S.Li1,G.Billingsley1, W.Sung3, decreased visual acuity and macular affectation. RP is A. Vincent1,2,4,B. Thiruvahindrapuram3,E. Héon1,2,4 clinically and genetically heterogeneous, and it can be inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, 1Genetics and Genome Biology, Toronto, ON, Canada, and X-linked manner. The majority of the X-linked RP, 2Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, associated with a severe phenotype, is caused by mutations ON,Canada,3TheCentreforAppliedGenomics,Toronto,ON, in the RPGR gene. All known mutations causing RPGR- Canada, 4Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences. The Hospital related retinal dystrophies are found to affect the for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada RPGRORF15 isoform, which contains a unique C-terminal 567-aa exon called ORF15. ORF15 is a mutational hotspot Introduction: Active transposable elements (TE) account for RPGR-associated RP, accounting for two-thirds of all for over 0.02% of the human genome. One de novo inser- disease-causing mutations. The exon ORF15, however, tionisbelievedtohappenwitheach10-100livebirths.TEs includes a highly repetitive, purine-rich sequence, which can cause disease by inserting themselves into coding or generally performs poorly in next-generation sequencing regulatory portions of genes, facilitating duplications and (NGS)-based assays. To address the clinical importance of deletions, among other mechanisms. Due to their repetitive the RPGR ORF15 and the lack of high quality NGS-based nature, traditional sequencing methods often fail to detect diagnostics, we have developed a novel test to detect var- TEs.HerewereportaBardet-Biedlsyndrome(BBS)patient iantsintheORF15region.ThistestcombinesNGSanalysis who is compound heterozygous for the most frequent with Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform and Sanger sequen- disease-causing mutation in BBS1 and an inserted SVAF cing, speciﬁcally optimised for this region. We have vali- retrotransposon. dated the test using samples with known RPGR ORF15 Methods and Results: Whole-genome sequencing variants, and additionally tested patients with a clinical (WGS) was performed for a female BBS patient with an suspicion of X-linked RP, who have remained negative in identiﬁed maternally inherited mutation M390R. No other previous genetic testing. We show that the test has high mutation was identiﬁed in BBS1 using dense microarray clinical sensitivity and speciﬁcity for detecting RPGR analysis, qPCR assays, and whole exome sequencing. An ORF15variants,andthatitimprovesthegeneticdiagnostics exonicTEinsertionwasdetectedinexon13ofBBS1inby of inherited retinal dystrophies. visual inspection of the WGS read ﬁles. Following Sanger sequencing, we determined the insertion to be a paternally68 J.delPicchia inherited SVAF element of ~2 kb. We have not identiﬁed Y. Kao: None. W. Fan: None. R. Chung: None. W. the same SVAF insertion upon screening twenty-four BBS Lin:None.W.Tsai:None.L.Hu:None.S.Huang:None. negative patients, 2 with disease-causing mutations in Y. Ching: None. BBS1. However, screening for other TE insertions are yet to be completed. P02.54A Conclusions: Disease-causing TE insertions can be An integrated molecular approach to characterize the missed by traditional genetic testing methods. However, genetic bases of hearing loss in an Italian cohort they can be detected by using WGS data with speciﬁc methods, not systematically implemented. Large -scale F. Cesca1,E. Bettella1,R. Polli1, E.Leonardi1,M.C. implementationofsuchalgorithmswillallowthediscovery Aspromonte1,S. Bigoni2,R.Santarelli3,A. Murgia1 ofmoredisease-causingTEinsertionsandbetterassessment of the frequency of this category of mutational events. 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment, E. Tavares: None. A. Vig: None. S. Li: None. G. Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of Billingsley: None. W. Sung: None. A. Vincent: None. B. Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Ferrara Thiruvahindrapuram: None. E. Héon: None. UniversityHospital,Ferrara,Italy,3AudiologyandPhoniatric Service, Treviso Regional Hospital, Treviso, Italy P02.53D In vitro functional analysis of a novel RP2 alleles Non-syndromic hearing loss is characterized by a vast genetic heterogeneity with more than 160 loci described in Y. KAO1,W.Fan2,R. Chung3,W.Lin1,W. Tsai1, L.Hu1, humans and 100 genes so far identiﬁed. With the aim of S. Huang1, Y.Ching1 targeting genes strongly associated, in Caucasians, with NSHLorwithSHLwhichonsetisusuallycharacterizedby 1TzuChiUniversity,Hualien,Taiwan,2ChangGungMemorial isolated deafness (i.e. Pendred and Usher syndrome), we Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan, 3National Health Research developed an NGS targeted panel of59 genes, to obtain an Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan advancedefﬁcientdiagnostictool.TheIonTorrentPGMTM platform combined with a customized bioinformatics pipe- Introduction: Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), a hereditary het- linewasusedfortheanalysisof87DNAsamplescollected erogeneous disease with a prevalence of 1/4000, char- from clinically highly selected Italian subjects negative for acterized by the degeneration of photoreceptors leading to GJB2 mutations/GJB6 deletions. An etiological diagnosis progressive loss of vision in patients. We have identiﬁed a was established in 41 of these subjects, with an overall three-generation X-linked RP family. diagnostic yield of 47%. An early molecular diagnosis of Materials and Methods: Eighteen X chromosome Usher syndrome was achieved in 3 unrelated children car- microsatellite markers were used to locate disease locus, rying mutations in ADGRV1, CDH23 and USH2A genes. and one of the Sibling-pairs within the familywere used to NGSallowedtheidentiﬁcationofahomozygousaswellas performed Whole-exome sequencing. a heterozygous deletion in the STRC gene; the latter dele- Results:Thediseaselocuswasmappedbetweenmarkers tion was found in-trans with a known STRC pathogenic DXS1068 and DXS1196. Whole-exome sequencing identi- variant. The deletions were conﬁrmed by q-PCR with pri- ﬁed 139 possible SNPs located within the critical diseases- mers that excluded the highly homologous STRC pseudo- causing intervals. Considering that co-segregation of gene. The novel likely causative variants identiﬁed were mutation and genes expression patterns, the RP2_c.102G> locatedinthefollowinggenes:ACTG1,ADGRV1,CDH23, A point mutation might be the responsible mutation of this CEACAM16, COCH, COL11A2, EYA4, GJB3, KCNQ4, family's disease. It isa novel allele ofRP2 genewith allele MYO7A, PCDH15, PTPRQ, SLC17A8, TMPRSS3. Our frequency<1%,andnoknownfunctionalimpact.Atprotein targeted panel coupled with a solid bioinformatics pipeline level the mutation appears to be no functional impact hasprovedasensitivemoleculartoolwithahighdiagnostic (Lys34> Lys), however, c.102G> A located at the last yield. We demonstrate the importance and efﬁcacy of nucleotide of the splicing donor site of exon1, suggesting integrating the powerful NGS technology with a compre- that this mutation might cause intron retention at the hensive data processing and a careful clinical evaluation. transcriptional level. A MiniGene assay was designed to F. Cesca: None. E. Bettella: None. R. Polli: None. E. validate the functional consequences of this mutation. Leonardi: None. M.C. Aspromonte: None. S. Bigoni: Conclusion: We have identiﬁed a novel splicing-site None. R. Santarelli: None. A. Murgia: None. mutation of RP2 gene from an X-Link RP family. In vitro functional analysis using MiniGene assay has been performed to verify the functional impact of the mutation.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 69 P02.55B 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, “Tor Vergata” Stereocilin gene mutations associated with vertigo: University, Rome, Italy, 2Emotest Laboratory, Pozzuoli, Italy, Expansion of the DFNB16 phenotype 3UOSD Retinal Pathology PTV Foundation “Policlinico Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 4Laboratory of Genomic Medicine C. A.Frykholm1, J.Klar1,2, T.Tomanovic3,A. Ameur2, UILDM, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy, N.Dahl1,2 5Department of Chemical Pharmaceutical and Biomolecular Technologies, Catholic University “Our Lady of Good 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Counsel”, Tirana, Albania Uppsala, Sweden, 2Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical Centre,UppsalaUniversity,Uppsala,Sweden,3Departmentof Introduction: Susceptibility to Age-related Macular Hearing and Balance Disorders, Karolinska University Degeneration (AMD) strictly depends on genetic, epige- Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden netic and environmental factors. Previous results high- lighted prominent differences concerning genetic Introduction: Vestibular disorders comprise a group of contributors to AMD in Italian population compared to diseases with transient or permanent loss of vestibular worldwidegroups.Amonggeneticvariables,SNPsofCFH, function characterized by vertigo and imbalance. Isolated ARMS2, IL-8, TIMP3, SLC16A8, RAD51B, VEGFA and vestibulopathy is rare and more often associated with COL8A1 were signiﬁcantly associated with the risk of migraine, Ménière disease, ataxia or sensorineural AMD in our cohort. Given these data, this study aimed to hearing loss. evaluate the contribution of genetic, epigenetic (SNPs of Materials and Methods: We examined two siblings and miRNA-146a, miRNA-31, miRNA-23a, miRNA-27, miRNA- their ﬁrst cousin with childhood onset of episodic vertigo 20a and miRNA-150 genes) and environment factors (age, and sensorineural hearing loss. Hearing loss and vestibular sex, smoking, diet) to exudative AMD. dysfunctionwasinvestigatedbyaudiometry,SVH,cVEMP Materials and Methods: 976 exudative AMD patients and oVEMP. DNA was analyzed using exome sequencing and 1000 controls were subjected to an epigenotyping and SNP-array. analysis through Real-Time PCR and direct sequencing. Results and Conclusions: Clinical investigations con- Biostatisticalanalysiswasperformedtocalculateassocia- ﬁrmedpathologicalvestibularresponsesintwosiblingsand tion and estimate the contribution of genetics, epigenetics hearinglossinallthreeaffectedindividuals.Thecousinhad and environment to AMD susceptibility. Gene- a history compatible with a vestibular disorder. DNA environment interactions were evaluated by analysis revealed that the siblings were homozygous for a bioinformatic tools. STRC stop variant (c.4027C>T) and their cousin was Results: The SNPs rs11671784 (miRNA-27, G/A) and compound heterozygous for the stop variant and a 90kb rs2910164 (miRNA-146a, C/G), advanced age, smoking deletion spanning the STRC gene. These results are anddietaryhabitsweresigniﬁcantlyassociatedwithAMD consistent with DFNB16. STRC, encoding stereocilin, is risk (p<0.05). Genetic/epigenetic variants appeared to expressedinthecochleaandinthevestibularorganwhereit contribute to AMD susceptibility for 23% while non- ensheats the kinocilium suggesting a role for the protein in genetic variants accounted for 10% of disease. Concern- sensing balance and spatial orientation. Our ﬁndings ing gene-environment interactions, we found that AMD- support such a function for stereocilin in the vestibular associated genes may be involved in the alteration of organ and expand the phenotype associated with DFNB16. Bruch's membrane and angiogenesis, contributing to the Grants: Supported by the Swedish Research Council exacerbation of aging and environmental damages. (2015-02424). Conclusions:Ourstudyprovidesanoverviewofgenetic/ C.A. Frykholm: None. J. Klar: None. T. Tomanovic: epigenetic and non-genetic factors characterizing AMD None. A. Ameur: None. N. Dahl: None. susceptibility in Italian population. These data may be applied to develop a “population-speciﬁc precision medi- P02.56C cine” approach able to prevent AMD or improve patients’ Genetic,epigeneticandenvironmentalcontributorstoAge- quality of life. related Macular Degeneration susceptibility C. Strafella: None. V. Errichiello: None. V. Caputo: None. F. Sangiuolo: None. F. Ricci: None. G. Novelli: C. Strafella1,2,V. Errichiello1,V.Caputo1, F.Sangiuolo1, None. A. Cusumano: None. R. Cascella: None. E. F. Ricci3, G.Novelli1, A.Cusumano3,R. Cascella4,5, Giardina: None. E. Giardina1,470 J.delPicchia P02.58A A. Chaussenot1,2,C. Rouzier1,2,C. Vincent-Delorme3, DiscoveryofnewHereditaryHearingLoss(HHL)genesby M.Bonnet-Dupeyron4, G.Auge1,V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,2 Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) and in vitro/in vivo functional studies: ﬁve years of experience 1Department of Medical Genetics, National Centre for Mitochondrial Diseases, Archet 2 Hospital, Nice, France, G.Girotto1,2, A.Morgan1,M.Brumat1,M. DiStazio1, 2NiceSophia-AntipolisUniversity,CNRSUMR7284,INSERM S. Cappellani2, E.Campana1,U.Ambrosetti1,M.La Bianca2, U1081, Institute for Research on Cancer and Aging, Nice, E. Orzan2,P. Gasparini1,2 France, 3Jeanne de Flandre hospital, Lille, France, 4Laboratoire de Biologie Médicale, Centre hospitalier de 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo, Valence, Valence, France Trieste, Italy Introduction: Dominant phenotypes related to WFS1 Introduction: HHL is genetically heterogeneous and at mutations were known to be less severe than the Wolfram least 40% of cases are not characterized by mutations in syndrome (WS) recessive phenotype, characterized by dia- knowngenes.Thus,weappliedWESfollowedby“invitro” betes mellitus, optic atrophy, diabetes insipidus and deaf- and “in vivo” functional studies for the discovery of ness. Dominant phenotypes included isolated low- new genes. frequency sensorineural hearing loss, optic atrophy and Methods: 14 Italian HHL families, negative for muta- hearing impairment, isolated adult-onset diabetes and iso- tions in 96 deafness-genes, were analyzed by WES (Ion latedcongenitalnuclearcataracts.Morerecently,DeFranco Proton™).Variantswereﬁlteredaccordingto:a)patternof et al. (Diabetes 2017) described a severe congenital inheritance, b) frequency, c) pathogenicity. Functional Wolfram-like syndrome (CWLS), characterized by con- studies on new candidates were carried out by in vitro/ genital progressive hearing loss, neonatal diabetes mellitus in vivo experiments. and cataract, due to de novo dominant mutations in WFS1. Results: WES allowed the discovery of ﬁve new HHL- Materials and Methods: We reported 3 unrelated cases genes: PSIP1 (https://doi.org/10.1038/srep18568), TBL1Y, with this new dominant phenotype, among our French SPATC1L, PLS1 and ATP2B2. As regards PSIP1, a cohort of 116 patients carrying at least 1 WFS1mutation. nonsense variant in a 3-generation family was identiﬁed; Results: The dominant known p.Glu809Lys mutation RNAseqandimmunolabelingconﬁrmedgeneexpressionin wasfounddenovofor2unrelatedgirls,respectively12and mouse inner ear. For TBL1Y, a missense variant was 3 years-old, who presented CWLS during the ﬁrst year of detected in a large Y-linked family; functional experiments life, associated with psychomotor retardation, failure to demonstrated TBL1Y expression in human cochlea and an thrive, amblyopia, dysmorphic features and cerebellar early degradation of the mutated protein. For SPATC1L, a hypoplasia. We also described a 20 years-old patient, who nonsense variant in a 3-generation family was identiﬁed; had developed with diabetes and deafness before 1 year of protein modeling revealed a reduced structural stability age and bilateral cataract diagnosed at 18 months, asso- (loss of part of the C-terminus) conﬁrmed by western blot ciated with glaucoma, amblyopia, cerebellar ataxia, short (presence of a shorter protein isoform). Finally, for PLS1 stature, hypothyroidism and hypogonadism. The clinical and ATP2B2 (known as a CDH23 modiﬁer) Zebraﬁsh KI presentation was very suggestive of CWLS. We found a modelsoftheidentiﬁedvariants(amissenseandanonsense heterozygous p.His860Asp WFS1 mutation, that was variant,respectively, intwodominant HHL families) areat previously described at compound heterozygous state in a the ﬁnal stages of validation. WES data of the remaining 9 case of WS, but with congenital deafness and occuring De families are now under investigation. Novo, asking the question of its pathogenicity. Conclusions: Our approach, based on WES followed by Conclusions: We highlight the expanding clinical functional studies, already proved to be effective for the spectrum of WFS1-related disorders with 3 case reports of discovery of new HHL-genes. severe congenital dominant phenotype. G. Girotto: None. A. Morgan: None. M. Brumat: A. Chaussenot: None. C. Rouzier: None. C. Vincent- None. M. Di Stazio: None. S. Cappellani: None. E. Delorme: None. M. Bonnet-Dupeyron: None. G. Auge: Campana: None. U. Ambrosetti: None. M. La Bianca: None. V. Paquis-Flucklinger: None. None. E. Orzan: None. P. Gasparini: None. P02.60C P02.59B Multidisciplinaryteamworktogetdifferentialdiagnosisof Dominant WFS1 mutations in a new congenital phenotype a reverse phenotype in retinal diseaseAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 71 L.Candita1,B.Boschi1,E.Contini1,I.Passerini1,A.Sodi2,A.L. 1Dept.ofClinicalGenetics,LeidenUniversityMedicalCenter, Nutini1,O.Colavecchio1,T. Morgani1, E.Ronconi1,E. Pelo1 Leiden, Netherlands, 2Dept. Nephrology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Dept. Internal 1SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy, Medicine, Ziekenhuisgroep Twente, Almelo, Netherlands, 2Dipartimento di Chirurgia e Medicina Traslazionale, Clinica 4Dept.GastroenterologyandHepatology,RadboudUniversity Oculistica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Dept. Nephrology, LeidenUniversityMedicalCenter,Leiden,Netherlands,6Dept. We report a case of a 23 year old woman referred to our Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, center with a diagnosis of Leber congenital amaurosis Netherlands, 7Dept. Nephrology, Erasmus Medical Center (LCA). An accurate clinical re-evaluation detected dystro- Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Dept. of Human phy of retinal pigment epithelium, Franceschetti sign, exo- Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, tropia and nistagmus. Clinical signs and symptoms were Netherlands thereforenotsuggestiveforLCA.Ageneticcounselingwas then offeredtothis patient. Weperformed NGS analysis of Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease is an 137 retinal dystrophy associated genes. Mutational and inherited disease characterized by progressive cyst forma- CNV analysis were performed. Pathogenic variants tion in both kidneys and renal function loss, which ulti- c.1666del inheterozygosis inCEP290 gene and c.484G>A mately leads to end-stage renal failure. A well-deﬁned in heterozygosis in CRB1 gene and probably pathogenic clinical cohort of 339 ADPKD patients that gave informed variant c.1054C>T in heterozygosis in CACNA2D4 gene consentandwerescreenedforparticipationinaclinicaltrial were detected. Variant c.1666del was reported in associa- was analysed for the presence of PKD1 and PKD2 muta- tion with LCA (Hui Wang et al., 2015) in compound het- tions. The molecular analysis is relevant for the trial since erozygosis with a pathogenic variant in CEP290 gene; disease progression is partly determined by mutation type. variantc.484G>AinCRB1genewasreportedinonefamily MutationanalysiswasperformedbySangersequencingand with pigmented paravenous chorioretinal atrophy (PPCRA) MLPAwhichresultedinamutationdetectionratioof94%. (McKay et al., 2005) dominantly inherited. The cose- Mutation negative patients were analysed for mutations in gregation analysis showed that proband’s father carried all GANAB, HNF1B or PKHD1 but no mutation was detected. thethreefamilialvariants.Nodeﬁnedclinical symptomsof Four mutation negative patients were sequenced with a impairment visual loss were reported. Clinical and mole- NGS approach (Illumina HiSeq4000 platform, targets cap- cularﬁndingsarenotalwaysclear:thereforewerecommend tured using custom-designed gene panel speciﬁc Agilent a multidisciplinary patient management in rare pathology. SureSelectXTClearseq enrichment kit). Data analysis was NGS data should lead to clinical revaluation, early diag- performed using an in house developed pipeline (stringent nosis in mild symptomatic relatives and sometimes lead to post-sequencingannotationpipelinebasedonBWA,GATK achieve reverse phenotype. In conclusion, we requested andVEPandvariousﬁlteringstepsinLOVD+).In3outof clinical revaluation of the proband and her parents by our 4 patients a pathogenic mutation was detected in PKD1 or physicians, to gain also a clinical PPCRA diagnosis, which PKD2. Mutations were missed by Sanger sequencing should justify a CRB1 dominant disease with variable because of allelic drop-out, or a gap in the overlapping expression or incomplete penetrance. Sanger sequencing fragments. The remaining 16 patients L. Candita: None. B. Boschi: None. E. Contini: None. are currently being analyzed with the same NGS approach. I. Passerini: None. A. Sodi: None. A.L. Nutini: None. O. In conclusion, mutation analysis in a well-deﬁned ADPKD Colavecchio: None. T. Morgani: None. E. Ronconi: cohorthasanextremelyhighmutationdetectionrate(94%). None. E. Pelo: None. The NGS approach is a very useful addition to standard mutation analysis techniques especially in very poly- morphic regions of the genome like the PKD1 genomic P03 Internal organs & endocrinology (lung, kidney, region. liver, gastrointestinal) M. Losekoot: None. A. Tholens: None. M. Phylipsen: None. E. Meijer: None. F.W. Visser: None. J.P.H. P03.01D Drenth:None.J.W.deFijter: None.J.F.Wetzels:None. High diagnostic yield in well-deﬁned cohort of ADPKD R. Zietse: None. R.T. Gansevoort: None. D.J.M. patients by conventional sequencing and NGS Peters: None. M.Losekoot1, A.Tholens1,M.Phylipsen1,E.Meijer2,F.W. P03.02 Visser2,3, J.P. H.Drenth4, J.W.deFijter5, J.F. Wetzels6, ANGS allele drop out in a family with NPHP4 related R. Zietse7, R.T. Gansevoort2,D.J.M.Peters8 nephronophthisis72 J.delPicchia A. V.Kirov1,L. Grozdanova2,T. Todorov3,1,A. Todorova1,3 So far, some founder mutations have been identiﬁed with many of them being region- or ethnicity-speciﬁc. COL4A5 1IMDLGenomeCentreBulgaria,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,2Department c.1871G>A,p.(Gly624Asp)pathogenicvariantisknownto of Medical Genetics, Medical University Hospital “St. be prevalent in AS patients from Slovenia (6 out of 17), George”, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3GMDL Genica, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Hungary (3 out of 10) and Greece and lead to late age at onset of end stage renal disease. In contrast to these Herewereportafamilywithonechilddiedsoonafterbirth populations,themutationisconsideredtoberareintheUS, due to bilateral renal agenesis and one terminated early Northern and Western Europe or Japan. Here we show that pregnancyduetothesame reason.The familywasreferred the mutation was detected in 7 AS patients out of 49 with for genetic counseling and molecular-genetic testing to our genetically conﬁrmed diagnosis from Russia. lab. DNA from the affected children was not available so Materials and Methods: The population sample con- we perform whole exome sequencing of both parents. We tained 76 apparently unrelated pediatric patients (1 to 17 analyzedthedatasearchingforheterozygousgeneticvariant years old) from diverse range of regions in the European in the known nephronophthisis and polycystic kidney dis- part of Russian Federation with conﬁrmed or suspected ease associated genes. However, only one heterozygous diagnosis of AS according to current guidelines. NGS variant in exon 23 of NPHP4 gene was detected in the sequencing was performed using Ion PGM (AmpliSeq mother: NM_015102.4: c.3292G>A (p.Ala1098Thr). Some panel). authors reported few patients with only one NPHP4 muta- Results: We conﬁrmed the diagnosis in 49 patients tion so we could not exclude the possibility of incomplete including 43 with X-linked AS (harboring COL4A5 gene penetrance of the genetic variant. We conﬁrm the genetic mutations) and 1 with digenic COL4A5 and COL4A3 ﬁnding with standard Sanger sequencing of both parents. inheritance. Seven of them were bearing the COL4A5 Surprisingly, the father was also a heterozygous carrier of c.1871G>A,p.(Gly624Asp)mutationwhichcorrespondsto thesamevariant.WedoublechecktheﬁndingandtheNGS 14% frequency in the sample. We demonstrate that the coverage (above 100x in both patients) and again it was mutation is characterized by late age at onset of hematuria missing from the NGS data of the father. It is well known (>48 months) and absence of proteinuria in childhood. The that both cytosine methylation and DNA structures known researchwassupportedbyRFBRgrant18-34-00708toL.I. as G-quadruplexes (G4s) in some region contributed to S. and Minzdrav government grant №115022070016. allelic dropout (ADO) in PCR based reactions and NGS L.I. Shagam: None. V.S. Sukhorukov: None. T.A. library preparation. However the genetic region in proxi- Kuznetsova: None. M.E. Aksenova: None. V.V. mity to our genetic variant is not GC-rich and as far as we Dlin: None. knowthisregionisalsonotmethylated.ObviouslyADOin NGSeraissomethingthatwestillneedtokeepinmindand P03.04C continue to investigate in our routine laboratory work. Identiﬁcation of the genetic background of Polish patients A.V.Kirov:None.L.Grozdanova:None.T.Todorov: with suspected Alport Syndrome using next-generation None. A. Todorova: None. sequencing P03.03B P. Halat-Wolska1,E. Ciara1, J.Antoniewicz2, K.Gadomska- COL4A5 G624D: abundance of the Alport syndrome Prokop2,L. Obrycki2,M. Rydzanicz3,J. Kosińska3, mutation in Russia along with Greek, Hungarian and D.Siestrzykowska1,B. Chałupczyńska1,P. Stawiński3,4, Slovenian populations suggests it is a frequent mutation in D.Jurkiewicz1,D.Piekutowska-Abramczuk1,M.Pelc1, Eastern Europe with mild phenotype P. Kowalski1,D.Wicher1,A.Cieślikowska1, P.Iwanowski1, M.Gierla2,A. Łuba2,A. Niemirska2,D.Runowski2, L. I.Shagam1,V. S.Sukhorukov1,2,T. A. Kuznetsova1, M.E. W.Jarmużek2,J. Lesiak2, M.Gorzkowska-Paczwa2, Aksenova1,V.V. Dlin1 A. Borowski2,J.Latoszyńska2, M.Podymniak-Grzeszykowska2, R. Grenda2,K. Chrzanowska1,R.Płoski3, M.Krajewska- 1Veltishev Pediatric Clinical Research Institute of Pirogov Walasek1, M.Litwin2 Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sechenov University, Moscow, Russian 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Federation HealthInstitute,Warsaw,Poland,2DepartmentofNephrology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, Introduction:Alportsyndrome(AS)isafamilialhematuria 3DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,WarsawMedicalUniversity, caused bymutations inCOL4A3,COL4A4 and/orCOL4A5 Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Genetics, Institute of genes which lead to defects in glomerular ﬁltration barrier. Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, PolandAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 73 Introduction: Alport syndrome (AS) is a clinically and B. Guillen-Guio1,J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar2,A. Corrales1,3, genetically heterogeneous nephropathy associated with E. Espinosa4,A.Muriel5,L. Lorente6,M. M.Martín7, sensorineural hearing loss and ocular anomalies, with thin C. Rodríguez-Gallego8, J.Solé-Violán9,A. Ambrós10, basement membrane nephropathy being at the mildest end D.Carriedo11,J. Blanco5,J.M.Añón12,J. M.Añón12, of the disorder spectrum. In most AS cases pathogenic J.Villar3,13,C. Flores1,2,3,theGenetics of Sepsis (GEN-SEP) variants can be found in COL4A5 (XL~80%) whereas Network COL4A3 and COL4A4 are associated with autosomal recessive (AR~15%) and dominant (AD~5%) forms. 1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Materials and Methods: In our study we examined a Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, groupof36unrelatedPolishpatientswithsuspectedAS.To 2Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías identify the molecular basis of the disease, we conducted Renovables(ITER),SantaCruzdeTenerife,Spain,3CIBERde next-generation sequencing (NGS) using Illumina TruSight Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, One Sequencing Panel, which allowed simultaneous Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital analysis of all genes encoding the subunits of type IV Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, collagen. Spain, 5Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Universitario Rio Results: A genetic etiology was established in 32 Hortega, Valladolid, Spain, 6Intensive Care Unit, Hospital patients. Overall, 31 pathogenic or likely pathogenic UniversitariodeCanarias,LaLaguna,SantaCruzdeTenerife, variants in COL4A3, COL4A4 (both AR~12% and Spain, 7Intensive Care Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de AD~12%)andCOL4A5(XL~75%)wereidentiﬁed,includ- Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 8Department of ing 10 known mutations and 21 novel variants expanding Immunology,HospitalUniversitarioDrNegrín,LasPalmasde the list of COL4A3-5 alterations. Changes were randomly Gran Canaria, Spain, 9Intensive Care Unit, Hospital distributedacrossallcoding regionsofCOL4A3-5,with no UniversitarioDrNegrín,LasPalmasdeGranCanaria,Spain, indices of a genetic “hot spot”, however we revealed 10Intensive Care Unit, Hospital General de Ciudad Real, variants repeated four times (COL4A5: c.1871G>A) or Ciudad Real, Spain, 11Intensive Care Unit, Complejo twice (COL4A3: c.2083G>A; COL4A5: c.2414G>T, Hospitalario Universitario de León, León, Spain, 12Intensive c.3399delA) in our study group. Care Unit, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, Conclusions: Diagnosis of patients with suspected AS 13Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrin, Las was conﬁrmed at the molecular level in ~89% cases. Our Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain ﬁndingscorrespondtothedatareportedworldwide.NGSis efﬁcient, reduces screening time and cost, and provides an Introduction: The acute respiratory distress syndrome expanding diagnostic tool to investigate the genetic back- (ARDS)isacomplexsyndromeofsevereacutehypoxemic grounds of AS, which will improve personalized diagnos- respiratory failure. Here, we describe the results of the tics, genetic and prognostic counseling for the patients and discovery stage for the ﬁrst genome-wide association study their relatives. (GWAS) of sepsis-induced ARDS. P. Halat-Wolska: None. E. Ciara: None. J. Antonie- Materials and Methods: We performed a GWAS on wicz: None. K. Gadomska-Prokop: None. L. Obrycki: 672 sepsis patients admitted into intensive care units. After None. M. Rydzanicz: None. J. Kosińska: None. D. quality control steps and variant imputation in the Siestrzykowska: None. B. Chałupczyńska: None. P. Haplotype Reference Consortium data, 7.8 million variants Stawiński: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. D. Piekutowska- with a minor allele frequency ≥1% were analyzed. Logistic Abramczuk:None.M.Pelc:None.P.Kowalski:None.D. regressions were carried out based on the Wald test, Wicher: None. A. Cieślikowska: None. P. Iwanowski: considering sex, age and the APACHE II score as None. M. Gierla: None. A. Łuba: None. A. Niemirska: covariates. GCTA-COJO was used to identify the indepen- None. D. Runowski: None. W. Jarmużek: None. J. dent loci. Gene-set enrichment analysis was assessed with Lesiak: None. M. Gorzkowska-Paczwa: None. A. Bor- EnrichR. owski: None. J. Latoszyńska: None. M. Podymniak- Results:Asuggestiveassociation(p<5.0e-5)withARDS Grzeszykowska: None. R. Grenda: None. K. Chrza- wasfound for 53 independent loci (lowestp=2.6e-7). Top nowska:None.R.Płoski:None.M.Krajewska-Walasek: hits were signiﬁcantly enriched in genes linked to VEGF None. M. Litwin: None. ligand-receptor interactions (p=3.5e-4), and located near genes previously associated with other respiratory traits P03.05D including lung function, chronic obstructive pulmonary Genome-wide association study of sepsis-induced acute disease, asthma, and idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. respiratory distress syndrome: discovery stage Conclusions: We have identiﬁed putative novel genetic variants associated with sepsis-induced ARDS. Replication74 J.delPicchia analysesarecurrentlyunderway.Theseresultswilladvance thatincreasedautophagymaybestrictlyassociatedtorenal our understanding of ARDS pathogenesis and will likely cystogenesis in OFD type I syndrome. allow identifying new therapeutic targets. Conclusions:Altogether ourdatasuggestthatautophagy Funding: ISCIII (PI11/00623, PI16/00049) and co- alterationsmaybeacommonpathogenicmechanisminCK. ﬁnanced by the European Regional Development Funds, Dissection of the molecular mechanisms underlying cyst “A way of making Europe” from the European Union; formation in OFD type I will allow elucidating the role of Agreement OA17/008 with ITER to strengthen scientiﬁc autophagy in CK and could disclose new therapeutic and technological education, training, research, develop- avenues for renal cystic disease. Supported by the ment and innovation in Genomics, Personalized Medicine Polycystic Kidney Disease Foundation and the Telethon and Biotechnology; Fellowship from the ACIISI Foundation (TESIS2015010057) co-funded by European Social Fund M. Morleo: None. U. Formisano: None. S. Brillante: to BGG. None. D. Iaconis: None. S. Maione: None. E. Damiano: B. Guillen-Guio: None. J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. None. R. Tammaro: None. C. Settembre: None. B. A. Corrales: None. E. Espinosa: None. A. Muriel:None. Franco: None. L. Lorente: None. M.M. Martín: None. C. Rodríguez- Gallego: None. J. Solé-Violán: None. A. Ambrós: None. P03.07B D.Carriedo:None.J.Blanco:None.J.M.Añón:None.J. Genotype/phenotype correlations in ADPKD M. Añón: None. J. Villar: None. C. Flores: None. M.Audrezet1, E.Cornec-Legall1,Y. Le Meur1, C.FEREC1,2 P03.06A Autophagy inhibition ameliorates renal cystic disease in 1University of Brest, BREST, France, 2INSERM UMR1078, OFD type I syndrome Brest, France M.Morleo1,2,U.Formisano1,S.Brillante1,D.Iaconis1, Autosomaldominantpolycystickidneydisease(ADPKD)is S. Maione1, E.Damiano1, R.Tammaro1,C. Settembre1, one of the most common gene kidney disorder with a B. Franco1,2 worldwide prevalence of 1/400 to 1/1000. ADPKD is a genetically heterogeneous disease with two main genes 1TelethonInstituteofGeneticsandMedicine-TIGEM,Pozzuoli, PKD1 and PKD2 responsible of the disorder .Recently a Italy, 2Federico II University, Naples, Italy new gene,GANAB has been reported to be involved in polycystic diseases(Porath et al., AJHG 2016) . We have Introduction: Oral-facial-digital type I syndrome is ascri- completely analyzed the coding sequence of a large cohort bed to cilia dysfunction and characterized by abnormalities of more than 4500 ADPKD patients (The genkyst cohort of face, oral cavity and digits and by renal cystic disease fromthewesternpartofFrance(2500patients)andpatients (CK).ThecausativegenecodiﬁesforOFD1,acentrosomal/ from different centers of France,(2000 patients).The analy- basal body protein, necessary for primary cilia formation. sis were performed ﬁrst by Sanger and more recently by Interestingly, recent data established a link between CK, New Generation Sequencing (NGS). We have found an primary cilia, cilioproteins and autophagy, a self- overall detection rate of 93% in our cohort,75% being degradative process. mutatedinPKD1and18%inPKD2.Wehaveperformeda Results: Mass spectrometry analysis identiﬁed genotype/phenotype correlation (Audrezet et al., Hum autophagy-related proteins among putative OFD1 interac- Mut,2012 ;Cornec-Le Gall et al., JASN,2013) and showed tors.Inaddition,wedemonstratedthatOFD1-depletedrenal thatthetypeofmutationinPKD1,truncatingmutationswas cellsshowincreasedautophagicﬂuxandthatOFD1exertsa 55.6 years versus nontruncating mutations were associated direct functional role on autophagosome biogenesis in an with a 12 years delay in ESRD. We have only found 6 mTOR and cilia-independent manner. To test the physio- families with a mutation in the GANAB gene .To investi- logical relevance of these ﬁndings we moved to in vivo gate the molecular basis of prenatal form of ADPKD we studies and demonstrated enhanced autophagic ﬂux both at screened 42 patients with early ADPKD and we showed precysticandcystic stagesintwoOfd1mutants(Ofd1-IND that additional PKD variation inherited from the unaffected and Ofd1;creKsp). Moreover, we achieved renal speciﬁc parent were identiﬁed in 37.2% of patients ..These results inactivationinkidneysofbothOfd1andAtg7,akeyplayer suggestthathypomorphicmutationscouldexplainatleasta of autophagy. Histological analysis showed a signiﬁcant part of the clinical variability observed in ADPKD reduction in the number and size of cysts in creKsp;Ofd1y/ﬂ; (Audrezet et al., JASN,2015) Atg7ﬂ/ﬂ mutants compared to creKsp;Ofd1y/ﬂ;Atg7+/+ mice, M. Audrezet: None. E. Cornec-Legall: None. Y. Le asrevealedbyquantiﬁcationofthecysticindex,suggesting Meur: None. C. Ferec: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 75 P03.08C 1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, ApathogenicPKD2nonsensevariantishighlyprevalentin Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, İzmir, Turkey the Northern Portuguese population Introduction: Berardinelli-Seip congenital generalized L. Rocha1,2,S. Fernandes1,J.P. Oliveira1,2 lipodystrophy(BSCL)isararedisorderduetohomozygous mutations of AGPAT2 (type-1), BSCL2 (type-2), CAV1 1Genetics, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine & (type-3) and CAVIN1 (type-4) genes and characterized by Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade reduced adipose tissue, muscular hypertrophy, hepatome- do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Medical Genetics – São João galy, insulin resistance and hypertriglyceridemia. Here, we Hospital Centre, Porto, Portugal report the longitudinal observation and comparison of the patients with BSCL type-1 and 4. Introduction: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney dis- Materials and Methods: Six patients clinically diag- ease (ADPKD) is a multi-organic hereditary disorder, nosed with BSCL from four families were enrolled. Exons responsible for 7-10% incident cases of end-stage renal and exon-intron boundaries of AGPAT2 and CAVIN1 were failure (ESRF). In most populations, pathogenic variants in studied by Sanger sequencing method. PKD1 (OMIM#601313) and in PKD2 (OMIM#173910) Results: Homozygous two known mutations (c.685G>T; account respectively for 85% and 15% of ADPKD cases. c.514G>A) and a novel mutation (c.316+1G>T) were AlthoughbothformsofADPKDhavesimilarpathogenesis, detected in AGPAT2 in ﬁve patients from three families. theonsetofclinicalmanifestationsandprogressiontoESRF Theywereadmittedbetween6monthsand11yearsofage. occursatyoungagesinpatientswithPKD1mutations,who The patients had reduced subcutaneous fat (5/5), muscular reach ESRF on average 10-15 years earlier than those with hypertrophy(5/5),enlargedhandsandfeet(3/5),acanthosis PKD2 mutations. The allelic heterogeneity is high for both nigricans (2/5), hepatomegaly (3/5), hypertriglyceridemia genes, making NGS an appropriate ﬁrst-tier approach to (5/5),hyperinsulinemia(3/5)andlowserumleptinlevel(1/ genetic diagnosis. 5).Duringtheirfollow-upperiod4to7years,hypertrophic Methods:DNAwasextractedfrom40unrelatedADPKD cardiomyopathy and hyperinsulinemia have developed in patients. PKD1 and PKD2 genes were analyzed by NGS onlyonepatient.Lastpatient,a2-year-oldboywithpyloric sequencing (Ion Torrent PGM). Heterozygosity for clini- stenosis operation history, had reduced subcutaneous fat, cally relevant variants was conﬁrmed by Sanger muscular hypertrophy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and sequencing. elevated CK value. Homozygous mutation in CAVIN1 Results:Tenofthe40patients(25%)wereheterozygous (c.259C>T) was detected. Hypertriglyceridemia and hyper- forasingle-nucleotidec.181C>TtransitioninPKD2exon1 insulinemia were observed at 5 years of age. - predicting the nonsense variant p.(Gln61Ter) - which co- Conclusions:AsdistinctfromotherBSCLtypes,pyloric segregated with a relatively mild form of ADPKD in the stenosis and high CK values in an infant should suggest affected families, most of which are from a circumscribed BSCL type-4. Interestingly, a previously reported patient region in the river Douro valley. with the same mutation of our BSCL type-4 patient had Discussion: The PKD2 p.(Gln61Ter) variant is reported similar features including achalasia/pyloric stenosis, devel- in the Mayo Clinic ADPKD Mutation Database and is not opmental hip dysplasia and high CK levels. recognized as polymorphic human variation. Its high N. Gunes: None. T. Erkan: None. T. Kutlu: None. H. prevalence in a limited region of the north of Portugal Onay: None. T. Atik: None. B. Tüysüz: None. suggestsa“founder”effect. Accordingly,we havechanged our genotyping approach to mildly affected ADPKD P03.10A families originating from the critical geographic region, A chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and interaction and screen ﬁrst for that PKD2 variant. betweensinglenucleotidepolymorphismsofFAM13Agene L. Rocha: None. S. Fernandes: None. J.P. and smoking Oliveira: None. S. Kim1,K. Y. Lee2,R. E.Kim1,C. Shin1,3 P03.09D Clinical and molecular aspects of the patients with 1Institute for Human Genomic Study, Seoul, Korea, Republic Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy types 1 and 4 of, 2Department of Radiology, Korea University Ansan Hospital, Ansan, Korea, Republic of, 3Division of Pulmonary, N.Gunes1,T.Erkan1,T.Kutlu1,H.Onay2,T.Atik2,B.Tüysüz1 Sleep and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University Ansan Hospital, Ansan, Korea, Republic of76 J.delPicchia Background and aims: Although smoking is a primary progressinadiscoveryofnew CP genes, thegeneticcause risk factor for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease of the disease, in the majority of the patients, remains (COPD), genetic polymorphisms within the FAM13A gene unknown. have been consistently reported to association with pul- Aim:Toidentifynovelsusceptibilitygenesinearlyonset monaryfunction and/or COPDingenome-wide association CP patients using whole exome sequencing (WES). studies.WeaimedtoinvestigatetheeffectofFAM13Agene Patients and Methods: Six patients (mean age at variants that interact with ever smoking on COPD and diagnosis 10 years) with idiopathic or hereditary/familial emphysema risk. CP with undetermined cause of the disease and their Methods:Usingacommunity-basedcohort,weanalyzed relatives were included for WES. Before, Sanger sequen- the association between genetic variants of FAM13A gene cing was performed to exclude the genetic causes of CP. and COPD (GOLD stage >1) / emphysema (e.g., total lung WES data (HiSeq 2500, Illumina) were compared between volume, emphysema volume and emphysema ratio on index patient and affected or/and unaffected relatives. The computedtomography)risksusingmultivariatelogisticand variants were selected taking into account: in silico linear regression models (total n=3,400). Furthermore, prediction (SIFT, MutTaster), minor allele frequency similar analyses were conducted after stratiﬁcation by (MAF<0.01),genefunctionandexpressioninthepancreas, smoking status and the variant co-segregation with CP. Results: Five common variants (rs1458551, rs2609264, Results:.Wedetected3variantsinknownCPgenes:two rs2609261, rs2609260 and rs7671167) annotated to the recurrent CFTR variants (p.L997F and p.R75Q) and one FAM13A gene were shown to have an additive effect on novel p.L100V*21 variant (introducing a STOP codon) in COPD and emphysema risk, whereas rs3756050 was only CTRC. We identiﬁed potentially pathogenic variants in 5 associated with a signiﬁcantly higher risk for COPD (risky novel genes: PNLIP (p.Q323L), GCK (p.V101M), TRPV6 homozygote odds ratio (OR) = 1.49 (95% CI 1.13-1.96)). (p.V239Sfs*53 and p.L576R), SCNN1G (p.I224V) and Finally, we identiﬁed signiﬁcant interaction between the SERPINA12 (p.G327D). The TRPV6 and SERPINA12 rs3756050 and ever smoking (P for interaction = 0.01). variants showed autosomal dominant inheritance. In 5/6 Conclusions: We conﬁrmed the previously reported oftheindexpatients,thetrans-heterozygousvariantsintwo association of FAM13A with COPD as well as emphysema different genes were observed. risk. The genetic variant of FAM13A gene also interacted Conclusions: Using WES approach, we identiﬁed novel with ever smoking to affect the risk of higher COPD risk. variants and susceptibility genes candidates in CP. Their ThisstudywassupportedbytheKoreaCentersforDisease clinicalsigniﬁcanceneedstobeelucidatedbythefunctional Control and Prevention grant (2011-E71004-00, 2012- and the case-control studies. E71005-00, 2013-E71005-00, 2014-E71003-00), the Financed: National Science Center Poland:2015/19/B/ National Research Foundation of Korea grant funded by NZ5/02224 the Korea government (NRF-2016R1A2B4012155 and A.M. Rygiel: None. A. Kujko: None. G. Oracz: None. NRF-2017R1A6A3A11034663), and the Korea T. Gambin: None. J. Kosińska: None. K. Wejnarska: University Grant. None. K. Wertheim-Tysarowska: None. E. Kołodziejc- S. Kim: None. K.Y. Lee: None. R.E. Kim: None. C. zyk: None. R. Płoski: None. J. Bal: None. Shin: None. P03.12C P03.11B The association between CEL-HYB1 allele and idiopathic/ Novel susceptibility genes candidates of chronic familial chronic pancreatitis in Polish pediatric patients pancreatitis identiﬁed by whole exome sequencing A. Kujko1,G.Oracz2,K. Fjeld3, K.Wejnarska2,K. Wertheim- A. M.Rygiel1,A. Kujko1,G.Oracz2,T. Gambin1,J.Kosińska3, Tysarowska1,E.Kołodziejczyk2,J.Bal1,D.Koziel4,A.Kowalik5, K. Wejnarska4, K.Wertheim-Tysarowska1,E.Kołodziejczyk2, S. Gluszek4,A. Molven6, A.M. Rygiel1 R. Płoski3,J. Bal1 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2The 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Haukeland University Hospital,, Bergen, Norway, 4Jan 3Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 4The Kochanowski University of Kielce, Kielce, Poland, 5Oncology Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland Center of the Holy Cross, Kielce, Poland, 6University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Theearlyonsetchronicpancreatitis(CP)isoftenassociated with mutations in a subset of CP genes. Despite of aAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 77 Introduction: The replacement of a part of the carboxyl The21-OHDiscausedbymutationsintheCYP21A2gene, ester lipase gene (CEL) and its pseudogene (CELP) can that maps within a repeated module (RCCX) in a region create CEL-HYB1 allelewhich hasbeen recently shown to (6p21) with a high recombination frequency. Some RCCX elevate susceptibility to chronic pancreatitis (CP) in adults arrangements can complicate and signiﬁcantly modify the patientsofEuropeanbutnotAsianancestry,suggestingthat interpretationofthegenetictests.Ourgoalwastoobtainthe it is an European CP risk factor. However, the replication correctdiagnosisofcomplexcasesbyintegrating:complete studies are lacking. gene sequencing, segregation analysis of variants/SNPs, Aim:ToevaluatetheriskassociatedwiththeCEL-HYB1 CNVsdetectionbyMLPA.Theanalysisof>1200casesby allele in the pediatric Polish CP patients as compared to this approach showed that: a) in the 6% of alleles with control group. multiple mutations they are distributed on different genes PatientsandMethod:Weenrolledasingle-centercohort (duplications); b) in the 33% of cases with the Q318X of 147 unrelated CP children (mean age at diagnosis 12 mutation there is a concomitant duplicated normal gene, years) including 64 idiopathic (ICP) or familial idiopathic resulting in a non-pathological allele; c) in 37% of cases (FCP) patients and 83 CP patients with various ethological with a whole gene deletion, this includes part of the con- risk factors (anatomical/physiological dysfunctions and/or tiguous TNXB gene, resulting in 21OHD potentially asso- genetics risk factors). The control group consisted of 331 ciated with EDS signs. In very rare cases (<1%) with ethnically matched individuals (mean age 45).The CEL- particularly complex arrangements, interpretative doubts HYB1 allele was detected using PCR, conﬁrmed by Sanger may persist. The complexity of 21OHD genetic analysis sequencing. thereforerequirestheintegrationofmultipletechniquesand Results: The CEL-HYB1 allele is signiﬁcantly over- anexcellentknowledgeofthepeculiaritiesofthelocus.An represented in ICP/FCP patients compared to controls incomplete investigation can lead to erroneous interpreta- (9.4% vs 2.1%, P=0.0098) with OR of 4.8 (95%Cl 1.5- tions of the result with serious consequences in clinical 13.3)butnotinaCPgroup with knownethologicalfactors management and genetic counseling. An accurate clinical (1.2% vs 2.1%, P>0.05, OR=0.57, 95% CI (0.05-3.4). We evaluation of patients with 21OHD should always include identiﬁed two CP families with CEL-HYB1 allele and the search for EDS signs. The approach described here has conﬁrmed the co-segregation of the allele with the disease. proved to be fundamental for a correct interpretation of Conclusions: Our replication study show that the CEL- complex arrangements and, especially in cases of pre- HYB1 allele isa signiﬁcant CP riskfactorin idiopathic and conceptional and prenatal tests, to improve the genetic familialCPpediatricpatients.ThescreeningforCEL-HYB1 counseling, as well as the clinical classiﬁcation/manage- allele should be considered in CP diagnostics in European ment of the patients. ancestry patients. S.Menabò:None.A.Balsamo:None.A.Cassio:None. Financed byNationalScience Center, Poland:2015/19/B/ L. Mazzanti: None. M. Seri: None. L. Baldazzi: None. NZ5/02224 A. Kujko: None. G. Oracz: None. K. Fjeld: None. K. P03.14A Wejnarska: None. K. Wertheim-Tysarowska: None. E. CYP21A2 mutations in congenital adrenal hyperplasia due Kołodziejczyk: None. J. Bal: None. D. Koziel: None. A. to 21 hydroxylase deﬁciency in Turkish population Kowalik: None. S. Gluszek: None. A. Molven: None. A. M. Rygiel: None. O.Cilingir1,E. Simsek2,B. DurakAras1,E. Erzurumluoglu1, C. Binay3,M.A. Temena1, S.Kocagil1,S. Artan1 P03.13D Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, due to 21-hydroxylase 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, deﬁciency (21-OHD), isolated or associated with Ehlers DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Eskisehir,Turkey,2Eskisehir Danlos syndrome (EDS): technical and counseling Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of problems related to molecular diagnosis Pediatric Endocrinology, Eskisehir, Turkey, 3Tekirdag Corlu State Hospital, Tekirdag, Turkey S. Menabò1,A.Balsamo1,A. Cassio1, L.Mazzanti1,M.Seri1, L. Baldazzi2 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) caused by 21- hydroxylase deﬁciency is a common autosomal recessive 1Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of disorderdue tomutationsin the CYP21A2 gene. Defects in Bologna,Bologna,Italy,2DepartmentofWomen,Childrenand thisgeneleadtoadrenalinsufﬁciency,ambiguousgenitalia, Urological Diseases, Medical Genetics Unit, "S.Orsola- salt-wastinginclassicformofCAH,andhyperandrogenism Malpighi" University-Hospital, Bologna, Italy during childhood or early adulthood in milder form of CAH, known as nonclassic CAH (NCAH). Mutations are78 J.delPicchia mostly caused by a rearrangement during intergenic 1University Children's Hospital Skopje, Skopje, Macedonia, recombination between CYP21A2 and its non-functional The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University of Cambridge, pseudogene CYP21AP with very high percentage of Metabolic Research Laboratories, Cambridge, United sequence homology. This study aimed at analyzing the Kingdom frequency of 11 prevalent mutations in 183 patients. Mutations, including P30L, 8bp deletion, exon 6 cluster, Introduction: Congenital hypothyroidism (CH), deﬁned as L307frameshift,R356W,R483P,I2splice,I712N,V281L, lack of thyroid hormones at birth, is the most common Q318 and, P453S were analyzed by reverse-hybridization neonatal endocrine disorder affecting 1 in 2000-4000 strip-based assay (CAH Strip Assay). While 62,3% of 183 newborns worldwide. While up to 20% of CH cases are patients (114/183) have wild type alleles, the revealed hereditary,themajorityofcasesaresporadicwithunknown CAH-related variants are given in the table. Interestingly, etiology. Mutationsinatleast15different genes havebeen homozygous Del8bpE3 and I2 splice mutations was found associated with CH. The genetics of CH has not been stu- in two siblings. Segregation analysis showed that the died in Macedonia previously. mother was heterozygous for these compound mutations. Materialand Methods: Amultigenic sequencingofCH After conﬁrmation of paternity, we are now focussing on candidate genes including TG, TPO, DUOX2, DUOXA2, thepossibilityofuniparentaldisomy(UPD).Furtherstudies SLC5A5, SLC26A4, IYD and TSHR was performed in a forthiscasewereplannedtoclarifythegeneticmechanisms cohort of 22 CH patients with “gland in situ” (GIS), both underlying this situation. familial and sporadic cases, associated with permanent, Table. Percentage of mutation frequencies transient or subclinical phenotype. Results: Mutations were identiﬁed in 27% of patients in MUTATIONS HETERO- HOMOZ- COMPOUNDMUTATIONS ZYGOUS(%) YGOUS(%) the TPO, TSHR and DUOX2 genes. In two siblings with HETERO- HOMOZ- ZYGOUS(%) YGOUS(%) severe persistent CH, monoallelic c.1187_1188insGCCG P30L 1,47 – I2Splice 1,47 Del8bpE3 4,41 mutationinTPOgenewasdetected.Achildwithprenatally Del8bpE3 I2Splice diagnosed goiter was compound heterozygous for two Del8bpE3 2,94 – I2Splice 1,47 V281L mutations in TPO gene (c.31_50dup/ c.1313G>A). Two E6Cluster 2,94 2,94 I2Splice 2,94 novel mutations were detected in TSHR gene in children Q318X L307fs – – I712N 1,47 with subclinical hypothyroidism c.1516G>A and c.692 Q318X +1_692+4delGTGA. A previously known mutation R356W – – V281L 1,47 I2Splice c.4637A>G in the DUOX2 gene was detected in hetero- R483P – – V281L 1,47 Q318X zygous state in one child with transient hypothyroidism. I2Splice – – V281L 2,94 Del8bpE3 1,47 Conclusion: Genetic variants were not frequently found P453S I2Splice P30L in Macedonian CH patients, thus the etiology of CH with I712N 2,94 – P30L 5,88 GIS remains elusive. Factors other than known I2Splice Del8bpE3 dyshormonogenesis-associated genes or the TSHR have to V281L 20,59 8,84 L307fs 1,47 Q318X be considered, as well as future studies with whole exome R356W sequencing for elucidating the cause of hypothyroidism. Q318X 25,00 – P30L 1,47 I2Splice N. Zdraveska: None. N. Schoenmakers: None. V. Del8bpE3 V281L Anastasovska: None. M. Kocova: None. P453S 2,94 1,47 TOTAL 58,82 13,25 22,05 5,88 P03.17D Development of a biochip array for the rapid detection of 32 common cystic ﬁbrosis mutations O. Cilingir: None. E. Simsek: None. B. Durak Aras: M.J. Latten1,D.A.Bailie2,C. A.Graham1,M.A. Crockard1, None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. C. Binay: None. M.A. J.V. Lamont1,S. P.FitzGerald1 Temena: None. S. Kocagil: None. S. Artan: None. 1Randox Laboratories Ltd, Crumlin, United Kingdom, P03.16C 2Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Centre, Belfast Health Molecular characterization of congenital hypothyroidism andSocialCareTrust,CityHospital,Belfast,UnitedKingdom with “gland in situ” in Macedonia Introduction: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal reces- N.Zdraveska1,N.Schoenmakers2,V. Anastasovska1, sivegeneticconditionwhichaffectsvitalorgans,mostlythe M.Kocova1 lungs,bycloggingthemwiththick,stickymucus.PersistentAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 79 infections can lead to chronic lung problems. The disorder To investigate the pathophysiology of cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the Cystic Fibrosis Transmem- several animal models have been developed including brane Conductance Regulator gene (CFTR) and to date, mouse, pig, and ferret; however, none of them perfectly over2,000activatingmutationshavebeenreported.Inmost recapitulates all human patient symptoms. On the contrary, populations, however, a panel of 30-35 mutations will zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) recently emerged as a powerful detect over 90% of disease causing variants. genetic model system to better understand CF onset and to Materials and Methods: An assay was designed for develop new pharmacological treatments. Indeed, zebraﬁsh detection of 32 common CF mutations and the intron 8 embryos present only innate immune system and the zeb- polypyrimidine tract variant 5,7,9 T, using genomic DNA. raﬁsh cftr gene is highly conserved with the human ortho- Following target-speciﬁc multiplex-PCR, amplicons were logue. cftr-loss-of-function zebraﬁsh embryos mimic CF hybridisedtoa7x7array ofDiscrete TestRegions(DTR) human defects in response to infection of P. aeruginosa, on a biochip (Randox Laboratories Ltd, UK). Using the presentingadampenedrespiratoryburstresponse,areduced Evidence Investigator analyser. Biochips were imaged and neutrophil migration and defects in endocrine organs analysed automatically. Assay run time was <3 hours. Pre- function. characterised samples (n=50) containing known CF In our previous work, we demonstrated that P. aerugi- mutations were assessed and results compared against the nosainfectioninmiceandGalleriamellonellalarvaecould predicate genotyping. becuredbyadministrationofphages,thenaturalenemiesof Results: The array was veriﬁed using 50 pre- bacteria.Phagetherapy,usedfordecadesinEasternEurope, characterised samples containing known CF mutations, as is gathering interest as a therapeutic alternative or a wellastheintron8polypyrimidinetract,inordertoconﬁrm complementary treatment to antibiotics. The goal of this speciﬁcity of the biochip for detection of mutations in the project is to in vivo validate the efﬁcacy of phage therapy CFTR gene. Each of the 32 targets was assessed at least against P. aeruginosa infections using the CF-zebraﬁsh once. 100% concordance was achieved. animal model. Both wild-type and cftr-loss-of-function Conclusions: This rapid screening technique enables the zebraﬁsh embryos, were infected with P. aeruginosa by simultaneous analysis of 32 common mutations associated microinjection, followed by phage administration. The with cystic ﬁbrosis. This will aid in the conﬁrmation of therapeutic effects of phages was evaluated, following suspectedcasesofCFandalsointheidentiﬁcationofthose embryo mortality, bacterial burden, neutrophil migration who are carriers of a mutation. and immune response. In addition, we plan to combine the M.J. Latten: A. Employment (full or part-time); phage treatmentwith antibiotics to verify if combinationof Signiﬁcant; Randox Laboratories Ltd. D.A. Bailie: C. the two treatments has a positive outcome against P. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of aeruginosa infections. drugs or other in-kind support); Signiﬁcant; Randox Funding Grant: Italian Cystic Fibrosis Research Foun- Laboratories Ltd. C.A. Graham: A. Employment (full or dation FFC#22.2017 part-time); Signiﬁcant; Randox Laboratories Ltd. M.A. M. Cafora: None. F. Forti: None. G. Deﬂorian: None. Crockard: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; L. Ferrari: None. D. Ghisotti: None. F. Briani: None. A. Randox Laboratories Ltd. J.V. Lamont: A. Employment Pistocchi: None. (full orpart-time); Signiﬁcant;RandoxLaboratories Ltd.S. P. FitzGerald: A. Employment (full or part-time); P03.19B Signiﬁcant; Randox Laboratories Ltd. Diagnostic contribution of in house designed next generation sequencing panel gene test for Disorders of P03.18A Sexual Development from Turkey In vivo validation of phage therapy against Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections using zebraﬁsh as a new model for A.Aghayev1,G.Toksoy1,S.Poyrazoglu2,B.Karaman1,S.Avcı1, cystic ﬁbrosis Z. YavasAbalı2,U.Altunoglu1,F. Bas2,F. Darendeliler2, S. Basaran1,Z. Uyguner1 M.Cafora1,F. Forti2, G. Deﬂorian3,L. Ferrari3,D.Ghisotti2, F. Briani2, A.Pistocchi1 1Dept. Med. Genet, Istanbul Med. Faculty, Ist. Uni., Istanbul, Turkey,2Dept.Ped.Endocrinology,IstanbulMed.Faculty,Ist. 1Dip. Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Uni., Istanbul, Turkey Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dip. Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, Introduction: Disorders of sexual development (DSD) are 3Istituto Fondazione FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare IFOM, deﬁned as congenital conditions covering a wide spectrum Milan, Italy of clinical expressions from mild hypospadias to abnormal80 J.delPicchia gonadal abnormalities causing complete sex reversal. Early cohort. A case-control analysis was carried out using 110 diagnosis is valuable as it will impact the individual’s affected individuals and 277 healthy controls from the mental well-being and overall life quality, including the Newfoundland population. advisability for genetic counseling. Results: There was a signiﬁcant association between Materials and Methods: We evaluated the results of 44 rs35705950 genotypes and IPF. The odds ratios for all DSD cases for gross deletion/duplication with MLPA and individuals affected with IPF who were heterozygous and for sequence alteration via in-house-designed next genera- homozygous for the variant allele of this promoter tion sequencing (NGS) targeted gene panel, using an Ion polymorphism respectively were 5.4 (95% CI, 3.3 to 9.6, Torrent platform, covering all exon and exon-intron P < .001) and 12.2 (95% CI, 3.3 to 44.7, P < .001). boundaries of 31 DSD associated genes. Cases with Furthermore, two families displayed segregation of the chromosomal abnormalities except one case with 47,XXY variant allele with the phenotype. Using SISA, we showed were excluded from the study group. Screening of targeted that, in one of these families, the likelihood that the minor regions that were missed by AmpliSeq primer design is allele segregates with PF by chance is 1.56%. covered by Sanger sequencing. Segregation analysis was Conclusions: The minor T allele of rs35705950 is performed for very rare and novel missense alterations. associatedwithFPFandlikelycontributestothesigniﬁcant Results: Seven previously described and 15 possible proportion of FPF families without a known genetic DSDassociated rarevariantswereidentiﬁedin10different predisposition. genes within a total of 19 cases, lead our diagnostic rate to Supported by the Regional Partnership Program of the 43%. The structural alteration in one novel coding region CIHR; the NL Lung Association; and the generous was simulated in three dimensional protein modeling donations from the family of Craig L. Dobbin. program. M.O. Woods:None.A.Pirzada:None.G. Zhai: None. Conclusions: This study revealed new data for known B. Fernandez: None. and novel associated variants and acknowledged mutation frequencies in cases with DSD from Turkey. Our results P03.21D underscored the critical role of early diagnosis which is Improving of CRISPR/Cas9 efﬁcacy for F508del mutation valuable for proper management of gonadal tumors, correction in cystic ﬁbrosis expedient treatments and deﬁnitive genetic counseling for families. S. A.Smirnikhina1,A. Anuchina1,K. Kochergin-Nikitsky1, A. Aghayev: None. G. Toksoy: None. S. Poyrazoglu: E. Adilgereeva1,A. Lavrov1,2 None.B.Karaman:None.S.Avcı:None.Z.YavasAbalı: None.U.Altunoglu:None.F.Bas:None.F.Darendeliler: 1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for None. S. Basaran: None. Z. Uyguner: None. Medical Genetics” of the Russian Academy of, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2The Russian National Research Medical P03.20C University Named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow, Russian Association between a promoter SNP in MUC5B and Federation idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis in the Newfoundland population Genome editing using CRISPR/Cas9 seems to be the most promisingwayforgenetherapytocorrectF508delmutation M.O.Woods, A.Pirzada, G.Zhai,B.Fernandez inCFTR gene incysticﬁbrosis. Design of sgRNA toDNA sequence near mutation is determined by the presence of MemorialUniversityofNewfoundland,St.John's,NL,Canada PAMforCas9.ItispossibletodesignonlyonesgRNAfor F508delmutationforspCas9-sgCFTR#1,butinHEK293T Background: Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF) is a late- cell culture this sgRNA demonstrated low efﬁciency in onset, complex genetic disease characterized by inﬂamma- indels formation in combination with different spCas9 tion and scarring of the lung parenchyma. To date, hetero- (13.8%), compared to other sgRNAs to CFTR gene (13- zygouscausalvariationsinTERT,TERC,SFTPC,SFTPA2, 18%), aswellas toGFP gene(34.2%). qPCR data showed that account for 2-20% of IPF, have been documented. that sgCFTR#1 and sgGFP_1 expression levels were low Morerecently,apromotervariant(rs35705950)upstreamof and did not differ in 0 and 7 hours after transfection; but MUC5B has been shown to be associated with IPF. expressionlevel ofsgGFP_1becamealmost 15-foldhigher Methods: All probands in this study were previously than sgCFTR#1 in 24 hours after transfection; 30 hours screenedforvariantsinthefourabovementionedPFgenes. after transfection - 22-fold higher. Attempts to increase ATaqManSNPGenotypingassayanda7900HTReal-time sgCFTR#1 expression by adding addition expression cas- PCR analyzer were used to genotype rs35705950 in our settetotheplasmid,fusingsgCFTR#1withactivesgGFP_1Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 81 andusinghybridpromoterweremade,however,increasing Introduction: As neonatal cholestasis is a common infant of sgCFTR#1 efﬁcacy was not received. Attempts to sta- disease with more than 50 possible etiologies, fast and com- bilize sgCFTR#1 by including G-quadruplexes to its prehensivediagnosisisdesirabletoinitiateearlytherapy.Also sequence, shortening and addition of GG to the 5'-region for other hepatopathies, especially those with acute liver also failed. Cultivation of the edited cells at lower tem- failure, rapid diagnosis is important, as they could constitute perature also did not lead to improved results. Further contraindicationtolivertransplantationorcanbetreatedwith attempts to enhance sgCFTR#1 expression and its stabili- speciﬁc therapies. We used four different whole-exome- zation should be performed, or other Cas9 enzymes, which sequencing-(WES)-based in-silico panels to analyze genes expand the ability to select sgRNA direct to F508del associated with different liver-related signs and symptoms. mutationcanbeused.Theworkwaspartiallysupportedby Methods: DNA was extracted from blood samples of 66 Russian Science Foundation (agreement 17-75-20095 from patients (age: 0-46, median 2.50 years, 37 males). Library 25/07/2017) and Russian Academy of Sciences. preparationwasperformedwithTruSeqNanoDNALibrary S.A. Smirnikhina: A. Employment (full or part-time); Preparation Kit (Illumina, San Diego, USA) or xGen Signiﬁcant; Research Centre for Medical Genetics. B. Exome Research Panel (IDT, Leuven, Belgium). Libraries Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or weresequencedonaNextSeq500(Illumina).Dataanalysis consultant and pending grants as well as grants already was done with the NGS pipeline megSAP (https://github. received);Signiﬁcant;RussianScienceFoundation,Russian com/imgag/megSAP). Variants were ﬁltered using GSvar Academy of Sciences. A. Anuchina: A. Employment (full (University Hospital Tübingen, Germany). Variant classiﬁ- or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Research Centre for Medical cation was done using Alamut Visual (Interactive Biosoft- Genetics. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- ware,Rouen,France)accordingtostandardsandguidelines borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants of American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. alreadyreceived); Signiﬁcant;RussianScienceFoundation, Results:In25/66patientswedetected(likely)pathogenic RussianAcademyofSciences.K.Kochergin-Nikitsky:A. variants or variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS). The Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Research Table shows details: Centre for Medical Genetics. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants Panel signsand genes Number Numberofpatientswith as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Russian symptoms orefquests Science Foundation, Russian Academy of Sciences. E. (likely) VUS+ VUS*heterozygous no pathogenic pathogenic pathogenic signiﬁcant Adilgereeva: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- variants* variant° variantsor ﬁndings VUS° cant; Research Centre for Medical Genetics. B. Research 1 Cholestasis ATP8B1, 19 4 1 1 1 12 Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand withlow ABCB11, gamma- TJP2, pending grants as well as grants already received); glutamyltran- AKR1D1, sferase CYP7B1, Signiﬁcant;RussianScienceFoundation,RussianAcademy AMACR, ABCD3, ofSciences.A.Lavrov:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); BAAT, CLDN1, Signiﬁcant; Research Centre for Medical Genetics. B. HSD3B7, NR1H4, Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or SLC25A13 2 Cholestasis ABCB4, 13 – – 3 – 10 consultant and pending grants as well as grants already withhigh JAG1, gamma- NOTCH2 received);Signiﬁcant;RussianScienceFoundation,Russian glutamyltran- sferase Academy of Sciences. 3 Acuteliver MPV17, 12 4 – 1 2 5 failurewith POLG, suspected DGUOK, lysosomal C10ORF2, P03.22A storage TRMU, disease, GFM1, Diagnosis of monogenetic metabolic hepatopathies by mitochondri- BCS1L, alDNA NPC1, whole-exome sequencing depletion NPC2, syndromeor ATP7B Wilson disease A. Stalke1,A. Schöner-Heinisch1,B. Auber1, U.Baumann2, 4 Hepatopathi- ATP7B, 22 2 – – 7 13 es/increased FBP1, T. Illig1,3,B.Skawran1,B. Schlegelberger1, G.Schmidt1, transaminas- G6PC, eswithout GBE1, E. Pﬁster1 primary GYS2, cholestasis PHKA2, PHKB, PHKG2, 1Hannover Medical School, Institute of Human Genetics, PYGL, SLC37A4, Hannover, Germany, 2Hannover Medical School, Paediatric SLC2A2 66 10 1 5 10 40 Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hannover, Germany, 3HannoverMedicalSchool,HannoverUniﬁedBiobank(HUB), *Twovariantsforrecessive,onefordominanttraits Hannover, Germany °forrecessivetraits82 J.delPicchia Conclusion: WES-based panel analysis represents a fast Conclusions: We found a signiﬁcant enrichment of and comprehensive tool to diagnose hereditary hepatopa- HPAH-related traits by a regulatory region within q24.2- thies in order to improve therapy and thus patient’s q31.1, located upstream from the FIGN gene. Full genome prognosis. The WES-based approach further offers the sequencing and functional assays will be required to possibility to analyze the remaining exome data in patients validate the linkage regions, identify the actual variant without clear diagnosis after panel analysis. modulating the penetrance and unravel the molecular A. Stalke: None. A. Schöner-Heinisch: None. B. mechanism that triggers the disease in the family Auber: None. U. Baumann: None. T. Illig: None. B. under study. Skawran: None. B. Schlegelberger: None. G. Schmidt: Acknowledgments: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI15/ None. E. Pﬁster: None. 00483) and ‘fondos FEDER’, AGAUR (2017SGR1134), “CERCA Programme / Generalitat de Catalunya” P03.23B I. Madrigal: None. P. Puigdevall: None. L. Piccari: Genetic linkage analysis identiﬁescandidate modulators of None. I. Blanco: None. J. Barberà: None. D. Geiger: reduced penetrance in heritable pulmonary arterial None. M. Milà: None. R. Castelo: None. C. hypertension Badenas: None. I.Madrigal1,2, P.Puigdevall3, L.Piccari4, I.Blanco4,5, P03.24C J.Barberà4,5,D.Geiger6, M.Milà1,2,R. Castelo3, C.Badenas1 Search for genetic risk factors in Hirschsprung's disease associated enterocolitis by Whole Exome Sequencing 1Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona and IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre T. Bachetti1,G.Santamaria1, M.Mosconi2,S.Sartori3,M.De forBiomedicalResearchonRareDiseases(CIBERER),ISCIII, Filippo3, A.PiniPrato4,I. Ceccherini1,F. Lantieri5 Barcelona, Spain, 3Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain,4PneumologyDepartment,HospitalClinicofBarcelona 1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, G. Gaslini Inst., Genoa, and IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 5Centro de Investigación Italy, 2UOC Pediatric Surgery, G. Gaslini Inst., Genoa, Italy, BiomédicaenReddeEnfermedadesRespiratorias(CIBERES), 3Center for Translational Genomics and BioInformatics, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 6Technion Israel Institute of IRCCSSanRaffaeleScientiﬁcInstitute,Milan,Italy,4Children Technology, Haifa, Israel Hospital, AON SS Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Italy, 5Health Science Department (DISSAL) – Biostatistics Unit, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy Introduction: Heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension is a rare disease inherited as an autosomal dominant disease. Introduction: Hirschsprung's disease (HSCR) is a con- Mutations in the BMPR2 gene have been detected in 75- genital gut malformation. The most serious and life- 80%ofthecases.However,onlyabout20%ofallmutation threatening complication is enterocolitis (HAEC), which carriers develop the disease, indicating a reduced occursinonethirdofthepatients.Theevidentsusceptibility penetrance. to HAEC in HSCR patients suggests a genetic background Material and Methods: We have studied a large family that can lead to abnormal inﬂammatory response. affectedbypulmonaryarterialhypertensionandsegregating Materials and Methods: To search for genetic factors withthepathogenicmissensemutationp.Arg491Glnwitha predisposing to HAEC, we have performed an exome next penetrance of ~30%. In order to identify genetic variants generationsequencing(NGS)on24HSCRpatients,12with thatmayaffect thepenetranceinthisfamily,wegenotyped enterocolitis episodes (HAEC) and 12 without (HSCR- 20 mutation carriers (6 affected and 14 asymptomatic) and only). Patients were selected based on Italian ancestry and 12 healthy individuals with the Illumina Inﬁnium absence of additional anomalies. The exomes were CoreExome-24 BeadChip. sequenced with Illumina at a 50X coverage and variants Results: Genetic linkage analysis showed two candidate were ﬁltered based on depth >= 10 and quality >= 10, regionsinchromosome2(q24.2-q31.1andq33.1-q33.3)to obtaining77396variants.Thesewerefurtherselectedbased host the modiﬁer and confer susceptibility to the disease on allele frequency in databases and impact on the protein, among BMPR2mutationcarriers. Themodiﬁerispredicted and on higher frequency in HAEC than in HSCR-only to be common in the population and to be inherited in an patients. autosomalrecessivemode.Theﬁrstregionislocated30Mb Results:Wehavethusidentiﬁed86variantsin90genes, upstream from BMPR2, while the second region overlaps which were ranked based on their frequency in the general the BMPR2 locus itself. population, predicted effect, association p-value, and recurrence in the samples. We also explored the geneAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 83 pathways, biological role, and PubMed citations, particu- monoallelic EHHADH mutation, inherited only from the larly in regard to immune and inﬂammation processes. We mother that presented bilaterally kidney stones and urinary arecurrently validating theﬁve topvariants andreplicating calculi history, associated with Fanconi renotubular syn- the results on a larger panel of 25 HAEC and 45 HSCR- drome 3. The same genetic background was identiﬁed also only patients. in fetal DNA extracted from amniotic ﬂuid. Conclusions: We have identiﬁed a few very promising TreatmentofIIHinearlyageisproblematicasvitaminD candidategenes.Themostpromisingvariant/swillundergo therapy often exacerbates hypercalcemia. Considering the functional tests to conﬁrm its/their role in HAEC possibilitytocheckanaffectedsubjectfromtheﬁrstmonth development. of life since the mother decided to continue the pregnancy, Acknowledgments: Funded by the Italian Ministry of our data could give new insights about the temporal Health (grant GR-2011-02347381) expression proﬁle of SLC34A1 in the kidney and an T.Bachetti:None.G.Santamaria:None.M.Mosconi: explanation to the development of hypercalcemia in child- None. S. Sartori: None. M. De Filippo: None. A. Pini hood, where intestinal absorption and renal handling of Prato: None. I. Ceccherini: None. F. Lantieri: None. calciumandphosphatelikelydifferfromolderpatientswith other forms of IIH. P03.25D F. Peluso: None. V. Palazzo: None. L. Dosa: None. G. Whole exome sequencing to detect the cause of early onset Traﬁcante:None.S.Landini:None.R.Artuso:None.A. nephrocalcinosis Provenzano: None. P. Reho: None. E. Bosi: None. G. Carignani: None. A. La Barbera: None. A. Pagliazzi: F.PELUSO1,V.Palazzo2,L.Dosa2,G.Traﬁcante2,S.Landini1, None. G. Forzano: None. F. Becherucci: None. M. R. Artuso2, A.Provenzano1,P. Reho1, E.Bosi1,G.Carignani1, Materassi: None. R. Biagiotti: None. C. Deﬁlippi: None. A. LaBarbera1,A. Pagliazzi1,G.Forzano1, F.Becherucci3, P. Romagnani: None. S. Giglio: None. M.Materassi3, R.Biagiotti4, C.Deﬁlippi5,P. Romagnani3,6, S. Giglio1,2 P03.26A The application of targeted sequencing and whole exome 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical analysis to identify disease-causing variants in familial Experimental and Clinical Sciences, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical pulmonary ﬁbrosis GeneticsUnit,MeyerChildren'sUniversityHospital,Florence, Italy, Firenze, Italy, 3Nephrology and dialysis Unit, Meyer S. Wilkinson1,2,U.Hodgson3,F. Honti1,H.Beckwith1, Children's Hospital, Florence, Firenze, Italy, 4Prenatal P. Molyneaux4,W. O.Cookson2,T. Maher4, M.Moffatt2, DiagnosisUnit,MeyerChildren'sUniversityHospital,Firenze, T. Laitinen3,D.J.Morris-Rosendahl1 Italy, 5Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Meyer Children's University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 6Medical Genetics Unit, 1ClinicalGeneticsandGenomicsLaboratory,RoyalBrompton DepartmentofBiomedicalExperimentalandClinicalSciences and Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London, United "Mario Serio", University of Florence, Florence, Italy Kingdom, 2Genomic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia (IIH) is characterized by 3DepartmentofPulmonology,UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki, severe hypercalcemia with failure to thrive, vomiting, Finland, 4Fibrosis ResearchGroup, National Heart and Lung dehydration, andnephrocalcinosis(NC).NC hasnotawell Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom understood genesis. Monogenic causes were restricted to rare genetic syndromes/tubulopathies. Introduction:IdiopathicPulmonaryFibrosis(IPF)isoneof Weexamineda24montholdchildforadvancedbilateral the most common forms of interstitial pneumonia and is medullary nephrocalcinosis (accidentally detected at irreversible.Ithasalateageofonset,mostlybetween55-75 15 months), failure to thrive, mild hypercalcemia/hypercal- years(median66years)andaveragesurvivalrateof3years ciuria, moderate hypophosphatemia without proximal postdiagnosis.Usingnext-generationsequencing(NGS)of tubulopathy, renal failure and skeletal dysplasia. He’s the whole exome (WES) and a targeted respiratory gene panel ﬁrstbornofhealthy consanguineousparents and the mother (Respigene) on Finnish and UK families with familial PF was pregnant; a maternal uncle has had recurrent nephro- (FPF), we identiﬁed many new potentially pathogenic var- litiasis since the age of 22 years old. Whole exome iants causative of FPF. sequencing (WES) was performed in order to clarify the Materials and Methods: WES and targeted analysis of molecular diagnosis and to offer a prenatal test. 42genespreviouslyassociatedwithinterstitiallungdisease WES revealed a novel homozygous SLC34A1 mutation (ILD) was performed on 25 individuals (21 affected and 4 linked to IIH and Fanconi renotubular syndrome 2, and a unaffected) from families with severe, early-onset FPF.84 J.delPicchia Variant assessment was performed according to ACMG decreased IVC levels were strongly associated with guidelines, using an in-house bioinformatics pipeline for increasedriskofIPF(p<2.9x10-10).Thenon-codingallele classiﬁcation of SNVs and CNVs, conﬁgured to rare that decreased IVC levels increased IVD expression (p< respiratory conditions. 3.4x10-12). Thus, we hypothesizedthat low IVC levels are Results: Twelve of 25 individuals were found to have associated with higher risk of IPF. To test our hypothesis, variants in ACMG classes 3-5 (VUS to pathogenic), in we ranacase-controlpilot study andfound that IVC levels genespreviouslyassociatedwithFPFandwhichsegregated aredecreasedinIPFcasesrelativetocontrols(P=2x10-3). in families where available. Seven patients were found to Therefore, these data strongly suggest the IVC metabolic have potentially pathogenic variants in TERT, TERC and pathway could play a role in IPF etiology. RTEL1,genesallpreviouslyassociatedwithtelomeraseand We are currently conﬁrming our results in a larger case- telomere integrity. 13/21 (61.9%)patients werepositivefor control study. the MUC5B SNP, rs35705950, as opposed to 1/4 Conclusion: IPF presents seriously unmet clinical needs. unaffected individuals. No CNVs were found in any genes Building on strong preliminary data, we propose that IVC related to ILD. levelsareassociatedwithhigherriskofIPF.IVCrepresents Conclusion: These ﬁndings conﬁrm that genes involved a clinically relevant biomarker and its enzyme, IVD, could intelomerefunctionplayamajorroleinfamilialpulmonary represent an entirely novel IPF drug target. ﬁbrosis. These ﬁndings have potential implications for A.Cerani:None.S.Ross:None.D.A.Schwartz:None. family members and raise the possibility of predictive P. Wolters: None. B. Richards: None. testing and early therapeutic intervention in FPF. S. Wilkinson: None. U. Hodgson: None. F. Honti: P03.28C None. H. Beckwith: None. P. Molyneaux: None. W.O. Interallelic interactions mediated bythe oligomerization of Cookson: None. T. Maher: None. M. Moffatt: None. T. podocin Laitinen: None. D.J. Morris-Rosendahl: None. E. Balogh1,2,P. Stráner3,G.Schay4,C. Arrondel5,Á. Mikó6,2, P03.27B G.L’Auné1,2,A. Benmerah5, A.Perczel3, D.K. Menyhárd3, Ametabolicbiomarkerforidiopathicpulmonaryﬁbrosis:a C. Antignac5,7,8,G.Mollet9,K. Tory1,2 two sample Mendelian randomization study and a case- control study 1MTA-SE Lendulet Nephrogenetic Laboratory, Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis University, Ist Department of A. Cerani1,2,S.Ross1,2,D.A. Schwartz3,P. Wolters4, Pediatrics,Budapest,Hungary,3MTA-ELTEProteinModeling B. Richards1,2 Research Group and Laboratory of Structural Chemistry and Biology, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary, 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Lady Davis 4Semmelweis University, Department of Biophysics and Institute for Medical Research, Montreal, QC, Canada, Radiation Biology, Budapest, Hungary, 5Laboratory of 3University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States, Hereditary Kidney Diseases, INSERM, UMR 1163, Imagine 4UniversityofCalifornia-SanFrancisco,SanFrancisco,CA, Institute, Paris, France, 6MTA-SE Lendulet Nephrogenetic Canada Laboratory, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary, 7Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Introduction: Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF) is a Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 8Assistance Publique – lethaldiseasewithoutcurrenteffectivetreatments.Thereis, Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, therefore,anurgentneedtoﬁndandvalidatebiomarkersfor Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 9Laboratory of diagnosis, prognosis, as well as potential drug targets. We Hereditary Kidney Diseases, INSERM, UMR 1163, Paris, propose to combine genomics and metabolomics to meet France these objectives. Methods and Results: To identify potential metabolites NPHS2, the major gene of steroid-resistant nephrotic syn- associated with IPF, we used an IPF GWAS that identiﬁed drome,encodespodocin,amembrane-anchoredcomponent novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) associated of the slit diaphragm. We formerly showed that its R229Q with isovaleryl dehydrogenase (IVD), whose inhibition is variantispathogenic only when trans-associatedtospeciﬁc known to increase themetabolite isovalerylcarnitine (IVC). 3’ missense mutations secondary to an altered C-terminal Concurrently, we collaborated in a metabolite GWAS in dimerization. We aimed to determine the membrane tar- healthysubjectsthatfoundthesameIPF-associatedSNPto getingandtheoligomerizationofpodocininfunctionofits be associated with IVC blood levels. Through 2-sample C-terminal integrity. Podocin localization was studied in Mendelian randomization, we observed that genetically podocytes co-transfected with GFP- and HA-taggedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 85 podocin variants. Oligomerization was assessed by mea- Defects in motile cilia result in conditions characterised by suring the FRET efﬁciency between maleimide-stained impaired pulmonary mucus clearance, susceptibility to podocin variants and by size exclusion chromatography. chronic recurrent respiratory infections, male infertility and We found the oligomerization to occur exclusively through laterality defects. Here we report that biallelic variants in the C-terminal tail (residues 283-382): principally through LRRC56 (also known as ODA8), result in a phenotype the283-313(H1)andthe332-348residues.Theinterallelic comprising laterality defects and chronic pulmonary infec- interactions are mediated by oligomerization: while the tions. Investigation of cultured patient epithelial cells monomer-forming R286Tfs*17 podocin remained mem- revealed severely dyskinetic cilia, but no structural branous irrespective of the coexpressed podocin variant, abnormalities on transmission electron microscopy. In podocin variants with an intact H1 signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced human cells, we show that LRRC56 interacts with the each other’s localization (r2=0.68, P = 9.2x10-32). The intraﬂagellar transport (IFT) protein IFT88. dominant negative effect resulting in intracellular retention In the model organism Trypanosoma brucei, we show of the pathogenic F344Lfs*4-R229Q heterooligomer LRRC56 is recruited during later phases of ﬂagellar occuredinparallelwithareductionintheFRETefﬁciency, assembly before being removed during ﬂagellum matura- suggesting a conformational rearrangement. In contrast, tion, after cell division. We disrupted anterograde or oligomerization with membranous podocin variants pre- retrograde IFT in T Brucei by use of RNAi. This showed vented the endocytosis of F344Lfs*4 or F344* podocin thatLRRC56actsasanIFTcargo,butonlyatlaterstagesof mutants induced by C-terminal truncation. In conclusion, ﬂagellar construction. oligomerization of podocin can mediate both a dominant LRRC56 localisation was unchanged in DNAI1RNAi and negativeeffectandinteralleliccomplementation.Interallelic ODA7RNAi mutants that are defective in their dynein arm interactionsof3’NPHS2mutationsarenotrestrictedtothe constitutionorcytoplasmicpreassembly,respectively.Thus R229Q variant and have to be considered in compound LRRC56doesnotrequirethepresenceofdyneinarmstobe heterozygous individuals. Supported by MTA-SE Lendulet associated with ﬂagella. Research Grant (LP2015-11/2015), NKFIA/OTKA In T. brucei carrying LRRC56 null mutations, or a K109718,K116305,KH125566,MedinProtSynergygrant, mutation(p.Leu259Pro)correspondingp.Leu140Provariant (ANR-10-IAHU-01), EURenOmics (2012-305608), ANR seen in one of the affected families, we observed abnormal (GenPod project ANR-12-BSV1-0033.01). ciliary beat patterns and an absence of outer dynein arms E.Balogh:None.P.Stráner:None.G.Schay:None.C. restricted to the distal portion of the axoneme. These Arrondel: None. Á. Mikó: None. G. L’Auné: None. A. ﬁndings conﬁrm that deleterious variants in LRRC56 result Benmerah: None. A. Perczel: None. D. K. Menyhárd: in human disease, and suggest this protein has a likely role None. C. Antignac: None. G. Mollet: None. K. in dynein transport during cilia assembly that is evolutio- Tory: None. narily important for cilia motility. E.G. Sheridan: None. S. Bonnefoy: None. C.M. P03.29D Watson: None. K.D. Kernohan: None. M. Lemos: None. Biallelic Mutations in LRRC56, encoding a protein S. Hutchinson1: None. J. Poulter: None. C. O'Call- associated with intraﬂagellar transport, causes defects in aghan: None. R.A. Hirst: None. A. Rutman: None. L. mucociliary clearance and laterality Huang: None. T. Hartley: None. D. Grynspan: None. C. Li: None. I.M. Carr: None. D.B. Bonthron: None. M. E.G.Sheridan1,S.Bonnefoy2,C.M.Watson1,K.D.Kernohan3, Leroux: None. K.B. Boycott: None. P. Bastin: None. M.Lemos4,S.Hutchinson12,J.Poulter1,C.O'Callaghan5,R.A. Hirst6,A. Rutman6,L. Huang3,T. Hartley3,D.Grynspan7, P03.30A C. Li8, I.M.Carr1,D.B.Bonthron1,M.Leroux8,Care4Rare Metformininducedchangesingutmicrobiomecomposition Canada Consortium, K.B. Boycott3,P. Bastin2 inhealthyindividualsandnewly-diagnosedtype2diabetes patients 1UniversityofLeeds,Leeds,UnitedKingdom,2InstitutPasteur, Paris, France, 3University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, I.Elbere1,I. Kalnina1,I.Silamikelis1,I.I. Dindune1, 4Institut Pateur, Paris, France, 5University College London, L.Gulbinska1,L.Zaharenko1,I.Radovica-Spalvina1,D.Gudra1, London, United Kingdom, 6University of Leicester, Leicester, D.Fridmanis1, I.Konrade2,V. Pirags1,3,J.Klovins1 United Kingdom, 7Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa,ON,Canada,8SimonFraserUniversity,Burnaby,BC, 1LatvianBiomedicalResearchandStudyCentre,Riga,Latvia, Canada 2Riga East Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 3Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia86 J.delPicchia Metforminisabiguanideclassagentwidelyusedasaﬁrst- Introduction: Kidney diseases can be caused by a wide line treatment for type 2 diabetes (T2D). Despite its spectrum of underlying conditions and, in practice, the advantages, metformin has variable therapeutic effects, exact cause of a patient’s renal disease often remains contraindications, and side effects. Previous ﬁndings have unknown. Knowing the precise genetic defect is important led to the hypothesis that both the beneﬁcial and adverse in terms of its diagnostic, prognostic value and appropriate effects of metformin are partially explained by its interac- geneticcounsellingandislikelytobecomemorecrucialfor tion with the gut microbiome, yet details of these mechan- directing speciﬁc therapy. NGS has opened up a new ﬁeld isms remain obscure. allowing the identiﬁcation of previously undiagnosed her- The study was conducted to investigate the effects of editary nephropathies. This study aims to investigate the metformin treatment on the composition of human gut etiologyofgenetickidneydiseasesintheclinicalroutineof microbiome. The microbial DNA was extracted from: our hospital´s patient population. (1.) Stool samples obtained from 18 healthy nondiabetic Materials and Methods: The Nefroseq® panel V2.0 is a individualsatthreetimepointsduringmetformintreatment: targeted NGS panel containing 350 genes involved in M0-beforemetformintreatment,M24h-24hoursafterthe inherited nephropathies, optimizing libraries from Kappa, ﬁrst metformin dose, and M7d - after a week-long Target enrichment by SeqCap EZ system (RocheNimble- metformin administration; gen),andsequencingonaNextSeq500platform(Illumina). (2.) Stool samples acquired from 11 newly-diagnosed Results: Regarding the analysis, it is done differently T2Dpatientsattwoconcordanttimepoints-M0andM7d. depending on the patient: restricted to the proband and Probable changes in the gut microbiome induced by knowngenes inpatientswithaspeciﬁcphenotype,oropen metforminintakewereassessedemployingmassiveparallel to a trio (including parents) when clinicians suggest an sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene V3 region. unspeciﬁcphenotype.Diagnosticyieldsarearound51-54%. A week-long metformin treatment rapidly and signiﬁ- RemarkingisthegeneticanalysisofthePKD1(responsible cantly decreased alpha diversity of gut microbiome among for most ADPKD cases), a diagnostic challenge: the 5′- both groups. Concurrently, signiﬁcant changes in several region of the gene overlapped with a pseudogene. Our taxonomic groups were observed, including an increase in approach “in a tube” validated by Long-Rage PCR and abundance of opportunistic pathogens representing Sanger sequencing yielded around 80% and it is cost- Escherichia-Shigella genus, and decrease in possibly effective. harming family Peptostreptococcaceae. Together these Conclusions: We share our management of the inherited ﬁndings support the role of metformin in the modulation nephropathiescases under amodel pointedout toprecision of the gut microbiome composition and the hypothesis that medicine,whichincludesamultidisciplinarycommitteefor there may be some speciﬁc interactions further linked with discussingthecasesincludedinthiscustomizedNGSpanel. efﬁcacy and side effects of metformin. J.Nevado:None.R.Mena:None.V.GómezdelPozo: This project was supported by ERDF No.:1.1.1.1/16/A/ None. R. Peces: None. M. Melgosa: None. L. Espinosa: 091. None. R. Selgas: None. P.D. Lapunzina: None. I.Elbere:None.I.Kalnina:None.I.Silamikelis:None. I.I. Dindune: None. L. Gulbinska: None. L. Zaharenko: P03.33D None. I. Radovica-Spalvina: None. D. Gudra: None. D. Genetic causes of early onset obesity are frequently Fridmanis: None. I. Konrade: None. V. Pirags: None. J. identiﬁed in a tertiary pediatric obesity cohort Klovins: None. L.Kleinendorst1,O.Abawi2,A.E.Brandsma3,M.H.Jongejan4, P03.32C E. F.C. VanRossum2, B.Van der Zwaag5,E. L. T.Van den Targeted-NGS panel for inherited nephropathies: an Akker2,M.M. VanHaelst6,1 example of clinical utility in a tube 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, J.Nevado1,2,R. Mena1, V.Gómez del Pozo1,R.Peces3, 2Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, M.Melgosa4,L. Espinosa4,R. Selgas3,P. D.Lapunzina1,2 Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Maasstad Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Franciscus Gasthuis, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 1INGEMM-IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 5UniversityMedicalCenterUtrecht,Utrecht,Netherlands,6VU 3AdultNephrologyDepartment,HULP-IdiPaz,Madrid,Spain, university medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands 4Pediatric Nephrology Department, HULP-IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain Obesity is predominantly considered a multifactorial dis- order. In unselected patient cohorts, an underlying genetic diagnosis can be established in only a minority of cases.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 87 They typically present with early-onset, severe obesity. Table (continued) Establishing a genetic diagnosis can lead to personalized Geneticdisorder No.of Characteristics treatment,reducestigmaandsupportreproductivedecision- patients making. This study provides an overview of obesity- associated mutations and copy number variations (CNV’s) Proopiomelanocortin 1 Deletion2p,including identiﬁed in this selected population. associatedobesity POMCgene In 174 obese children, referred to the pediatric obesity Pseudohypoparathyroidism 1 HeterozygousSTX16 type1B mutation center Centrum Gezond Gewicht between 2012 and 2017, Single-minded1associated 1 Deletion6q16.3,including diagnosticsequencingof52obesity-associatedgenes,CNV obesity SIM1gene detection by SNP-microarray analysis and, on clinical Spasticparaplegiatype11 1 Compoundheterozygous suspicion,speciﬁcadditionaldiagnosticswereperformedto SPG11mutation identify genetic causes of obesity. In 28 patients (16.1%), an underlying genetic cause was identiﬁed (table 1). In an additional 22 patients (12.6%), a L. Kleinendorst: None. O. Abawi: None. A.E. novel CNV or sequence variant of unknown clinical Brandsma: None. M.H. Jongejan: None. E.F.C. Van signiﬁcance (VUS) was shown in obesity-associated genes, Rossum: None. B. Van der Zwaag: None. E.L.T. Van forwhichtheroleinthephenotypehasyettobeconﬁrmed. den Akker: None. M.M. Van Haelst: None. A deﬁnitive obesity-associated genetic diagnosis was madein16.1%ofourpatientswithearly-onsetobesity.This P03.35B may increase, if follow-up studies in patients with VUS Isolatedoesophagealatresiaassociatedwithrarestructural conﬁrmacausalrolefortheirvariants.Thisdiagnosticyield variants identiﬁed by whole genome sequencing isrelativelyhighcomparedtosimilarstudiesandshowsthat genetic testing can be highly relevant in selected obese J.Klar1,H.Engstrand Lilja2,J. Mattisson1,N.Dahl1 patients, especially when personalized treatment becomes available. 1DepartmentofImmunology,GeneticsandPathology,Uppsala Table 1. Underlying genetic causes identiﬁed in our University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Women's and pediatric obesity patient cohort Children's Health, Section of Paediatric Surgery, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden Geneticdisorder No.of Characteristics patients Introduction: Oesophageal atresia (OA) is the most com- mon congenital anomaly of the oesophagus with an inci- Melanocortin-4receptor, 5 HeterozygousMC4R dence of around 1/3500 births. OA with a low dominantlyinheritedobesity mutation tracheoesophageal ﬁstula constitute 85% of all cases and Melanocortin-4receptor 2 Homozygousorcompound deﬁciency heterozygousMC4R syndromicOA atleast50%ofcases. Genetic variants have mutation been identiﬁed in a proportion of patients with syndromic Leptinreceptordeﬁciency 5 Homozygousorcompound OA but the genetics behind isolated forms remains elusive. heterozygousLEPR Materials and Methods: We identiﬁed three families mutation with recurrent and isolated OA suggesting inherited factors 16p11.2deletionsyndrome 3 Typical16p11.2deletion behind the malformation. Whole genome sequencing Melanocortin-2receptor 2 HeterozygousMRAP2 (WGS; Illumina) was performed on DNA from affected accessoryprotein2associated mutationin2sibs individuals (n=6) and presumed obligate and healthy obesity carriers (n=4). Pseudohypoparathyroidism 2 HeterozygousGNAS Results and Conclusions: We identiﬁed single nucleo- type1A mutation tide variants (SNVs) and small insertions/deletions (indels) Centralhypothyroidism 1 HeterozygousIGSF1 mutation using GATK, and structural variants (SVs) using Manta. Cohensyndrome 1 HomozygousVPS13B Afterstringentﬁltering(frequency=0)againsttheSwedish mutation 1000 genome project (SweGen), only one gene (DOCK4) Mentalretardation, 1 HeterozygousMYT1L remained that contains rare SNVs in all 10 individuals. autosomaldominant39 mutation Furthermore,weidentiﬁedatotalof186SVsintheaffected MaternalUPD14 1 mUPD14 individuals. Interestingly, we observe a signiﬁcant enrich- Proproteinconvertase-1 1 HeterozygousPCSK1 ment of rare SVs on chromosome 21, suggesting a role for associatedobesity mutation this chromosome in the aetiology of isolated OA in our cohort.88 J.delPicchia Grants: This work was supported by grants from the G.Pipitone:None.S.Calzavara:None.R.Magistroni: Swedish Research Council (2015-02424). None. S. Merella: None. A. Boletta: None. M. Ferrari: J.Klar:None.H.EngstrandLilja:None.J.Mattisson: None. P. Carrera: None. None. N. Dahl: None. P03.37D P03.36C A comprehensive genetic testing in children with the Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) differential genetic clinical diagnosis of ARPKD identiﬁes phenocopies analysis in polycystic kidney diseases: work in progress T. Szabó1,Z. Maróti2,T. Kalmár2,L. Madar3,É.Gombos3, G.Pipitone1,S. Calzavara1, R.Magistroni2,3, S.Merella1, O.Orosz3,K. Tory4,5,I.Balogh3 A. Boletta2,M. Ferrari1,4,5,P. Carrera1,4 1Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of 1Clinical molecular biology laboratory, IRCCS San Raffaele, Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, Milano, Italy, 2Molecular basis of polycystic kidney disease Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, unit, Division of genetics and cell biology, IRCCS San 3Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Raffaele,Milano,Italy,3DivisionofnephrologyanddialysisA. Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, O.U. Policlinico, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Debrecen, Hungary, 4Ist Department of Pediatrics, Modena,Italy,4Unitofgenomicsforhumandiseasediagnosis, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 5MTA-SE Division of genetics and cell biology, IRCCS San Raffaele, Lendulet Nephrogenetic Laboratory, Budapest, Hungary Milano, Italy, 5University Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milano, Italy Introduction: Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney dis- ease(ARPKD)isgeneticallyoneoftheleastheterogeneous Polycystic Kidney Diseases are clinically and genetically ciliopathies, resulting primarily from mutations of PKHD1. heterogeneous conditions mainly caused by mutations in However, 15-40% of patients diagnosed with ARPKD are PKD1/2. In the absence of a family history and/or in the foundnottocarryPKHD1mutations.Aimofthisstudywas presence of atypical presentations, other cystic diseases or to identify whether mutations in other genes might explain other clinical conditions should be considered for a differ- these cases. ential diagnosis. Thanks to NGS is now possible to mod- Materials and Methods: Thirty-six unrelated patients ulate genetic test ranging from a few genes to a with the clinical diagnosis of ARPKD were tested by comprehensive clinical-exome testing, allowing differential PKHD1 sequencing and MLPA. Patients without biallelic geneticanalysisbasedontheclinicalsuspicion.Toevaluate mutations were reevaluated and tested for second locus thisapproach,weappliedtheilluminaClinical-ExomeNGS mutations in function of the phenotype, followed, if protocol in 10 patients negative for ADPKD. Analysis of negative, by clinical exome sequencing. 106 genes, selected due to their relation with atypical form Results: Twenty-eight patients (78%) carried PKHD1 of PKD, was performed using an in-house validated pipe- point mutations, three of whom were heterozygotes for line (100% sensitivity, >94% speciﬁcity). Considering a small-scale alterations. Two of the three patients possessed population frequency <1% in the 1000KG and Exac Data- either a duplication of exons 33-35 or a large deletion bases and basing on the consistency with the clinical phe- involving exons 1-55 in trans. All eight patients without notypeswe focused on 16candidate variants intotal.Eight PKHD1 mutations had mutations in other genes (PKD1 ofthesevariantswereprivateandnovel.Wefound:4novel (n=2), HNF1B (n=3), NPHP1, TMEM67, PKD1/TSC2). variants in HNF1B, BBS9, REN, GLIS3 and 5 already Perinatal respiratory failure, a kidney length >+4SD and described variants in BBS9, PKHD1, GLIS3, NPHP3 and early-onset hypertension were speciﬁc features of PKHD1- WDPCP. Moreover, one novel stop-gained and one start- associated ARPKD. lost variant were found in INVS and GLIS3 and three Conclusions: We found all ARPKD cases without intronic and one splice donor variants were found in PKHD1 point mutations to be phenocopies, and none to TMEM138, TMEM67, IFT43 and COL4A1. Interestingly, be explained by biallelic PKHD1 copy number variations. one frameshift variant was found in PKD1, previously Based on this non-consanguineous cohort, screening for misdiagnosed by Sanger sequencing, indicating a good copy number variations is indicated only in patients with a performance of NGS. All variants, except one (start-lost heterozygous point mutation. This work was supported by variantinGLIS3),wereconﬁrmedbySangersequencingas OTKA K109076 and Ministry of National Economy, well as the re-evaluation of clinical phenotypes and the Hungary, GINOP-2.3.2-15-2016-00039 (to István Balogh, potential for family and functional studies. Zoltán Maróti and Tibor Kalmár), MTA-SE Lendulet Research Grant (LP2015-11/2015) of Hungarian AcademyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 89 of Sciences and NKFIA/OTKA K109718, KH125566 (to P03.39B Kálmán Tory). The importance of comprehensive genomic proﬁling in T.Szabó:None.Z.Maróti:None.T.Kalmár:None.L. differentialdiagnosisanddiscoveryofnoveldiseasecausing Madar: None. É. Gombos: None. O. Orosz: None. K. genetic variants in patients with pediatric lung diseases Tory: None. I. Balogh: None. M.Z. Andjelkovic1,P. Minic2,3,M.Vreca1,M. Stojiljkovic1, P03.38A A. Skakic1, A.Sovtic2,M. Rodic2, V.Skodric-Trifunovic4,3, Prader-Willi syndrome: clinical particularities found in 15 N.Maric5,J. Visekruna2,V. Spasovski1,S. Pavlovic1 patients 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, S. Calapod1, A.Hrisca2, R.Popescu1,E. Gorduza3, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Mother and Child Health Care Institute of M.Gramescu3,M.Panzaru1,L. Butnariu1,C. Rusu1 Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 3School of Medicine, University of Belgrade,Belgrade,Serbia,4Clinicfor Pulmonology,Clinical 1"St.Mary” Children's Hospital - Medical Genetics Center, Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Clinic for children Iasi, Romania, 2"St.Spiridon” Emergency Clinical Hospital - diseases, Banja Luka, Belgrade, Serbia Department ofEndocrinology,Iasi, Romania,3”Gr. T. Popa” UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy-DepartmentofMedical Introduction: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare Genetics, Iasi, Romania inherited autosomal recessive or X-linked disorder that mainlyaffectslungs.PCDdiagnosisrequireswell-described Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic disorder char- clinical phenotype combined with the identiﬁcation of acterized by severe hypotonia and feeding difﬁculties in underlying genetic causes since clinical symptoms of PCD early infancy, followed by excessive eating and morbid overlaps with symptoms of other pediatric lung diseases. obesityinchildhood,intellectualdisability,smallhandsand The aim of the study was to point out the signiﬁcance of feet and hypogonadism. The genetic defect (microdeletion, comprehensive genomic proﬁling in differential diagnosis uniparental disomy or imprinting defect) involves region of presumed PCD patients and detection of novel disease- 15q11.2-q13. We performed a clinical and genetic study of causing genetic variants. 15 patients diagnosed with PWS in Iaşi Medical Genetics Materials and Methods: Using Next Generation Center to evaluate the relevance of clinical features for the Sequencing (NGS) approach and Clinical-Exome Sequen- diagnosis, identify particularities and possible complica- cingPanelwith4813genes,weanalysed74genesrelatedto tions. All cases were conﬁrmed using MS-MLPA or FISH PCD and other pediatric lung diseases in a cohort of 21 testing. We have identiﬁed neonatal hypotonia in 11/15 Serbian patients with clinically suspected PCD. cases, feeding difﬁculties in infancy in 12/15, excessive Results: After variant ﬁltering and prioritization, the weight gain in 9/15 (6/15 being under GH therapy), char- molecular diagnosis of PCD was achieved in 14/21 acteristic facial features in 13/15 and acromicria in 8/15. (66.67%) patients. The most frequently mutated gene was Micropenis (2/6), cryptorchidism (4/6) and hypoplasia of DNAH5 (23.33%). We have also genetically diagnosed labiaminora(1/9)indicatedthepresenceofhypogenitalism. asthma, NRDS, and bronchiectasis without CF, leading to High pain threshold was seen in 5/15 cases, sleep apnea as detectionrateof95.24%(20/21).Identiﬁedvariantswerein well as skin picking in 4/15, ADHD, strabismus and homozygous, compound heterozygous and trans- incontinence were associated in 2/15. One case associated heterozygous state. We also detected a novel homozygous centralfever.Particularfeaturesidentiﬁedincluded:skeletal frameshift mutation that leads to premature stop codon in anomalies (5/15), congenital heart defects (4/15), cerebral DNAI1 gene (c. 947_948insG, p. Thr318TyrfsTer11), in malformations (3/15), ADHD (2/15), epilepsy (1/15) and two affected PCD siblings. For detailed characterization of multiple allergies (1/15). The correlation of the clinical novel genetic variant we performed RT-qPCR, in silico featureswiththetypeofgeneticdefectwillbeillustratedin prediction of variant impact at protein level and protein detail. Follow-up revealed: skeletal deformities that con- analysis by Western Blot. traindicated GH therapy in one case, epilepsy and multiple Conclusions: Analysis of the genomic proﬁle of PCD allergies in another and central fever that led to death in suspected patients improves differential diagnosis and another. In conclusion, we present a clinical study on 15 enables prenatal and carrier testing. It also leads to better PWS patients to illustrate particular features and long-time understanding of the molecular basis of pediatric lung evolution. diseases. S.Calapod:None.A.Hrisca:None.R.Popescu:None. M.Z. Andjelkovic: None. P. Minic: None. M. Vreca: E. Gorduza: None. M. Gramescu: None. M. Panzaru: None.M.Stojiljkovic:None.A.Skakic:None.A.Sovtic: None. L. Butnariu: None. C. Rusu: None. None. M. Rodic: None. V. Skodric-Trifunovic: None. N.90 J.delPicchia Maric:None.J.Visekruna:None.V.Spasovski:None.S. Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual Pavlovic: None. property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. K. Dolnikov: None. A. Mory: None. T. Paperna: None. T. P03.40C Hershkovitz:None.J.D.Overton:A.Employment(fullor PLVAP in protein-losing enteropathy: a homozygous part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. E. missense variant leads to an attenuated phenotype Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceu- A. Kurolap1,2,O.Eshach-Adiv1,C. Gonzaga-Jauregui3, ticals Inc. M. Kaplan: None. Y. Zohar: None. A.R. K. Dolnikov1,A. Mory1, T.Paperna1,T. Hershkovitz1,J. D. Shuldiner: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Overton3, M.Kaplan1,Y. Zohar1,A. R. Shuldiner3,G.Berger1, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. E. Ownership Interest H.N.Baris1 (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. G. Berger: 1Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, Haifa, Israel, None. H.N. Baris: None. 2Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 3Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY, United States P03.42A Genes with mutational enrichment in metastatic clear cell Background: The integrity of the intestinal lymphatics is kidney cancer associate with patient mortality essential for proper nutrient absorption and tissue home- ostasis. Damage to the lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) A. Mendoza-Alvarez1,2,B. Guillen-Guio2,C. Hernandez-Perez3, leads to an enteric loss of protein-rich lymphatic ﬂuid, i.e. A. Baez-Ortega4, J.M.Lorenzo-Salazar1,S. Lakhwani- protein-losing enteropathy (PLE). We investigated the Lakhwani2,M.D.C. Maeso5, M.Morales3, C.Flores1,2,6 genetic cause of PLE in two patients, ﬁrst-degree cousins once removed, who presented at 22 and 2.5 years. 1Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed for Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 2Research two affected and ﬁve healthy family members. Variants Unit, Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria, were ﬁltered based on autosomal recessive inheritance Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, model, population frequencies, and predicted functional 3Service ofMedical Oncology,Hospital UniversitarioNuestra effect. Señora de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, Results: We identiﬁed a rare homozygous variant 4Transmissible Cancer Group, Department of Veterinary (NM_031310.2:c.101T>C; p.Leu34Pro) in PLVAP, which Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United co-segregated with the disease. The variant is predicted Kingdom, 5Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario deleterious by bioinformatics algorithms, affecting the NuestraSeñoradeCandelaria,SantaCruzdeTenerife,Spain, protein’s transmembrane domain. Electron microscopy 6CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud (EM) of the younger patient's duodenal biopsy revealed Carlos III, Madrid, Spain preserved endothelial fenestral diaphragms. Discussion: The plasmalemma vesicle-associated protein Introduction: Kidney cancer only represents 2-3% of all (PLVAP) is the building block of LEC fenestral dia- cancers. However, more than 60% of the patients die after phragms, which serve as a ﬁltration system that blocks 2-3 years from diagnosis. Here we aimed to evaluate the passage of large molecules and pathogens through the association of somatic genetic variation with mortality by intestines. Mouse models of Plvap-deﬁciency demonstrate metastatic kidney cancer. PLVAP’s important contribution to LEC barrier function. MaterialsandMethods:Whole-exomesequencingfrom Recently, a homozygous nonsense variant in PLVAP was pairedtumor/normalFFPEtissueobtainedfromtenpatients reportedin a single patient with severe congenital PLE and with metastatic clear-cell renal cell carcinoma was hypertriglyceridemia.Wenowshowthatbi-allelicmissense performed with AmpliSeq Exome RDY kit with the Ion variants in PLVAP can cause an attenuated form of the Proton System (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). Somatypus and syndrome, albeit apparently intact endothelial diaphragms VEP were used to identify and annotate single nucleotide on EM. Thus, our report establishes the role of PLVAP in variants and small indels. A gene-based burden of putative the pathophysiology of PLE, and expands the phenotypic somaticmutationswascalculated,andmutationenrichment and mutation spectrums of the disorder, underscoring the assessed by the Fisher’s exact test. Gene-set enrichment importance of PLVAP in LEC barrier function in the gut. analysis (GSEA) was evaluated with EnrichR. A. Kurolap: None. O. Eshach-Adiv: None. C. Gon- Results:Meanexome-widetargetcoveragewas127-fold zaga-Jauregui: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- fortumorand130-foldformatchednormalsamples.Atotal niﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. E. Ownership of 9,220 putative somatic variants mapping to 5,256 genesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 91 were detected across samples. Mutation enrichment was microbiome perturbations associate with ICU mortality in associated with mortality at nominal signiﬁcance in 138 septic patients. genes (lowest p=2.0e-6), and GSEA on this subset Materials and Methods: We analyzed DNA from 41 evidenced a signiﬁcant link with renal cancer (p=2.3e-9), bronchoalveolar aspirates from non-pulmonary septic ICU speciﬁcally for 49 of the genes. patients at sepsis diagnosis (8h), and after 24h and 72h. Conclusions: Mutational burden in 138 genes associate Bacterial abundance was obtained by DNA sequencing of with mortality among metastatic kidney cancer patients, the 16S rRNA V4. QIIME was used for operative which represents a concise gene set for conducting focused taxonomic units (OTUs) assignment. validation and functional studies. Results:Thecoremicrobiome(taxain>50%ofpatients) Funding: Fundación CajaCanarias (SALUCAN11); was composed by 46 OTUs and its number diminished in Agreement OA17/008 with ITER to strengthen scientiﬁc deceased compared to surviving patients at all collection and technological education, training, research, develop- times. Diversity differences were evident very early (17 vs ment and innovation in Genomics, Personalized Medicine 45 OTUs in deceased and survivors at 8h of sepsis and Biotechnology; ACIISI fellowship to BGG diagnosis, respectively; p<0.01). The four most abundant (TESIS2015010057) co-funded by European Social Fund; taxa in non-survivors comprised >89% of the core CEDeI fellowship (Cabildo de Tenerife) to AMA. microbiome, while these only represented 15% of the core A.Mendoza-Alvarez:None.B.Guillen-Guio:None.C. microbiome in survivors. Hernandez-Perez: None. A. Baez-Ortega: None. J.M. Conclusions: A reduction in bacterial lung diversity Lorenzo-Salazar: None. S. Lakhwani-Lakhwani: None. within8hofsepsisdiagnosisassociateswithICUmortality, M.D.C. Maeso: None. M. Morales: None. C. providinganovelprognosticbiomarkeratanearlystageof Flores: None. disease. Funding: ISCIII (PI11/00623, PI16/00049) and co- P03.43B ﬁnanced by the European Regional Development Funds, Lung metagenomics to predict patient mortality by non- “A way of making Europe” from the European Union; pulmonary sepsis Agreement OA17/008 with ITER to strengthen scientiﬁc and technological education, training, research, develop- B.Guillen-Guio1,D.Domínguez2,A.Baez-Ortega3,F.Lorenzo- ment and innovation in Genomics, Personalized Medicine Diaz4,A. Díaz-deUsera5,R. González-Montelongo5, and Biotechnology; Fellowships from the ACIISI R. Hernández-Bisshopp2,J.Arias2,L. Soto2,J. Belda6, (TESIS2015010057) co-funded by European Social Fund E. Espinosa2,J.Alcoba-Florez7, J.Villar8,9,C. Flores1,5,9 toBGGandtheSpanishMinistryofEducation,Cultureand Sports (FPU16/01435) to ADU. 1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, B.Guillen-Guio:None.D.Domínguez:None.A.Baez- Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, Ortega:None.F.Lorenzo-Diaz:None.A.Díaz-deUsera: 2DepartmentofAnesthesiology,HospitalUniversitarioN.S.de None. R. González-Montelongo: None. R. Hernández- Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 3Transmissible Bisshopp:None.J.Arias:None.L.Soto:None.J.Belda: CancerGroup,DepartmentofVeterinaryMedicine,University None. E. Espinosa: None. J. Alcoba-Florez: None. J. of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Department of Villar: None. C. Flores: None. Biochemistry, Microbiology, Cell Biology and Genetics, Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, P03.45D 5Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Searching for causal treatment in patients with Wolfram Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, syndrome 6DepartmentofAnesthesiology,HospitalClínicoUniversitario de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 7Department of Microbiology, A. Zmyslowska1,M.Borowiec2,E. Polakowska1,A. Lesiak3, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de W.Mlynarski1 Tenerife, Spain, 8Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrin, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 9CIBER de 1Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology and Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland, Madrid, Spain 2Department of of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Lodz,Lodz,Poland,3DepartmentofofDermatology,Pediatric Introduction: Death by sepsis remains high in patients andOncologyDermatology,MedicalUniversityofLodz,Lodz, admitted into intensive care units (ICUs) worldwide. Iden- Poland tifying early biomarkers of disease prognosis remains an urgent necessity. Here we hypothesized that lung92 J.delPicchia Introduction: Wolfram syndrome (WFS) is an example of involves the highest number of affected members docu- neurodegenerative disease due to increased ER stress mented. In all patients the non-syndromic long segment coexisting with diabetes mellitus with no causal treatment. disease (HSCR type 2) is present. At the age of 8 months WFS is caused by recessive mutations in the WFS1 gene the proposita was admitted to Cincinnati Children´s Hos- among which are the mutations of premature termination pitalforileostomyunderthecareofoneoftheauthors(EP), codons (PTCs). Some prospects for the causal treatment of then a resident in pediatrics. During the following 15 years WFSpatientscangiveareadthroughofPTCs.Theuseofa she required 41 surgical procedures of the GI tract or the chemical compound e.g. PTC124 can result in bypassing rectum. In spite of the complicated course she is well the PTCs and a continuation of translation. The aim of the adjusted to her disorder. This family was re-investigated in study was to evaluate a repairing of a genetic defect by November 2017, including two daughters of the proposita using PTC124 in WFS patients with conﬁrmed mutations alsoaffectedwithlongsegmentHirschsprungdisease.Both of PTCs. daughters also required several additional surgical proce- Materials and Methods: Diagnosis of WFS was dures. Hirschsprung disease, a genetically heterogeneous conﬁrmed by direct sequencing of the WFS1 gene. On and clinically variable disorder, results from the absence or ﬁbroblasts from skin biopsies of WFS patients and healthy malfunctionofintestinalganglioncells.Atleastthreesignal individuals the in vitro studies were performed involving effector pathways are required for normal migration and theinductionofERstress(Tunicamycin)withasubsequent development of intramural intestinal ganglion cells, (i) the using a compound PTC124 (Ataluren). Evaluation of ER RET tyrosine-kinase receptor and its ligand GDNF (glial- stress induction was performed by mRNA expression cell-derived neurotrophic factor, OMIM 600837), (ii) analysis of wolframin and markers of the ER stress endothelin type B receptor (EDNRB, OMIM 600837) and (7900HT Real Time PCR; Applied Biosystems, USA). its ligand EDN3 (endothelin 3, OMIM 131244), (iii) Results:In12/15ofWFSpatientsthemutationsofPTCs SOX10 transcription factor (OMIM 602229). were identiﬁed. The most speciﬁc markers of ER stress in E. Passarge: None. A.N. Ziegler: None. R.J. Hopkin: patients with WFS should be considered: GRP78, None. H.M. Saal: None. GADD153 (CHOP) and ATF4. Thus, a compound PTC124 may unfortunately increase the ER stress. Conclusions: It seems that PTC124 by ER stress P04 Skeletal, connective tissue, ectodermal and skin increasing can not be used as a potential causal treatment disorders for the WFS patients. Supported by the National Science Centre grants No P04.01A 2014/15/B/NZ5/01579 and 2015/19/B/NZ5/02243. Microduplicationof13q31.3region:clinicalandmolecular A. Zmyslowska: None. M. Borowiec: None. E. analysis based on a new case Polakowska: None. A. Lesiak: None. W. Mlynarski: None. M.Młynek,M.Kucharczyk, D.Wicher, A.Cieślikowska, A. Gutkowska,M. Krajewska-Walasek P03.46A Aﬁfty-year follow-up of familial Hirschsprung disease Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland E. Passarge1,A. N.Ziegler2, R.J. Hopkin3,H.M. Saal3 Microduplication of 13q31.3 is a rare genomic disorder associatedwithabnormalgrowthandskeletaldevelopment. 1InstitutfürHumangenetik,UniversitätsklinikumEssen,Essen, To date, less than ten comparable submicroscopic duplica- Germany, 2., Harrison, OH, United States, 3Human Genetics tions involving this region have been described. The most Division, Cincinnati Children´s Hospital Medical Center, importantphenotypicfeaturesincludedevelopmentaldelay, Cincinnati, OH, United States digital malformations, growth abnormalities, macrocephaly and facial dysmorphism. MIR17HG (encoding the miR- WedescribefamilialHirschsprungdisease(OMIM142623) 17~92 polycistronic miRNa cluster) and GPC5 are the with histologically proven congenital intestinal aganglio- major candidate genes for the genotype-phenotype nosis in the proposita, her two affected brothers, her two correlation. affected daughters and in the extended family three ﬁrst Here, we report on the case of a 3 4/12 year-old girl cousins (two males and one female). Originally this family referred for genetic counseling because of excessive height was described in 1967 as part of systematic study of the and weight (above the 97th centile) and dysmorphic geneticsofHirschsprungdisease(Family21inE.Passarge, features (macrocephaly, frontal bossing, hyperthelorism, New Eng J Med 1967; 276:138-143). It presumably long palpebral ﬁssures, long philtrum, tilted upper lip, pugAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 93 nose,widelyspacedteeth).Intheneonatalperiodumbilical Results: In all models we noted similar extensive and herniawas observed. At theclinical examination, indistinct progressivevertebralhypermineralization(Table1),starting speech, laxity of hand joints, long and overlapping toes, duringembryonicdevelopment,withspinaldeformitiesand café au lait spot on the thigh and hypoplastic nipples scoliosis in adults. Contrary to previously reported data, were noted. abcc6a was essential for neither embryonic survival nor Conventional G-banding karyotyping revealed a de novo morphological development. translocation 46,XX,t(1;13)(q21;q13.31). Whole-genome Conclusions: Observing an identical ossiﬁcation pheno- oligonucleotide microarray analysis revealed a 11.47-Mb type in 3 independent models conﬁrms its speciﬁcity and cryptic interstitial duplication of the 13q31.1q32.1 region indicates for the ﬁrst time a direct relation between abcc6a associated with the translocation breakpoints deﬁciencyanddysregulatedosteogenesis.Thephenotypeis (chr13:85583670-97054435; GRCh37). Microarray studies readily quantiﬁable and an excellent readout for compound in both parents gave normal results, proving de novo screening. occurrence of this aberration in the child. Table 1: Mineralization semi-quantiﬁed at 10 days post In conclusion, this study contributes additional informa- fertilization (Mean ± SD; *P<0.05) tion for the 13q31.3 microduplication and strongly support the involvement of miR-17~92 cluster of miRNA and +/+orControl -/-orMorpholino GPC5 gene in normal growth and skeletal development. This study was supported by the NCN Grant No. UMO- CRISPR(c.180delTCGG) 100% ± 9.6 121% ± 8.8* 2016/21/B/NZ5/02541. Sa963(c.2250+1G>A) 100% ± 15.8 135% ± 40.2* M. Młynek: None. M. Kucharczyk: None. D. Wicher: Morpholinoabcc6a 100% ± 19.2 155% ± 29.6* None. A. Cieślikowska: None. A. Gutkowska: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. M. Van Gils: None. A. Willaert: None. E. De Vilder: P04.02B None. P. Coucke: None. O. Vanakker: None. Generation and validation of the ﬁrst complete knockout model of abcc6a in zebraﬁsh P04.03C Functional characterization of a predicted regulatory M.Van Gils1, A.Willaert1,E. DeVilder1,2,P. Coucke1,2, element associated with alopecia areata (AA) O.Vanakker1,2 M.M.Mattern1,2,A. Tafazzoli1,2, S.Sivalingam1,2,J.Schultze3, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 2Ghent K. Ludwig2,M. M.Nöthen1,2, P.Kokordelis1,2,R. C. Betz1,2 University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum is an ectopic Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, mineralization disease due to biallelic ABCC6 mutations. UniversityofBonn,Bonn,Germany,3Life&MedicalSciences- Asnocurativetherapyisavailable,developmentofreliable Institute (LIMES), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany disease models for compound screening is necessary. Zeb- raﬁsh, which have a functional abcc6a orthologue, are an Alopeciaareata(AA)isageneticcomplexhairlossdisorder excellent candidate model organism, if it has a reliable characterized by patchy hair loss. Genetic studies have phenotype. For a morpholino-induced knockdown and a supported the hypothesis that AA is autoimmune in nature. missensemutantmodelofabcc6aphenotypicdiscrepancies The identiﬁed loci only explain a limited proportion of are reported, questioning their validity. Therefore, we disease heritability. The goal of the current project is to developed a complete CRISPR/Cas9 knockout model and functionally characterize a regulatory element (RE) and its compared its phenotype to a novel mutant (Sa963) and our effectonIL2RAandothergenesinclosevicinity.Basedon morpholino model. data of a recent meta-analysis on AA, we performed a Materials and Methods: Both carriers of the CRISPR- genome-wide in-silico analysis of REs. We cloned a T-cell induced (c.180delTCGG) and Sa963 (c.2250+1G>A) speciﬁc RE, which contains the identiﬁed lead SNP, into a heterozygotes were out- and incrossed to F4 generations. pGL4.23 vector to perform dual-luciferase-assay (DLA) in Morpholino dosage was optimized to 3ng and co-injected Jurkatcells.Further,weanalyzedtheeffectofthereference with 4.5ng p53-morpholino. Development was monitored and alternative allele on gene transcription in association during embryonic development into adulthood. Mineraliza- with a minimal promoter or with a promoter of a predicted tion was assessed via alizarin red S staining and ImageJ target gene. analysis.94 J.delPicchia We identiﬁed a region mapping into a predicted T-cell missense variant in a conserved domain of the tissue- enhancer, which might inﬂuence the expression of the nonspeciﬁc alkaline phosphatase gene, ALPL. The ALPL nearby AA-susceptibility gene IL2RA. Analysis of CTCF variantshowedfullsegregationwiththediseaseinacohort sites revealed co-localization of IL2RA and the RE in the of 489 KBDs, and was absent from 303 dogs from control same CTCF ﬂanked domain. DLAs of the cloned RE breeds. showedsigniﬁcantdecreaseofgeneexpressioncomparedto Conclusions: In humans, near 350 ALPL mutations are controls. Furthermore, gene expression was signiﬁcantly knowntocausehypophosphatasia,ametabolicbonedisease suppressed after integration of the validated IL2RA with heterogeneous clinical manifestations. We have promoter. However, introduction of the identiﬁed SNP led identiﬁed a recessive ALPL missense change in dogs with to signiﬁcantly less suppression. clinicalandpathologicalﬁndingscompatiblewithhypopho- Taken together, with our experiments we could prove sphatasia.Toourknowledge,thisistheﬁrsttimenaturally- allele-dependent silencing properties of the examined occurringinheritedhypophosphatasiahasbeendescribedin regulatory region. Regulation of the IL2RA gene might animals, and we hope our ﬁndings contribute to under- play a relevant role in the development of regulatory and standing of the disease. effector T-cells in AA. Grants: This study was supported by the Academy of Funded by the EKFS-Promotionskolleg, Bonn. Finland, Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation and Wisdom M.M. Mattern: None. A. Tafazzoli: None. S. Sivalin- Health. gam: None. J. Schultze: None. K. Ludwig: None. M.M. K.Kyöstilä: None.P.Syrjä: None.S.Hundi:None.A. Nöthen: None. P. Kokordelis: None. R.C. Betz: None. Lappalainen: None. R. Viitmaa: None. V. Karkamo: None. H. Lohi: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, P04.04D collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as AhomozygousmissensechangeincanineALPL,ananimal grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Wisdom Health. F. model for hypophosphatasia Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Genoscoper Laboratories Oy. K. Kyöstilä1,2,3,P. Syrjä1,S.Hundi1,2,3,A. Lappalainen4, R. Viitmaa4,V. Karkamo5,H.Lohi1,2,3 P04.05A Loss of GPNMB causes autosomal recessive amyloidosis 1DepartmentofVeterinaryBiosciences,UniversityofHelsinki, cutis dyschromica in humans Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 3Research C.Yang1,S.Lin2,3,C.Chiang4,5,Y.Wu2,3,W.H'ng1,C.Chang1, Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, Y. Chen1, J.Wu1 Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Equine and Small Animal Medicine,UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki,Finland,5Sectionof 1Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Mackay Medical College, Companion Animal Pathology, Finnish Food Safety Authority NewTaipeiCity,Taiwan,3MackayMemorialHospital,Taipei, Evira, Helsinki, Finland Taiwan, 4Tri-Service General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 5National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan Introduction: The purebred dogs are affected with similar skeletal disease as humans. In the present study, we have Amyloidosis cutisdyschromica (ACD) is a distinct form of performed clinical, pathological and genetic examinations primarycutaneousamyloidosischaracterizedbygeneralized to characterize a previously unknown, autosomal recessive hyperpigmentation mottled with small hypopigmented skeletal disease in the Karelian Bear Dog (KBD) breed. macules on the trunks and limbs. Families and sporadic Materials and Methods: Clinical examinations were cases have been reported predominantly in East and performed on six affected dogs and pathological examina- Southeast Asian ethnicities; however, the genetic cause has tion on seven dogs. Exome sequencing was carried out on not been elucidated. Homozygous premature nonsense one affected dog. mutationsleadingtolossoffunctionofGPNMBcontribute Results: Altogether seven affected puppies were recog- to the iris pigment dispersion phenotype in mouse pig- nized in the KBDs. The clinical phenotype varied from a mentaryglaucoma.However,nomutationsinGPNMBhave failure to thrive and seizures at 2 weeks of age to a growth beenidentiﬁedinhumanpigmentaryglaucomaandpigment defectandsevereambulatorydifﬁcultiesat12weeksofage. dispersion syndrome. We establish that the compound het- Serum analysis indicated low alkaline phosphatase activity erozygosity or homozygosity of GPNMB truncating alleles and hypercalcemia. Radiographic and pathological exam- is the cause of autosomal recessive ACD. Six nonsense or inations revealed defective skeletal mineralization and frameshift mutations were identiﬁed in nine individuals ossiﬁcation. Exome sequencing identiﬁed a homozygous diagnosedwithACD.ImmunoﬂuorescenceanalysisofskinAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 95 biopsiesshowedthatGPNMBisexpressedinallepidermal TWIST1) and novel candidate genes such as SPRR1B and cells, with the highest staining observed in melanocytes. TRADD,whichhaveareportedroleinkeratinocytebiology GPNMB staining is signiﬁcantly reduced in the lesional and apoptosis, thereby rendering an involvement of these skin of affected individuals. Hyperpigmented lesions processes in early MPB-pathogenesis likely. The fact that exhibited signiﬁcantly increased amounts of DNA/keratin- associationswithpreviouslyimplicatedgenesweredetected positive amyloid deposits in the papillary dermis and inﬁl- in subcutaneous adipose tissue (TWIST1) and blood trating macrophages compared with hypo-/depigemented (WNT10A)lendsfurthersupporttothehypothesis,thatcells macules. Depigmentation of the lesions was attributable to in the perifollicular environment play a role in MPB. In loss of melanocytes. Intracytoplamic ﬁbrillary aggregates summary, our analyses provide evidence for an MPB- were observed in keratinocytes scattered in the lesional associated genetic regulation of plausible candidate genes epidermis. Thus, our analysis indicates that loss of (SPRR1B,TRADD,WNT10A) and biological processes GPNMB, which has been implicated in melanosome for- (apoptosis,adipogenesis) and yield novel insights into the mation,autophagy,phagocytosis,tissuerepair,andnegative functional effects of current GWAS ﬁndings. regulation of inﬂammation, underlies autosomal recessive S. Heilmann-Heimbach: None. L.M. Hochfeld: None. ACD,andprovidesinsightsintotheetiologyofamyloidosis V. Schüller: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. and pigment dyschromia. C.Yang:None.S.Lin:None.C.Chiang:None.Y.Wu: P04.07C None. W. H'ng: None. C. Chang: None. Y. Chen: None. EvidenceforafunctionalinteractionbetweenWNT10Aand J. Wu: None. EBF1 in the development of androgenetic alopecia (AGA) P04.06B L. M.Hochfeld1,2,D.Broadley3,N.V. Botchkareva3, M.P. MetaXcan gene-based association analysis yields novel Philpott4,S.Schoch5,R.C.Betz1,M.M.Nöthen1,2,S.Heilmann- insights into male-pattern baldness biology Heimbach1,2 S. Heilmann-Heimbach1,2,L. M.Hochfeld1,2,V.Schüller3,the 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of MAANConsortium, M.M. Nöthen1,2 Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University of 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3School of Chemistry and Bioscience, Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Centre for Skin Sciences, University of Bradford, Bradford, 2Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University of United Kingdom, 4Centre for Cell Biology and Cutaneous Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute for Medical Biometry, Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Germany London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany Male-patternbaldness(MPB)isaheritabletraitandGWAS have implicated more than 100 genomic regions. The TheWNT10A-locuson2q35isaknownrisklocusforAGA. majority of associated variants however are located in A reduced WNT10A expression in hair follicle (HF) of risk noncoding regions and their functional relevance remains allele carriers for rs7349332 supports the role of WNT10A unclear.Integrativeanalysesthatlinkgeneticvariationwith as the functionally relevant gene (Heilmann et al., 2013). biologicalfunctionareneededtoidentifyrelevantgenesand This lead variant is in high LD (r2=0.96, D’=0.99) with mechanisms. Here, we used MetaXcan (Barbeira et al., rs3856551, located within a binding site for the transcrip- bioRxiv) on summary statistics from two published large- tion factor EBF1. Interestingly, the gene encoding EBF1 is scale genetic studies for MPB (Heilmann-Heimbach et al., located at the 5q33.3-AGA risk locus, suggesting that 2017; Hagenaars et al., 2017) and gene-expression data changes in EBF1 mediated regulation of WNT10A expres- from human hair follicle (own data) and the GTEx-project sion may contribute to AGA. To investigate this potential (skin, adipose tissue, blood) to test for an association interaction, we performed luciferase assays by co- between MPB and the genetically determined regulation of transfecting (i) luciferase vectors containing the WNT10A gene-expression in these tissues. The analysis identiﬁed promoter and the 2q35-EBF1 binding site with either the associationsbetweenMPBandexpressionlevelsof30(hair risk or the alternate allele and (ii) an EBF1 expression follicle) to 637 genes (skin). Twenty-seven genes showed vector. Our experiments in HEK cells showed that EBF1 signiﬁcant association in one or more tissues after Bonfer- activates the WNT10A promoter and that the WNT10A/ roni correction (P<0.05/27300 gene-tissue pairs). These EBF1 interaction was increased with the risk allele, which included previously implicated genes (e.g. WNT10A, IRF4, togetherwiththe previousmRNA expression data suggests96 J.delPicchia that EBF1 acts as a negative regulator of WNT10A. To of the NFRKB gene on the other allele. This mutation, conﬁrm this interaction in AGA relevant tissue, we tested predicted to be disease causing, is located at the NFRKB- for co-expression of WNT10A and EBF1 in a published WHL domain which belongs to a group of helical domains RNA-Seq dataset of mouse HF (Joost et al., 2016) and involvedinprotein-proteininteractions.Thismightsuggest performed immunoﬂuorescence co-staining in human HF that the interaction activity is probably altered in the ﬁrst andskin.Theanalysesrevealedthestrongestco-expression stages of development. in HF keratinocytes. Therefore, the initial luciferase assays Conclusions: This study revealed for the ﬁrst time the are repeated in human keratinocytes. In parallel, EBF1 involvementoftheNFRKBgeneintoothagenesis.NFRKB knockout experiments in human HF are under way. Taken might be involved in transcriptional regulation. Further together,ourdataprovidetheﬁrstevidenceforafunctional qPCR studies and functional studies will be performed. interaction between WNT10A and EBF1 in AGA M. Haddaji Mastouri: None. P. De Coster: None. N. pathobiology. BenSalah:None.A.Touati:None.I.Veerecke:None.A. L.M. Hochfeld: None. D. Broadley: None. N.V. Zaghabani: None. A. Saad: None. D. H’mida-Ben Botchkareva: None. M.P. Philpott: None. S. Schoch: Brahim: None. P. Coucke: None. None. R.C. Betz: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. S. Heilmann-Heimbach: None. P04.09A Novel heterozygous deletion in PIEZO2 identiﬁed by NGS P04.08D in a familial case with distal arthrogryposis type 5 Genetic investigation of a rare form of severe tooth agenesis: Anodontia C. Rieubland,S.Gallati, A.Schaller M.HaddajiMastouri1,P.DeCoster2,N.BenSalah1,A.Touati1, Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland I.Veerecke3,A. Zaghabani4, A.SAAD1,D.H’mida-Ben Brahim1,P. Coucke3 Introduction: Distal arthrogryposis type 5 (DA5) is char- acterized by multiple congenital contractures of distal 1Laboratory of cytogenetics, molecular genetics and extremities associated with ocular abnormalities, facial reproductive biology, Farhat HACHED Hospital, Sousse, dysmorphism and restrictive lung disease and caused by Tunisia, 2Departement. of Restorative Dentistry and heterozygous PIEZO2 gain of function mutations. Endodontology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, Casereport:A4yearoldboypresentedwithsevereclub 3Department of Medical Genetics, MRB, Ghent University foot,camptodactyly,shortstature,ophtalmoplegia,deep-set Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Private Practice, Sousse, Tunisia eyesandmicrognathia. Thefamilyhistoryrevealedthathis father had congenital arthrogryposis with short stature, Introduction: Andontia refers to the total absence of den- keratoconus and astigmatism. The clinical presentation tition.Itcanaffectpermanentand/ortemporarydentition.In being very suggestive for DA5. Sanger sequencing of most cases, anodontia is associated with different clinical PIEZO2 was performed initially and revealed no mutation. manifestations as a part of syndrome but also non- NGS panel for distal arthrogryposis did also reveal no syndromic forms have been described although their etiol- mutation in the analyzed genes. As no MLPA is available ogy is often unclear. for PIEZO2, in silico CNV analysis was performed and Material and Methods: In this study we explored a detectedadeletionofexons32and33inPIEZO2(c.4634-? Tunisian family with most likely a recessive form of _4855+?del). The deletion was conﬁrmed by RT-qPCR. anodontia of permanent dentition in the proband whereas Discussion: Heterozygous gain of function mutations in the parents and some other family members show PIEZO2causeDA5,GordonandMarden-Walkersyndrome hypodontia. We performed DNA targeted sequencing of whereas homozygous loss of function mutations cause candidate genes, PAX9, MSX1, WNT10A and AXIN2 and muscularatrophy,perinatal respiratorydistress,progressive consequently whole exome sequencing (WES). arthrogryposis, scoliosis and loss of proprioception. We Results: Sequencing of the 4 genes did not reveal any hypothesize that the in frame deletion of exons 32 and 33 causative mutation. Therefore, we performed WES on the causes a dominant negative effect resulting in a gain of anodontia patient. We selected six homozygous mutations function of the channel activity. andsegregationanalysisontheremainingfamilymembers. Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of an intragenic OneoftheseisamissensemutationlocatedinNFRKBgene deletion in PIEZO2 in a family with autosomal dominant (Nuclear FactorRelatedtoKappa-B-bindingprotein)inthe DA5 diagnosed by NGS. Inframe deletions of PIEZO2 proband.Interestingly,intherestofthefamilythismutation mightbeafrequentcauseofDA5.AsnoMLPAisavailable is compound heterogeneous with most likely a duplicationAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 97 for PIEZO2, in silico CNV analysis using NGS may be a S. Oguz: None. P.O. Simsek Kiper: None. G.E. Utine: useful tool to diagnose intragenic deletions. None. Y. Alanay: None. S. Ozen: None. K. Boduroglu: C. Rieubland: None. S. Gallati: None. A. None. M. Alikasifoglu: None. Schaller: None. P04.11C P04.10B The effects of calcium-sensing receptor CASR genotypes, Camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis treatment duration, gender bone health and mineral syndrome in a large family: A clinical condition with a metabolism in chronic renal failure patients diagnostic challange P.Ata1,B.Erkal1,D.Gultekin2,B.Altas2,B.Celik2,D.Kayır2, S. Oguz1,P. O.Simsek Kiper2, G.E. Utine2,Y. Alanay3, A. Low2,A. Eren3,S. Tuglular4 S. Ozen4,K. Boduroglu2,M. Alikasifoglu1 1Marmara University, School of Medicine Medical Genetics, 1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University, School of Medicine, Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Istanbul,Turkey,3KocUniversity,Istanbul,Turkey,4Marmara FacultyofMedicine,DepartmentofPediatrics,Departmentof University, School of Medicine Nephrology, Istanbul, Turkey Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Acıbadem University FacultyofMedicine,DepartmentofPediatrics,Departmentof Introduction:Theaimofthisstudyistoexaminetheeffect Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Hacettepe University of the CaSR genotype, which signiﬁcantly affects Ca, P, FacultyofMedicine,DepartmentofPediatrics,Departmentof PTH values on the disease progression in chronic renal Pediatric Rheumatology, Ankara, Turkey failure (CRF) patients. Materials and Methods: Fortyfıve CRF patients on Introduction: Camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara- hemodialysis treatment aged between 15-80yrs who pericarditis syndrome (CACP; OMIM 208250) is a rare admitted between 1994-2017 were included. Serum PTH, autosomal recessive disorder caused by PRG4 mutations. Ca2+ and P values were examined. The control group PRG4 product is a glycoprotein called lubricin. We report included50healthypatientswithoutCRF,bonediseaseand on the clinical and molecular ﬁndings of two related osteoporotic risk factors. Genomic DNA isolation was families who were initially diagnosed with JIA, and PRG4 performedusingtheGentraQiagenkit.CaSRallele-speciﬁc mutations were identiﬁed in the follow-up. PCR analysis was performed.Findings: Patients’ average Materials and Methods: After the referral of the ﬁrst age was 60.5 ±17.5 years, (male/ female 53.3% / 46.7%) familywiththreeaffectedindividualswithCACP,alinkage Patients with hemodialysis treatment for less than 3 years analysiswasdoneandahighLODscoreonthelongarmof had normal CaxP value while this value was increased for chromosome 1 was found. However, no further studies patients with hemodialysis over 3 years. The pathological could be performed, and the family was lost in the follow- CaxP value was found in 8,3% (n = 2/24) of the male up. Years later, and after the discovery of PRG4 mutations patientsand38,09%(n=8/21)ofthefemalepatients(p= in CACP, another patient from another family with a 0,029). In the patient group, the 990th codon AA diagnosis of JIA who was not responsive to anti-rheumatic polymorphism in the CaSR gene was found to be 32.4% treatmentwasreferredwithasuspicionofageneticdisorder (n = 12) while in the control group it was 23.1% (n = 6). of the skeleton. With the help of the pedigree analysis, it Conclusion: The CaSR kodon 990 AA allele seemed to was revealed that these two families were actually related, beariskfactorforbonehealthinourpatientgroup.Among and a recent contact with the ﬁrst family could be CRF patients with increased hemodialysis duration osteo- established years after. porosis and fracture risks were increased. Risk of develop- Results: Molecular analysis in all patients revealed a ing bone disease for female patients was higher than that homozygous deletion of two nucleotide of males. (c.1910_1911delCT)inthehighlyrepetitiveregionofexon P. Ata: None. B. Erkal: None. D. Gultekin: None. B. 6 of PRG4 in all patients. Altas: None. B. Celik: None. D. Kayır: None. A. Low: Conclusions: Patients with CACP syndrome can easily None. A. Eren: None. S. Tuglular: None. be misdiagnosed as JIA, leading to unnecessary treatment and a delay for the actual diagnosis. In patients with P04.12D arthropathic conditions, CACP should be kept in mind, WES in 42 trios of syndromic and isolated Chiari especially in the presence of progressive symptoms and Malformation type 1: how to deﬁne the genetic cause in a parental consanguinity. high clinical heterogeneous condition98 J.delPicchia A. LaBarbera1,A. Provenzano1,L. Tiberi1, R.Artuso2, P04.13A V. Palazzo2, P.Reho1,E. Bosi1,A. Pagliazzi1, F.Peluso1, Exome sequencing of two Italian pedigrees with non S. Landini1,I.Sani2,L. Giunti2,S. Guarducci2,M.Pantaleo2, isolatedChiarimalformationtypeIrevealscandidategenes B. Lucherini2, M.Scagnet3,L. Genitori3,S. Giglio1 for cranio-facial development 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and P. DeMarco1,L. Tattini2, A.Accogli1,G.Piatelli1, ExperimentalBiomedicalSciences'MarioSerio',Universityof M.Pavanello1,D.Tortora1, A.Cama1,V. Capra1 Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’sUniversityHospital,Florence,Italy,3Neurosurgery 1Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 2Università di Pisa, Unit,AnnaMeyerChildren'sHospital,UniversityofFlorence, Pisa, Italy Florence, Italy Chiari malformation type I (CMI) is a congenital abnorm- Chiari malformation type 1 (CM1) is a congenital anom- ality of the cranio-cerebral junction with an incidence of 1 aly of cranio-cerebral junctions characterized by under- in 1280. CMI is characterized by underdevelopment of the developmentoftheoccipitalboneandposteriorfossa(PF) occipital bone and posterior fossa (PF) and consequent and consequent cerebellar tonsil herniation across the cerebellartonsilherniation.Thepresenceforageneticbasis foramen magnum. This condition can impair the normal toCMIissupportedbymanylinesofevidence.Thecellular ﬂow of cerebral spinal ﬂuid (CSF) leading to syr- and molecular mechanisms leading to CM1 are poorly ingomyelia. Patients display a high degree of clinical understood. The occipital bone formation is dependent on variability depending on the compression of the tissue, complex interactions between genes and molecules with nerves and on the buildup of CSF pressure. CM1 is also pathologies resulting from disruption of this delicate pro- associated with known syndromes, (e.g. craniosynos- cess.Whole-exomesequencingofaffectedandnotaffected tosis), and is often reported as clinical sign in more individualsfromtwoItalianfamilieswithnonisolatedCMI complex phenotypes, but the molecular mechanisms of was undertaken. Single nucleotide and short insertion- isolated CM1 are not yet known. To understand the deletion variants were prioritized using KGGSeq- molecular basis and which factors could contribute to the knowledge-based platform. We identiﬁed three hetero- high heterogeneity, we performed WES of 42 trios with zygous missense variants: DKK1 c121G>A (p.(A41T)) in sporadic and syndromic, without craniosynostosis, CM1. the ﬁrst family, and the LRP4 c.2552C>G (p.(T851R)) and WES of syndromic cases provided a diagnosis of distinct BMP1 c.941G>A (p.(R314H)) in the second family. The genetic disorders, in which pathogenic variants were variants were located at highly conserved residues, segre- associated to bone dysplasia, growth retardation and gated with the disease, but they were not observed in more resistance to gonadotropins. In sporadic cases, variants in than100unaffectedin-housecontrols.DKK1encodesfora genesinvolvedincommonmolecularpathwayshavebeen potentsolubleWNTinhibitorthatbindstoLRP5andLRP6, identiﬁed; these are all associated with modeling and and is itself regulated by BMPs. DKK1 is required for deposition of bone matrix and with regulatory processes, embryonic head development and patterning. LRP4 is a all requested in the same pathway. In 75% of trios we novel osteoblast expressed receptor for DKK1 and a WNT foundvariantsinthesamerecurrentgenes,sharedbothby and BMP signaling pathways integrator. Screening of isolated and syndromic CM1 cases; functional tests on DKK1 in a cohort of 65 CMI sporadic patients identiﬁed bone biopsies of these patients are underway to demon- anothermissensevariant,thec.359G>T(p.(R120L)),intwo strate the pathogenicity of these genes. Our data remark unrelated patients. These ﬁndings implicated the WNT complex interactions among several genes involved in signaling in the correct development of the cranial different steps of the same pathways, underlying the high mesenchyme originating the PF. clinical-genetic heterogeneity of CM1. P. De Marco: None. L. Tattini: None. A. Accogli: A.LaBarbera:None.A.Provenzano:None.L.Tiberi: None.G.Piatelli:None.M.Pavanello:None.D.Tortora: None. R. Artuso: None. V. Palazzo: None. P. Reho: None. A. Cama: None. V. Capra: None. None.E.Bosi:None.A.Pagliazzi:None.F.Peluso:None. S. Landini: None. I. Sani: None. L. Giunti: None. S. P04.14B Guarducci: None. M. Pantaleo: None. B. Lucherini: AsmallhomozygousCHST11deletioninchondrodysplasia, None. M. Scagnet: None. L. Genitori: None. S. brachydactyly,overriding digits, clino-symphalangism and Giglio: None. synpolydactyly R. Shabbir1,G.Nalbant2,N.Ahmad3,S. Malik1,A. Tolun2Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 99 1Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan, 2Bogazici Cell Laboratory, Centre of Excellence for Advanced Sciences, University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Institute of Biomedical and National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt Genetic Engineering, Islamabad, Pakistan Introduction: Cleft palate is one of the most common Introduction:CHST11isamembraneproteinofGolgithat congenital craniofacial defects that may present alone or in catalyses the transfer of sulphate to position 4 of the N- association with various genetic disorders. Repairing such acetylgalactosamine residue of chondroitin. Chondroitin defectisveryimportanttorestoreoralfunctionsandnormal sulphate is the predominant proteoglycan in cartilage, and facialfeatures.Regenerativemedicineandstemcelltherapy itssulphationisimportantinthedevelopinggrowthplateof are emerging ﬁelds that have shown great potentials in cartilage.Ahomozygousdeletionencompassingpartofthe treating various diseases. Here, we follow a regenerative gene and the embedded microRNA MIR3922 had been approach by introducing a method in which we use auto- detected in a woman with hand/foot malformation and logous bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMNCs) com- malignant lymphoproliferative disease. Chst11 deﬁcient bined with platelet-rich ﬁbrin (PRF) and nano- mousehasseverechondrodysplasia,congenitalarthritisand hydroxyapatite for bone regeneration in patients with uni- neonatallethality.Wesearchedforthecausativevariantfor lateral alveolar clefts. the unusual combination of limb malformations with vari- Materials and Methods: The study included 10 patients able expressivity accompanied by skeletal defects in a withunilateralalveolarcleftdefectsandofagerange8to15 consanguineous Pakistani kindred. years. Autologous BMMNCs were isolated using the Materials and Methods: We performed detailed clinical density gradient separation method and seeded on a investigations in family members. Homozygosity mapping collagen sponge. The seeded collagen sponge was then usingSNPgenotypedatawasperformedtomapthedisease used in combination with nano-hydroxyapatite and auto- locus and exome sequencing to identify the underlying logous PRF to repair alveolar cleft defects via the molecular defect. regenerative approach. The effectiveness of the technique Results: The limb malformations include brachydactyly, wasevaluatedafter12monthsoffollowupviaclinicaland overriding digits and clino-symphalangism in hands and radiographic assessments. feet, and syndactyly and hexadactyly in feet. Skeletal Results: All patients healed probably without any defects include scoliosis, dislocated patellae and ﬁbulae, complications. During the 12-month follow-up, no donor and pectus excavatum. The disease locus is mapped to a site morbidities have been reported. Postoperative pain, 1.6-Mbregionat12q23,harbouringahomozygousin-frame bleeding, and swelling were within the normal for same deletion of 15 nucleotides in CHST11. Novel variant surgical procedures. Cone beam radiographs showed c.467_481del (p.L156_N160del) is deduced to lead to the successful complete bone regeneration in all cases. deletionofﬁveevolutionarilyhighlyconservedaminoacids Conclusion: Results of this study suggest that a mixture and predicted as damaging to protein by in silico analysis. of autologous BMMNCs, nano-hydroxyapatite, and PRF Conclusions: Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the crucial role of greatly promote bone regeneration providing a novel CHST11inskeletalmorphogenesisandshowthat CHST11 therapeutic strategy for alveolar cleft defects. defects have variable manifestations that include a variety H.H. El-Ahmady: None. A.F. Abd Elazeem: None. N. of limb malformations and skeletal defects. E.B. Ahmed: None. M.A. Abdelrahman: None. M.A. (Grant: TUBITAK114Z829) Abderazik: None. R.Shabbir:None.G.Nalbant:None.N.Ahmad:None. S. Malik: None. A. Tolun: None. P04.16D Expanded phenotypic spectrum of type I collagenopathy P04.15C Regenerative approach for treating maxillofacial defects J.Lee1, B.Lim2,M.Choi3, T.Cho2, J.Chae2 associated with some genetic disorders 1Gachon University Gil Medical Center, Incheon, Korea, H.H.El-Ahmady1,A. F.Abd Elazeem2,3,1, N.E. B. Ahmed2,3, Republic of, 2Seoul National University Children’s Hospital, M.A. Abdelrahman2, M.A.Abderazik1 Seoul,Korea,Republicof,3SeoulNationalUniversity College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of 1Al-Azhar Cleft Lip and Palate Treatment Center, Faculty of Dental Medicine for Girls, Al-Azhar university, Cairo, Egypt, ItisknownthattypeIcollagenopathyhasabroad-spectrum 2Department of Oro-dental Genetics, Center of Medical phenotypic variability. Here, we report a case of a Korean Excellence, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 3Stem girl with a heterozygous COL1A1 mutation who had an atypical presentation. A 26-month-old girl presented with100 J.delPicchia delayed motor development and failure to thrive. She had depending on whether the CL/P is associated with another severe growth retardation. She exhibited right-sided plagi- anomaly or not. In general, patients with syCL/P follow ocephaly,bluesclerae,andfacialdysmorphism,includinga Mendelian inheritance, while those with nsCL/P, have a small pointed chin, frontal bossing, and a triangular face, complex etiology and as such, do not adhere to Mendelian buthadmicrocephaly.Whole-exomesequencingrevealeda inheritance. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) novel de novo heterozygous sequence variant in COL1A1 have identiﬁed approximately 30 risk loci for nsCL/P, (p.Gly1127Asp), which was validated by Sanger sequen- which could explain a small fraction of heritability. cing.Radiological ﬁndingshowedgeneralizedosteoporosis Materials and Methods: To identify variants causing with progressive scoliosis of the spine without evidence of nsCL/P, we conducted Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) platyspondyly related to fractures and bowing of the long on 84 individuals with nsCL/P, drawn from multiplex bones, and markedly delayed carpal bone age. Muscle families (n=46). pathologyshowedamarkedsizevariationofmyoﬁbersand Results: We identiﬁed rare damaging variants in four selective type 1 atrophy. This study expanded the clinical genes known to be mutated in syCL/P: TP63 (1 family), and genetic spectrum of type I collagenopathy with a TBX1(1family),LRP6(1family)andGRHL3(2families), COL1A1 variant. Therefore, we suggest that type I col- and clinical reassessment conﬁrmed the isolated nature of lagenopathy should be considered in the patients who have their CL/P. some features of osteogenesis imperfecta simultaneously Conclusion: These data demonstrate that CL/P patients with atypical features such as facial dysmorphism. without cardinal signs of a syndrome may still carry a J. Lee: None. B. Lim: None. M. Choi: None. T. Cho: mutationinagenelinkedtosyCL/P.Rarecodingandnon- None. J. Chae: None. coding variants in syCL/P genes could in part explain the controversial question of “missing heritability” for nsCL/P. P04.17A Therefore, gene panels designed for diagnostic testing of Whole exome sequencing identiﬁes mutations in 10% of syCL/PshouldbeusedfornsCL/Ppatients,especiallywhen familial non-syndromic cleft lip and/or palate patients in there isat least 3rddegree family history. Thiswould allow genes mutated in well-known syndromes a more precise management, follow-up and genetic counseling. Moreover, stratiﬁed cohorts would allow M.Basha1, B.Demeer2,N.Revencu3,S.Theys4,S. BouSaba5, hunting for genetic modiﬁers. O.Boute6,B. Devauchelle7,G.François8,B. Bayet9, M.Basha:None.B.Demeer:None.N.Revencu:None. M.Vikkula10 S. Theys: None. S. Bou Saba: None. O. Boute: None. B. Devauchelle: None. G. François: None. B. Bayet: None. 1de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Center for Human M. Vikkula: None. Genetics, CLAD nord de France, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 3Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires P04.18B Saint-Luc,UniversityofLouvain,Brussels,Belgium,4Pediatric BBS9 as potential tissue-speciﬁc key protein in BBSome Dentistry and Oral Care for Special Needs, Cliniques binding and ciliary trafﬁcking in NCS patients universitaires Saint-Luc, University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 5Department of Orthodontics and dentofacial M.Barba1,L. DiPietro1,C. Bernardini1,L. Massimi1, orthopedics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, University of G.Tamburrini1,S. DellaLonga2,A. Arcovito1,O.Parolini1, Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 6Center for Human Genetics, S. A.Boyadjiev3, W.Lattanzi1 Lille, France, 7Service of Maxillofacial Surgery and Stomatology, CHU Amiens-Picardie, Amiens, France, 1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 8Department of Pediatrics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, 2University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy, 3University of University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 9Centre California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States Labiopalatin, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, University of Louvain, Brussels, Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NSC) is a congenital Belgium, 10Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, malformation due to the premature ossiﬁcation of calvarial University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium sutures, with an unclear molecular etiopathogenesis. The Bardet-Biedl Syndrome-associated gene 9 (BBS9), already Introduction: Oral clefts i.e. clefts of the lip and/or cleft associated to NCS by GWAS, encodes a member of the palate (CL/P) are the most common craniofacial birth well-characterized class of BBS proteins that interact defects with an approximate incidence of ~1/700. To date through their C-term to form an octameric complex named physicians stratify patients with oral clefts into either syn- BBSome, necessary for ciliogenesis and ciliary function. dromic CL/P (syCL/P) or non-syndromic CL/P (nsCL/P) Preliminary data identiﬁed a suture speciﬁc signature,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 101 including BBS9 and several genes involved in primary By describing 10 new patients recruited from a population ciliumsignalingandassembly.Inparticular,weshowedthe attending centres for Human Genetics, we further delineate overexpression of 5 spliced isoforms of BBS9 in fused the clinical spectrum of a new syndromic craniosynostosis suture specimens of single-suture midline NCS patients. resembling Crouzon syndrome. Singularly, it is inherited The aim of this study is to clarify the mechanism through according to an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. which BBS9 exerts its regulatory function during the Missense mutations in IL11RA, a gene encoding alpha osteogenic commitmentand differentiation ofsomatic stem subunit of interleukin 11 receptor, were at cause in all ﬁve cells inside skull bone. We conﬁrmed through qPCR the families,fourofthemnotreported,includingtwointheIg- overexpression of the selected BBS9 splice isoforms in likeC2-typedomain.Asubsetofpatientshadanassociated mesenchymalstromalcells(CMSC)isolatedfromfused(p) connective tissue disorder with joint hypermobility and andunfused(n)suturesofNCSpatients.Then,weassessed intervertebral discs fragility. Two of our patients had syr- by immunoﬂuorescence that p-CMSC showed a reduced ingomyelia. A lower ﬁgure of teeth anomalies than pre- number of primary cilia compared with same patient-n- viouslyreportedinthetwolargeseriesofpatientsevaluated CMSC. Computational modeling of the upregulated iso- in dental institutes points towards an ascertainment bias. forms showed structural differences in the C-term of the E. Brischoux-Boucher: None. A. Trimouille: None. G. proteins, predicting that their binding afﬁnity within the Baujat: None. A. Goldenberg: None. E. Schaefer: None. BBSome may be affected. Taken together, these data sug- B.Guichard:None.P.Hannequin:None.S.Baer:None. gest that selected BBS9 protein isoforms show a tissue- C.Cabrol:None.E.Weber:None.G.Godfrin:None.M. speciﬁc increased expression in osteogenic precursors Lenoir: None. D. Lacombe: None. C. Collet: None. L. residing in NCS fused sutures, owing to a less effective Van Maldergem: None. assembly of the BBSome, which impairs ciliogenesis. [Funding support: NIH-NIDCR grant R01DE16886, Fed- P04.20D erazione GENE and Università Cattolica] Targeted exome sequencing analysis in Turkish non- M. Barba: None. L. Di Pietro: None. C. Bernardini: syndromic craniosynostosis patients None. L. Massimi: None. G. Tamburrini: None. S. Della Longa:None.A.Arcovito:None.O.Parolini:None.S.A. E. Yilmaz,B. Nur,E.Mihci, O.M.Alper Boyadjiev: None. W. Lattanzi: None. AKDENIZ UNIVERSITY, ANTALYA, Turkey P04.19C IL11RA-related Crouzon-like autosomal recessive Introduction: Craniosynostosis is described as an early craniosynostosis in ten new patients: which are the fusion of one or more calvarial sutures. Early closure of differences? these sutures results with new head shape that inhibits the normal growth and development of the brain. Worldwide, E. Brischoux-Boucher1, A.Trimouille2,G.Baujat3, the estimated prevalence of the syndrome is 1 in 2500. A. Goldenberg4, E.Schaefer5,B. Guichard6,P. Hannequin7, Craniosynostosis is divided into two sub-goups: syndromic S. Baer5, C.Cabrol1,E. Weber8,G.Godfrin9,M.Lenoir10, and non-syndromic (nsCRN). More than 70% of the D.Lacombe2,C. Collet11,L. VanMaldergem1 patients have nsCRN. Although more than 50 genes were identiﬁed, the genetic cause is mostly unknown. Approxi- 1Centre de genetique humaine CHU Besançon, Besancon, mately 24% of cases can be genetically identiﬁed. France, 2Service de génétique médicale CHU Bordeaux, Method:UnrelatedseventeennsCRNTurkishcaseshave Bordeaux, France, 3Institut Imagine CHU Necker-Enfants- been sequenced by using Dysmorphia and Dsyplasia Malades, Paris, France, 4Service de genetique CHU Rouen, Research Panel v2, includes 519 genes, of Ion AmpliSeq. Rouen, France, 5Service de genetique médicale CHU IonS5 sequencing technology was used and data were Strasbourg,Strasbourg,France,6Servicedechirurgiemaxillo- analyzed with Ingenuity software. Genetic variants in faciale CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 7Service de several genes known to cause craniosynostosis were nrurochirurgie CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 8Service de ﬁltered. Clinically pathogenic variants were checked and chirurgie maxillo-faciale CHU Besançon, Besancon, France, conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. 9ServicedeneurochirurgieCHUBesançon,Besancon,France, Results: In six of the cases (35.3%), we identiﬁed six 10Service de radiologie CHU Besançon, Besancon, France, different mutations (including three novel ones) in ERF, 11Service de biochimie et biologie moléculaire CHU FREM1 and TCF12 genes. The novel missense mutations Lariboisière, Paris, France are p.P1802L(c.5405C>T) and p.G1493R(c.4477G>A) in FREM1, and frameshift mutation is c.1106_111delCTCT- CAC(p.P369fs*26) in TCF12 gene. POLYPHEN,102 J.delPicchia PROVEAN and SIFT analysis revealed that p.P1802L and calvarial niche. Our data seem to suggest that in NCS the p.G1493R are predicted to be deleterious and damaging in vivo tissue microenvironment may cause the enhanced with scores of 0.997; -9.07; 0.003 and 1.000; -3.99; 0.019, osteogenic differentiation of suture MSCs leading to pre- respectively. maturesutureclosure.Fundingsupport:FederazioneGENE Conclusion: Our data highlights the importance of and Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore increased diagnostic rate (35.3%) with the use of this M. Barba: None. L. Di Pietro: None. C. Prampolini: panel, and help to solve the genotype-phenotype correla- None. V. Orticelli: None. L. Massimi: None. P. Frassa- tions in nsCRN. nito: None. S.A. Boyadjiev: None. M. Caldarelli: None. Acknowledgement: This research was supported by G. Tamburrini: None. O. Parolini: None. W. grant from Scientiﬁc Research Project Council of Akdeniz Lattanzi: None. University (#TDK-2015-933). E.Yilmaz:None.B.Nur: None.E.Mihci:None.O.M. P04.22B Alper: None. The outcome of broadgenetic screening in a cohort of 144 patients with craniosynostosis P04.21A Characterization of the calvarial suture skeletogenic stem A. Topa1,2,A. Rohlin2,L. Lovmar2,G.Stenman1,2,L. Kölby3 cell niche in nonsyndromic craniosynostosis 1Department of Pathology and Genetics, University of M.Barba1,L. DiPietro2,C. Prampolini2, V.Orticelli2, Gothenburg,TheSahlgrenskaAcademy,Gothenburg,Sweden, L. Massimi2,P. Frassanito2, S.A. Boyadjiev3,M.Caldarelli2, 2Department ofClinical Pathology and Genetics, Sahlgrenska G.Tamburrini2,O.Parolini2,W.Lattanzi2 University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Department of Plastic Surgery, University of Gothenburg, The Sahlgrenska 1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden 2Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 3UniversityofCaliforniaDavis,Sacramento,CA,UnitedStates Approximately 1 in 2000 children are affected by cranio- synostosis. During the last few years, mutations in several Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NCS) is the congenital genes have been identiﬁed as cause of early closing of the premature fusion of skull sutures. The suture mesenchyme cranial sutures. The list increases constantly as new genes houses a skull-speciﬁc stem cell niche, plausibly impaired with relation to craniosynostosis are detected. Craniosy- in NCS fused suture sites. To test this hypothesis, we nostosis occurs isolated or associated with other symptoms characterized the stem cell niche of open and fused sutures including malformations as part of several syndromic dis- of NCS patients. Lineage-speciﬁc markers were analyzed, orders - the most known are represented by Pfeiffer, by qPCR and immunoﬂuorescence, in suture tissues and in Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss, Antley-Bixler, Apert, Saethre- calvarial mesenchymal stem cells (CMSC). MSC from Chotzen and Muenke syndromes. The aim of our project alternative tissues served as controls. We analyzed the was to study the prevalence and spectrum of the genetic localization of THY1 (skeletal stemness-marker), GLI1 disorderswhichareassociatedwithearlysutureclosingina (putative calvarial stemness-marker) and AXIN2 uniquepatientcohortincluding144individualswithmostly (mesenchymal cell fate determinant) in suture tissue sec- uni- or bicoronal synostosis. The mutational screening of tions: AXIN2 resulted mainly expressed at the endosteal our patient cohort has been performed by using a custom- ossiﬁed side, while THY1 and GLI1 were primarily designed NGS-enrichment panel including 63 expressed within the trabeculae, enriched with proliferating craniosynostosis-related genes selected from OMIM. In 91 cells. Both NCS suture tissues and CMSC isolated thereof out of 144 screened patients (approximately 63%), either a expressedreducedlevelsofTEKandENPEP(bonemarrow known previously reported pathogenic variant or a likely stem cells differentiation markers) compared with controls. pathogenic variant has been detected. As expected, the AXIN2 levels were higher in open suture-derived CMSC majority of variants have occurred in the craniosynostosis than in fused suture cells and in controls. Upon in vitro “core genes”: FGFR2, TWIST1, FGFR3, TCF12, EFNB1 osteogenic induction, the expression of THY1 and GLI1 and POR. However, novel likely pathogenic variants have decreased, whereas AXIN2 levels increased, in both open- beenobservedalsoinIL11RA,KMT2DandSKI-genes.Our and fused- suture derived CMSC. CMSCs isolated from studyshowsthatabroadgeneticscreeningusingatargeted both fused and unfused sutures shared the same marker NGSassayhaveahighdiagnosticyieldinalargecohortof expression proﬁle, indicating that explant cultures allowed patients with craniosynostosis. + + selecting comparable cell populations, THY1 /GLI1 A.Topa:None.A.Rohlin:None.L.Lovmar:None.G. representing the stem cell population within the human Stenman: None. L. Kölby: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 103 P04.24D microscopy in skin biopsies of all CL subtypes and found Ultrastructural elastic ﬁber morphology in cutis laxa discriminative and speciﬁc ﬁndings that correlate with the reﬂects the underlying pathogenesis and supports a novel main presenting symptoms (emphysema, arterial tortuosity, clinical classiﬁcation skeletal defects/mental disability with or without intrauter- ine growth retardation/cataract). Moreover, EF ultrastuc- A. Beyens1,2,R. De Rycke3,H.Syryn1, B.Fischer-Zirnsak4, tural morphology reﬂects the involved molecular T. VanDamme1,I. Hausser5,M. DeBruyne3,M.Morroni6, pathogenesis and provides new insights in elastic ﬁber S. Nampoothiri7, K.Mahesh8, U.Kornak4,Z. Urban9,S. Hadj- biogenesis. Rabia10,C. Bodemer11,S. De Schepper2,E. C. Davis12, Conclusion: Our novel nosology of the CL syndromes B. Callewaert1 provides a practical approach to the broad differential diagnosisofCLsyndromes.Theclassiﬁcationformsabasis 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, to integrate the clinical presentation with the pathogenesis Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Dermatology, Ghent and ultrastructural EF defects and might bode for new University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of management guidelines and therapeutic approaches. Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, (Grant Reference BOF01N04516) Belgium, 4Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, A.Beyens:None.R.DeRycke:None.H.Syryn:None. Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, B. Fischer-Zirnsak: None. T. Van Damme: None. I. 5Institute of Pathology, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Hausser:None.M.DeBruyne:None.M.Morroni:None. Heidelberg, Germany, 6Department of Experimental and S. Nampoothiri: None. K. Mahesh: None. U. Kornak: Clinical Medicine, Section of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, None. Z. Urban: None. S. Hadj-Rabia: None. C. School of Medicine, Università Politecnica delle Marche and Bodemer: None. S. De Schepper: None. E.C. Davis: Electron Microscopy Unit, United Hospitals, Ancona, Italy, None. B. Callewaert: None. 7DepartmentofPediatricGenetics,AmritaInstituteofMedical Sciences and Research Center, Kochi, India, 8Department of P04.25A Pediatric Cardiology, School of Medicine, Kochi, India, Diversemechanisms ofgermline andsomaticmosaicism in 9Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public CYLD cutaneous syndrome Health,UniversityofPittsburgh,Pittsburgh,PA,UnitedStates, 10Service de Dermatologie, CHU Paris - Hôpital Necker- M.Areﬁ1, V.Wilson2,D.Bajwa1,S. Zwolinski2,N.Sinclair1, Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 11Centre MAGEC (Maladies P. Brennan2,N.Bown2,D.Bourn2,M.Santibanez-Koref1, rares Génétiques a Expression Cutanée), Service de J.Burn1,N.Rajan1 Dermatologie, CHU Paris - Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 12Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada Kingdom, 2Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom Background: Cutis laxa (CL) syndromes are a hetero- geneous group of multisystem disorders that share a loose, Six unsolved cases that met clinical diagnostic criteria for redundant skin as a common feature reﬂecting elastic ﬁber CYLD cutaneous syndrome, deemed to be mutation nega- (EF) deﬁciency. The pathogenesis of each of the CL sub- tive following Sanger sequencing, were investigated for types is different but affects elastogenesis. However, light clinical and genetic features of mosaicism. One case microscopy of the dermis is non-discriminative and the demonstrated 8% blood mosaicism for a pathogenic muta- recently observed vast molecular heterogeneity mitigates tion using a NGS assay targeting CYLD. We found no the clinical validity and practicality of the current classiﬁ- causative lesions in the blood of ﬁve of the six remaining cation, based on the mode of inheritance and systemic cases. In two cases, we investigated tumour tissue. In the involvement. ﬁrst case, two tumour samples demonstrated a recurrent Aims:WeaimtoclassifytheCLsubtypesbymeansofa 19bp deletion in the skin only. In the second, ﬁve distinct simple ﬂowchart and to evaluate correlations between EF mutations resulting in a stop codon in CYLD were detected ultrastructural morphology (as evaluated by transmission in ﬁve tumours. SNP array analysis of three tumours electron microscopy) and clinical presentation. demonstrated a recurrent 5.5Mb deletion encompassing Results: Following literature review, we developed a 7- CYLDand23othergenes.Thispatienthadadaughterwho step ﬂowchart to classify the CL subtypes. As a proof of had developmental delay and unilateral renal agenesis, but principle, we systematically evaluated 68 CL patients from no cylindromas. This phenotype has been reported in other ourin-housedatabaseandcouldallocate95%ofpatientsto patients with large germline deletions including CYLD, the right gene. We performed transmission electron suggesting transmission of the deletion. The remaining104 J.delPicchia three cases had clinical features suggesting cutaneous autoantibodies and dermatomyositis. The increased pre- mosaicism. We conclude that, ﬁrstly, mosaicism may be sence of viral peptides in DM patients, particularly ssRNA detectable in the blood and account for the presence of andretro-transcribingviruses,agreeswithpathwaysknown cylindromas in the skin. Secondly, some patients may only to be regulated by TRIMs and points towards increased have a unilateral linear arrangement or cluster of tumours, susceptibility for certain viral families. The increased with absence of mosaic mutation in the blood suggesting detection of peptides against potentially ‘pathogenic’ but cutaneous mosaicism alone. Thirdly, mosaic mutations not‘non-pathogenic’bacteriafromthesamefamiliesmight detectable in the blood may affect the germline and be play a key role in the development of the disease. transmissibletooffspring;wherethisisduetoacontiguous S. Megremis: None. T. Walker: None. X. He: None. J. deletion involving CYLD, the phenotype may involve O’Sullivan:None.A.Payton:None.N.Pendleton:None. multiple organ systems. L. Hampson: None. R. Cooper: None. W. Ollier: None. M. Areﬁ: None. V. Wilson: None. D. Bajwa: None. S. H. Chinoy: None. I. Hampson: None. J. Lamb: None. Zwolinski: None. N. Sinclair: None. P. Brennan: None. N. Bown: None. D. Bourn: None. M. Santibanez-Koref: P04.27C None. J. Burn: None. N. Rajan: None. A whole exome study identiﬁes novel candidate genes for vertebral bone marrow signal changes (Modic changes) P04.26B Microbial signatures in TIF1γ autoantibody positive M.Kraatari1,2,3,S.Skarp1,2,4,J. Niinimäki3,5,J. Karppinen1,3,6, dermatomyositis patients M.Männikkö1,2,4 S. Megremis1,T. Walker1, X.He1,J.O’Sullivan1,A. Payton1, 1Center for Life Course Epidemiology and Systems Medicine, N.Pendleton1,L.Hampson1,R.Cooper2,W.Ollier1,H.Chinoy1, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, I.Hampson1,J.Lamb1 2Center for Cell – Matrix Research, Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3MedicalResearchCenterOulu,OuluUniversityHospitaland 2University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom UniversityofOulu,Oulu,Finland,4BiocenterOulu,University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 5Research Unit of Medical Imaging, Introduction: Tripartite motif-containing (TRIM) proteins Physics and Technology, Faculty of Medicine, University of are involved in innate immunity.Reports support a role for Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 6Finnish Institute of Occupational microbial infections in dermatomyositis (DM); TIF1γ Health,HealthandWorkAbility,andtheDisabilityPrevention (TRIM33)autoantibodypositivepatientsmayhavereduced Center, Oulu, Finland ability to restrict pathogen infection. Material and Methods: Serum total Ig from 20 DM Lumbar disc degeneration (LDD) isone of thecontributing patients and 20 age-matched healthy controls were pooled factorsbehindlowbackpain(LBP).Modicchange(MC)is for competitive panning and clonal expansion of the a phenotype of LDD and is visualized as bone marrow FliTrxTMbacterialrandom-peptidesurface displaysystem. signal intensity changes on magnetic resonance imaging. DNA libraries were sequenced using pair-end high- MC is a heritable trait with heritability estimation around throughput sequencing. Translated peptide sequences were 30%. It is strongly associated with LBP. We studied two searched for maximum exact matches against the NCBI families to identify predisposing variants for MC. Nine microbial database and assigned to taxa. individuals were chosen for whole exome sequencing. We Results: DM patients exhibited higher number of focused on rare (MAF < 0.01) and private variants with microbial peptide reads (22x106 vs 14x106) and unique harmful in silico predictions and variants located in reg- microbial taxa (32x105 vs 28x105). Viral peptides were ulatory regions. The identiﬁed variants were genotyped higherinDMpatients(4x106vs2x106)andoccupiedlarger from additional family members. One rare variant co- space in the complete microbial IgOme (12% vs 9%). segregated with MC in each family. In the Family I, the Peptides of cellular microbial origin also were increased in observed variant was an insertion and deletion mutation in DM patients but with no change in the relative abundance the HSPG2 gene, resulting in a premature stop codon. (63% vs 64%). Speciﬁc differences were observed for HSPG2 encodes a heparin sulfate proteoglycan, which is a dsDNA (Herpesvirales), ssRNA (Orthomyxoviridae), and structural protein expressed in mammalian cartilage and retro-transcribing viruses (HIV) and for potentially patho- basement membranes. Rare autosomal recessive disorders genic bacteria (Streptococcaceae). with osteochondrodysplasia are caused by mutations in the Conclusions:Thisistheﬁrstsystematic high-throughput HSPG2 gene. In the Family II, a single nucleotide poly- investigation of a link between microbial exposures, TIF1γ morphism in the MAML1 gene was identiﬁed. MAML1 isAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 105 considered to be a transcriptional coactivator in the Notch to the Index patient; which decreased her generalized signaling pathway which regulates many biological func- lesions and severe pruritus very effectively. tions including cartilage development and homeostasis. Conclusions: Genetic and environmental factors as well MAML1hasbeenreportedtoaffecttheactivityofRUNX2, as hormonal status may be responsible for the intrafamilial a transcription factor essential in the osteoblast differentia- phenotypic heterogeneity. Also, we would like to empha- tion. RUNX2 has been reported to be highly expressed in size IVIG as a treatment option in DEB patients with more degenerated discs. We identiﬁed two promising candidate severe phenotype. genesforMC,HSPG2andMAML1.Ourﬁndingsarenovel E. Gökpınar İli: None. S. Vural: None. C.D. Durmaz: in lumbar spine degenerative phenotypes. None. J.A. McGrath: None. P. Ertop: None. A. Okçu M. Kraatari: None. S. Skarp: None. J. Niinimäki: Heper: None. A. Boyvat: None. H. Ilgın Ruhi: None. None. J. Karppinen: None. M. Männikkö: None. P04.29A P04.28D Comparison of the distribution of duplicated regions Intrafamilial phenotypic heterogeneity in dominant associatedwithSHOXgenebetweenLWD/ISSpatientsand dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa associated with G2043R population sample - conclusions of the meta-analysis mutation in COL7A1 R. Solc1, K.HIrschfeldova2 E. Gökpınarİli1,S. Vural2,C. D.Durmaz1,J.A. McGrath3, P. Ertop2, A.Okçu Heper4,A. Boyvat2,H.IlgınRuhi1 1CharlesUniversityinPrague,FacultyofScience,Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, Prague, Czech 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,AnkaraUniversitySchoolof Republic, 2Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Dermatology, Medicine, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 3St Czech Republic John'sInstituteofDermatology,King'sCollegeLondon,Guy's Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Introduction: The human SHOX gene encodes an impor- Pathology, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, tant growth regulating transcription factor. Heterozygous Turkey deletions of the gene or deletions of one of its numerous enhancers are responsible for Lėri-Weill dyschondrosteosis Introduction:Dystrophicepidermolysisbullosa(DEB)isa (LWD) and small portion of idiopathic short stature (ISS). rare form of genodermatoses characterized by blistering Effect of reciprocal duplications isless distinct. The aim of condition, caused by COL7A1 gene mutations with domi- ourstudywastocomparefrequency,extentanddistribution nant or recessive inheritance. Autosomal dominant DEB of SHOX gene and associated elements duplications may remain throughout life in a mild form. However, between the LWD/ISS patients and population sample. A phenotypic aggravation may be seen between patients. preliminaryanalysisindicatedthatratherthanthedifference Here, we present a family with seven affected members infrequencyitisthedifferenceindistributionofduplicated from three-generations with phenotypic heterogeneity. areas.Ameta-analysisofpublishedcaseswasperformedto Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was isolated conﬁrm the consistency of these data. from peripheral blood samples ofthe patients andCOL7A1 Material and Methods: For the purpose of meta- gene was sequenced. analysis, merged groups of published cases were created: Results: p.G2043R (c.6127G>A) mutation was found in LWDpatients(31individuals),ISSpatients(29individuals) the index patient and veriﬁed in the other affected family andpopulationsample(36individuals).Onlycarriersofthe members. One patient in the family was diagnosed with duplication with one brakepoint within the chromosomal DEBwhileothershadsevere pruritus andlicheniﬁedlinear regionchrX:398,000-980,000(hg19)wereincluded.Extent, plaqueslocatedmoreprominentlyontheextensorsurfaceof distribution and relative frequency of duplications were the arms and shins. Disease onset was early infancy with a compared among merged groups. signiﬁcant increase in complaints after puberty. In female Results:Therewasasigniﬁcantdifferenceintherelative patients,whohadamorepronouncedphenotype,pregnancy frequency of CNE-9 enhancer duplications (11 vs. 3) and was associated with exacerbation of the disease. Nail completeSHOX(exon1-6b)duplications(4vs.24)(p-value dystrophy of hands and feet was present in all patients. 0.0139 and p-value 0.000014, respectively) between the Index patient had moderately high serum IgE levels. Skin merged LWD sample and the merged population sample. biopsy revealed eosinophilic inﬁltrate, and the previous Conclusion: We propose, partial duplications of the diagnosis was in favor of acquired epidermolysis bullosa. SHOX gene coding sequences and small duplications Intravenousimmunoglobulin(IVIG)treatmentwasinitiated encompassing the CNE-9 enhancer are the highly106 J.delPicchia penetrating alleles associated with the increased risk of P04.31C LWD/ISS development. Acknowledgement: The study was Biallelic homozygous mutation ofHSPG2 in a patient with supported by Charles University (UNCE204022) and its dysssegmental dysplasia, Rolland-Desbuquois type Grant Agency (GAUK202615). R. Solc: None. K. HIrschfeldova: None. K. Kurosawa,K. Shono,T. Yokoi, N.Harada, M.Akahira- Azuma, Y. Enomoto,Y. Tsurusaki,N.Aida P04.30B Degradation routes of trafﬁcking-defective VLDLR Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan mutants associated with dysequilibrium syndrome Dyssegmental dysplasia (DD) is a rare autosomal recessive B. R.Ali, P.Kizhakkedath, A.John,L. Al-Gazali skeletal disorder characterized by congenital short limbed dwarﬁsm.Basedonclinicalfeatures,itisclassiﬁedintotwo United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab types; the severe, lethal Silverman-Handmaker type Emirates (DDSH) and milder form Rolland-Desbuquois type (DDRD). Among the molecularly conﬁrmed DD patients, Introduction: Endoplasmic reticulum associated degrada- most are DDSD type. There have been no reports in the tion (ERAD) of misfolded proteins by the ubiquitin- patients with molecularly conﬁrmed DDRD. Here, we proteasome system is a recurrent theme in rare genetic report a case with homozygous biallelic mutation in disorders and the process crucially involve ER-membrane HSPG2, diagnosed as DDRD based on clinical features in complexes such as HRD1-SEL1L. Previously, we have neonatalperiod.Theprobandwas15-years-oldboy.Hewas reported that missense mutations in the Very Low Density the ﬁrst child of non-consanguineous and healthy parents. Lipoprotein Receptor gene (VLDLR), causing Dysequili- Physicalexaminationrevealedcleftlippalate,shorteningof brium syndrome (DES), disrupt ligand-binding, due to limbs, clubfoot, ﬂexion contractures of bilateral knees and retentionofthemutantsinER.Thisstudyexploresindetail elbows, right inguinal hernia, and narrow chest. X-rays the degradation routes of these ER-retained VLDLR showed small thorax and vertebral body size difference, mutants. dumbbell-shaped tubular bones. Based on the radiological Materials and Methods: The missense pathogenic investigation, he was diagnosed as DDRD. Now, he is 15 VLDLR variants have been generated by QuikChange site- yearsold,withtheheight120cm(-7.5SD),weight27.6kg directed mutagenesis. The constructs were expressed in (-2.8 SD), and had short distance walkable. To conﬁrm the HEK293 cells and analyzed by immuno-pull down assays diagnosis molecularly, we performed Mendelian exome and Western blotting. Protein turn-over studies were using the TruSight One Sequencing Panel (Illumina, Inc., conducted by translation shut-off assays and inhibition of SanDiego,CA,USA).CapturedDNAwassequencedona proteasomal/lysosomal degradation. The HRD1-SEL1L MiSeq platform (Illumina) with 151 bp paired-end reads. knockout HEK293 cell lines have been generated by Targeted resequencing and Sanger sequencing identiﬁed a CRISPR/Cas9. novel biallelic homozygous variant c.9970G>A, p.G3324R Results: We show that VLDLR mutants are retained in in HSPG2. This is a ﬁrst case report with molecularly the ER for prolonged periods which could be facilitated by conﬁrmed DDRD. These results suggest genotype- association with the ER resident chaperone calnexin. The phenotype correlation in the HSPG2 related disorders. mutantswerefoundtobeaggregationproneandcapableof K.Kurosawa:None.K.Shono:None.T.Yokoi:None. eliciting ER stress. Inhibition studies suggested that these N. Harada: None. M. Akahira-Azuma: None. Y. mutantsaredegradedpartiallybytheproteasomalpathway. Enomoto: None. Y. Tsurusaki: None. N. Aida: None. Further,thedegradationofVLDLRwildtypeandamutant were delayed in CRISPR/Cas9 edited SEL1L knock-out P04.32D cells which could be reversed by exogenous expression Congenitalanonychiaanduncombablehairsyndrome:co- of SEL1L. inheritanceofhomozygousmutationsinRSPO4andPADI3 Conclusions: ER retention of VLDLR mutants involves binding to calnexin, elevated ER stress, and delayed M.T. Romano1,2,C. K.Hsu3,4,5, A.Nanda6,E.Rashidghamat3, degradation which is dependent on SEL1L. Since LDLR J.Y.W.Lee3,H.Y.Huang4,C.Songsantiphap3,7,J.Y.Y.Lee4, family members share common structural domains, com- H.Al-Ajmi6,M.A. Simpson8,C.Tziotzios3,R. C.Betz1,2,J.A. mon mechanisms may be involved in their processing and McGrath3 trafﬁcking (31M254). B.R. Ali: None. P. Kizhakkedath: None. A. John: 1Department of Genomics, Life&Brain, Bonn, Germany, None. L. Al-Gazali: None. 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 107 Germany, 3St John’s Institute of Dermatology, King's College 1Queens University Medical School, Kingston, ON, Canada, London, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of 2IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada, 3University of Dermatology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Washington, Seattle, WA, United States Tainan, Taiwan, 5Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, 6As’ ad Al-Hamad We present an adult woman with cEDS, bilateral hip dis- Dermatology Center, Al Sabah Hospital, Kuwait city, Kuwait, location and obstetric anesthetic complications. The patient 7Department of Dermatology, Chulalongkorn University, had generalized joint hypermobility, childhood skin fragi- Bangkok, Thailand, 8Division of Genetics and Molecular lity and shoulder dislocations. Her bilateral congenital hip Medicine, King's College London, London, United Kingdom dislocations were treated with Plavik harness. She was diagnosed with cEDS at age 15 following evaluation with Ectodermal dysplasia comprises a heterogeneous group of multiple affected family members. There was an extensive genetic disorders deﬁned by developmental defects in family history of cEDS features in 7 individuals over three ectoderm-derived tissues. The great heterogeneity of the generations spanning in age from 7 to 80 years, none were symptoms is often an obstacle for the identiﬁcation of the knowntohavehadbonefragilityorvascularcomplications. causative gene, although the use of next generation The patient had a normal echocardiogram during preg- sequencinghasbroughtnewinsights.Here,weinvestigated nancy. The patient presented with severe post-partum a 4-year-old Kuwaiti boy showing both congenital ano- orthostatic headache after failed epidural anesthesia, dur- nychia and uncombable hair syndrome. Through whole ing which there was unexpected dural puncture. She exome sequencing (WES) we identiﬁed mutations in two recovered after epidural blood patch treatment, following separate genes, demonstrating that the patient’s phenotype unsuccessfulsphenopalatineganglionblock.Sequencingof comes from the overlap of two autosomal recessive dis- a large panel of EDS genes, identiﬁed the COL1A1 variant orders. With regards to anonychia, we identiﬁed a pre- c. 934C>T, p.Arg312Cys. This variant has been reported viouslyknownhomozygoussplice-sitemutationinRSPO4. with a classical EDS like phenotype. The child of patient 1 The encoded protein, R-spondin, is expressed in nail reported in Malfait et al. (2007), had congenital hip dis- mesenchyme and is an activator of the Wnt/β-catenin location (1). The variant is mentioned in the 2017 EDS pathway. For the hair abnormality, we found a novel nosologyforbothcEDSandvasculartypeEDS(2).Whilst homozygous missense mutation in PADI3. This gene three patients with this same pathogenic variant have been encodes for peptidylarginine deiminases 3 (PADI3), which reportedtohavehadavascularcomplication,arecentreport is involved in deiminating trichohyalin in the hair follicle, of a large family was more reassuring (3). We present contributing to its structure.All mutations were veriﬁed by further cumulative phenotypic data on a large family with Sanger sequencing. Furthermore, the PADI3 mutation was this genotype. investigated through immunoblotting and immuno- J. Duong: None. A. Rideout: None. J. Beis: None. S. ﬂuorescenceinakeratinocytecellline,showingbothlower Parkash: None. U. Schwarze: None. A. expression and formation of aggregates for the mutant Vandersteen: None. protein compared to wild-type. In conclusion, our case highlightsthevalueofWESinidentifyingco-inheritanceof P04.34B twodistinctconditionsinconsanguineouspedigrees,giving Molecular genetic analysis of Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome in rise to an ectodermal dysplasia phenotype. Northwestern region of Russia M.T. Romano: None. C.K. Hsu: None. A. Nanda: None. E. Rashidghamat: None. J.Y.W. Lee: None. H.Y. T.I.Kadurina1,E.A.Serebriakova1,2,L.N.Abbakumova3,Y.A. Huang: None. C. Songsantiphap: None. J.Y.Y. Lee: Barbitoff4,2,5,D.E.Polev2, A.S. Glotov2 None. H. Al-Ajmi: None. M.A. Simpson: None. C. Tziotzios: None. R.C. Betz: None. J.A. McGrath: None. 1North-Western State Medical University named after I.I. Mechnikov,Saint-Petersburg,RussianFederation,2Biobankof P04.33A the Research park, Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint- A second patient with Classical Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Saint-Petersburg State (cEDS) and congenital hip dislocation caused by the Pediatric Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian pathogenic variant COL1A1 c. 934C>T, p.Arg312Cys Federation, 4Bioinformatics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5Department of Genetics and J.Duong1,A. Rideout2,J.Beis2,S. Parkash2,U.Schwarze3, Biotechnology, Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint- A. Vandersteen2 Petersburg, Russian Federation108 J.delPicchia Introduction: Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) is a hetero- progressive, moderate hearing loss in addition to a geneous group of connective tissue disorder, caused by disproportionateshort-limbdwarﬁsmwithdistalwardshort- metabolicimbalance ofcollagen, thestructureand function ening ofextremities andpostaxial hexadactyly.Herbrother of myomatrix also the synthesis of proteoglycans. Accord- as well as other members of the family also presented ingtoanewinternationalclassiﬁcationofEDS(2017),now disproportionate short stature and anomalies of the limbs. it isclassiﬁedin13different types and it isassociated with Next generation sequencing with a customized skeletal mutations in 19 genes. The exception is the hypermobility dysplasia panel containing over 370 genes and subsequent type EDS (hEDS) the diagnosis of which is based only on bioinformatics analysis disclosed two homozygous muta- clinical criteria. tions in EVC2 (c.2653C>T; p.Arg885*) and COL11A2 Materials and Methods: 12 patients with hEDS were (c.966dup;p.Thr323Hisfs*19),respectively.Sangersequen- examined. NGS was applied to 10 patients with hEDS and cing showed that both parents were heterozygous carriers 19 genes associated with EDS were analyzed (ADAMTS2, forbothEVC2andCOL11A2mutationsandthesisterwasa B3GALT6, B4GALT7, C1R, C1S, CHST14, COL1A1, heterozygous carrier for the COL11A2 mutation but wild COL1A2, COL12A1, COL3A1, COL5A1, DSE, FLNA, type at the EVC2 mutation position. FKBP14, PLOD1, PRDM5, SLC39A13, TNXB, ZNF469). This study highlights a dual molecular diagnosis in a Additionally,directPCRmethodwasperformedtoidentify patient with a blending of two distinct phenotypes and del30kb in the TNXB for two patients. illustrates the advantage and importance of this staple Results: We identiﬁed a heterozygous mutation technology to facilitate rapid and comprehensive genetic c.2818G>A in one patient in the ADAMTS2 gene with dissection of a heterogeneous phenotype. The differentia- uncertain clinical signiﬁcance. Mutations in the ADAMTS2 tion between phenotypic expansion of a genetic disorder areassociatedwithautosomalrecessive,dEDS.Inaddition, and a blended phenotype that is due to more than one we detected one heterozygous mutation c.3023C>T with distinctgeneticaberration isessentialinordertoreducethe uncertain clinical signiﬁcance in another patient in the diagnostic odyssey endured by patients. COL5A1 gene which is associated with cEDS. A hetero- P.L. Bahena Carbajal: None. B. Vona: None. R. zygous del30kb in the TNXB was identiﬁed by direct PCR Marooﬁan: None. G. Mendirattac: None. M. Croken: method in two patients. None. S. Peng: None. S. Peng: None. X. Ye: None. J. Conclusions: Our results indicate that heterozygous Rezazadeh: None. C. Lekszas: None. T. Haaf: None. L. mutations in genes associated with different types of EDS Edelmannc: None. L. Shic: None. can be the cause of hEDS, which indicates genetic heterogeneity of this pathology and needs further research. P04.37A T.I. Kadurina: None. E.A. Serebriakova: None. L.N. Application of a machine learning approach to identify Abbakumova: None. Y.A. Barbitoff: None. D.E. Polev: miRNA ﬁngerprint signatures in recessive dystrophic None. A.S. Glotov: None. epidermolysis bullosa P04.35C R. Zauner1, M.Wimmer1,T. Lettner1,S. Atzmüller2,J. Pröll2, Dual diagnosis of Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and hearing C.Guttmann-Gruber1,E.M.Murauer1,J.Reichelt1,D.Strunk3, loss in a consanguineous family J.W. Bauer4,V. Wally1 P. L. BahenaCarbajal1,B. Vona1,R. Marooﬁan2, 1EBHouseAustria,ResearchProgramforMolecularTherapy G.Mendirattac3, M.Croken3,S. Peng3, S.Peng3,X.Ye3, of Genodermatoses Department of Dermatology, University J.Rezazadeh4,C. Lekszas1,T. Haaf1,L. Edelmannc3,L. Shic3 Hospital of the Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria, 2Red Cross Transfusion Service for Upper Austria, 1Institut of Humangenetics, Würzburg, Germany, 2University Linz, Austria, 3Institute for Experimental and Clinical Cell of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 3Icahn Therapy, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria, School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United 4Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of the States, 4Genetic counselling and Rehabilitation Unit, Welfare Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria organization, South Khorasan, Iran, Islamic Republic of Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) repre- Multilocus analysis of rare or genetically heterogeneous sents one of the most severe subforms of a rare geno- diseases is a distinct advantage of next generation sequen- dermatosis and is caused by mutations within the COL7A1 cing over conventional single-gene investigations. gene. Absent or dysfunctional type VII collagen impedes We described a female proband from a large consangui- the structural integrity of the molecular link between epi- neous Iranian family who manifests postlingual, dermis and underlying dermis, which manifests in severeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 109 blister formation sublamina densa and erosions of skin and epidermal juction. Clinically, patients suffer from extra- mucousmembranes.RDEBpatientssufferfromchronically ordinary sensitivity of the skin to mechanic friction or impaired wound healing and an extraordinary high risk of traumaandpresentwithanincreasedriskofinfections.One developing a particularly aggressive form of squamous cell major concern in this patient population relates to the high carcinoma (SCC). So far there is only very limited data incidence of developing a particularly aggressive form of available on non-coding RNA events in RDEB cancer squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs), resulting in a highly progression. increased mortality due to frequent metastatic spreading. In order to widen the therapeutic spectrum for RDEB Recent studies have demonstrated a signiﬁcantly deregu- cancerpatientsweaimtoimproveourunderstandingonthe lated miRNome in RDEB-SCC in vitro. In order to inves- impact of differentially expressed small non-coding miR- tigatethecauseoftheobservedalteredmiRNAabundance, NAsondiseaseprogressionandtoexploretheirpotentialas we analyzed expression levels of major components of the biomarkers.Therefore,IlluminamiRNA-seqwasperformed miRNAbiogenesispathwayviamicroarray,sqRT-PCRand onRDEB-SCC,UV-SCC,RDEBandnonEBkeratinocytes Westernblot.Sangersequencingofmutationalhotspotswas derived from skin biopsies. Fingerprint miRNAs able to performed formajorcomponents ofthemiRNA processing discriminate RDEB-SCCs from the other experimental machinery.Culturedprimaryskincellsderivedfrompatient groups were derived applying a neural network machine SCCs and keratinocytes and healthy controls served as learning approach. Speciﬁc self-organizing maps were experimental groups. trained on our miRNA-seq data sets and co-expression We found signiﬁcantly increased RNA and protein modules of miRNAs with differential expression proﬁles expression levels of DROSHA in SCC cells as compared extracted. In a guilt-by-association assessment based on to healthy controls, without indication of mutagenic events microarray expression data, we could demonstrate an in reported hotspots. Karyotyping of RDEB SCC cells enrichment of target mRNAs with strong correlation to conﬁrmed chromosomal abberations in regions of interest signaturemiRNAs,inhallmarksignatureslikeepithelial-to- concerning DROSHA. mesenchymal transition, which is related to the observed A dysregulation of canonical miRNA biogenesis is aggressive phenotype in RDEB-SCCs. associated with many diseases, particularly cancer, and Eventually,ourset ofidentiﬁedﬁngerprint miRNAs may could prove instrumental in further deepening our under- provide the foundation for the identiﬁcation of biomarkers standing of triggers and promoters of SCC in RDEB. and drugable targets. M. Wimmer: None. R. Zauner: None. A. Waldmann: R. Zauner: None. M. Wimmer: None. T. Lettner: None. H. Bodocian: None. M. Ablinger: None. S. None.S. Atzmüller: None.J. Pröll:None. C.Guttmann- Atzmueller: None. J. Proell: None. D. Strunk: None. J. Gruber: None. E.M. Murauer: None. J. Reichelt: None. W. Bauer: None. J. Reichelt: None. V. Wally: None. D. Strunk: None. J.W. Bauer: None. V. Wally: None. P04.39C P04.38B Correction of type XVII collagen using spliceosome- Major player in miRNA processing appear altered in mediated RNA trans-splicing recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa squamous cell carcinoma M.Reisenberger, P.Schlager, J.Reichelt, J.W.Bauer, U.Koller,S. Hainzl, M.Ablinger, T. Lettner, V. Wally M.Wimmer1, R.Zauner1,A. Waldmann1, H.Bodocian1, M.Ablinger1,S. Atzmueller2,J.Proell2,D.Strunk3,J.W. EB House Austria, Research Program for Molecular Therapy Bauer1,J. Reichelt1,V. Wally1 of Genodermatoses, salzburg, Austria 1EBHouseAustria,ResearchProgramforMolecularTherapy Distinct subtypes of junctional EB (JEB) are caused by of Genodermatoses, Department of Dermatology, University mutations within the COL17A1 gene, encoding type XVII Hospital of the Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, collagen, which leads to fragility of the skin and blister Austria, 2Red Cross Transfusion Service for Upper Austria, formation within the lamina lucida upon minor friction. So Linz, Austria, 3Institute for Experimental and Clinical Cell far,thereisnocausaltherapyavailableforthisEBsubtype. Therapy, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria SMaRT is a post-transcriptional therapeutic approach, which uses the cellular splicing machinery to replace Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) is mutation-bearingexons.Theaimofthisstudywastoapply characterized by loss-of-function mutations in the COL7A1 SMaRT therapy for the correction of any mutation down- gene, resulting in impaired or absent type VII collagen stream from COL17A1 exon 33. We engineered a set of protein, a major anchoring molecule at the dermal- RNA trans-splicing molecules (RTMs), which bind110 J.delPicchia COL17A1 pre-mRNA, thereby inducing a trans-splicing MaterialandMethods:AsFLNBisalargegenewith46 reaction that results in the generation of a hybrid mRNA, exons, we preferred exome sequencing index patients from containing RTM-derived and endogenous gene portions. In all the seven families as this is cost-efﬁcient at our center a minigene-based approach we ﬁrst studied the impact of followed by Sanger validation and segregation analysis. various RTM sequence modiﬁcations on trans-splicing Results:Clinicalfeaturesoftenpatients(sixfemalesand efﬁciency and speciﬁcity. The modiﬁcations included four males) included short stature (9/9), short neck (6/10), binding domain optimization, removal of the COL17A1 pectus carinatum (5/10), facial dysmorphism (2/10) and 3’UTR and removal of potential cryptic splice sites. Ret- cleft lipand palate(1/10).Radiological features werefused roviraltransductionofaJEBkeratinocytelineharbouringa vertebrae (9/10), carpal fusion (10/10), tarsal fusion (5/5), compound heterozygous mutation (exon 52 and 53) with scoliosis(9/10),lumbarlordosis(2/10)andcrowdingofribs the most functional RTM (RTM135mSU), coding for the (9/10).Sevennovelhomozygousvariantswereidentiﬁedin COL17A1 wild type exons 34-56, led to restoration of type FLNB: c.6317del [p.(Pro2106ArgfsX12)] in patient 1, XVII collagen expression at mRNA level and protein level c.1493del [p.(Glu498GlyfsX4)] in patient 2, c.1243C>T assessed by immunoﬂuorescence. We found that a binding [p.(Arg415X)] in patient 3, c.1204del [p.(Val402- domain covering the intron/exon junction and the removal TryfsX88)] in patient 4, c.28G>T [p.(Glu10X)] in patient of splice sites in the RTMs coding region resulted in an 5,c.1429delinsCT[p.(Val477Leufs*2)]inpatients6and7, increasedtrans-splicingefﬁciency.Ourresults indicate that andc.1592dup[p.(His532ThrfsX9)]inpatients8,9and10. the SMaRT technology is a promising tool for the devel- Conclusion: Ourworkdemonstrates thatspondylocarpo- opment of an RNA therapy for JEB patients. tarsal synostosis syndrome has a unique pattern of M.Reisenberger:None.P.Schlager:None.J.Reichelt: anomalous vertebral segmentation and all the reported None. J.W. Bauer: None. U. Koller: None. S. Hainzl: patients have truncating variants in FLNB. The study is None. M. Ablinger: None. T. Lettner: None. V. funded by Indian Council of Medical Research. Wally: None. S.Salian:None.A.Shukla:None.H.Shah:None.S.N. Bhat: None. V.R. Bhat: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. R. P04.40D Shenoy: None. S.R. Phadke: None. S.V. Hariharan: Seven additional families with spondylocarpotarsal None. K.M. Girisha: None. synostosis syndrome with novel biallelic deleterious variants in FLNB P04.42B Novel clinical features in frontometaphyseal dysplasia 2 S. Salian1,A. Shukla1, H.Shah1,S. N.Bhat1, V.R. Bhat1, caused by a recurrent mutation in MAP3K7 S. Nampoothiri2, R.Shenoy3,S. R.Phadke4,S. V.Hariharan5, K. M.Girisha1 A. Costantini1, C.Wallgren-Pettersson2,O.Mäkitie1,3,4,5 1Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Udupi, India, 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery and Center 2DepartmentofPediatricGenetics,AmritaInstituteofMedical for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sciences and Research Centre, Cochin, India, 3Department of Sweden, 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Pediatrics, KS Hegde Medical Academy, Mangalore, India, Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Folkhälsan Institute of Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India, Genetics and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Pediatrics, Sree Avittom Thirunal Hospital, 4Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki Government Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram, India University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Introduction: Location and/or type of variants in FLNB Sweden result in a spectrum of osteochondrodysplasias: spondylo- carpotarsal synostosis syndrome and Larsen syndrome that Frontometaphyseal dysplasia 2 (FMD2) is a skeletal dys- are milder and atelosteogenesis I and III, and Boomerang plasia with supraorbital hyperostosis combined with dysplasiathatareperinatallethal.Sofar,ninebi-allelicloss- undermodeling of the bones, joint contractures and some of-function variants in FLNB are reported to cause spon- extraskeletal features. It is caused by heterozygous muta- dylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome in nine families. We tions in MAP3K7, encoding the Mitogen-Activated Protein aimed to identify pathogenic variants in FLNB in ten Kinase 7. MAP3K7 is activated by TGF-β and plays an patients from seven families with spondylocarpotarsal important role in osteogenesis. Less than 20 patients with synostosis syndrome. FMD2 and MAP3K7 mutations have been described thus far. Three out of four patients harbor a recurrent missenseAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 111 mutation, NM_003188.3: c.1454C>T, p.(Pro485Leu), identiﬁed as expressed in hNCCs, none of which mapped which leads to a more severe phenotype than mutations in to the known nsCL/P loci. However, positional integration other domains. Here we describe an additional patient with of GWAS summary statistics revealed 25 variants (at P- FMD2 caused by the recurrent c.1454C>T MAP3K7 value <0.01) that were located within 1kb of a candidate mutation, identiﬁed as a de novo variant by whole-genome miRNA. Association of one variant, a low-frequency sequencing. The 17-year-old boy has the characteristic variant at chr. 2q37.3 close to miRNA-149, was conﬁrmed skeletal and facial features of FMD2. However, several in a replication analysis of an independent nsCL/P cohort. novel features were also observed, including multiple Target gene prediction with miRWalk2.0 and literature hemangiomas, hand and foot abnormalities, growth retar- research revealed that miRNA149 likely binds known dation, spina biﬁda, Sprengel deformity, Chiari malforma- nsCL/P candidate genes such as FGFR1, BMP9 and tionandocularmanifestations.Healsoshowedkeloidscars RUNX2, and has been shown to differentially interact with but, in contrast to other patients harboring the same muta- MTHFRuponfolatedeﬁciency.Althoughfurtherfunctional tion, he does not have intellectual disability. This report characterization is required and currently ongoing, our expands the clinical spectrum of FMD2 caused by the study suggests that miRNA-149 might be involved as recurrentc.1454C>T, p.(Pro485Leu)mutationinMAP3K7. regulatory mechanism in facial development. A.Costantini:None.C.Wallgren-Pettersson:None.O. L.G. Stuessel: None. L.M. Hochfeld: None. J. Schroe- Mäkitie: None. der: None. F. Thieme: None. T. Hess: None. J. Gehlen: None. S. Heilmann-Heimbach: None. M. Knapp: None. P04.44D E. Mangold: None. A. Rada-Iglesias: None. K.U. MicroRNA proﬁling in human neural crest cells and Ludwig: None. integration of GWAS data suggest involvement of miRNA149 in craniofacial disease P04.45A Genetic analysis of genodermatoses in domestic animals L.G.Stuessel1,2,L.M.Hochfeld1,2,J.Schroeder1,2,F.Thieme1,2, T. Hess1,2,J. Gehlen1,2,S. Heilmann-Heimbach1,2,M.Knapp3, A. Bauer1,2,P. Balmer1,3, M.A. T.Brunner1,4,M.Caduff1,2, E. Mangold2, A.Rada-Iglesias4,5,K. U.Ludwig1,2 M.De Lucia5,C. Drögemüller1,2,M.Drögemüller1,2, V. Jagannathan1,2, J.Nimmo6, L.Murgiano1,2,7,B. S. Sayar1,8, 1Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, Bonn, N.Tarasova9,K. Timm10,R. E.Towers11,12,G.Zur13, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, E. Müller1,8,14,P. Roosje1,3,M.M. Welle1,4,T. Leeb1,2 Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Biometry Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 1Dermfocus,UniversityofBern,Bern,Switzerland,2Instituteof 4CenterforMolecularMedicineCologne(CMMC),University Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Cologne Excellence Cluster Switzerland,3DivisionofClinicalDermatology,Departmentof for Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases Clinical Veterinary Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 4Institute of Animal Pathology, VetsuisseFaculty,University ofBern,Bern,Switzerland,5San GWAS for nonsyndromic cleft lip with/without cleft palate Marco Veterinary Clinic and Laboratory, Padova, Italy, (nsCL/P) have identiﬁed 40 risk loci for this human cra- 6ASAP Laboratory, Mulgrave, Victoria, Australia, 7Section of niofacial malformation. The vast majority of these asso- Ophthalmology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of ciated loci map to non-coding genomic regions. One Pennsylvania,Philadelphia,PA,UnitedStates,8Departmentof possible mechanism by which variants at these loci might Biomedical Research, Molecular Dermatology and Stem Cell exert their regulatory effect is the control of microRNA Research, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 9Russian (miRNA) expression and miRNA-mediated gene regula- Akhal-Teke Association, Moscow, Russian Federation, tion, in disease-relevant tissue. In the present study, we 10Vetderm, Hünenberg, Switzerland, 11Institute of Medical soughttoidentifycandidatemiRNAsinhumanneuralcrest Genetics,CardiffUniversity,Cardiff,UnitedKingdom,12Tees, cells (hNCCs), an early precursor cell population of facial Esk and Wear Valleys NHS Foundation Trust, United tissue, and integrate GWAS data to identify potential sus- Kingdom,13VeterinaryTeachingHospital,TheKoretSchoolof ceptibility miRNA candidates that might be involved in Veterinary Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, nsCL/P. Rehovot, Israel, 14Clinic for Dermatology, Inselspital, Bern MiRNA proﬁling was performed in four independent University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland hNCC samples, previously generated from induced plur- ipotent stem cells, using the Affymetrix miRNA 4.0 array Introduction: Spontaneous mutants in domestic animal platform. After stringent ﬁltering, 152 miRNAs were species are valuable models to study heritable human112 J.delPicchia disorders. Purebred animals are kept in closed populations P04.46B necessitating a certain degree of inbreeding, which favors Novel case with a double “apparently” balanced the expression of recessive alleles. Due to the unique rearrangement disrupting EXT1 in a patient with population structure of purebred animals, identiﬁcation of hereditary multiple exostoses disease causing genetic variants is often more straightfor- ward than in humans. A. Alexandrou1,N.Salameh1,I. Papaevripidou1,N.Nicolaou2, Materials and Methods: Genetic mapping and whole P. Myriathopoulos1,A.Ketoni1, P.Evangelidou1,G.A. genome sequencing approaches were used. Tanteles2,C. Sismani1,3 Results: We identiﬁed candidate causative variants for severalgenodermatosesincludingvariantsingenesthathad 1CytogeneticsandGenomicsDepartment,TheCyprusInstitute not previously been associated with disease phenotypes in of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Clinical humans. As an example, we discovered genetic variants in Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and SUV39H2 in dogs with hereditary nasal parakeratosis, Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3The Cyprus School of Molecular which revealed a role for SUV39H2 in keratinocyte Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, differentiation. Nicosia, Cyprus Hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) is an autosomal Selecteddomesticanimalmodelsforhumangenodermatoses dominant skeletal disorder characterized by the develop- Gene Phenotype Species Humandisorder(MIM#) ment of multiple, circumscript, occasionally painful and ASPRV1 ichthyosis dog ? usually symmetric bony protuberances called osteochon- dromas.HMEiscausedbyEXT1andEXT2lossoffunction EDA X-linked dog,cattle 305100 hypohidrotic mutations. Most pathogenic mutations are nonsense fol- ectodermaldysplasia lowedbymissensemutationsanddeletions.Wereportona FAM83G hereditaryfootpad dog palmoplantar patient with a rare and complex genotype resulting in a hyperkeratosis keratodermaand classical HME phenotype. exuberantscalphair Mutations in EXT1 and EXT2 were excluded by Sanger IKBKG incontinentia horse 300291 sequencing. The patient was subsequently referred for pigmenti karyotype and array-CGH analyses. Results obtained were MBTPS2 brindle1 horse 300918, 308205,308800 validated with FISH and qRT-PCR and parental studies NSDHL congenital dog 308050,300831 determined the mode of inheritance. corniﬁcationdisorder Chromosomal analysis revealed a de novo “apparently” OCA2 oculocutaneous dog 203200,227220 double balanced rearrangement: a balanced translocation albinism,type2 between chromosomes 2 and 3 at breakpoints 2q22 and ST14 nakedfoalsyndrome horse 602400 3q13.2 and a pericentric 8p23.1q24.1 inversion both of SUV39H2 hereditarynasal dog ? which were conﬁrmed by FISH analysis. Subsequently, parakeratosis array-CGHanalysisrevealedanovelheterozygousdeletion TSR2 streakedhairlessness cattle ? within the EXT1 gene at the inversion breakpoints, rendering the inversion as unbalanced. The inheritance mode as well as the size of the deletion was further Conclusions: The study provides new candidate genes investigated by qRT-PCR and the deletion was character- forgenodermatosesinhumanandveterinarymedicineanda ized as a de novo 3.1kb deletion removing exon 10. The betterunderstandingofthegenotype-phenotypecorrelation. inversion in combination with the 8p23.1 deletion most Grant: Swiss National Science Foundation likely abolishes the transcription of EXT1 downstream of CRSII3_160738/1 exon 10 hence resulting in a truncated protein. A. Bauer: None. P. Balmer: None. M.A.T. Brunner: To conclude, a rare and novel pathogenic cause of HME None. M. Caduff: None. M. De Lucia: None. C. is presented in this study, highlighting the importance of Drögemüller: None. M. Drögemüller: None. V. Jagan- additional comprehensive cytogenetic investigation when nathan:None.J.Nimmo:None.L.Murgiano:None.B.S. EXT1 and EXT2 mutation analysis is negative. Sayar: None. N. Tarasova: None. K. Timm: None. R.E. A. Alexandrou: None. N. Salameh: None. I. Papaevri- Towers: None. G. Zur: None. E. Müller: None. P. pidou: None. N. Nicolaou: None. P. Myriathopoulos: Roosje: None. M.M. Welle: None. T. Leeb: None. None. A. Ketoni: None. P. Evangelidou: None. G.A. Tanteles: None. C. Sismani: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 113 P04.47C whenclinicallyevaluatingindividualsandfamilieswiththis AninsertionmutationinHOXC13underliespurehairand rare variant of ED. nail ectodermal dysplasia with lacrimal duct obstruction A. Humbatova: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. M. Romano: None. A. Tafazzoli: None. M. Behnam: None. A.Humbatova1,2,3,R.Marooﬁan4,M.Romano1,2,A.Tafazzoli1,2, N. Dilaver: None. N. Nouri: None. M. Salehi: None. S. M.Behnam5,N.Dilaver6,N.Nouri5,M.Salehi5,7,S. Wolf1,2, Wolf: None. J. Frank: None. P. Kokordelis: None. R. J.Frank8, P.Kokordelis1,2,R. Betz1,2 Betz: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of P04.48D Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Italianvalidationofthefunctionaldifﬁcultiesquestionnaire 2Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, Bonn, (FDQ-9) and its correlation with major determinants of Germany,3InstituteofGeneticResources,AzerbaijanNational quality of life in adults with hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos AcademyofSciences,Baku,Azerbaijan,4Molecular&Clinical syndrome/hypermobility spectrum disorders SciencesResearchInstitute,St.George'sUniversityofLondon, Cranmer Terrace, London, United Kingdom, 5Medical S. Morlino1,C. Dordoni2,I.Sperduti3,C. Piedimonte4, Genetics Laboratory of Genome, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic M.Ritelli2, M.Colombi2,P. Grammatico1,M.Castori5 Republic of, 6Swansea University Medical School, Swansea University,Wales,UnitedKingdom,7DivisionofGeneticsand 1Lab. Medical Genetics, Dep. Molecular Medicine, Sapienza Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of University, S.Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Div. Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Biology and Genetics, Dep. Molecular and Translational 8Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 3Biostatistics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany IRCCS San Gallicano Dermatologic Institute, Rome, Italy, 4Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University, Ectodermal dysplasias (EDs) encompass a large group of "Umberto I" Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5Div. Medical Genetics, clinically and genetically heterogeneous hereditary dis- IRCCSCasaSollievodellaSofferenza,SanGiovanniRotondo ordersthataredeﬁnedbyabnormaldevelopmentofatleast (FG), Italy twoectodermalstructures,whichincludebutarenotlimited to hair, nails, teeth and sweat glands. A rare form of auto- The 2017 EDS International Classiﬁcation deﬁned the new somal recessive ED that is usually characterized by hypo- criteria for hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hEDS), trichosisandnaildystrophyonlyisknownaspurehairand whichisnowconsideredoneendofacontinuous spectrum nail ectodermal dysplasia (PHNED). To date, mutations in originating from isolated, non-syndromic joint hypermobi- KRT85, KRT74, and HOXC13 have been reported in lity (JH) and passing through hypermobility spectrum dis- patientsandfamiliesofdifferentethnicoriginwithPHNED. orders (HSD). Preliminary data indicate a link between JH Here,westudiedtwosistersfromaconsanguineousIranian and neurodevelopmental disorders, and the strongest evi- marriage who were not only affected by hypotrichosis and dence is the non-causal association with developmental nail dysplasia but also lacrimal duct obstruction (LDO). coordinationdisorder(DCD)inchildren.AssessingDCDin Homozygosity mapping and GeneDistiller analysis sug- adults is difﬁcult and the recently described functional dif- gested linkage of the disease to chromosome 12q13.13. In ﬁcultiesquestionnaire9(FDQ-9)isoneofthefewavailable this region, KRT85, KRT74, and HOXC13 were the most tools. The aims ofthis study were: (i) tovalidate FDQ-9 in plausible candidate genes. Sanger sequencing of HOXC13 Italianandtonormalizeitsvaluesin230Italiannon-clinical revealedahithertoundescribedhomozygous28bpinsertion patients; and (i) to explore the relationship of FDQ-9 with mutation (c.837_838insACTTGCGGCTAGCAAGTT- the brief pain inventory, composite autonomic symptom CATCACCAAA;p.A280Tfs*4)inexon2inbothaffected score 31, multidimensional fatigue inventory, ADHD self- children that was present in the heterozygous state in the report version 1.1, and the SF-36 for quality of life in 105 parents. Italian adults with hEDS/HSD. Validity of FDQ-9 was LDO has not previously been described in association assessedbythePearsontest in10bilingualindividuals and with PHNED although this symptom has been frequently 5 bilingual hEDS/HSD patients who completed the ques- observedinothertypesofED.Therefore,LDOmighthave tionnaire in English and Italian. In the hEDS/HSD group, been neglected or underdiagnosed in earlier reports of 67% patients had a value of FDQ-9 above the cut-off and, PHNED. The clinical and molecular genetic ﬁndings in the therefore,ahighprobabilityofDCDintheirdevelopmental family expand the phenotypic and mutation spectrum of age.Multivariate analysis was carried outcomparing FDQ- PHNED and suggest that LDO should be examined for 9 values with features of pain, fatigue, autonomic dys- function, ADHD and quality of life, and demonstrated an114 J.delPicchia inﬂuence of a past history of coordination troubles on France, 16Centre National de Recherche en Génomique chronic symptoms in adults with hEDS/HSD. Our pre- Humaine,Evry,France,17DépartementdeGénétiqueetCentre liminary data open wider management and therapeutic de Référence Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, perspectives for coordination troubles in hypermobile Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpétrière, AP–HP, Paris, France, individuals. 18DepartmentofHumanGenetics,FacultyofMedicine,McGill S. Morlino: None. C. Dordoni: None. I. Sperduti: University,Montreal,QC,Canada,19ServicedeDermatologie, None. C. Piedimonte: None. M. Ritelli: None. M. CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France Colombi: None. P. Grammatico: None. M. Castori: None. Whole exome sequencing (WES) is as a powerful tool for deciphering the genetic basis of developmental disorder, P04.49A either single nucleotides variants (SNV), indels, or recently DetectionofmosaicCopy-NumberVariationsfromWhole- copy number variants (CNV). In mosaic development dis- ExomeSequencinginmosaicpigmentationdisordersusing orders involving the skin, it has allowed detection of post- XHMM and a custom SNP approach zygotic mutations (mSNV) in various genes, but detection of mosaic CNV (mCNV) still relies on conventional cyto- A.SORLIN1,2,3,É.Tisserant2,3,J.Thevenon1,3,2,Y.Duffourd2,3, genetic studies, such as array-CGH. We sought to develop P. Kuentz2,3,4,V. Carmignac2,3,V. Cormier-Daire5,C. Michot5, an all-in-one strategy for patients with mosaic disorders, V. Malan6,M. Beaujard6,F. Morice-Picard7,C. Rooryck- using trio-WES (lesional skin versus parent’s blood). We Thambo8,C. Vincent-Delorme9,T. Smol10,É. Boudry-Labis10, combined a SNV detection pipeline with a CNV detection S. HadjRabia11,A. Phan12,M.Cordier13, M.Till13, approach, based on both a read-depth approach and a cus- D.Sanlaville13,J.St-Onge3,2,14, C.Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3, tom SNP-based approach. A. MoscaBoidron15,2,3,R. Olaso16,A. Boland16,J. Deleuze16, WeperformedWESin74patientswithcutaneousmosaic B. Keren17, L.Faivre1,2,3,J. Rivière2,3,14,18,P. Callier2,3,15, disorders. We detected 6 mCNV, all in a subgroup of 21 P. Vabres2,3,19 patients with hypomelanosis of Ito without known patho- genicSNV:3mosaictrisomy(chromosomes7,12,15)and 1Centre deGénétique,CHU DijonBourgogne,Dijon,France, 3 smaller mCNV. Blood and skin karyotypes were 2INSERM 1231, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, previously negative, due either to the absence of mosaic Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, cells in blood or to their elimination from cultured 3Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine ﬁbroblasts. For the 3 mosaic trisomies, SNP inheritance Translationnelle et Anomalies du Développement, CHU Dijon andb-allelefrequencyprovidedinformationontheparental Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Génétique Biologique Histologie, origin of extra chromosomes and clues to understand the CHRU de Besançon, Besançon, France, 5AP-HP, Hôpital underlying mechanism. We have conﬁrmed that chromo- Necker-Enfants malades, Genetics Departement, Centre of somal mosaicism is associated with mosaic pigmentation ReferenceforSkeletalDysplasia,INSERMUMR1163,Institut disorders (6/21, 29% in our cohort). An appropriate fresh Imagine, University Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, tissuesampleisessential.Ourcombinedapproachshoweda Paris, France, 6Service d'Histologie-Embryologie- good efﬁciency to detect both (m)SNV and (m)CNV in a Cytogénétique,HôpitalUniversitaireNecker-EnfantsMalades, single one-step assay, doubling our diagnostic rate, and Paris, France, 7Service de génétique médicale, CHU de offering new perspectives in the study of mosaic develop- Bordeaux-GH Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 8Laboratoire de mental disorder. génétique moléculaire, CHU de Bordeaux-GH Pellegrin, A. Sorlin: None. É. Tisserant: None. J. Thevenon: Bordeaux, France, 9Service de génétique clinique, CHRU de None. Y. Duffourd: None. P. Kuentz: None. V. Car- Lille-HôpitalJeannedeFlandre,Lille,France,10Laboratoire mignac: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. C. Michot: de Génétique médicale, CHRU de Lille - Hôpital Jeanne de None. V. Malan: None. M. Beaujard: None. F. Morice- Flandre, Lille, France, 11Service de dermatologie, Hôpital Picard: None. C. Rooryck-Thambo: None. C. Vincent- Universitaire Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, Delorme: None. T. Smol: None. É. Boudry-Labis: None. 12Pediatric Dermatology Department, Hôpital Femme Mère S.HadjRabia:None.A.Phan:None.M.Cordier:None. Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 13Service de M. Till: None. D. Sanlaville: None. J. St-Onge: None. C. génétique, GH Est-Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Hospices Thauvin-Robinet: None. A. Mosca Boidron: None. R. Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 14Child Health and Human Olaso: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze: None. B. Development Program, Research Institute of the McGill Keren: None. L. Faivre: None. J. Rivière: None. P. University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, Callier: None. P. Vabres: None. 15Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire et de Cytogénétique, PlateauTechniquedeBiologie,CHUDijonBourgogne,Dijon,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 115 P04.50B self-designedpanelof86genes(RocheNimbleGenSeqCap Results of diagnostics of ichthyoses and epidermolysis EZ System) for library preparation and MiSeq sequencer bullosa using dedicated next generation sequencing panel (Illumina) were used, followed by Sanger sequencing/ MLPA for mutations veriﬁcation. K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, D.Śniegórska1,A.Grabarczyk1, Results:Weidentiﬁedfullgenotypein86/103(83%)ofI S. Radomska1, A.Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, J.Sawicka1, and7/8(87%)ofEBpatients.In12/103(12%)ofIpatients M.Jackiewicz1, P.Bialik1,A. Kujko1, A.M. Rygiel1, wedidn’tdetectanymutation,whilein6(5Iand1EB)we K. Niepokoj1,L. Ruszkowska2,K. Osipowicz3, R.Smigiel4, found mutation in one allele only. Overall, we detected B. Wawrzycki5,K.Wozniak3,A. Jazela-Stanek6,A. Jakubiuk- mutations in 19 distinct genes. Furthermore, in 10 patients, Tomaszuk7,A. Eckersdorf-Mastalerz8,A. Barczyk1, in addition to their primary disease-causing mutations, D.Marańska9,I.Dąbrowska-Wójciak10,K. Ebner11, harbored also another possibly pathogenic mutation in one J.Castaneda1,N.Bezniakow1,M.Firek-Pędras12,E.Obersztyn1, alleleoftheothergene,includingsemi-dominantmutations M.Pasinska13,A.Pietrzyk14,K.Szczałuba15,J.Wierzba16, in FLG. P. Wlasienko1, C.Kowalewski3,J.Bal1 Conclusions: In conclusion, our panel proved to be an efﬁcient and sensitive ﬁrst-line diagnostic tool. Our data 1Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Mother and Child, providefurtherinformationregardingmolecular epidemiol- Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Paediatric Dermatology, ogyofIandEBandalsofocusonthepresenceofsecondary SpecialistHospitalMiedzyleski,Warsaw,Poland,3Department mutations, which have important impact on genetic of Dermatology and Immunodermatology, Warsaw Medical counselingand,presumably,mayaffect therapy.Supported University, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Paediatrics and by grant NCN 2014/13/D/NZ5/03304 RareDisorders,WroclawMedicalUniversity,Warsaw,Poland, K. Wertheim-Tysarowska: None. D. Śniegórska: 5Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Pediatric None. A. Grabarczyk: None. S. Radomska: None. A. Dermatology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland, Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: None. J. Sawicka: None. M. 6The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, Jackiewicz:None.P.Bialik:None.A.Kujko:None.A.M. 7Podlaskie Medical Center "Genetics", Bialystok, Poland, Rygiel:None.K.Niepokoj:None.L.Ruszkowska:None. 8DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,MedicalUniversityofLodz, K. Osipowicz: None. R. Smigiel: None. B. Wawrzycki: Lodz, Poland, 9Department of Adult Dermatology, Specialist None. K. Wozniak: None. A. Jazela-Stanek: None. A. Hospital Miedzyleski, Warsaw, Poland, 10Department of Jakubiuk- Tomaszuk: None. A. Eckersdorf-Mastalerz: Neonatology, SALVE ZOZ, Lodz, Poland, 11Department of None. A. Barczyk: None. D. Marańska: None. I. Intensive Care and Anaesthesiology for Children, Medical Dąbrowska-Wójciak: None. K. Ebner: None. J. Casta- UniversityofLodz,,Lodz,Poland,12ClinicalHospitalNo.6of neda: None. N. Bezniakow: None. M. Firek-Pędras: the Silesian Medical University in Katowice, Katowice, None. E. Obersztyn: None. M. Pasinska: None. A. Poland, 13Department of Clinical Genetics - Collegium Pietrzyk: None. K. Szczałuba: None. J. Wierzba: None. Medicum Nicolaus Copernicus University in Bydgoszcz, P.Wlasienko:None.C.Kowalewski:None.J.Bal:None. Bydgoszcz, Poland, 14Department of Genetics and Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 15MedGen P04.52D Medical Center, Warsaw, Poland., Warsaw, Poland, Ichthyosis prematurity syndrome identiﬁed for the ﬁrst 16Departments of Pediatrics, Hematology, Oncology and time in the Spanish population. Unprecedented molecular Department of General Nursery, Medical University of characterization of a FATP4 splicing variant in humans Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland U.Esperón Moldes1,M.Ginarte Val2, M.SantamariñaPena1, Introduction: Ichthyoses (I) and epidermolysis bullosa B. RordríguezLage1,L. Rodríguez Pazos3,A. VegaGliemmo1 (EB)arerare,monogenicskincomprisingseveraldozensof clinical entities, caused by mutations in over 36 and 21 1Fundaciónpúblicagalegademedicinaxenómica,Santiagode genes, in I and EB, respectively. Low incidence, genetic compostela, Spain, 2Servicio de dermatología del complexo diversity, overlapping phenotypes and age-dependent dis- hospitalariouniversitariodesantiagodecompostela,Santiago ease course negatively inﬂuence the detection rate in tra- decompostela,Spain,3Serviciodedermatologíadelcomplexo ditional diagnostic procedure based on phenotype to hospitalario universitario de vigo, Vigo, Spain genotype approach. The aim of the study was to elaborate thecosteffectivegenodermatoses-dedicatednextgeneration Introduction: Ichthyosis prematurity syndrome (IPS) is a sequencing (NGS) panel. rare syndromic form of autosomic recessive ichthyosis MaterialsandMethods:Weenrolled103and8patients caused by mutations in FATP4. To date, three different presenting clinical symptoms of I and EB, respectively. A FATP4splicesitemutationshavebeenassociatedwithIPS,116 J.delPicchia butnoneofthemhasbeenyetcharacterizedatRNAlevelin as the cause of vWS syndrome. Mutations are mostly humans. clustered in exons encoding functional domains. Mutations Materials and Methods: Two 26 and 27 years-old in the IRF6 gene are also associated with the Popliteal Spanish siblings who presented with congenital ichthyosis Pterygium Syndrome(OMIM 119500), which has similar clinical manifestations, and tested negative for autosomal orofacial features with vWS; however, it also presents with recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) related genes, were popliteal webs, syndactyly, and genital anomalies.Herewe senttoourservice.Clinicalfeatureswerecarefullyassessed report,43patientswithvWSat6differentfamiliesandtwo and genetic analysis was performed in both patients and of them have novel mutations, which have not reported their parents. In silico predictions of mutational effects and before. A novel c.841-2A>C mutation was identiﬁed in further characterization by RNA study was performed for family A and a novel c.881T>A mutation was identiﬁed in one putative splicing variant identiﬁed. family B. These mutations will provide a better under- Results:TwonovelFATP4mutationswerefoundinboth standing of the phenotypic effect of exon 7 mutations. Due patients: one frameshift variant, c.1322dup, p. to variable expression, the same mutation can lead to dif- Gly442Argfs*2 and one intronic substitution, c.988- ferent clinical manifestations.However,differentmutations 19A>G.Parentswereheterozygousforeachofthevariants. in the same genes can also be presenting with several Molecular characterization of c.988-19A>G showed that phenotypes. For this reason, the clinical effect of new thisvariantcreatesoneaberranttranscriptthatlackstheﬁrst mutationshelpusforbetterunderstandingthecausesofthe 45bpofexon8,whichencodestheendoftheproteinATP/ disease. It contributes to the genetic counselling. AMP motif, and it also leads to a deregulation of naturally A.C. Ceylan: None. I. Vargel: None. occurring isoforms. In silico analyses predicted the variant toaltertherecognitionsitesforsplicingregulatoryproteins. P04.55C Conclusions:Thisstudydescribes,fortheﬁrsttime, two Do homozygous mutations in the upstream of Ig-like C2- cases of genetically diagnosed IPS in the Spanish popula- type 2 domain of FGFR1 result in isolated ectrodactyly? tion, adding new mutations to the current list of FATP4 pathogenic variants. It also characterizes the non canonical B. Cavdarli,V. Topcu,A. Bakir splice-site c.988-19A>G mutation, being the ﬁrst splicing study in FATP4 in humans. Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara Numune Education Grant references: Fundación Ramón Areces and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey U. Esperón Moldes: None. M. Ginarte Val: None. M. SantamariñaPena:None.B.RordríguezLage:None.L. Introduction: Ectrodactyly, also known as split hand/foot Rodríguez Pazos: None. A. Vega Gliemmo: None. malformation, is seen in 1 of 8,500-25,000 newborn as isolated or part of a syndrome. There are various types of P04.54B ectrodactyly that are inherited with autosomal recessive, NovelmutationsandclinicalvariabilityinVanderWoude dominant and X linked manner. Ectrodactyly is also a Syndrome componentofHartsﬁeldsyndromeresultinginhomozygous or heterozygous mutations in Ig-like C2-type 2 domain A. C.CEYLAN1,I.VARGEL2 (conserved)ofFGFR1gene.Ourpurposeforpresentingthis work is to discuss homozygous mutations in the upstream 1Ankara Yildirim Beyazit Universiṫy, Department of Medical regionofFGFR1gene conservedregionmay bea cause of Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacetepe University, Faculty of isolated ectrodactyly. Medicine, Department of Plastic Reconstructive and Aesthetic Materials and Methods: We performed next-generation Surgery, Ankara, Turkey sequencing (NGS) panel (Trusight one sequencing panel) for a 2 years old female with left-hand ectrodactyly. VanderWoudeSyndrome(OMIM119300)isanautosomal Neuromotor and growth development of the patient were dominant clinical condition characterized by cleft palate, normal and no abnormality was observed in cranial MRI cleftlip,andlowerlippits.vWSisthemostcommoncause and echocardiography. All laboratory tests including ofsyndromiccleftlip-palate,andalso2%ofallcleftlipand biochemical and metabolic screenings were also normal. palate cases. vWS presents with variable phenotypic fea- Results: A homozygous mutation (c.386A>C; p. tures and high penetrance. Interferon Regulatory Factor 6 Asp129Ala) was detected with NGS panel in the upstream (IRF6) gene mutations have been reported as the cause of of Ig-like C2-type 2 domain of FGFR1 gene. p.Asp129Ala vWS. The 3th and 4th exons of the gene encode DNA hasn’t been reported before and insilico tools predicted the binding domain; 7,8, and 9th exons encode protein binding mutation as deleterious. The mutation is detected as domain.Morethan300IRF6mutationshavebeenreportedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 117 heterozygous in unaffected parents and expression analysis congenital hip dislocation, atrial septal defect, and anterior currently continues. ectopic anus. Trio analysis by WES revealed compound Conclusion: Hartsﬁeld syndrome, characterized by heterozygosity for two novel missense mutations in ectrodactylyandholoprosencephaly,istheresultofFGFR1 B3GAT3,thusexpandingitsallelicrepertoire.Weprovidea gene conserved domain mutations. Up to now, FGFR1 comparative overview of the phenotypic features of lin- mutations have not been reported in patients with isolated keropathies headlining the extended phenotypic range of ectrodactyly.Thisreportisuniqueintermsofshowingthat B3GAT3 mutations that overlaps with skeletal dysplasias homozygous mutations in upstream of Ig-like C2-type 2 and other CTDs including EDS, hence offering future per- domain of FGFR1 gene are related with isolated spectives for EDS nosology and clinical research in ectrodactyly. this ﬁeld. B. Cavdarli: None. V. Topcu: None. A. Bakir: None. M. Ritelli: None. C. Dordoni: None. E. Giacopuzzi: None. N. Chiarelli: None. V. Cinquina: None. M. P04.57A Venturini: None. M. Colombi: None. Further delineation of the linkeropathy syndrome due to glucuronyltransferaseI-deﬁciencyinafamilywithB3GAT3 P04.58B compoundheterozygosityfortwonovelmutationsrevealed Higherdiagnosticyieldcanbeachievedbyusingmultigene by whole exome sequencing NGS panel in testing patients with Marfan-related disorders M.Ritelli1, C.Dordoni1, E.Giacopuzzi1, N.Chiarelli1, V. Cinquina1,M. Venturini2,M.Colombi1 A. karamzade1,Z. Golchehre1,M. Keramatipour1,M.Saberi1, A. Nasrollahzadeh1,M. Arabpour1,P. Nourmohammadi2, 1Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular R. Behdad3 and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 2Division of Dermatology, Department of Clinical and 1Tehran university of medical sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Experimental Sciences, Spedali Civili University Hospital, Republic of, 2Pishgam Biotech Company, NGS Department, Brescia, Italy North Kargar Street, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Watson Genetic Laboratory, North Kargar Street, Tehran, Linkeropathies are a group of heterogeneous syndromes Iran, Islamic Republic of alongaspectrumofskeletalandconnectivetissuedisorders (CTDs) with the full disease range yet to be deﬁned. Lin- Introduction: Marfan syndrome is a life threatening con- keropathy genes encode for enzymes branching glycosa- dition with estimated prevalence of 1:5,000-1:10,000. All minoglycan chains onto proteoglycans via a common cases appear to be due to heterozygous mutation in FBN1 tetrasaccharide linker; XYLT1 and XYLT2 encode for xylo- gene. However, there are other heritable conditions with syltransferases, B4GALT7 and B3GALT6 for galactosyl- partially overlapping phenotypes caused by other genetic transferases, and B3GAT3 for a glucuronyltransferase. defects. Here, we compare the diagnostic yield of using XYLT1 and XYLT2 are associated respectively with Des- NGS multigene panel with FBN1-only testing, in 34 buquois dysplasia type 2 and with spondylo-ocular syn- patients. drome, B4GALT7 and B3GALT6 with spondylodysplastic Methods: Targeted NGS was applied to analyze Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (spEDS). For B3GAT3, 23 34 samples from individuals with clinical presentation of patients, all but one from 9 consanguineous families with Marfan-related disorders. Twenty samples were analyzed homozygous missense variants, have been described ran- for FBN1 gene only, and 14 samples were analyzed for a ging in phenotypic severity from mild to severe and panel of 14 genes named as “Marfan, Aneurysm and resembling Larsen-, Antley-Bixler-, Shprintzen-Goldberg-, Related Disorders”. Target regions captured with Nimble- and Geroderma osteodysplastica-like syndromes. Here, we genchip,followedbyNGSonIlluminaplatform.Candidate report on a 16-year-old girl with a clinical suspicion of variantswereinterpretedaccordingtoACMG-guidelinefor spEDS. She was born to non-consanguineous parents and variant interpretation 2015. presented with facial dysmorphism (dolichocephaly, pro- Results: In 10 samples, out of 20 samples, that were minent forehead, enophthalmos, midface hypoplasia, analyzed for FBN1 gene only, a strong candidate causative micrognathia,low-setears),shortstature,musclehypotonia, variant with pathogenic, likely pathogenic or VUS classi- severe kyphoscoliosis, joint laxity with recurrent disloca- ﬁcation were detected. Other 10 samples end up with a tions, pectus carinatum, bilateral radio-ulnar synostosis, negativeresult.Ontheotherhand,all14samplestestedfor atlanto-occipital instability, and bilateral pes planovalgus. the panel of 14 genes, resulted strong candidate causative Medical history included severe low bone density, variants. 9 out of 14 carried a causative variant in FBN1118 J.delPicchia gene(64%),while5sampleshadpossiblecausativevariants patients harbor the recurrent heterozygous c.1486C>T (p. in ﬁve other genes. Missense variants were the most Arg496Cys) mutation in SMAD4 (NM_005359). TEM of common causative variants and in total 7 novel variants the dermis of the second proband shows dens collagen and were also identiﬁed. irregular elastin cores with globular deposits and almost Conclusion: This study showed using NGS panel of absent surrounding microﬁbrils. genes associated with Marfan-related disorders, gives a Conclusions: We report on two novel probands with higherdiagnosticyieldforsuchpatients.Nearly30%found MYHRS. To our knowledge our data represent the ﬁrst in this study were novel variants. familial case of MYHRS and further widens the clinical A. karamzade: None. Z. Golchehre: None. M. Kera- spectrum of the disorder. TEM analysis implicates both matipour: None. M. Saberi: None. A. Nasrollahzadeh: collagen and elastic ﬁber anomalies and may shed novel None. M. Arabpour: None. P. Nourmohammadi: None. insightsontherelationbetweengrowthfactorsignalingand R. Behdad: None. extracellular matrix homeostasis. Grants: FWO: G028415N to PC and BC P04.61A I. Meerschaut: None. A. Beyens: None. W. Steyaert: Two novel probands with Myhre syndrome identiﬁed None. R. De Rycke: None. B. Menten: None. K. Bonte: through whole exome sequencing None. T. De Backer: None. S. Janssens: None. F. Malfait: None. J. Panzer: None. F. Plasschaert: None. I.Meerschaut1,2, A.Beyens1,W.Steyaert1,R. DeRycke3, P. Coucke: None. D. De Wolf: None. B. B.Menten1,K.Bonte4,T.DeBacker5,S.Janssens1,F.Malfait1, Callewaert: None. J.Panzer6,F.Plasschaert7,P. Coucke1,D.De Wolf6, B. Callewaert1 P04.62B CALMPlex: a multi-gene panel for variant detection in 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, patients with Phakomatoses and overlapping disorders Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Pediatrics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Biomedical T. Giugliano1,C. Santoro2,A. Torella1,3, G.Esposito1,3, Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, S. Perrotta2,V. Nigro1,3,G.Piluso1 4Department of Head, Neck and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 5Department of 1Dipartimento di Medicina di Precisione, Università degli Cardiology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Napoli, Italy, 6Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Ghent University 2Dipartimento della Donna, del Bambino e di Chirurgia Hospital,Ghent,Belgium,7DepartmentofOrthopedicSurgery, Generale e Specialistica, Università degli Studi della Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium Campania“LuigiVanvitelli”,Napoli,Italy,3TIGEM(Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine), Pozzuoli, Italy Introduction: Myhre syndrome (MYHRS) (MIM 139210) isarareautosomaldominant multisystemconnectivetissue Phakomatoses,characterized by pigmentary manifestations, disorder, characterized by mental retardation, cardiopathy, are phenotypically overlapping disorders often difﬁcult to skeletal abnormalities, short stature, scleroderma and lar- distinguish only on the basis of clinic in early childhood. yngeal stenosis. So far, all reported cases were due to de Nevertheless, a proper diagnosis is essential for an appro- novo gain-of-function missense mutations in SMAD4, priate clinical management. We developed CALMPlex, a encoding the SMAD protein commonly required for both targeted NGS platform for molecular diagnosis of Phako- transforming growth factor-beta and bone morphogenic matoses. It comprises 70 disease-causing genes, including proteins signal transduction. genes responsible for Phakomatoses, RNF135 and SUZ12 Materials and Methods: We report on two adult as NF1 ﬂanking genes involved in 17q11 microdeletion, probands with MYHRS identiﬁed through whole exome SPRED2 and SPRED3 as SPRED1 homologous genes and sequencing and performed transmission electron micro- all the genes of RASopathies. It also includes 25 candidate scopy (TEM) on a skin biopsy. genes identiﬁed as direct interactors of the selected disease Results: The ﬁrst proband presented with a congenital genes with different bioinformatics tools (i.e. STRING, heart defect and vertebral anomalies, but normal skin, GeneMANIA). We enrolled 149 children (0-18 years) with stature and intelligence. Later-on, she developed severe clinical diagnosis of Phakomatoses. Additional 13 samples laryngeal stenosis. She has two similarly affected children. with already known mutations were used as training set to The second proband presented with visual impairment validate CALMPlex. 10/149 patients were clinically diag- following lensectomy in childhood, short stature, brachy- nosedasNF1notconﬁrmedbySangersequencingatRNA dactyly,stiffskinanddecreasedperipheralsensitivity.Both analysis.CALMPlexdetectedalldisease-causingmutationsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 119 in the training set and a NF1 mutation in 100% (10/10) of deﬁne genetic background of this type of heterogenious molecularly unresolved NF1 cases. In the other 139 cases, diseases. CALMPlex identiﬁed the molecular defect in 57%(80/139) H. Tozkır: None. S. Demir: None. H. Gürkan: None. of them: 77 had mutations in genes ﬁtting the clinical D. Eker: None. E. Atli: None. diagnosis (NF1, NF2, SPRED1, PTPN11, KIT, TSC1, TSC2, LZTR1 and PPP1CB), while 3 had mutations in an P04.64D unexpected gene respect to initial clinical suspicion. Large-scale resequencing study of nsCL/P candidate genes Pathogenic variants in candidate genes have also been in 1061 nsCL/P cases and 1591 controls detected in some of patients remained undiagnosed but a furthercharacterizationisnecessary.CALMPlexisauseful N.Ishorst1,2,L. Henschel1,2,F. Thieme1,2,D.Drichel3, ﬁrst-tier test for genetic evaluation of these phenotypically S. Sivalingam1,2,S. L. Mehrem1,2, A.C. Fechtner1,2, overlapping conditions especially when only pigmentary A. Heimbach1,2, M.Alblas1,2,K. Keppler1,2,A. Hoischen4,5,6, manifestations occur. K. Aldhorae7,B. Braumann8, M.Martini9,L. Gölz10, T. Giugliano: None. C. Santoro: None. A. Torella: H.Reutter1,11, S.Nowak1,M.Knapp12,M.M.Nöthen1,2, None. G. Esposito: None. S. Perrotta: None. V. Nigro: M.Nothnagel3,T. Becker13, K.U.Ludwig1,2,E. Mangold1 None. G. Piluso: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, P04.63C Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, Genetic diagnosis of bone mineralisation disorders with University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Cologne Center for Next Generation Sequencing and deﬁnition of ﬁve novel Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, pathogenic variations 4DepartmentofHumanGenetics,RadboudUniversityMedical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Internal H.Tozkır,S.Demir, H.Gürkan, D.Eker,E. Atli Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Genetics, Edirne, Turkey 7Orthodontic Department, College of Dentistry, Thamar University, Thamar, Yemen, 8Department of Orthodontics, Introduction: Bone mineralisation disorders are a very University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 9Department of heterogenious group of bone disorders both in terms of Oral and Maxillo-Facial-Plastic Surgery, University of Bonn, clinical manifestations and genetic background. Next Gen- Bonn, Germany, 10Department of Orthodontics, University of eration Sequencing (NGS) is a powerfull technology Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 11Department of Neonatology, allowing analysis of a lot of genes of a number of patients Children's Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, simultaneusly with a low cost in a short time. We aimed to 12InstituteofMedicalBiometry,InformaticsandEpidemiology, reportsixnovelvariationsofbonemineralisationdisorders- UniversityofBonn,Bonn,Germany,13InstituteforCommunity related genes in 6 different patients directed to our depart- Medicine, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany ment with clinical diagnosis of abnormal bone mineralisation. Non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/ Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA samples were P)isoneofthemostcommoncongenitalmalformationsand isolatedfromEDTA-bloodsamplesof11patients.Libraries hasamultifactorialetiology.Todate,anumberofcommon were prepared with Osteo-GeneSGKit DensidadOsea, IVD risk variants have been identiﬁed for nsCL/P, explaining -CE kit according to instructions of manufacturer’s. Fastq about 25% of the genetic heritability. We hypothesize that generation was performed by MiSeq Reporter (v2.5.1; some of the remaining genetic liability is explained by rare IlluminaInc.)GenomizeSeq.Platformwasusedforvariant dominant de novo mutations. In order to identify such rare callingandﬁltering.Varsomewasusedforinsilicoanalysis de novo events, we performed whole exome sequencing of variants and ClinVar and HGMD databases were (WES) in 50 nsCL/P patients and their unaffected parents. accepted as refference for known variant interpretation, Theanalysisresultedin33raredenovoeventsin33genes. Results:Wedeﬁned5noveland4knownmutationsin9 To ﬁnd further support for these candidate genes and to (4variantsinCOL1A1,2variantsinCOL1A2,1variantin strengthen our hypothesis of dominant de novo events PHEX,1variantinTGFB1and1variantinSLC34A1)out adding to nsCL/P etiology, the candidate genes were sub- of 11 patients (81.81 %). jected to a multiplex resequencing study with single mole- Conclusion: We suggest that sequencing of the genes cule molecular inversion probes (smMIPs) in a multiethnic associated with bone mineralisation simultaneously with case/control sample of Arabian, Mexican and Central Eur- Next Generation Sequencing offers a practical approach to opean ancestry (n =1,061, n =1,591). The assay cases controls120 J.delPicchia was designed using the standard MIPgen pipeline and was SHIP2, one of the phosphatases that catalyse depho- successful for 32 genes. Libraries were sequenced on an sphorylation at the 5-position of phosphoinositides. Illumina HiSeq2500 2x125bp using Illuminav4 paired-end OPSMD is characterised by severe pre and post-natal chemistry.RawreadswerealignedwithBWAandvariants micromelia with extremely short hands and feet, large were called with UniﬁedGenotyper. Downstream analysis fontanel, craniofacial dysmorphisms and typical radio- included ﬁltering for CADD ≥ 15 and MAF ≤ 0.1% fol- graphic features such as major delay in bone maturation, lowedbyamanualinspectionofreadsandavalidationstep platyspondyly, squared metacarpals and metaphyseal including segregation analysis. Our preliminary results of cupping. theresequencingapproachshowthepresenceoffurtherrare Case Reports: We report on three unrelated Portuguese variants/raredenovoeventsinourcandidategenesinnsCL/ patients, two male and one female, with the diagnosis of P patients. Further results will be presented at the OPSM based on their clinical, radiographic and molecular conference. ﬁndings.Patient1wasthe6thcasedescribedintheliterature N.Ishorst:None.L.Henschel:None.F.Thieme:None. andisnow25years,likelyoneoftheoldestknownpatients D. Drichel: None. S. Sivalingam: None. S.L. Mehrem: alive. From his follow-up we highlight: adult height of None. A.C. Fechtner: None. A. Heimbach: None. M. 1.05m; spinal surgery for severe scoliosis (4 years); severe Alblas: None. K. Keppler: None. A. Hoischen: None. K. atlantoaxial instability; bilateral cryptorchidism; mitral Aldhorae:None.B.Braumann:None.M.Martini:None. valve prolapse; noninvasive ventilation during sleep (since L. Gölz: None. H. Reutter: None. S. Nowak: None. M. 15 years); without other signiﬁcant problems. Patient 2 (5 Knapp:None.M.M.Nöthen:None.M.Nothnagel:None. years)hasalsotypicalfeatureswhilePatient3(8years)has T. Becker: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. E. a milder phenotype, in accordance with his genotype: Mangold: None. compoundheterozygousforc.1497+5G>Candc.1649T>C (p.Phe550Ser) in INPPL1 gene. Patients 1 and 2 are P04.66B homozygous for null mutations: c.2719C>T(p.Arg907*) Opsismodysplasia - report on long-term follow-up of a and c.768-769del(p.Glu258Alafs*45), respectively. Neuro- previously described and two new Portuguese cases developmental assessments showed normal cognitive func- tion and marked motor delay. P.MaiaAlmeida1,2,H.G.Santos3,J.M.Saraiva1,4,J.Seabra5, Discussion:Oncethoughttobealethalcondition,OPSM C. Reis1, M.Venâncio1,6, K.Heath7,V. Cormier-Daire8,S.B turned out to have a wider phenotypic variability, well- Sousa1,6 illustratedinthedescriptionofthese 3patients.Despitethe growingnumberofreportedsurvivingcases,informationis 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro lacking on natural history and long-term follow-up. Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, P. Maia Almeida: None. H. G. Santos: None. J. M. 2Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Beira Interior, Saraiva: None. J. Seabra: None. C. Reis: None. M. Covilhã, Portugal, 3Serviço de Genética Médica, Venâncio: None. K. Heath: None. V. Cormier-Daire: Departamento de Pediatria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, None. S. B Sousa: None. Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 4University Clinic of Pediatrics, P04.67C Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Whole exome sequencing in Finnish families identiﬁes new Portugal, 5Serviço de Ortopedia Pediátrica, Hospital candidate genes for osteoarthritis Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 6University Clinic of Genetics, Faculty of S. Skarp1,2,O.Kämäräinen2,G.Wei2,E. Jakkula2, Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, I.Kiviranta3,4,H.Kröger5,J. Auvinen1, P. Lehenkari6,L. Ala- 7Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Kokko7,M.Männikkö1,2 IdiPAZandSkeletaldysplasiamultidisciplinaryUnit(UMDE), Hospital Universitário La Paz, Madrid, Spain and CIBERER, 1CenterforLifeCourseHealthResearch,FacultyofMedicine, ISCIII, Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 8Department of Medical University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 2Faculty of Biochemistry Genetics,INSERMU1163,UniversitéParis-Descartes,Institut and Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3DepartmentofOrthopaedicsandTraumatology,Universityof Paris, France Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Jyväskylä Introduction: Opsismodysplasia (OPSM) is a rare auto- Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, Finland, 5Department of somal recessive spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia caused Orthopaedics and Traumatology, Kuopio University Hospital by biallelic mutations in INPPL1 gene, which encodes and Kuopio Musculoskeletal Research Unit, University ofAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 121 Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, 6Department of Anatomy Introduction: Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a clinically and Cell biology and Surgery Clinic, Medical Research and genetically heterogeneous disorder. Till date, patho- Center, University of Oulu and Oulu University Hospital, genic variants in approximately twenty genes are known to Oulu,Finland,7ConnectiveTissueGeneTests,Allentown,PA, cause OI with mutations in the type 1 collagen genes United States (COL1A1 and COL1A2) being the most common cause. Materials and Methods: In our study, we evaluated the Introduction: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common clinicalfeaturesofOIin50Indianindexpatients.Grouping degenerative joint disease characterized by progressive according to phenotypic and radiographic features revealed degradation of the joint cartilage. OA is a complex disease four individuals with Bruck syndrome, three patients with that has a strong genetic background with heritability esti- hypertrophic callus and twenty with extreme bone bowing. mationsof39%and60%forkneeandhipOA,respectively. The molecular evaluation was done by a small custom The objective of this study was to identify rare variants designed gene panel or exome sequencing. predisposing subjects to OA in three Finnish families. Results: In all but two patients, pathogenic variants in Materials and Methods: Eight subjects from three knowndiseasegenesweredetected.Weobservedatotalof families with hip and knee OA were studied using whole 24 novel mutations and 24 known OI mutations, of which exomesequencing.Wefocusedonrareexonicvariantswith several were recurrent. In one patient no relevant mutation predicted pathogenicity and variants located in active was found, and another patient harboured a class III promoter or strong enhancer regions. The software tool COL1A1 intronic variant. The percentage of autosomal ANNOVAR was used for functional annotation and minor recessive forms due to mutations in BMP1, FKBP10, allele frequencies were obtained from the Exome Aggrega- LEPRE1, SERPINF1, and WNT1 was unusually high tion Consortium (ExAC) and Sequencing Initiative Suomi (48%).Cases with FKBP10,IFITM5,and WNT1mutations (SISu) database. Expression of identiﬁed genes in human could best be distinguished clinically. Most severe forms bone and cartilage tissue was studied using PCR. were due to IFITM5 and LEPRE1 mutations, followed by Results:Tworarevariantsco-segregatedwithOAintwo qualitative COL1A1, SERPINF1, and WNT1 mutations. families.InFamily8amissensevariantwasobservedinthe Quantitative COL1A1 mutations and COL1A2 mutations OLIG3genethatencodesatranscriptionfactorknowntobe had milder effects. In one family we found evidence for a associated with rheumatoid arthritis and inﬂammatory digenic inheritance pattern due to heterozygous variants in polyarthritis.InFamily12theobservedvariantwaslocated COL1A1 and COL1A2.Conclusions: The ﬁndings in our in the transcription start site of the FIP1L1 gene. FIP1L1 large cohort demonstrate the clinical utility of gene panel participates in the regulation of polyadenylation. Both testing for OI. FIP1L1 and OLIG3 were observed to be expressed in Grant: DBT-BMBF Cooperative Science Program (BT/ human bone and cartilage tissues. IN/Germany-BMBF/05/GK/2015-16) Conclusion: The exome sequencing revealed novel G.S. Bhavani: None. J. Mrosk: None. H. Shah: None. candidate genes for OA. OLIG3 and FIP1L1 may J. Hecht: None. U. Krüger: None. A. Shukla: None. U. participate in the regulatory events leading to OA. Kornak: None. K.M. Girisha: None. S.Skarp:None.O.Kämäräinen:None.G.Wei:None. E. Jakkula: None. I. Kiviranta: None. H. Kröger: None. P04.69A J. Auvinen: None. P. Lehenkari: None. L. Ala-Kokko: Sclerostin and bone: The role of the SOST gene in None. M. Männikkö: None. osteoporosis and fragility fractures in Malta P04.68D D.Scerri, A.Xuereb Anastasi, M.M.Formosa Mutation spectrum, genotype-phenotype correlation & digenicinheritanceinalargeIndiancohortofosteogenesis Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health imperfecta Sciences, Msida, Malta G.S.Bhavani1,J.Mrosk2,H.Shah1, J.Hecht3,U.Krüger3, Introduction: Sclerostin is an important regulator of the A. Shukla1,U.Kornak2,3,4,K. M.Girisha1 bone remodelling cycle acting as an inhibitor of the cano- nical Wnt signalling pathway, resulting in reduced bone 1Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, India, 2Institute of mass. The aim ofthe study was toidentify known ornovel Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, SOST variants associated with osteoporosis and fracture 3Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, susceptibility in the Malta Osteoporotic Fracture Study Berlin, Germany, 4Max Planck Institute for Molecular (MOFS). Genetics, Berlin, Germany122 J.delPicchia MaterialsandMethods:SangersequencingoftheSOST clubbing, prominent sweating of hands and feet and joints exons and their intronic ﬂanking regions, together with the pain. In older patient pachydermia and excessive sweating promoterand3’untraslatedregion(UTR) wasperformedin was noticeable, however in younger patient the skin is not 200 individuals having normal and low bone mineral yet affected. HPGD gene analysis was performed and in density (BMD). bothofthemthesametwotruncatingmutationswerefound Results: A total of 10 known and 3 novel variants were – c.175_176delCT and c.373delC. Biparental origin of identiﬁed including: rs851055, rs140960915, rs117857467, these mutations was conﬁrmed. First mutation rs59613373, rs17882143, rs768384322, rs199560099, (c.175_176delCT) is the most common mutation of HPGD rs17883310, rs17881550, rs17886183, c.220+134(T>C), gene in Caucasian population, whereas second mutation c*331(A>G) and c*390(C>A). Preliminary logistic regres- (c.373delC) has not been reported previously. sion with regards to the rs851055 promoter variant (G>A), We assume that the c.373delC truncating mutation of indicate that homozygosity for the A allele was associated HPGD gene, together with the c.175_176delCT mutation, with a protective effect on BMD at the lumbar spine, LS might be the founder mutations in Polish population, (Age adjusted Odds ratio: 0.1 [95% conﬁdence interval responsible for more cases of Pachydermoperiostosis 0.03-0.8]) and total hip, TH (OR: 0.3 [0.1-1.0]). The syndrome. rs178815503’UTRinsertion(-/G)alsoshowedaprotective K. Bernatowicz: None. A. Kashyap: None. C. Wlec- effect on LS BMD (OR 0.1 [0.03-0.7]), TH (OR 0.2 [0.04- zyk: None. S. Zajączek: None. 0.9]), and also with fracture risk (OR 0.2 [0.05-0.9]) in womenwiththehomozygousmutantgenotypecomparedto P04.71C women with the homozygous wild-type genotype. Polymorphisms in genes involved in the base excision Conclusion: Observations suggest that the rs851055 and repair (BER) pathway are associated with susceptibility to rs17881550 variants might be affecting transcriptional Paget´s disease of bone activation or epigenetic mechanisms resulting in altered Sclerostin function. All variants will be replicated in the C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero1,2, R.Usategui-Martín1,2, S.Jiménez- entireMOFScollectiontodetermineassociationwithBMD Vázquez2,I. Calero-Paniagua1,3,4,J.García-Aparicio1,5, and fracture susceptibility at different anatomical sites. L. Corral-Gudino1,6,J.del Pino-Montes1,4,R. González- D. Scerri: None. A. Xuereb Anastasi: None. M.M. Sarmiento1,2,7 Formosa: None. 1InstitutoDeInvestigaciónBiómedicaDeSalamanca(IBSAL), P04.70B Salamanca, Spain, 2Unidad de Medicina Molecular, Facultad A novel recurrent mutation (c.373delC) in HPGD gene is de Medicina, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, responsible for Pachydermoperiostosis 3Servicio de Reumatología, Hospital Universitario, Salamanca, Spain, 4Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital K. Bernatowicz1,A. Kashyap1, C.Wleczyk2,S. Zajączek1 Virgen de la Luz, Cuenca, Spain, 5Servicio de Medicina InternaHospitalUniversitario,Salamanca,Spain,6Serviciode 1DepartmentofGeneticsandPathology,PomeranianMedical Medicina Interna, Hospital del Bierzo, Ponferrada, Spain, University,Szczecin,Poland,2CytogeneticUnit,Departmentof 7Laboratorio14,InstitutodeBiologíaMolecularYCelulardel Laboratory Diagnostics, Pomeranian Medical University, Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain Szczecin, Poland Introduction: Paget´s disease of bone (PDB) is a chronic Pachydermoperiostosis (primary hypertrophic osteoarthro- bonemetabolicdisorder.Currently,PDBisthesecondmost pathy,Touraine-Solente-Golesyndrome,MIM167100)isa frequentbonedisorder.PDBisafocaldisorderaffectingthe rare genetic disorder characterized by digital clubbing, skeletonsegmentally. Its cause isunknown, but it has been pachydermia and periostosis. Genetic background of this hypothesised that somatic mutations could be responsible disease has been recently revealed. Homozygous and forthemosaicismdescribedinPDBpatients.Therefore,our compound heterozygous mutations in HPGD gene cause hypothesis is that defective response to DNA damage may insufﬁciency of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase, lead to somatic mutations, which in turn increase the risk an enzyme responsible for PGE2 catabolism. Elevated of PDB. levels of PGE2 were reported in all homozygous patients, MaterialsandMethods:Weanalysedpolymorphismsin thus leading to chronic inﬂammation process, most strik- DNA repair genes involved in the BER, NER and DSBR ingly affecting joints. pathways in order to evaluate the role of these variants in We recently diagnosed two unrelated patients from non- modulating PDB risk. consanguineous families, age 7 and 23, both with digitalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 123 Results: We found statistically signiﬁcant differences in Reference Centre for vEDS (Georges Pompidou European genotypic and allelic distribution for polymorphisms in Hospital, Paris, France). genes involved in the BER pathway. Our results showed Results : We found 3 unrelated cases harboring C1R or that carrying the allele T of the XRCC1 rs1799782 C1S missense variants: p.Tyr302Cys (previously reported) polymorphism and the allele G of the APEX rs1130409 andp.Cys309PheinC1R,p.Cys321SerinC1S.Thetwolast polymorphism increased the risk of developing PDB. variants affect cysteines in CCP1 domains, like most Conclusions: These polymorphisms could cause a lower described pathogenic variants. These affected cases had DNA repair efﬁciency and this might lead to local somatic three characteristic features: early-onset periodontitis with mutations favouring the bone metabolic alterations char- complete tooth loss, easy bruising and pretibial hyperpig- acteristic of PDB. This is the ﬁrst report showing an mentation. Two were sporadic cases and one had a family associationbetweenpolymorphismingenesinvolvedinthe history of periodontitis. The negative cases had unusual BER pathway and PDB. periodontal manifestations and severe joint hypermobility. This work was supported by a grant from Instituto de We are currently building a database of conﬁrmed pEDS Salud Carlos III (Ministry of Economy and Competitive- patients to study the role of pathogenic variants in the ness) (ISC IIII-FEDER: PI16/01920) immune response because of recurrent infections (40% of C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero: None. R. Usategui-Martín: cases). None. S. Jiménez-Vázquez: None. I. Calero-Paniagua: Conclusions : We conﬁrmed pEDS is a rare condition None. J. García-Aparicio: None. L. Corral-Gudino: with a well-deﬁned phenotype including the three features None. J. del Pino-Montes: None. R. González- abovementioned. The clinical diagnosis should lead to Sarmiento: None. genotypeC1RandC1S.Thepathophysiologyremainstobe discovered, including the impact in the immune response P04.72D system. Screening a French series of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome A. Legrand: None. M. Devriese: None. S. Adham: patients with periodontal manifestations reveals new None. K. Benistan: None. E. Schaefer: None. R. variantsinC1RandC1Sandreﬁnestheclinicalfeaturesof Jaussaud: None. M. Frank: None. X. Jeunemaitre: periodontal Ehlers-Danlos syndrome None. J. Albuisson: None. A. Legrand1,2,M. Devriese1,S. Adham1,K. Benistan3, P04.73A E. Schaefer4,R. Jaussaud5,M. Frank1,X. Jeunemaitre1,2, PLS3 deletions lead to severe spinal osteoporosis and J.Albuisson1,2 disturbed bone matrix mineralization 1Département de génétique et Centre de Référence des A. J.Kämpe1,A. Costantini1, Y.Levy-shraga2,3,L. Zeitlin4, Maladies Vasculaires, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, P. Roschger5,F. Taylan1, A.Lindstrand1,6, E.P. Paschalis5, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, S. Gamsjaeger5,A. Raas-Rothschild7,M. Hövel8,H.Jiao9, 2INSERM,U970,ParisCentredeRechercheCardiovasculaire, K. Klaushofer5,C. Grasemann10,O.Mäkitie1,6,11 Paris, France, 3Département de Génétique, Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Garches, 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery and Center France, 4Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux for Molecular Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Pediatric Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, Endocrinology Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's 5Département de Médecine Interne et Immunologie Clinique, Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, CHU de Nancy-Hôpitaux de Brabois, Vandoeuvre-Lès-Nancy, 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, France Israel, 4Pediatric Orthopedic Department, Dana-Dwek Children'sHospital,SouraslyMedicalCenter,Tel-Aviv,Israel, Background : Pathogenic variants in C1R and C1S were 5Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch recently discovered as a cause for periodontal Ehlers- Hospital of WGKK and AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, 1st Danlos syndrome (pEDS, previously EDS VIII). EDS are Medical Department Hanusch Hospital, Vienna, Austria, connective tissue disorders deﬁned by major criteria: joint 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University laxityandskinalterations.pEDSshareseveralfeatureswith Hospital,Stockholm,Sweden,7InstituteforRareDiseases,The vascular EDS (vEDS), like acrogeria, gum fragility and Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical arterial or gastrointestinal ruptures. Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 8Department of Orthopedics Methods : C1R and C1S were screened by Sanger and Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Essen and the Sequencing in a series of 20 cases with periodontal University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 9Department manifestations and addressed to the French National ofBiosciencesandNutrition,andScienceforLifeLaboratory,124 J.delPicchia Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 10Klinik für Background.Polydactylycanbeisolatedorencounteredin Kinderheilkunde II, University Hospital Essen and the more than 300 syndromes, mostly ciliopathies. University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 11Children's Methods. A young girl aged 5 was investigated for Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University dysmorphic features, speech delay, obesity, strabismus and Hospital, Helsinki, Finland post axial polydactyly of the four limbs. Results. Array CGH revealed a de novo heterozygous Introduction: PLS3 is one of the genes associated with X- duplication of uncertain signiﬁcance in the 13q31.3 region linked osteoporosis in children and pathogenetic variants includingthegeneGPC6.ApanelanalysisforBardetBiedl have thus far been reported in 16 families. However, our Syndrome (BBS) revealed a new maternally inherited understanding of PLS3’s speciﬁc role in bone metabolism pathogenic splice site mutation in intron 13 of the TTC8 and how it exerts its effects is still poor. To study this gene (c.1317+1G>A) and a likely pathogenic splice site further we investigated 3 children from 2 different families variant in the exon 5 of the TTC8 gene inherited from the with PLS3 deletions. father (c.459G>A (p.Thr153Thr)). MaterialandMethods:Family1consistedof2brothers, Discussion. A previous publication of a case of PAP-A2 11 and 7 years old, and their healthy parents. For the older with a similar duplication has postulated GPC6 as a brother, a transiliac bone biopsy was taken and extensively candidategeneforPAPA-A2.Forourpatient,theadditional analyzedusinghistomorphometry,QuantitateBackscattered symptomshaveledtotestforBBS.Thisanalysisshoweda Electron Imaging and Raman microspectroscopy. Family 2 never described mutation: a new pathogenic splice site consistedofa12-year-oldboy,hisosteoporoticmotherand mutation in intron 13. According to the algorithms, the healthyfather.Massiveparallel sequencingand array-CGH variant c.1317+1G>A leads to a loss of the natural splice was used to genetically evaluate all subjects. site leading to exon skipping, inclusion of intronic Results: In both families the affected boys had sequences or usage of a cryptic splice site. childhood-onset osteoporosis with severe spinal involve- Conclusion. We describe a girl with a BBS8 with two ment and multiple compression fractures. Both brothers in novel molecular anomalies: a new splice site mutation in Family 1 had a deletion of exon 4-16 in PLS3, which was intron 13 of TTC8 and a duplication including GPC6, a inheritedfromtheirmother.TheindexboyinFamily2had candidate gene in the pathogenesis of PAP-A2. The a larger deletion, also inherited from his mother, which patient’s polydactyly is a feature of BBS, but the spanned the entire PLS3 gene. All children had a normal duplicationofGPC6hasprobablyinﬂuencedthephenotype biochemical proﬁle. Results from the bone tissue analyses of the patient, with polydactyly of all four limbs. showed a strong hypomineralization of the bone and a J.Harvengt:None.U.Schierloh:None.S.Bulk:None. striking increase in osteoid volume, osteoid thickness and G. Pierquin: None. mineralizing lag time. Conclusion:OurresultsindicatethatPLS3deletionslead P04.76D to severe spinal osteoporosis and defective bone matrix The inﬂammasome pathway is involved in PXE through mineralization,andsuggestthatPLS3isdirectlyinvolvedin IL1Bupregulationinpatientswithaseverecardiovascular the mineralization process. PXE phenotype A.J. Kämpe: None. A. Costantini: None. Y. Levy- shraga: None. L. Zeitlin: None. P. Roschger: None. F. E. Y.G.De Vilder1,2,3, L.Martin4,G.Lefthériotis5,P. Coucke1, Taylan: None. A. Lindstrand: None. E.P. Paschalis: A. DePaepe1,F.Van Nieuwerburgh6, O.M. Vanakker1 None. S. Gamsjaeger: None. A. Raas-Rothschild: None. M.Hövel:None.H.Jiao:None.K.Klaushofer:None.C. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Grasemann: None. O. Mäkitie: None. Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3PhD Fellow of the P04.74B Research Foundation - Flanders, Brussels, Belgium, Post axial polydactyly: isolated symptom or part of a 4Department of Dermatology, Angers University Hospital, syndrome. A case of BBS8 with two novel molecular Angers, France, 5Department of Vascular Investigations, Nice anomalies University Hospital, Nice, France, 6Department of Pharmaceutics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, J.HARVENGT1,U.SCHIERLOH2,S.BULK1,G.PIERQUIN1 Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium 1CHU Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2CHL KannerKlinik, Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), an auto- Luxembourg, Luxembourg somal recessive ectopic mineralization disorder, causes skin, eye and cardiovascular symptoms. The disease showsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 125 striking phenotypic variability without underlying Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum genotype-phenotype correlations. Therefore, we evaluated Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 5Department of Dermatology, the collective modifying effect of rare variants on the PXE Georg-August-University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, cardiovascular disease severity. 6Department ofRheumatology,Fachklinik BadBentheim,Bad Methods: Whole Exome Sequencing and burden tests Bentheim,Germany,7DepartmentofInternalMedicineI,José- (SKAT-OandC-alpha)wereperformedin12PXEpatients CarrerasCentrumforImmuno-andGeneTherapy,University with an extreme cardiovascular phenotype (severe/mild). of Saarland Medical School, Homburg/Saar, Germany, Functional validation included inﬂammasome stimulation 8DepartmentofDermatology,UniversityofMünster,Münster, with LPS/ATP in dermal ﬁbroblasts of PXE patients with Germany, 9Division of Medical Inﬂammation Research, extreme cardiovascular phenotypes (4 severe/6 mild) and 2 Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, healthy controls. Readout comprised qPCR analysis for Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden NLRP1 and inﬂammasome outcome parameter IL1B. Results:Sixteen(SKAT-O)and74(C-alpha)geneswere Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) and psoriasis vulgaris (PsV) are identiﬁedassigniﬁcantmodiﬁersofthePXEcardiovascular common chronic inﬂammatory disorders of complex etiol- disease and were enriched for 3 pathways: calcium ogy. In a mouse-model, psoriasis-like skin and joint homeostasis, vascular disease and apoptosis. One modiﬁer, symptoms were aggravated in a NADPH oxidase deﬁcient NLRP1,islinkedtovasculardiseaseandapoptosis,andwas strain, indicating regulation by reactive oxygen species withheldforfunctionalvalidation.IL1Bwasupregulatedin (ROS).AsubunitofthehumanNADPHoxidaseisencoded dermalﬁbroblastsofPXEpatientswithasevereversusmild byNCF1,agenelocatedinastructurallycomplexgenomic cardiovascular phenotype (fold change (FC) +/- 8; Mann- regiononchromosome7q11.23including two homologous Whitney (MW) test: p<0.001) and a severe phenotype pseudogene copies. The considerable homology of the versushealthycontrols(FC+/-51;MWtest:p<0.001).In genomic region comprising NCF1, its pseudogenes and addition, baseline IL1B expression was signiﬁcantly higher further genes predisposes to genomic rearrangements in PXE patients versus healthy controls (FC +/- 10; MW resulting in variability of copy number (CN). A reduced test: p<0.001). NCF1 CN and a functional missense variant (c.269G>A/p. Conclusion:Thisstudyprovidesfunctionalvalidationfor Arg90His) in NCF1, causing a reduced ROS production, a predicted modiﬁer gene in the PXE cardiovascular haverecentlybeenidentiﬁedasstronggeneticriskfactorsin phenotype, and for the ﬁrst time implicates inﬂammasome other autoimmune diseases. Those associations combined involvement inthePXE pathophysiology. Thiswill help to withtheanimalmodelpromptedustoanalyzebothvariants direct future research on the mechanisms underlying PXE in 1,248 PsA, 1,157 PsV patients and 932 controls. NCF1 andrelatedsofttissuecalciﬁcationdisorders(FWO14/ASP/ and pseudogene CNs were determined by qPCR, the 084). functional variant was genotyped with a nested PCR strat- E.Y.G. De Vilder: None. L. Martin: None. G. egy. We did not observe evidence for association with the Lefthériotis: None. P. Coucke: None. A. De Paepe: NCF1 CN nor with the functional variant in carriers of the None. F. Van Nieuwerburgh: None. O.M. most frequent CN ratio (4 pseudogenes : 2 gene copies) Vanakker: None. despite 97% power to detect nominally signiﬁcant asso- ciation with PsA or PsV with c.269G>A/p.Arg90His. The P04.78B negative ﬁndings make a role of these functional NCF1 Association analyses of functional NCF1 variants in variants in psoriasis unlikely, but since oxidative burst psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis vulgaris seems to play a role in autoimmune disorders, other path- waysresultingindeviantROSproductionmightplayarole U.D.Hüffmeier1, S.Löhr1, A.B. Ekici1, S.Uebe1,M.Köhm2, in the pathogenesis of the disease. F.Behrens2,B.Böhm2,M.Sticherling3,G.Schett4,R.Mössner5, Funding: BMBF-Metarthros-01EC1407A A. Nimeh6,G.Assmann7,J. Rech4,V. Oji8, R.Holmdahl9, U.D. Hüffmeier: None. S. Löhr: None. A.B. Ekici: H.Burkhardt2, A.Reis1 None.S.Uebe:None.M.Köhm:None.F.Behrens:None. B. Böhm: None. M. Sticherling: None. G. Schett: None. 1HumanGenetics,UniversityofErlangen,Erlangen,Germany, R.Mössner:None.A.Nimeh: None.G.Assmann:None. 2Division of Rheumatology and IME, Fraunhofer Project J. Rech: None. V. Oji: None. R. Holmdahl: None. H. Group Translational Medicine and Pharmacology, Johann Burkhardt: None. A. Reis: None. Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 3Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Erlangen, P04.79C Erlangen, Germany, 4Department of Internal Medicine 3 - Evidence of common and differential genetic biomarkers Rheumatology and Immunology, Friedrich-Alexander- for Ps and PsA126 J.delPicchia V. Caputo1,V. Errichiello1,C. Strafella1,2, A.Mazzotta3, V. Caputo: None. V. Errichiello: None. C. Strafella: G.Novelli1,F. Sangiuolo1,E. Campione4,R. Cascella1,5, None. A. Mazzotta: None. G. Novelli: None. F. E. Giardina1,6 Sangiuolo: None. E. Campione: None. R. Cascella: None. E. Giardina: None. 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, “Tor Vergata” University, Rome, Italy, 2Emotest Laboratory, Pozzuoli, Italy, P04.80D 3UOSD Dermatology, San Camillo Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Analysis of the genetic background of psoriasis in a Italy, 4Department of Systems Medicine, Division of Hungarian cohort Dermatology,UniversityofRome“TorVergata”,Rome,Italy, 5Department of Chemical Pharmaceutical and Biomolecular A.Penyige1,E.A.Janka2,I.Sawhney2,A.Csordás2,Z.Kovács2, Technologies, Catholic University “Our Lady of Good A. Szegedi2,P. Holló3, S.Fiatal4,R.Ádány4,D.Törőcsik2,É. Counsel” Laprakë, Rruga Dritan Hoxha, Tirana, Albania, Remenyik2 6Laboratory of Genomic Medicine UILDM, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy 1Univ. of Debrecen, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Univ. of Debrecen, Introduction: Collagens provide stability and resilience to Faculty of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Debrecen, extracellularmatrixofconnectivetissues,includingdermis, Hungary, 3Semmelweis University, Department of bloodvesselsandbone.Therefore,collagengenescouldbe Dermatovenereology and Dermatooncology, Budapest, involved in the etiopathogenesis of Psoriasis (Ps, Hungary, 4Univ. of Debrecen, Faculty of Public Health, OMIM#177900) and Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA, Department of Preventive Medicine, Debrecen, Hungary OMIM#607507), which display dysfunction and instability of the connective tissues. COL10A1 (rs3812111, A/T), Introduction:Psoriasisischronic,inﬂammatorydisorderof COL6A5 (rs12488457, A/C), COL8A1 (rs13081855, G/T) the skin, often associated with arthritis and systemic co- and the miR-146a (rs2910164, G/C) were selected as morbidities. Previous genetic studies established that psor- potential biomarkers for Ps and PsA susceptibility. iasis susceptibility has strong genetic components beside Materials and Methods: 393 Ps, 424 PsA and 600 environmental risk factors. controls were genotyped by Real Time-PCR and subjected MaterialsandMethods:19SNPsin15candidategenes to biostatistic analysis using chi-square test and evaluation were genotyped in782psoriasispatientsand2000controls ofORs.Thepotentialpathogeneticimpactoftheassociated and their association with psoriasis was assessed in a case- genes was then investigated by bioinformatic tools. control study. Departures from HWE were tested using Results: rs12488457 (A/C, COL6A5), rs13081855 (G/T, Fischer exact test. Allelic and genotypic association tests COL8A1) and rs2910164 (G/C, miR-146a) were associated wereperformedbyusingeitherχ2testorFisher’sexacttest, with both Ps [rs12488457: p=2.97*10-9;, OR (C): 1.75, then allelic and genotypic odds ratios with 95% conﬁdence CI95%: 1.44-2.13; rs13081855: p=0.001, OR (T): 1.79, intervals were calculated, the model was adjusted to CI95%:1.24-2.59; rs2910164: p=0.01, OR (G): 1.29, confoundingfactors,too.Associationofinferredhaplotypes CI95%:1.04-1.61] and PsA [rs12488457: p=1.24*10-5, with psoriasis was assessed by a log-additive model. OR (C): 2.46, CI95%: 2.03-2.97; rs13081855: p=9.06*10- Pathway and network analysis was also carried out. 6,OR(T):2.17,CI95%:1.53-3.06;rs2910164:p=0.04,OR Results: 12 SNPs in 11 candidate genes showed (G): 1.23 CI95%:1.0-1.51], while rs3812111 (A/T, signiﬁcant association with psoriasis susceptibility. Six COL10A1) showed signiﬁcant association with PsA only SNPshaveprotectiveeffectandsixconferincreasedriskfor [p=0.008, OR (T):1.29, CI95%:1.07-1.57]. The bioinfor- psoriasis revealing modest effect on phenotype. The same matic analysis reported that COL6A5, COL8A1 and miR- variants were found to be signiﬁcantly associated with the 146a may be potentially involved in alteration of the early onset of psoriasis. Protecting and sensitizing haplo- proliferation, neovascularization and inﬂammation path- types were identiﬁed on chromosomes 1, 5, 6 and 7. ways leading to Ps and PsA. On the other hand, COL10A1 Conclusion: Network analysis of disease associated was implicated in bone metabolism mechanisms which are genes - LCE3D, PLCL2, IL12B, TNF, TRAF3IP2, dysregulated in PsA. TNFAIP3, IL6, PON1, FTO and SPATA2 - identiﬁed six Conclusion: COL6A5, COL8A1, miR-146a and functional modules centered around TNF, TNFAIP3, COL10A1 represent new susceptibility biomarkers for Ps IL12B/IL6, SPATA2, PON1 and PLCL2. These results and PsA, reﬂecting thereby the existence of differential underlie the importance of TNF and NFκB signaling mechanisms underlying the etiopathogenesis of these pathways, cytokine production and inﬂammatory response pathologies. in psoriasis patients and hints connections to obesity, asthma, atherosclerosis, and IBD among others.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 127 A. Penyige: None. E.A. Janka: None. I. Sawhney: patients with Roberts syndrome might be evaluated None. A. Csordás: None. Z. Kovács: None. A. Szegedi: endocrinologically during their follow-up. None. P. Holló: None. S. Fiatal: None. R. Ádány: None. N. Guleray: None. P.O. Simsek Kiper: None. G.E. D. Törőcsik: None. É. Remenyik: None. Utine: None. K. Boduroglu: None. M. Alikasifoglu: None. P04.81A ExpandingtheclinicalandmutationalspectrumofRoberts P04.82B Syndrome with previously unreported endocrine ﬁndings Skeletal abnormalities in SATB2-associated syndrome N.Guleray1, P.O.Simsek Kiper2,G.E. Utine2,K. Boduroglu2, M.Rio1,M.Mouille1,S.Breton2,J.Souberbielle3,G.Maruani3, M.Alikasifoglu1 A.Afenjar4,J.Amiel1,5,Y.Capri6,M.Fouillet7,A.Goldenberg8, C. Michot1,9,C. Mignot4, L.Perrin6, A.Putoux10,C. Quelin11, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University J.Van Gils12,V. Cormier Daire1,5,9 FacultyofMedicine,Ankara,Turkey,2DepartmentofPediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University 1Département de génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey APHP, paris, France, 2Centre de référence maladies osseuses constitutionnelles, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, paris, Introduction: Roberts/SC Phocomelia syndrome (MIM France, 3Laboratoire d'explorations fonctionnelles, Hôpital 268300,269000) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, paris, France, 4Département characterizedbylimbanomalies,craniofacialdysmorphism, de génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, paris, France, pre- and postnatal growth failure, developmental delay and 5INSERM UMR1163, Institut Imagine, Université Paris avarietyofvisceralanomalies.Robertssyndromeispartof Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, 6Département a spectrum named ‘’cohesinopathies’’ with varying phe- de génétique, Hôpital Robert debré, APHP, paris, France, notypic expression, and is caused by mutations in ESCO2. 7Servicedepédiatrie,CHULyon,Lyon,France,8Département ESCO2 encodes a protein that establishes sister chromatid de génétique, CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 9Centre de cohesion during S phase. In this study, we report on 4 new référence maladies osseuses constitutionnelles, Hôpital patients with previously unreported endocrine ﬁndings. Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10Service de Material and Methods: Three patients clinically and génétique, CHU Lyon, Lyon, France, 11Service de génétique, radiologically diagnosed with Roberts syndrome, were CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 12service de génétique, CHU screened for ESCO2 variations using Sanger sequencing Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France analysis while one patient diagnosed with FATCO syndrome underwent whole exome sequencing. The SATB2-associated syndrome (SAS) has been recently Results: Sanger sequencing revealed 3 pathogenic proposed as a new clinically recognizable syndrome that mutations, including a novel mutation identiﬁed in a results from deleterious alterations of the SATB2 gene in conserved region of ESCO2. While the patient with novel humans. The characteristic features are intellectual dis- c.1433_1437delCTTTT mutation had severe intellectual ability with absent or limited speech development, beha- disability, the other two patients with previously reported vioral problems, craniofacial abnormalities with cleft or c.1131+1G>A splice donor mutation presented with high palate, and dental abnormalities. About ﬁfty patients generalized decreased bone mineral density and hypothyr- have been reported in the literature. Skeletal abnormalities oidism, respectively. Finally in the patient with clinical such as tibial bowing, bone fragility or osteoporosis have ﬁndings resembling FATCO syndrome, WES analysis been reported in patients, suggesting a higher frequency of revealed c.879_880delAG. In this individual premature skeletal complications in SAS. The role of SATB2 in the adrenarche without signiﬁcant hormonal imbalance was regulation of skeletal development has recently been found and this ﬁnding was attributed to the Roberts demonstrated. Indeed, SATB2 is a regulator of the Osx syndrome. promoter, itself responsible for the differentiation of Conclusion: This study demonstrates that premature mesenchymal cells into osteoblasts. In this context, we adrenarche and hypothyroidism may accompany Roberts decided to perform a non-interventional, multicentric syndrome.ESCO2expressioninthyroidandadrenalglands research to understand mechanisms that lead to osteopenia as well as the previous description of thyroid agenesis, in SAS patients. For all patients, we carried out a complete hypothyroidism and osteoporosis in another ‘’cohesino- phosphocalcic assessment including markers of bone for- pathy’’ Cornelia de Lange syndrome further support this mation and bone resorption. We also reviewed skeletal observation. This study provides further evidence that radiographies and bone densitometry when available. We report here our data of 23 patients with SAS (21 with128 J.delPicchia intragenic pathogenic variant and 2 with a microdeletion) disease causing mutations in known short stature genes in aged from 4 to 33 years. A clinically signiﬁcant fracture 19% of patients. We now performed exome sequencing in history was present in 10 patients. Osteopenia was present 211 clinically characterized families without mutations in in skeletal radiographies of 10/10 patients. Low mineral known short stature genes to identify potential candidate density ascertained by osteodensitometry was present in 4/ genes. Variants were assessed for a potential effect on the 10 patients. We hope that ungoing results will allow better gene and its product using multiple lines of evidence clinical management of SAS patients. including expression in chondrocytes. We found 21 genes M. Rio: None. M. Mouille: None. S. Breton: None. J. mutated in at least two patients. Six were especially strong Souberbielle: None. G. Maruani: None. A. Afenjar: candidates (CPZ, EDEM3, FBRS, RASA3, SLC7A8 and None.J.Amiel:None.Y.Capri:None.M.Fouillet:None. USP45) with mutations in at least two patients. The A. Goldenberg: None. C. Michot: None. C. Mignot: resulting proteins participate in protein degradation, tran- None. L. Perrin: None. A. Putoux: None. C. Quelin: scriptional regulation and protein transport. One out- None. J. Van Gils: None. V. Cormier Daire: None. standing candidate gene, RASA3, is a member of the RAS- MAPK pathway. Mutations in other members of this P04.83C pathway are known to cause diseases of the RASopathy Identiﬁcation of novel candidate genes for idiopathic short complex, with short stature as a main symptom. The 2 stature using whole exome sequencing patients carrying de novo mutations in RASA3 share some clinical characteristics with other RASopathy patients. We C. T.Thiel1, N.N.Hauer1,C. Vogl1,R. Ahmadian2,P.S. recentlyidentiﬁedathirdpatientwithadenovomutationin Dhandapany3, B.Popp1, C.Büttner1,S. Ube1,H. Sticht4, RASA3.AsGHtreatmentisdiscussedforsomeRASopathy F. Ferrazzi1,A. B. Ekici1, A.deLuca5,E.Schöller1, patients, successful application in one of our patients sug- S. Schuhmann1,K. E.Heath6,A. Hisado-Oliva6,P. Klinger7, gestedthat GH might be indicated in thetreatmentofthese S.Boppudi8,J.Kelkel9,A.M.Jung9,C.Kraus1,U.Trautmann1, patients. In conclusion, using exome analyses in patients A. Wiesener1,K.Kutsche10,A. Rauch11,D.Wieczorek12, with idiopathic short stature, we found 21 strong candidate T. Rohrer9,M.Zenker8,H.Dörr13, A.Reis1 genesin40patients.Thus,Exomesequencingcantherefore beofgreatvaluetoidentifytheunderlyinggeneticcausein 1Institute of Human Genetics, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, these individuals. Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular C.T.Thiel:None.N.N.Hauer:None.C.Vogl:None.R. Biology II, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine University, Ahmadian: None. P.S. Dhandapany: None. B. Popp: Düsseldorf, Germany, 3The Mindich Child Health and None. C. Büttner: None. S. Ube: None. H. Sticht: None. Development Institute Icahn School of Medicine at Mount F. Ferrazzi: None. A.B. Ekici: None. A. de Luca: None. Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 4Institute of Biochemistry E. Schöller: None. S. Schuhmann: None. K.E. Heath: FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 5Mendel None. A. Hisado-Oliva: None. P. Klinger: None. S. Laboratory Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital IRCCS Boppudi: None. J. Kelkel: None. A.M. Jung: None. C. San Giovanni Rotondo, Rome, Italy, 6Institute of Medical and Kraus: None. U. Trautmann: None. A. Wiesener: None. Molecular Genetics and Skeletal dysplasia Multidisciplinary K.Kutsche:None.A.Rauch:None.D.Wieczorek:None. UnitHospitalUniversitarioLaPazUniversidadAutónomade T. Rohrer: None. M. Zenker: None. H. Dörr: None. A. MadridIdiPAZandCIBERER,Madrid,Spain,7Departmentof Reis: None. Orthopaedic Rheumatology, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 8Institute of Human Genetics Otto‐von‐ P04.84D Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, SJOGREN-LARSSON SYNDROME IN TWO SISTERS 9DivisionofPediatricEndocrinologyDepartmentofPediatrics WITH AN INTRONIC VARIANT OF ALDH3A2 GENE: and Neonatology Saarland University Hospital, Homburg/ CLINICAL FINDINGS Saar, Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, F. Fernandez1, G.Pi2,M. Carmona1,L. Pedrola1,M.Evole3, 11Institute of Medical Genetics University of Zurich, Zürich, A. Zuñiga1,J. Cervera1 Switzerland, 12Institute of Human-Genetics University Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany, 13Department of 1Unidad de Genética. HUP La Fe., Valencia, Spain, 2Serv. PediatricsandAdolescentMedicineFAUErlangen-Nürnberg, Pediatria. Hospital de la Ribera., Alzira, Spain, 3Serv. Erlangen, Germany Dermatología. HUP La Fe., Valencia, Spain Short stature affects 3% of the population. We recently Introduction: Sjögren-Larsson syndrome is a neurocuta- demonstrated that exome sequencing is able to identify neousdiseaseduetoaninbornanomalyoflipidmetabolismAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 129 and characterized by congenital ichthyosis, intellectual Haploinsufﬁciency of the transcription factor Short Stature deﬁcitandspasticity.Halfofthepatientsapproximatelyare Homeobox (SHOX) manifests as a spectrum of clinical not able to walk. It is due to mutations of the ALDH3A2 phenotypes,rangingfromdisproportionateshortstatureand gene (17p11.2), which encodes the enzyme required in the Madelung deformity to isolated short stature. Here, we oxidation of fatty alcohols in fatty acids. Transmission is describe ﬁve infants with molecularly conﬁrmed diagnoses autosomal recessive. They usually live to adulthood of SHOX haploinsufﬁciency who presented in-utero with requiring care. Neurological symptoms and intellectual short long bones during routine antenatal scanning from as deﬁcit do not evolve after puberty. Early symptomatology early as 19 weeks gestation. Other fetal growth parameters suggests more serious involvement. GEN: ALDH3A2 were normal. The molecular basis of SHOX haploinsufﬁ- Case report: Our index case was a 20-year-old female ciency was distinct in each case. In four cases SHOX hap- patientwithneurologicalproblems (seizures and spasticity) loinsufﬁciency was inherited from a previously and congenital bone malformations. She presented a dry, undiagnosed parent. In our de novo case, SHOX hap- rough, and scaly with a brownish or yellowish tone skin in loinsufﬁciency reﬂected the formation of a derivative sex the trunk and extremities, hyperpigmented hyperkeratotic chromosome during paternal meiosis. Final adult height in plaques predominantly in ﬂexures and abundant scalp the SHOX deﬁcient parents ranged from -1.9 to -1.2 SDS. scaling. She had a 15-year-old sister with the same All affected parents had disproportionately short limbs and symptomatology, but who also has a spastic, scissor gait, twoaffectedmothershadbilateral Madelung deformity. To mental retardation and most severe skin lesions. A genetic our knowledge, SHOX haploinsufﬁciency has not pre- study was carried out, detecting the variant c.471 + 1delG viously been reported to present in-utero. Our experience intheALDH3A2geneinhomozygousstate.Thisvariantis illustrates that SHOX deﬁciency should form part of the described as pathological with an autosomal recessive differentialdiagnosisoffetalshortlongbonesandsuggests pattern of inheritance, which conﬁrms at the genetic level a low threshold for genetic testing. This should be parti- the clinical suspicion of SJOGREN-LARSSON SYN- cularlytargetedat,butnotlimitedto,familieswithahistory DROME. The variant detected is also present in sister of of features suggestive of SHOX deﬁciency. Data on the thepatientwiththesameclinicaldiagnosisbutwithamost postnatal growth of our index cases is presented which severe phenotype. Genetic conﬁrmation is of great impor- demonstrates that antenatal presentation of SHOX hap- tance in these patients, due to the clinical follow-up they loinsufﬁciency is not indicative of severe postnatal growth require, and offers the possibility of assessing genetic restriction. Early identiﬁcation of SHOX deﬁciency will counseling. enable accurate genetic counselling reﬂecting a good post- F.Fernandez:None.G.Pi:None.M.Carmona:None. natal outcome and facilitate optimal initiation of growth L. Pedrola: None. M. Evole: None. A. Zuñiga: None. J. hormone therapy. Cervera: None. S. Ramachandrappa: None. A. Kulkarni: None. H. Gandhi:None.C.Ellis:None.R.Hutt:None.L.Roberts: P04.85A None. R. Hamid: None. A. Papageorghiou: None. S. SHOX haploinsufﬁciency presenting with isolated short Mansour: None. long bones in the second and third trimester P04.86B S. Ramachandrappa1, A.Kulkarni1, H.Gandhi2,C. Ellis3, Functional missense and splicing variants in the retinoic R. Hutt4,L. Roberts4,R.Hamid5, A.Papageorghiou6, acid catabolizing enzyme CYP26C1 in idiopathic short S. Mansour1 stature 1South West Thames Regional Genetics Unit, London, United G.A. Rappold1, A.Montalbano1,L. Juergensen2,M.Fukami3, Kingdom,2DepartmentofObstetricsandGynaecology,Surrey C. T.Thiel4, N.H.Hauer4, R.Roeth1, B.Weiss1, Y.Naiki5, and Sussex Healthcare NHS Trust, Surrey, United Kingdom, T. Ogata6,D.Hassel2 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Epsom and St Helier University Hospitals NHS Trust, Epsom, United 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Kingdom, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Royal Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Surrey County Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Guildford, Germany, 2Department of Internal Medicine III, Cardiology, UnitedKingdom,5DepartmentofObstetricsandGynaecology, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Croydon Health Services NHS Trust, Croydon, United Molecular Endocrinology, National Research Institute for Kingdom, 6Fetal Medicine Unit, St George’s University of Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 4Institute of London, London, United Kingdom Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen- Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 5Division of Endocrinology130 J.delPicchia and Metabolism, National Center for Child Health and forallpediatricsubspecialties.Theregistrymainlyincluded Development, Tokyo, Japan, 6Department of Pediatrics, patients with the genetics disorders of the skeleton. Age at Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, diagnosis, geographical region of referral, family history, Japan parental consanguinity, clinical diagnosis, molecular diag- nosis and inheritance patterns when available were Height is a complex quantitative trait with a high herit- reviewed respectively. The study was approved by ability. Short stature is diagnosed when height is sig- Hacettepe University Noninterventional Clinical Research niﬁcantly below the average of the general population for Ethics Board (Ref No: GO 17/321). that person´s age and sex. We have recently found that the Results: The ﬁndings of a total of 884 patients were retinoic acid degrading enzyme CYP26C1 is a modiﬁer for reviewed. The overall consanguinity rate in our study is SHOX deﬁciency phenotypes towards more severe clinical 52%withsomeregionaldifferences.Acomparisonismade manifestations. Here, we asked whether damaging variants in two time periods, 2005-2009 and 2009-2018. The in CYP26C1 alone could lead to short stature. We per- registryhasenabledscientiﬁccontributionsthroughclinical, formed exome and Sanger sequencing to analyze 856 radiographic and molecular delineation of different clinical individuals with short stature where SHOX deﬁciency was diagnosis including identiﬁcation of founder mutations in previously excluded. Three different damaging missense FKBP10inautosomalrecessiveOIandSFRP4mutationsin variants and one splicing variant were identiﬁed in six Pyle disease. Additional patients with recently identiﬁed independent individuals; the functional signiﬁcance of the genes including RSPRY1, EXTL3, XYLT2, EXOC6 and identiﬁed variants was tested in vitro or in vivo using PGAP3werealsodiagnosedandregisteredduringthistime Zebraﬁsh as a model. The genetic and functional data period. reported here indicate that CYP26C1 represents a novel Conclusions:Thepresentstudyprovidesfurtherinforma- gene underlying growth disorders and that damaging var- tionabouttheclinicalandnosological characteristics ofthe iants in the absence of SHOX mutations can lead to short genetic disorders of the skeleton in Turkey. Despite stature. limitations this registry still represents the ﬁrst of its own G.A. Rappold: None. A. Montalbano: None. L. kind from Turkey and around, and is a useful tool not only Juergensen: None. M. Fukami: None. C.T. Thiel: None. for the physicians but also for the families. N.H. Hauer: None. R. Roeth: None. B. Weiss: None. Y. P.O. Simsek-Kiper: None. G.E. Utine: None. E.Z. Naiki: None. T. Ogata: None. D. Hassel: None. Taskiran:None.C.Kosukcu:None.U.Arslan:None.Y. Alanay: None. M. Alikasifoglu: None. K. P04.87C Boduroglu: None. Clinical,demographicandnosologiccharacterisationofthe genetic disorders of the skeleton in Turkey: The skeletal P04.88D dysplasia registry Duplication of 10q24 locus: broadening the clinical and radiological spectrum P.O.Simsek-Kiper1,G.E.Utine1,E.Z.Taskiran2,C.Kosukcu3, U.Arslan4,Y. Alanay5,M.Alikasifoglu2,K. Boduroglu1 M.Holder-Espinasse1,A.Jamsheer2,F.Escande3,J.Andrieux3, F. Petit4,A. Sowinska-Seidler2,M.Socha2, A.Jakubiuk- 1Hacettepe University School of Medicine Pediatric Genetics Tomaszuk5,M. Gerard6,M.Matthieu-Dramard7,V.Cormier- Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University School of Daire8,A. Verloes9,A. Toutain10,G.Plessis6,P. Jonveaux11, Medicine Medical Genetics Department, Ankara, Turkey, C. Baumann12,A.David13,C. Farra14,E. Colin15, 3Hacettepe University Institute of Health Sciences,Department S. Jacquemont16,A. Rossi17,S. Mansour18,N.Ghali19, of Bioinformatics, Ankara, Turkey, 4Hacettepe University A. Moncla20,N.Lahiri21,J.Hurst22,E. Pollina23,C. Patch1, Institute of Public Health, Ankara, Turkey, 5Acıbadem A. Valat24, A.Mezel25,P. Bourgeot26,S.Manouvrier-Hanu4 University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatric Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey 1Clinical Genetics Department, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan, Introduction: We aimed to determine the clinical, demo- Poland, 3CHU Lille, Institut de Biochimie et Genetique graphic and nosologic characteristics of the genetic dis- Moleculaire,Lille,France,4CHULille,CliniquedeGenetique orders of the skeleton in Turkey over the past 13 years Guy Fontaine, Lille, France, 5Medical Genetics Unit, (February 2005-February 2018). Bialystok, Poland, 6Service de Genetique, Caen, France, Materials and Methods: “The Skeletal Dysplasia 7Service de Genetique, Amiens, France, 8Institut Imagine, Registry” was established in 2005 at Hacettepe University Paris, France, 9Service de Genetique, Hopital Robert-Debre, Pediatric Genetics Department, a tertiary reference center Paris, France, 10Service de Genetique, Tours, France,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 131 11Service de Genetique, Nancy, French Guiana, 12Service de None. C. Baumann: None. A. David: None. C. Farra: Genetique, Hopital Robert Debre, Paris, France, 13Service de None. E. Colin: None. S. Jacquemont: None. A. Rossi: Genetique, Nantes, France, 14American University, Beirut, None. S. Mansour: None. N. Ghali: None. A. Moncla: Lebanon, 15Service de Genetique, Angers, France, None.N.Lahiri:None.J.Hurst:None.E.Pollina:None. 16Department of Paediatrics, Montreal, QC, Canada, C. Patch: None. A. Valat: None. A. Mezel: None. P. 17Laboratoire de Cytogenetique, Bois-Guillaume, France, Bourgeot: None. S. Manouvrier-Hanu: None. 18Clinical Genetics Department, Saint George's Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 19North West Genetics Service, P04.89A Harrow, United Kingdom, 20Laboratoire de genetique A Syrian patient with Steel syndrome due to compound chromosomique, Marseille, France, 21Clinical Genetics heterozygous COL27A1 mutations with hitherto Department, Saint George’s Hospital, London, United undescribed colobomas extending the clinical spectrum Kingdom, 22Clinical Genetics Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 23Pathology L. Pölsler1, B.Simma2,U.Schatz1,J.Zschocke1,S. Rudnik1 Department, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Woolwich, United Kingdom, 24CPDPN, CHU Lille, Lille, French Guiana, 1Division of Human Genetics; Medical University Innsbruck, 25Servicedechirurgieorthopedique,CHULille,Lille,France, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent 26CPDPN, CHU Lille, Lille, France Medicine; Academic Teaching Hospital LKH Feldkirch, Feldkirch, Austria Split hand-split foot malformation (SHFM) is a rare con- dition that occurs in 1 in 8500-25000 newborns and Introduction: The combination of short stature, bilateral accounts for 15% of all limb reduction defects. SHFM is congenital dislocation of the hip, carpal coalition, disloca- heterogeneous and can be isolated, associated with other tion of the radial head, cavus deformity, scoliosis, and malformations or syndromic. The mode of inheritance is vertebral anomalies was ﬁrst described in 1993 by Steel mostly autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance, et al. (OMIM #615155) in twenty-three children from but can be X-linked or autosomal recessive. Seven loci are Puerto Rico. It is caused by deﬁcient matrix protein col- currently known: SHFM1 at 7q21.2q22.1 (DLX5 gene), lagen 27 alpha 1 expressed in cartilage, skin, and tendons SHFM2 at Xq26, SHFM3 at 10q24q25, SHFM4 at 3q27 and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Causative (TP63 gene), SHFM5 at 2q31 and SHFM6 as a result of mutations in the gene COL27A1 have been identiﬁed pri- mutations in WNT10B (chromosome 12q13). Duplications marily as a possible founder effect in Puerto Ricans and in at 17p13.3 are seen in SHFM when isolated or associated only two more families, in one of which the patient also withlongbonedeﬁciency.Tandemgenomicduplicationsat presented hearing loss. chromosome 10q24 involving at least the DACTYLIN gene Here we report a girl aged 9 years born to non- areassociatedwithSHFM3.Nopointmutationinanyofthe consanguineous Syrian parents with characteristic features genes residing within the region has been identiﬁed so far, of Steel syndrome (short stature, massive malalignment of butduplicationofexon1oftheBTRCgenemayexplainthe large joints, kyphoskoliosis, hearing loss) and matching phenotype, with likely complex alterations of gene regula- facial dysmorphism (large, laterally extended palpebral tion mechanisms that would impair limb morphogenesis. ﬁssures, arched eyebrows, ﬂat midface, long philtrum, and We report on 32 new index cases identiﬁed by array-CGH short nose with low hanging columella) who also showed and/or by qPCR, including some prenatal ones, leading to bilateral colobomas of the irides, retinae, and uveae with termination for the most severe. Twenty-three cases were unilateral affection of the macula, which have not been presenting with SHFM and 7 with monodactyly only. Two describedbefore.Herintelligenceseemednormal,aswasan had an overlapping phenotype. Additional ﬁndings were MRI of the brain. identiﬁedin5(renaldysplasia,cutisaplasia,hypogonadism Results: Exome sequencing identiﬁed two novel com- and agenesis of corpus callosum with hydrocephalus). We pound heterozygous variants in COL27A1: c.93del, p. present their clinical and radiological ﬁndings and review (Phe32Leufs*71) in exon 2 and c.3075del, p. the literature on this rearrangement that seems to be one of (Lys1026Argfs*33) in exon 26 in this child. Her parents the most frequent cause of SHFM. were conﬁrmed heterozygous carriers. M. Holder-Espinasse: None. A. Jamsheer: None. F. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings extend the clinical spectrum Escande: None. J. Andrieux: None. F. Petit: None. A. of this exceptionally rare disorder and provide evidence of Sowinska-Seidler: None. M. Socha: None. A. Jakubiuk- developmental defects of the eye caused by COL27A1 Tomaszuk: None. M. Gerard: None. M. Matthieu- mutations. Dramard: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. A. Verloes: Abstract ESHG 2018 Milano. Version 1.2 02.02.2018 None. A. Toutain: None. G. Plessis: None. P. Jonveaux:132 J.delPicchia L.Pölsler:None.B.Simma:None.U.Schatz:None.J. B. Tüysüz: None. N. Güneş: None. G. Yeşil: None. E. Zschocke: None. S. Rudnik: None. Özer: None. D. Uludağ-Alkaya: None. D. Pehlivan: None. J. Lupski: None. P04.90B Distinct phenotypes within TRPV4-associated disorders in P04.91C the infantile period Transcriptome analysis of skin ﬁbroblasts with dominant negative COL3A1 mutations provides insights into the B. Tüysüz1,N.Güneş1,G.Yeşil2,E. Özer1,D.Uludağ-Alkaya1, molecular pathology of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome D.Pehlivan3, J.Lupski3 N.Chiarelli, G.Carini, N.Zoppi, M.Ritelli, M.Colombi 1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Bezmialem Vakif University, Department of Medical Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics,, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Molecular and and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, Italy United States Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a dominant Introduction:TRPV4isacalciumpermeablenon-selective inherited connective tissue disorder caused by mutations in cation channel expresses in different tissues. TRPV4 muta- theCOL3A1geneencodingtypeIIIcollagen(COLLIII),the tions have been implicated in autosomal dominant diseases major expressed collagen in blood vessels and hollow of skeletal and peripheral nervous system. Here, we report organs. The majority of COL3A1 causative variants are TRPV4 mutations in three patients with spondylometaphy- glycine substitutions and in-frame splice mutations in the seal dysplasia Kozlowski type (SMDK), metatropic dys- triple helix domain that through a dominant negative effect plasia (MD) and scapuloperoneal spinal muscular atrophy are associated with the severe clinical spectrum character- (SPSMA). ized by fragility of soft connective tissues with arterial and Metod and Result: Patient-1 was a 3-year-old girl. She organ ruptures. Herein, we performed gene expression had normal height, short trunk, lumbar scoliosis, general- proﬁlinginculturedskinﬁbroblastsfromthreepatientswith izedsevereplatyspondyly,leftproximalfemoralmetaphysis different structural COL3A1 mutations. Transcriptome irregularity, short femoral necks and delayed carpal analysis revealed signiﬁcant expression changes of several ossiﬁcation which were compatible with SMDK. Progres- genes involved in maintenance of endoplasmic reticulum sive scoliosis, waiddling gait and metaphyseal irregularity (ER) homeostasis, COLLs folding, extracellular matrix of right distal ulna and radial bones were developed with (ECM) organization, proteasome complex, and cell cycle aging.At8.5yearsofageherheightwas-2.5SDS.Patient- regulation. Protein analyses showed that aberrant COLLIII 2, a 2-year-old boy had torticollis (noticed in 3rd month), expression causes thedisassemblyofmanystructuralECM narrow chest with normal stature (-1.7SD), was diagnosed constituents, such as ﬁbrillins, EMILINs, elastin, perlecan, asMDespeciallyshorteningoflongtubularbones,tail-like decorin, and versican, all playing a crucial role in the vas- sacral appendage and radiological features including cularsystem.Furthermore,thealtereddistributionoftheER defective ossiﬁcation of servical bodies, platyspondyly, marker protein disulﬁde isomerase PDI and the strong metaphyseal ﬂaring, and delayed epiphyseal ossiﬁcation. reduction of the COLLs-modifying enzyme FKBP22 are His height is -1.7 SD at 4.5 years of age. Heterozygous consistent with the disturbance of ER-related homeostasis TRPV4 mutations c.1781G>A and c.2396C>G were and COLLs post-translational modiﬁcations, indicated by detected by Sanger sequencing in Patient 1 and 2, microarray. Our ﬁndings provide a picture of the gene respectively. Patient-3, a 1-year-old boy had laryngomala- expression changes in vEDS skin ﬁbroblasts and highlight cia,torticollis,hipdysplasia,muscleweakness,bilateralpes that dominant negative mutations in COL3A1 affect equinovarus, and scoliosis. Mild platyspondyly and acet- maturation and deposition into the ECM of several struc- abularirregularitywerepresentradiologically.Usingexome tural proteins crucial to the integrity of soft connective tis- sequencing, we identiﬁed heterozygous novel mutation in sues, and that ERdysfunctionmightplay an important role TRPV4 (c.806G>A). The patient was diagnosed SPSMA in the etiology of this severe vascular disorder. phenotype. N. Chiarelli: None. G. Carini: None. N. Zoppi: None. Conclusion: This study showed both neuromuscular M. Ritelli: None. M. Colombi: None. diseases and skeletal dysplasia due to TRPV4 mutation in infantile period should be kept in mind.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 133 P05 Cardiovascular disorders P. Votypka1,A. Krebsova2,P. Norambuena1,V. Zoubkova1, M.Vlckova1, M.Nemcikova1,M. Havlovicova1, P05.01A A. Puchmajerova3, M.Balascakova1,M. Macek,Jr.1 Genetic variants in familial abdominal aortic aneurysms 1DepartmentofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,2ndFacultyof A. IJpma1,2,D.Heijsman1,3,H. T.Bruggenwirth1,3,D.Majoor- Medicine, Charles University and Motol, Prague, Czech Krakauer1,3 Republic,2DepartmentofCardiology,InstituteforClinicaland Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 3GENNET, 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Clinical Prague, Czech Republic Bioinformatics, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands Introduction: Aortopathies represent heterogeneous group of rare inherited disorders with a variable phenotype ran- Introduction: Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm (AAA) has a ging form of aortic aneurysm/dissection with/without prevalenceof5%intheelderlypopulation.AnAAAoccurs associated cardiac valvular disease. We studied the dis- when the aorta below the renal arteries expands to a dia- tribution of variants within selected candidate genes in a meter of 3cm or more. In the Netherlands, each year representative cohort of Czech paediatric-/adult patients. approximately 5000 AAA patients are hospitalized and Materials and Methods: Massively parallel sequencing around 750 people die due to AAA rupture. was performed in 120 unrelated individuals (average age Hypothesis: Approximately 20% of AAA patients are 42,5 years) using a custom-made panel comprising either familial and our hypothesis is that genetic predisposition is 136or229cardiac/aorticconditions-relatedgenes(Nimble- a signiﬁcant cause for abdominal aneurysm pathology. Our Gen/Illumina). Detected variants were validated by Sanger goalistoidentifythegenesthatplayaroleintheformation DNA sequencing and segregation analysis. In 40 “sequen- of AAA. cing-negative” cases CNVs in the FBN1, TGFBR1 and Methods: Our study population consists of approxi- TGFBR2 genes were examined by MLPA (MRC-Holland). mately 1250 AAA patients. So far we sequenced 548 of Results: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic DNA variant these AAA patients. Complete Genomics whole genome (Class ≥ 4) were found in 10/120 (8.3%) cases, while sequencing (WGS) was performed in 3 families (15 VUS (Class 3) were detected in 40/120 (33.3%) patients individuals)and whole exome sequencing (WES) on the comprising genes FBN1, NOTCH1, FBN2, MYH11 and illumina platform using Agilent Haloplex and CRE others. Majority of pathogenic variants were observed in sureselect exome capturing technology was performed in FBN1 (20.0%), while CNVs were not identiﬁed. Interest- 71 families (175 individuals) and 358 single familial AAA ingly, pathogenic variants were also observed in 7/120 patients. Burden analysis was used to identify genes (5,8%) patients within aortopathy-unrelated genes confer- enriched in our AAA population. ring other cardiovascular risks. Results:Wepresentthedetailedworkﬂowoftheanalysis Conclusions: As expected majority of variants were of the genomics data. We will discuss several candidate identiﬁed in connective tissue-related genes. The overall genes identiﬁed such as the enrichment for variants we lower variant detection rate corresponds to published data. identiﬁed in the COL4A2 gene. The detection of pathogenic or potentially pathogenic Conclusions: In 118 out of 512 families a variant in a variants for other cardiac conditions (e.g. arrhythmias) diagnostic AAA gene was found. Analysis of all genes in demonstrates the diagnostic usefulness of broader gene the exome dataset led to the identiﬁcation of several panels.Segregationanalysistogetherwithclinicalexamina- candidate genes that show variants in more than one AAA tion of positive cases increases the utility of DNA family and that have not been linked to AAA before. sequencing, thereby underscores the multidisciplinary A. IJpma: None. D. Heijsman: None. H.T. Bruggen- character of our approach and usefulness of cooperating wirth: None. D. Majoor-Krakauer: None. with compliant at risk families. Supported by 00064203, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022, LD14073, IGA NT13770.15- P05.02B 27682A and IKEM: 00023001; 9039. Targeted massively parallel sequencing of a representative P. Votypka: None. A. Krebsova: None. P. Noram- cohort of Czech patients with various rare aortopathies buena:None.V.Zoubkova:None.M.Vlckova:None.M. demonstrates the clinical utility of genetic testing and the Nemcikova: None. M. Havlovicova: None. A. Puchma- need for a multidisciplinary approach to at risk families jerova: None. M. Balascakova: None. M. Macek, Jr.: None.134 J.delPicchia P05.03C M.Cason1, M.BuenoMarinas1,R. Celeghin1,E.Lazzarini1, MicroRNAs in Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy: from S.Rizzo1,K.Ludwig1,C.R.Bezzina2,C.A.Remme2,B.Bauce1, tissue-proﬁle to circulating-signature G.Thiene1,C.Basso1,K. Pilichou1 M.BuenoMarinas1,R. Celeghin1,M.Cason1,E.Lazzarini1, 1Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences, D.Paladin2,G.Thiene1,C. Basso1,K. Pilichou1 UniversityofPadua,Padua,Italy,2DepartmentofClinicaland Experimental Cardiology, University of Amsterdam, 1Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Sciences. Amsterdam, Netherlands University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 2Ditta Dr. Dino Paladin, Padua, Italy Background. Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC) is an inherited myocardial disease characterized by ﬁbro-fatty Background: Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC) is a replacement of the myocardium and life-threatening clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease, char- arrhythmias caused mainly by low penetrant mutations in acterizedbyprogressivemyocardialﬁbro-fattyreplacement desmosome-encoding genes. The molecular mechanism and high risk of sudden cardiac death. Half of AC patients underlying disease pathogenesis is still unclear. To deter- harbor private desmosomal gene mutations. MicroRNAs mine molecular pathways underlying disease onset, gene (miRNA) have been associated with numerous pathophy- expression proﬁling was performed on AC patients and siological conditions, as gene-expression regulatory mole- transgenic mice with a desmoglein-2 (dsg2) mutation. cules. Their role in AC is largely unknown. Methods. RNA-Seq was carried out, separately, on the Methods: The study cohort comprised 59 genotype- right (RV) and the left (LV) ventricle of 9 AC heart- positive AC-subjects and 24 healthy controls (Ctrl). 84- transplanted patients carrying pathogenic desmosomal miRNA array analysis was carried out on frozen right- mutations paired with 6 age-matched nondiseased donors. ventricle myocardial tissue samples derived from 8 AC RNA-Seq was carried out also on 8 transgenic mice over- heart-transplantedpatients;9AC-wholebloodsamples,and expressing NS-dsg2 mutation (TgNS) at 2 different age- 6Ctrls.miRNAvalidationwasperformed byqPCR(ΔΔCt groups (<2weeks and >3weeks), to deduct genetic/epige- method) on 42-AC and 18-Ctrl. netic interference-factors and on a paired age-matched Results: miRNA proﬁling on AC-tissue samples dis- control group comprised 6 over-expressing wild type dsg2 played a genotype-related proﬁle showing 19 differentially (TgWt) and 2Wt mice. expressedmiRNAsinPKP2carriers,15inDSPcarriersand Results. 1136 and 822 differentially expressed genes 14 in DSG2 carriers. A common signature was identiﬁed (DEGs) were respectively identiﬁed in the RV and LV of between PKP2 and DSP carriers (PKP2/DSP proﬁle), AC patients. Further, 143 DEGs were identiﬁed comparing different from DSG2 proﬁle. In silico target prediction of TgNS<2weeks and TgNS>3weeks gene expression proﬁl- both proﬁles marked Hippo Signaling Pathway (p-value ing. Finally, 82 DEGs were shared comparing human and 1.6e-9 and 6.4e-6). Analysis of AC-tissue sample-data as a murine (TgNS>3weeks) expression-proﬁling among which unique group conﬁrmed 26 miRNAs (AC-tissue proﬁle) genesmostlinkedtothesuppressionofthecanonicalWNT/ with predicted targets in the AC pathway (p-value 0.01). β-catenin and the activation of TGF-β signaling pathways. AC-bloodmiRNAproﬁlingshoweda14-miRNAsignature, However, 29 DEGs were identiﬁed in TgNS<2weeks ofwhich10miRNAs werefound also inAC-tissueproﬁle. comparing them to age-matched controls (WT<2weeks Conclusions: A genotype-related miRNA proﬁle was and TgWt<2weeks). observed on AC-tissue samples, as to reﬂect clinical Conclusions.Transcriptomeproﬁlingenabledtheidentiﬁca- variability. In addition, 10 miRNAs in common were tionoftheculpritmoleculeaidingcell-cellcontactdetachment identiﬁed between AC-tissue and AC-blood proﬁles, under stress conditions and wound healing repair through demonstrating a speciﬁc AC-miRNA signature. In silico suppression of the WNT/β-catenin signalling pathway. analysishighlightedpathwaysinvolvedinACpathogenesis M. Cason: None. M. Bueno Marinas: None. R. demonstrating a key role of miRNAs in AC. Celeghin: None. E. Lazzarini: None. S. Rizzo: None. K. M. Bueno Marinas: None. R. Celeghin: None. M. Ludwig:None.C.R.Bezzina:None.C.A.Remme:None. Cason: None. E. Lazzarini: None. D. Paladin: None. G. B. Bauce: None. G. Thiene: None. C. Basso: None. K. Thiene: None. C. Basso: None. K. Pilichou: None. Pilichou: None. P05.04D P05.06B Differential gene expression analysis in Arrhythmogenic The effect of the expression level of tissue inhibitor of Cardiomyopathy metalloproteinase-3 on the development of atherosclerosis in patients with myocardial infarctionAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 135 G.Celebi1,F. Guclu-Geyik1,D.Ozsoy2, C.Yildiz2,M.Yildiz3, 1WilliamHarveyResearchInstitute,London,UnitedKingdom, D.Oksen3, E.Komurcu-Bayrak1 2Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Barts Heart Centre, St 1Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine,Istanbul Bartholomews Hospital, London, United Kingdom University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Institute of Cardiology,Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Anesthesiology and Introduction: Reduced heart rate (HR) responses to exer- Reanimation,IstanbulUniversityCardiologyInstitute,Istanbul, cise(ΔHRex)andtorecovery(ΔHRrec)areassociatedwith Turkey higher cardiovascular mortality rates, possibly due to abnormalities in autonomic balance. We aimed to discover TIMP3, a member of the Tissue Inhibitors of Metallopro- single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with both teinases (TIMPs) binds to components of the extracellular indices and to identify associated biological pathways. matrix and forms insoluble complex. TIMP3 has a crucial Methods: A total of 67,257 participants in an exercise regulatory role in adipose tissue. Our aim is to reveal the test from the UK Biobank study were included. We relationship between TIMP3 expression and atherosclerosis calculated differences in HR at peak exercise (ΔHRex) pathogenicity in peri-coronary epicardial adipose tissue andat1-minutepost-peakexercise(ΔHRrec)withrespect (EAT) and circulating leukocytes of patients with myo- to resting HR. Next, we randomly divided participants cardial infarction (MI). Methodologically, the expression intodiscovery(N=40,000)andreplication(N=27,257) levels of TIMP3 were investigated in patients with MI (n cohorts and we performed a genome-wide association =46) who had atherosclerosis severity determined by study (GWAS) for each trait in the discovery dataset and SYNTAX and GENSINI scores that compared with the validatedtheﬁndingsinthereplicationcohort.Weﬁnally control group (n=24). The expression levels of TIMP3 in conducted a combined meta-analysis of GWAS using the the leukocytes (n=69) and peri-coronary EAT (n=23) full cohort for both traits. obtained from coronary artery bypass graft surgery using Results:Werobustlyvalidatedsixandeightindependent qRT-PCR. The expression results were analyzed using the SNPsforΔHRexandΔHRrec,respectively.Thecombined comparative CT method, and results were statistically analysis revealed a further eight and seven SNPs for each evaluated. Previously unpublished ﬁndings showed that respective trait that were genome-wide signiﬁcant (P < TIMP3 expression levels were signiﬁcantly lower in post- 5x10-8).Intotal,14and15SNPswereidentiﬁedforΔHRex mortem advanced atherosclerotic plaques than in normal and ΔHRrec, respectively, with eight SNPs being common arteries (p<0.05) and that TIMP-3 protein was present in across traits. Bioinformatics analyses highlighted neural plaque enriched with macrophages of the coronary artery development and adrenergic modulation by the autonomic sections.Inthisstudy,itwasdeterminedthatexpressionsof nervous system pathways. TIMP3 increased 1.25 fold in peri-coronary EAT and Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that ΔHRex and decreased4.5 fold incirculating leukocytes ascomparedto ΔHRrec are genetically modulated. Our biological ﬁndings controlsamples(p>0.05).Thedatawereevaluatedindetail support the potential link between genetics and autonomic according to conventional risk factors. In conclusion, modulation and highlight several plausible candidate genes TIMP3 expression levels in leukocytes and fat tissue forboth traits.Future studieswillconﬁrmthecontributions affectingthedevelopmentofatherosclerosiswereevaluated of our identiﬁed genetic variants to cardiovascular risk. inpatientswithMI.Theseanalysesarestillongoinginmore J. Ramírez: None. S. van Duijvenboden: None. I. patient samples. This study was supported by Scientiﬁc Ntalla: None. B. Mifsud: None. H.R. Warren: None. E. Research Projects Coordination Unit of Istanbul University Tzanis: None. M. Orini: None. A. Tinker: None. P.D. (Project numbers:28473 and 21496) Lambiase: None. P.B. Munroe: None. G. Celebi: None. F. Guclu-Geyik: None. D. Ozsoy: None.C.Yildiz:None.M.Yildiz:None.D.Oksen:None. P05.08D E. Komurcu-Bayrak: None. Gene expression signature in human immortalized venous endothelial cells, human coronary artery and human P05.07C internal thoracic artery endothelial cells exposed to Identiﬁcation of novel loci for heart rate response to different types of mineral-organic nanoparticles exercise and recovery M.Sinitsky1,2,E. Velikanova1,D.Shishkova1, M.Asanov1, J.Ramírez1,S.vanDuijvenboden2,I.Ntalla1,B.Mifsud1,H.R. A. Ponasenko1, A.Kutikhin1 Warren1,E. Tzanis1,M.Orini3,A. Tinker1,P. D.Lambiase2, P. B.Munroe1 1Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation, 2Federal Research136 J.delPicchia Center of Coal and Coal Chemistry, Kemerovo, Russian Genetic testing for inherited cardiomyopathies has Federation improved in the last decade using next generation sequen- cing(NGS).AlthoughCNVoflargesegmentsofDNAmay Introduction: Mineral-organic nanoparticles (bions) are a signiﬁcantly affect transcription and translation of cardio- result of increasing concentration of precipitating ions or myopathic genes, these abnormalities remain often unrec- failure in the mechanism of their excretion from human ognized even with the use of NGS. body.It wasfound thattheatherosclerosisandheartvalves Wehaveperformedwholeexomesequencinginacohort calciﬁcation risk factors are similar to ones of bions for- of 323 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. We used a mation. This indicates that bions play role in the patho- read-depth coverage strategy to call CNVs from the short- genesis of cardiovascular calciﬁcation. read sequence data. Detected CNVs werethen validated by Materials and Methods: Conﬂuent cultures of human q-PCR, RT-PCR and western blot analysis. The prevalence immortalized venous endothelial cells (EA.hy 926), human ofmajorCNVsinthecohortwas2%.Wehavefoundlarge coronary artery (HCAEC) and human internal thoracic deletionsinDMD,LAMP2,FLNCandMYH7genes,which artery endothelial cells (HITAEC) exposed to different were predicted to cause major structural and functional types of bions (magnesium phosphate bions [MFB], abnormalities of the affected genes. The corresponding spherical calcium phosphate bions [SCFB], and needle- pedigrees and clinical phenotypes will be presented. like calcium phosphate bions [ICPB]) were used in this Assessment of CNVs with whole exome sequencing study. Expression of LDLR, VLDLR, SCARF1, NOS3, elucidates genetic architecture in a substantial proportion PXDN genes was evaluated by RT-qPCR. Results were of patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. It should be a normalized by three housekeeping genes (ACTB, GAPDH, routine part of NGS bioinformatics. Supported by the B2M). Expression level was calculated by Pfafﬂ method. researchgrant:AZV-MZ15-27682AandIKEM00023001. Results: 2-fold decreasing of SCARF1 expression was L. Piherova: None. F. Majer: None. A. Krebsova: detected in EA.hy 926 culture exposed to SCFB. In None. P. Melenovska: None. V. Stranecky: None. T. HCAEC culture we found no signiﬁcant differences in Palecek: None. M. Kubanek: None. S. Kmoch: None. geneexpressionsignature.InHITAECculturetheexposure by all types of bions caused an increase in VLDLR gene P05.10B expression. HITAEC cultures exposed by all types of Rare variants in cardiomyopathy related genes - a mineral-organic nanoparticles are characterized by Portuguese cohort population enhanced expression of all studied genes compared to HCAEC. A. M.Coutinho1, J.Tavares1,M. Carmo-Fonseca2, Conclusions: Exposure by mineral-organic nanoparticles D.Antunes1,3 can lead to changing in gene expression signature in different types of endothelial cells depending on type of 1GenoMed - Diagnósticos de Medicina Molecular SA, Lisbon, bions. HITAEC are more sensitive to such exposure. The Portugal, 2Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de reportedstudywasfundedbyRussianFoundationforBasic Medicina,UniversidadedeLisboa,Lisbon,Portugal,3Medical Researchaccordingtotheresearchproject№17-04-00570. Genetics Department, Hospital de Dona Estefânia, Centro M. Sinitsky: None. E. Velikanova: None. D. Shish- Hospitalar Lisboa Central, Lisbon, Portugal kova: None. M. Asanov: None. A. Ponasenko: None. A. Kutikhin: None. Introduction: With the latter advances in high throughput sequencing technologies there was an increasing demand P05.09A for broader comprehensive Next-Generation Sequencing AssessmentofCNVsindilatedcardiomyopathiesbywhole (NGS) gene panels to screen for mutations in genetic dis- exome sequencing eases with heterogeneous etiology. In cardiology, genetic testing has been routinely offered to patients to improve L. Piherova1,F. Majer1, A.Krebsova2, P.Melenovska1, prognosis through appropriate lifestyle and medical inter- V. Stranecky1,T. Palecek3, M.Kubanek2,S.Kmoch1 ventions. There are now 340 gene entries retrieved under “cardiomyopathy” search in OMIM and 375 genes under 1Research Unitfor RareDisease, Charles University, Prague, the HPO superclass “Abnormal myocardium morphology” Czech Republic, 2Department of Cardiology, Institute of (HP:0001637). ClinicalandExperimentalMedicine,Prague,CzechRepublic, Methods:Thestudypopulationcomprised150unrelated 32nd Internal Clinic, Charles University, Prague, Czech patients diagnosed with cardiomyopathies, namely Hyper- Republic trophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM), Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM) and Arrhythmogenic Right VentricularAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 137 Cardiomyopathy (ARVC). Up to 57 genes associated with follow-up (hypocalcemia and pace-maker induced dilated cardiomyopathies were sequenced, mostly by NGS. cardiomyopathy). 118 gene lists for cardiomyopathy were Results:Pathogenicvariantsweredetectedin39patients analyzed in 12 included cases. In cases of syndromic and in further 50 patients it was found an uncertain cardiomyopathy, speciﬁc genes were added to aid the signiﬁcance/likely pathogenic variant, namely novel var- analysis, but none was detected. Pathogenic and likely iantsin17patients(11.3%).Onenovelvariantwasdetected pathogenic mutations were identiﬁed in 5 patients: SOS1, in two unrelated DCM patients in the LMNA gene - HRAS, TTN, FLNC and TXNRD2. c.490G>A, p.(Asp164Asn), suggesting an increased fre- Conclusion: Our cohort demonstrated that 41% of our quency in the Portuguese population. caseswerenotactuallyidiopathic.Inlightofthisrevelation Conclusions: Although genetic analysis through com- and despite its high cost, genetic testing is also useful in prehensive multigene NGS approach potentially increases determining genetic risk in the family as well as helping to diagnostic rate, it also raises new challenges. Rare benign predict the prognosis of the cardiomyopathy. speciﬁc population polymorphisms add extra difﬁculty K. Rojnueangnit: None. B. Sirichongkolthong: None. regarding pathogenicity classiﬁcation of variants. Further R. Wongwandee: None. T. Khetkham: None. S. Noojar- characterization studies of speciﬁc populations could ern: None. A. Khongkraparn: None. D. improve classiﬁcation variants algorithm, preferably within Wattanasirichaigoon: None. public databases with the possibility to identify variants by nationality. P05.13A A.M. Coutinho: None. J. Tavares: None. M. Carmo- Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing in Patients with Fonseca: None. D. Antunes: None. Non-syndromic and syndromic Congenital Heart Disease P05.11C A. Chirita-Emandi1,N.Andreescu1,R. Jurcut2,G.Doros3, Identiﬁcation of gene mutations in pediatric A. Popoiu3,A. Lacatusu4,A. Dobrescu5,M.Puiu1 cardiomyopathy by whole exome sequencing 1Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and K. Rojnueangnit1, B.Sirichongkolthong1,R. Wongwandee1, Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, T. Khetkham1,S. Noojarern2,A. Khongkraparn2, 2Institute ofEmergencyforCardiovascular Diseases"Prof.dr. D.Wattanasirichaigoon2 C.C.Iliescu", University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Carol Davila" Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 3Clinical Emergency 1Thammasat University, Klong-Luang, Thailand, Hospital for Children “Louis Turcanu” Timisoara, University 2Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, Thailand Timisoara, Romania, 4Emergency Clinical County Hospital, Timisoara. Department of Pediatrics, University of Medicine Introduction: Primary cardiomyopathy in children is rare and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, Timisoara, but serious condition with a high mortality rate. Hyper- Romania,5DepartmentofGenetics,UniversityofMedicineand trophicanddilated cardiomyopathies arethemostcommon Pharmacy of Craiova, Craiova, Romania presentations. Etiology has been mainly idiopathic; how- ever,withtheuseofnextgenerationsequencingtechniques, Congenital heart diseases are genetically heterogeneous. it has been noted that up to nearly half of idiopathic Targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) can identify pediatric cases arose from a speciﬁc genetic mutation. the genetic causes in a signiﬁcant proportion of the Therefore, this study aimed to identify genetic causes of population. primary unexplained cardiomyopathy. Aim: We tested a targeted NGS speciﬁc gene panel in Materials and Methods: Children with primary unex- patients, adults and children, with syndromic and non- plainedcardiomyopathy,rangingfromnewbornsto20-year syndromic cardiac involvement. olds, were recruited during March 2016 to May 2017 at Results: The patient cohort included 77 patients(52 Thammasat University Hospital. Complete patient history males;28.4 ± 22.6years), 41 people with hypertrophic/ and physical examination data were collected by a dilatedcardiomyopathy,3witharrhythmogeniccardiomyo- geneticist; cardiac examination and echocardiogram was pathy, and 33with syndromiccardiacinvolvement(includ- performedbypediatriccardiologists.Wholeexomesequen- ing RASopathies and ﬁbrillinopathies). Amplicon libraries cing was performed in all cases. for 174 related genes were generated using the TruSight- Results: Fourteen patients were enrolled in our study: 8 Cardio®kit(Illumina,CA) and sequenced using the Illumina casesweredilatedtype,and6werehypertrophic.Twowere MiSeq platform. Sequence data were processed using excluded given identiﬁcation causes during period of ANNOVAR software. Thirty-six variants (30 missense, 4138 J.delPicchia frameshift, 2 splice-site variants) were considered patho- environment R. Isolate MI showed the association with genicorlikelypathogenicand10werevariantsofunknown genes of various biological pathways: immune response signiﬁcance (VUS) in MYH7;MYBPC3;MYL2; MYO6; CD79A (rs3810153), IFNGR1 (rs17181457), endothelial MYPN;ACTC1;BAG3;CSRP3;KCNH2;DSC2;CAC- dysfunction KIAA1462(rs3739998), reparations LIG1 NA1C;FBN1;PTPN1;SOS1;BRAF;LPL;ABCC9 and (rs20579), ﬁbrogenesis (ADAMDEC1(rs3765124). In APOE genes. Twenty-ﬁve variants present in public groups with risk factors, it was found that: MI and HT databases, with very rare allele frequency, have been associations with genes involved in ﬁbrogenesis ITGA4 previously linkedtocardiomyopathy orrelevantsyndromic (rs1143674), ITGB5(rs6778643, rs1007856), ADAMDEC1 phenotypes. Twenty-four were novel mutations, currently (rs3765124), CDKN2BAS1(rs1333049) and immune notfoundinpublicdatabases,ofwhich9wereclassiﬁedas response IFNGR1 (rs17181457); MI, HT and DLE asso- VUS. Two patients carried pathogenic variants for two ciations with genes involved in ﬁbrogenesis (ITGA4 diseases (heterozygotes in different genes), with possibly (rs1143674), ITGB5(rs6778643), ADAMDEC1(rs3765124), synergistic deleterious effects. CDKN2BAS1(rs1333049)), immune response IFNGR1 Conclusion: First-line targeted genetic NGS testing (rs17181457), homeostasis of glucose and low-density identiﬁed a signiﬁcant variant (pathogenic or likely lipoproteins (TAS 2R38(rs1726866), LDLR(rs2738446)). pathogenic) for the phenotype, in 51,5%(17/33) of the “Syntropy of cardiovascular continuum“ associations with cases with syndromic cardiac involvement, and in 40.9% genes involved in ﬁbrogenesis (CDKN2BAS1(rs1333049), (18/44)ofthecases withnon-syndromiccardiomyopathies, (MTAP(rs7023329)), endothelial dysfunction KIAA1462 providing the opportunity for diagnostic, risk stratiﬁcation (rs3739998), lipid metabolism APOA2(rs5082). In conclu- and prevention, along with genetic counselling. sion, isolate MI and MI with risk factors had different Funding: Development of Existing Infrastructure and genetic susceptibility proﬁles. Cardiovascular continuum Creation of New Infrastructure POSCCE-A2-O2.2.1-2013- comorbiditywascharacterizedbygenesinvolvedinvarious 1, Center of Genomic Medicine of the University of biological processes. The study was conducted with the Medicine and Pharmacy ‘Victor Babes’ Timisoara. support of the RFBR (№16-04-00840\16). A. Chirita-Emandi: None. N. Andreescu: None. R. I.A. Goncharova: None. M.S. Nazarenko: None. T.B. Jurcut: None. G. Doros: None. A. Popoiu: None. A. Pecherina: None. V.V. Kashtalap: None. N.B. Tara- Lacatusu: None. A. Dobrescu: None. M. Puiu: None. senko: None. O.L. Barbarash: None. V.P. Puzyrev: None. P05.14B Theassociationofgenesofﬁbrogenesistothedevelopment P05.15C of cardiovascular continuum comorbidity KRIT1 loss of function induces a chronic Nrf2-mediated adaptivehomeostasisthatsensitizescellstooxidativestress: I.A.Goncharova1,2,M.S.Nazarenko1,2,T.B.Pecherina2,V.V. implication for Cerebral Cavernous Malformation disease Kashtalap2,N.B.Tarasenko1,O.L.Barbarash2,V.P.Puzyrev1 E. Trapani1,C. Antognelli2,S.Delle Monache3,A. Perrelli1, 1Scientiﬁc Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, C.Fornelli1,V.Benedetti1,S.Sarri1,G.Costantino1,F.Geddo1, RussianFederation,2ResearchInstituteforComplexProblems A. Zotta1, L.Goitre1,S. F. Retta1 of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation 1Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, Orbassano, The aim of this study was to assess the genetic structure of TO, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, Perugia, cardiovascular continuum comorbidity. The study included Italy, 3Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical 531 patients with myocardial infarction (MI) and 285 Sciences, L'Aquila, Italy Russian inhabitants of Siberia. Рatients were divided into groups: 113 MI patients without risk factors (аrterial KRIT1 (CCM1) is a disease gene responsible for Cerebral hypertension (HT), dyslipidemia (DLE), type 2 diabetes Cavernous Malformations (CCM), a major cerebrovascular mellitus (T2D)); 146 MI patients with HT; 96 MI patients disease of proven genetic origin affecting 0.3-0.5% of the withHTandHDL;96MIpatientswithHT,HDLandT2D population. Previously, we demonstrated that KRIT1 loss- designated as “syntropy of cardiovascular continuum”. of-function is associated with altered redox homeostasis, Genotyping of 58 SNPs was performed on Sequenom suggestinganovelpathogenicmechanismforCCMdisease MassARRAY (USA). These SNPs are localized in the andraisingthepossibilitythatKRIT1lossexertspleiotropic genes involved in ﬁbrogenesis and/or associated with car- effectsonmultipleredox-sensitivemechanisms.Toaddress diovascular diseases and atherosclerotic plaque stability. this possibility, we investigated major redox-sensitive Statistical data analysis was performed in the software pathways and enzymatic systems that play critical roles inAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 139 fundamental cytoprotective mechanisms of adaptive However,patientswithCADandDM2hadmorefrequently responses to oxidative stress, including the master Nrf2 loss of SFMBT1 (16%) than patients with CAD (8%). The antioxidant defense pathway and its downstream target frequencyofgain2q31.2(PRKRA)was6%inpatientswith Glyoxalase 1 (Glo1), a pivotal stress-responsive defense CAD whereas in control group we identiﬁed it in one enzymeinvolvedincellularprotectionagainstglycativeand person only. The frequency of loss 20p13 (SIRPB1) was oxidative stress through the metabolism of methylglyoxal 67% in both groups. (MG). Experimental outcomes showed that KRIT1 loss-of- Conclusion:ItislikelythattheidentiﬁedCNVlossinthe functioninducesaredox-sensitivesustainedupregulationof 3p21.1 region (SFMBT1) plays a certain role in the risk of Nrf2 and Glo1, and a drop in intracellular levels of major developing CAD and DM2 (p=0.006). At the same time, apoptosis-protective proteins, including MG-modiﬁed heat wedetectedatrendtowardsincreasedfrequencyofthegain shock protein 70 (Hsp70) and 27 (Hsp27), leading to a in the 2q31.2 region (PRKRA) in patients with CAD. chronic adaptive redox homeostasis that counteracts A.A. Sleptsov: None. M.S. Nazarenko: None. N.R. intrinsic oxidative stress but increases susceptibility to Valiakhmetov: None. A.N. Kazantsev: None. O.L. oxidative DNA damage and apoptosis. While supporting Barbarash: None. V.P. Puzyrev: None. and extending the pleiotropic functions of KRIT1, these ﬁndings shed new light on the mechanistic relationship P05.18B between KRIT1 loss-of-function and enhanced cell sensi- Multivariate analysis of comorbidities in congenital heart tivity to oxidative stress, thus providing valuable new disease: Making sense of phenotypic heterogeneity insights into CCM pathogenesis and novel options for the development of preventive and therapeutic strategies. R. Cabrera1,M.Miranda-Fernández1,V. Huertas-Quiñones1, E. Trapani: None. C. Antognelli: None. S. Delle G.Alberto1,N.Sandoval1,C. M.Restrepo2,P. Laissue2, Monache: None. A. Perrelli: None. C. Fornelli: None. C. Silva2,K. MorenoMedina1,R. Dennis Verano1 V.Benedetti:None.S.Sarri:None.G.Costantino:None. F. Geddo: None. A. Zotta: None. L. Goitre: None. S.F. 1Fundacion Cardioinfantil - Instituto de Cardiología, Bogota, Retta: None. Colombia, 2Universidad de la Rosario, Bogota, Colombia P05.16D Introduction: The clinical presentation of congenital heart Quantiﬁcation of DNA copy number variations in patients disease (CHD) is often accompanied by diverse comorbid- with coronary artery disease by digital droplet PCR ities within and outside the cardiovascular system. There is signiﬁcant heterogeneity in the presence of comorbidities A.A.Sleptsov1,M.S.Nazarenko1,2,3,N.R.Valiakhmetov1,A.N. and this can make genetic diagnosis and identiﬁcation of Kazantsev2,O.L. Barbarash2,V. P. Puzyrev1 new CHD-associated genes challenging, especially for rare forms of CHD, where cohorts are usually small. This is 1ResearchInstituteofMedicalGenetics,TomskNRMC,Tomsk, evident in low diagnostic yields of standard criteria for Russian Federation, 2Institute for complex issues of suspicion of 22q11-deletion syndrome (22q11DS), and cardiovascular diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation, limited identiﬁcation of genes associated with Ebstein 3SiberianStateMedicalUniversity,Tomsk,RussianFederation Anomaly (EA). Materials and Methods: Taking advantage of a Introduction: Recently we performed the genome-wide concentration of cases of rare forms of CHD in a single analysis of CNVs in patients with coronary artery disease centerinColombia,unusuallylargecohortsofpatientswith (CAD)byusingarray-CGH.Wefound90CNVs,and13% suspicion of 22q11DS and EA were assembled. A ofthemwerenovel.Theaimofthisstudywastodetermine comorbidity database was constructed and multivariate the frequencies of the several candidate CNVs (SFMBT1, statistical analysis was carried out to identify correlations PRKRA, and SIRPB1). between comorbidities in different subgroups in each Materials and Methods: We have extracted DNA cohort. specimens from white blood cells of 100 patients with Results:ThedatashowphenotypicheterogeneityinCHD CAD, 100 patients with both CAD and diabetes mellitus 2 canmasktheexistenceofidentiﬁablesubgroupswhichcan type (DM2), and 130 persons without any clinical and be used to improve diagnosis and identify genetic variants laboratory features of atherosclerosis, at the same ages. in CHD. In patients meeting criteria for 22q11.2DS, Digital droplet PCR (QX200) along with TaqMan Assays multivariate analysis of comorbidities can improve the was used to identify CNVs. speciﬁcity of clinical evaluations without sacriﬁcing Results: We detected the loss in the 3p21.1 region sensitivity. In patients with EA, multivariate analysis (SFMBT1) in 11.48% patients and 8.5% in control group. revealed a distinct homogenous subgroup with a likely140 J.delPicchia distinct genetic etiology, presenting with pre-excitation thereisevidencethatknockoutmousehasventricularseptal arrhythmias with reduced outﬂow tract obstruction and defects and hypoplastic aortic valve. improved survival. Grant reference: British Heart Foundation Conclusions: Multivariate analysis can reveal clinically E.Fotiou:None.S.Williams:None.D.Page:None.K. relevant patterns in comorbidity datasets of phenotypically Hentges: None. B. Keavney: None. heterogeneouslydiseasecohorts.Thisapproachcanbeused in the identiﬁcation of novel genetic causes and the P05.20D improvement of clinical diagnostic criteria. Molecular autopsy reveals clues for genetic basis of R. Cabrera: None. M. Miranda-Fernández: None. V. congenital valve defect Huertas-Quiñones: None. G. Alberto: None. N. Sandoval:None.C.M.Restrepo:None.P.Laissue:None. F.A.R.Madia1,A.T.Dias2,É.A.Zanardo2,J.G.Damasceno2, C. Silva: None. K. Moreno Medina: None. R. Dennis A. M.Nascimento1,T. V. M.M.Costa2,S. N.Chehimi1,G.M. Verano: None. Novo-Filho2,M.M.Montenegro2,Y.G.Oliveira2,A.B.Freitas2, L.L.Vieira2,R.Schultz3,F.T.Gonçalves4,C.Fridman4,C.A. P05.19C Kim5, L.D.Kulikowski1,2 Integration of large-scale genomic data sources to identify novel genetic loci for congenital heart disease 1Laboratorio de Citogenomica, Departamento de Pediatria, Faculdade de Medicina FMUSP, Universidade de Sao Paulo, E. Fotiou,S. Williams, D.Page,K. Hentges, B.Keavney Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Laboratorio de Citogenomica, Departamento dePatologia,FaculdadedeMedicina FMUSP, Division of Cardiovascular Science, Manchester, United Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Servico de Kingdom Anatomia Patologica,Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade deMedicinaFMUSP,UniversidadedeSaoPaulo,SaoPaulo, Background: Small nucleotide variants and copy number Brazil, 4Departamento de Medicina Legal, Etica Medica e variants (CNV) have been found to affect congenital heart Medicina Social e do Trabalho, Faculdade de Medicina disease (CHD) risk. Yet, the identiﬁcation of the genetic FMUSP, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, causes of CHD remains quite challenging. 5UnidadedeGenetica,DepartamentodePediatria,Institutoda Purpose: To integrate data on both classes of variation Crianca, Hospital das Clinicas HCFMUSP, Universidade de associated with non-syndromic CHD cases as a better Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil means for identiﬁcation of candidate genes predisposing to CHD. Introduction: Congenital heart defect (CHD) consists in a Methods: Here, we have updated a previously published large set of functional and structural anomalies that arise CHDcaseCNVlistandgeneratedacontrolCNVlistusing: during the cardiac embryogenesis including septal defects, a) DECIPHER database, b) ISCA database, c) ECARUCA valve defects, and outﬂow tract anomalies. Valve defect is database, d) 1000 Genome phase 3 dataset, e) DGV an important cause of mortality and morbidity. However, database and f) published literature. the genetic basis of congenital valve defect is unclear. Results: Analysing deleted (del) and duplicated (dup) MaterialsandMethods:Weinvestigatethecontribution CNVs independently resulted in unique case CNV regions of genomic alterations in the valve defect`s pathogenesis not present in the controls. Further ﬁltering led to the using molecular methods in 18 cases postmortem of identiﬁcationof54novelcandidateprotein-codinggenesin stillbirth and infant from Serviço de Veriﬁcação de Óbitos, del CNVs present only in non-syndromic CHD cases and HC-FMUSP. DNA samples from skin, diaphragm, and with high/medium impact variants in exome data from our heart tissues were evaluated using AmpFℓSTR® MiniFi- cohort of Tetralogy of Fallot patients. Moreover, we have ler™ PCR Ampliﬁcation Kit (Life Technologies™, Cali- identiﬁed 50 genes in those unique case CNV regions that fornia, USA) and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe were previously shown to be associated with CHD such as Ampliﬁcation (MLPA) with different kits (MCR-Holland, GATA4for atria septaldefectsandNKX2-6 for conotruncal Amsterdam, the Netherlands). heart malformations. Results:In8outof18stillbirthandinfant(44,4%)show Conclusions: We demonstrate a promising new strategy alterations in the genome, including trisomy 18 (5 cases), with the integration of large-scale genomic data sources to trisomy 21 (2 cases) and duplication of 4p16 (1 case). The identify novel candidate genes for CHD and their contribu- tricuspid valve defect was reported in all syndromes tion in heart development. We are currently performing describe above. Besides that, the mitral valve defect was functionalworkwithourstrongestcandidategeneforwhich associatedwithdeletionof4p16,andabnormalitiesofaortic and pulmonary valve was associated with trisomy 18.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 141 Conclusion: Molecular autopsy is a signiﬁcant tool for DNA methylation and copy number changes in arteries. In thecharacterization ofthebasis ofcardiacvalve defect and conclusion, although DNA methylation differences do not also become vital for an accurate genetic counseling. appear to be linked to the copy number changes in arteries Grants: FAPESP: 09/53105-9 and FINEP-CT INFRA of patients with coronary heart disease both mechanisms 0160/12 SP8. may be important in the disease. F.A.R. Madia: None. A.T. Dias: None. É.A. Zanardo: M.S. Nazarenko: None. A.V. Markov: None. A.A. None. J.G. Damasceno: None. A.M. Nascimento: None. Sleptcov: None. A.N. Kazancev: None. O.L. Barbarash: T.V.M.M. Costa: None. S.N. Chehimi: None. G.M. None. V.P. Puzyrev: None. Novo-Filho: None. M.M. Montenegro: None. Y.G. Oliveira: None. A.B. Freitas: None. L.L. Vieira: None. P05.22B R. Schultz: None. F.T. Gonçalves: None. C. Fridman: Monogenic and complex risk factors for ischemic heart None. C.A. Kim: None. L.D. Kulikowski: None. disease in Finland - Elucidating the role of severe hypercholesterolemia P05.21A Somatic DNA methylation and copy number landscape of N.Junna1,P. Ripatti1, I.Surakka1,2,S. Ripatti1,3,E. Widén1 coronary artery disease patients 1FIMM, Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of M.S. Nazarenko1,2,3,A. V. Markov1, A.A. Sleptcov1,A.N. Helsinki,Helsinki,Finland,2DepartmentofInternalMedicine, Kazancev3,O.L. Barbarash3,V. P.Puzyrev1 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3DepartmentofPublicHealth,Clinicum,FacultyofMedicine, 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland Federation, 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, RussianFederation,3ResearchInstituteforComplexProblems Severe hypercholesterolemia is one of the most signiﬁcant of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation risk factors for coronary artery disease (CAD), and it has a strong and complex genetic predisposition. Currently, not DNA methylation and copy number variations (CNVs) of even patients with inherited forms of severe hypercholes- affected and healthy vascular tissues of patients with terolemia are adequately identiﬁed in Finland, and only a atherosclerosis had not been investigated in detail. The part of their mutation load is known. Illumina HumanMethylation27 BeadChip and Agilent To unravel the underlying genetic architecture, we SurePrintG3 HumanCGH+SNP 2×400K microarrays were screened 206 individuals with severe hypercholesterolemia used for DNA testing from right coronary arteries in the (LDL-cholesterol >= 5mmol/l) in the prospective GeneR- area of advanced atherosclerotic plaques and ISKstudy,encompassing7,328subjects,aged45-64years, atherosclerotic-resistant internal mammary arteries of six from Southern Finland. Exome-sequencing identiﬁed a patients with coronary artery disease. The atherosclerotic novel, likely causal mutation in LDLR (R574L), but plaques to compare with the healthy arteries were char- surprisingly we didn’t identify any of the acterized by predominate DNA hypermethylation changes. hypercholesterolemia-associated LDLR-mutations pre- These genes were annotated with muscle system process viously shown to be enriched in Finland. Neither did we and positive regulation of cytosolic calcium ion con- identify potentially causal mutations in APOB or PCSK9. centration in Gene Ontology terms. In contrast, hypo- Polygenic modeling (106 LDL-cholesterol-associated methylated genes encode molecules belonging to different SNPs) explained 17% of the LDL-cholesterol variation in biological processes such as development, immune/inﬂam- thecohortbutsuggestedonlyslightclusteringofpolygenes mationresponses,lipidstorage,andprogrammedcelldeath. with severe hypercholesterolemia. In atherosclerotic plaques the most pronounced hypo- Evaluating the use of lipid-lowering medication in the methylation was registered in 2q31.1 (HOXD4/HOXD3/ GeneRISK-cohort, we found that only 4.3% of individuals MIR10B), 7p15.2 (HOXA7) and 11p11.2 (ALX4). More- with severe hypercholesterolemia were on lipid-lowering over, methylation changes at 2q31.1 in blood cells were treatment at baseline. This is considerably less than the consistentlyassociatedwithsmokeandischemicstroke.We 10.1% that were treated in the full cohort. Our preliminary identiﬁed 90 high-conﬁdence CNVs that were present in data further show that at follow-up 1.5 years later, lipid- matched arteries studied. Gene Ontology analysis revealed loweringmedicationhadbeeninitiatedonlytoanadditional enrichments in the immune/inﬂammation responses and 3.3% of the individuals with severe hypercholesterolemia. olfactory transduction. Furthermore, two patients contained Given that patients with hypercholesterolemia are poorly thegainin10q24.31(ERLIN1)thataffectedonlytheblood identiﬁed and treated, there is an unmet need not only to DNA but not arteries. There was not overlap between both further characterize causal variants underlying severe142 J.delPicchia hypercholesterolemia but also to raise awareness among 1.54]). Comparing hypertriglyceridemic individuals (TG caretakers to take action to reduce the disease burden. >2.5 mmol/l) to individuals with TG <1.7 mmol/l, those N.Junna:None.P.Ripatti:None.I.Surakka:None.S. with high TG score had higher CAD risk (HR 2.11 [1.58- Ripatti: None. E. Widén: None. 2.81]) than those without high TG score (HR 1.61 [1.33- 1.94])despitecomparableTGlevels(p=0.022).Only5.2% P05.23C of the hypertriglyceridemic individuals received ﬁbrate Polygenichyperlipidemiasandcoronaryarterydiseaserisk treatment. The CAD risk associated with a high polygenic load of P. Ripatti1,J.T. Rämö1,S. Söderlund2,3,I.Surakka1,4,A.S. LDL-C or TG-increasing variants depends directly on their Havulinna1,5,N.B. Freimer6, V.Salomaa5,A. Palotie1,7,8, effectonlipidlevels.Theclinicalutilityofpolygenicscores M.Taskinen2,9,S.Ripatti1,10 needs further study. P. Ripatti: None. J.T. Rämö: None. S. Söderlund: 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland, None. I. Surakka: None. A.S. Havulinna: None. N.B. 2Research Programs Unit, Diabetes & Obesity, University of Freimer: None. V. Salomaa: None. A. Palotie: F. Helsinki,Helsinki,Finland,3DepartmentofInternalMedicine, Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;PﬁzerGeneticsScien- Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department tiﬁc Advisory Panel. M. Taskinen: B. Research Grant of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and United States, 5Department of Public Health Solutions, pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, Amgen, Novo Nordisk, Merck, Sharpe & Dohme. Other; 6Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute for Modest; Amgen, Novo Nordisk, Sanoﬁ Aventis, Chiesi, Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California, Astra Zeneca, Pﬁzer. S. Ripatti: None. Los Angeles, CA, United States, 7The Stanley Center for PsychiatricResearch,TheBroadInstituteofMITandHarvard, P05.24D Cambridge, MA, United States, 8Psychiatric & Reﬁnement of coronary artery disease risk assessment by Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General genomic information Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 9Clinical Research Institute HUCH, Ltd., Helsinki, Finland, 10Department of J.Partanen1,P. Ripatti1,N.Mars1, P.Pöllänen2, Public Health, Clinicum, Faculty of Medicine, University of K. Hotakainen3,4, J.Partanen5,E.Widén1,S. Ripatti1,6 Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Hyperlipidemia, particularly increased LDL-cholesterol Helsinki,Helsinki,Finland,2Carea–KymenlaaksoSocialand (LDL-C) or triglycerides (TGs), is a treatable risk factor Health Services, Kotka, Finland, 3Department of Clinical for coronary artery disease (CAD). In addition to high- Chemistry and Hematology, Medicum, Faculty of Medicine, penetrantmutationsingeneslikeLDLR,APOBandPCSK9, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Mehiläinen Oy, hyperlipidemiascanbeaconsequenceofpolygenicburden. Helsinki,Finland,5FinnishRedCrossBloodService,Helsinki, Whereas monogenic familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) Finland, 6Department of Public Health, Clinicum, Faculty of increases CAD risk considerably due to high lifelong Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland exposure to LDL-C, it is unclear whether a high polygenic load of LDL-C or TG-increasing variants increases Introduction: Current cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk CAD risk. assessment relies on clinical risk scores, which fail to In this prospective cohort study, we constructed incident identify a large proportion of individuals who develop CAD events (n=970) from the genotyped FINRISK CVD. Novel biomarkers may complement such scores. population cohort (n=20499) linked with healthcare Genomic information has improved risk estimation in sev- registries. We tested if high (>90th percentile) polygenic eral prospective cohort studies and is therefore the most scores for LDL-C or TG increased CAD risk. promising candidate to enhance clinical risk assessment. FinnishLDLRFHmutationsincreasedLDL-C3.5mmol/l Materials and Methods: We established a novel cohort on average, and CAD risk considerably (HR 3.67 [1.18- of 7439 coronary artery disease (CAD)-free 45-65-year-old 11.43]). In contrast, high LDL-C score increased LDL-C individualsfromsouthernFinland.WeestimatedtheirCAD 0.8 mmol/l and CAD risk only marginally (HR 1.22 [1.00- risk using 1) an established national clinical risk score, and 1.49]). 2) the clinical score combined with a genetic risk score No monogenic large-effect TG-increasing variants were (GRS) for CAD. We returned both estimates to the present.HighTGscore,however,increasedTG0.6mmol/l participants. We aimed to 1) evaluate the CAD risk on average, and CAD risk signiﬁcantly (HR 1.26 [1.04- spectrum of the cohort, 2) assess how combining the GRSAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 143 to the clinical score reﬁnes risk estimation, and 3) identify F.B.Isik:None.M.D.Sozuguzel:None.N.Genc:None. high-riskindividualswithactionableclinicalcharacteristics. E.F.Caralan:None.Z.Dogru:None.C.Akdeniz:None. Results: Genotyped participants numbered 5125. Those V. Tuzcu: None. H. Cangul: None. withhighCADrisk(10-yearrisk≥10%)increasedfrom406 (7.9%) to 452 (8.8%) with the combined score; 113 were P05.27C reclassiﬁedtoalowerriskcategoryand159tothehigh-risk Variation in the LPL gene, low density lipoprotein- category. The combined score reﬁned CAD risk clinically cholesterol lowering alleles and risk of coronary disease meaningfully in 950(18.5%)participants. Of the452high- and type 2 diabetes risk participants based on the combined score, 197 (44%) smoked,165(37%)wereobese,80(18%)haddiabetes,310 L. A.Lotta1,I.Stewart1, S.Sharp1,F. Day1,S. Burgess1, (69%) had LDL-C >3 mmol/l, 98 (22%) used statins and J.Luan1,L. Cai1, L.Wittemans1,N.Kerrison1,K. Khaw1, 205 (45%) used antihypertensives. M.McCarthy2, S.O'Rahilly1, R.Scott1,D.Savage1,J. Perry1, Conclusions:IncorporatingtheCADGRStotheclinical C. Langenberg1,N.Wareham1 risk score considerably reﬁned CAD risk estimation. High- risk individuals presented multiple risk factors and inter- 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, vention opportunities. 2University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom J.Partanen:None.P.Ripatti:None.N.Mars:None.P. Pöllänen: None. K. Hotakainen: A. Employment (full or Background: Several pharmacological enhancers of lipo- part-time);Signiﬁcant;MehiläinenOy.J.Partanen:None. protein lipase (LPL) are in preclinical/early-clinical devel- E. Widén: None. S. Ripatti: None. opment for dyslipidemia, but it is unknown if they will reducecardio-metabolicdiseaseriskwhenaddedtoexisting P05.25A lipid-lowering drugs. Human genetics can be used to study A novel candidate frameshift mutation for if genetic-differences in LPL-mediated lipolysis contribute Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia to these disease independent of pathways targeted by existing drugs. F.B.Isik,M.D.Sozuguzel,N.Genc,E.F.Caralan,Z.Dogru, Methods: Using individual-level genetic data from C. Akdeniz, V.Tuzcu, H.Cangul 390,470 individuals and a “factorial” design, we investi- gated the independent and combined consequences on Medipol University, istanbul, Turkey coronary disease and type 2 diabetes risk of triglyceride- lowering LPL-alleles and LDL-C-lowering alleles at Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia different genes, including those encoding targets of current (CPVT) is a cardiac disorder which characterized by LDL-C-lowering therapy (HMGCR, NPC1L1 and PCSK9). arrhythmias, sudden cardiac arrest after physical activity or Results: People carrying a higher than median load of emotional stress which could result from CASQ2 gene bothtriglyceride-loweringLPL-allelesandLDL-Clowering mutations which follow autosomal recessive pattern. alleles had an odds ratio (OR) for coronary disease of 0.73 CASQ2 encodes the protein Calsequestrin-2 which is a compared to people below the median of both exposures high-capacity calcium-binding protein acting as an internal (95%conﬁdenceinterval[CI],0.70to0.76;p=2.8×10-52), calciumstoreinmuscle.Therefore,itplaysapivotalrolein whichwasagreatereffectthanthatobservedinpeoplewith excitation-contraction coupling which regulates the rate of higher than median load of either exposure. Triglyceride- heartbeats.Inthisstudy,weidentiﬁedanovelmutationon lowering LPL-alleles were strongly associated with lower CASQ2 (NM_001232.3) gene in two, non-related patients diabetes risk (odds ratio per standard deviation genetically- with overlapping symptoms such as repetitive syncope and lowertriglycerides,0.69;95%CI,0.62to0.76;p=2.6×10- polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Molecular analysis of 13). In factorial analyses, this protective association the 2 patients’ by next generation sequencing showed a neutralized the association of LDL-C lowering alleles with homozygoussplicevariantp.L79X(c.237delT)whichisnot a higher diabetes risk (p in effect heterogeneity currently present in clinical databases. We evaluated this estimates=0.0094). novel variant as a likely pathogenic variant because of its Conclusions: Triglyceride-lowering LPL-alleles and potential nonsense effect. In vivo functional studies at LDL-C-lowering genetic mechanisms have independent transcriptional and translational level are underway to contributions to a lower risk of coronary disease. These demonstrate the causative role of this mutation in patho- ﬁndings provide human genetics evidence to support the genesis of CPVT. developmentofagentsthatenhanceLPL-mediatedlipolysis for use in the context of LDL-C-lowering therapy.144 J.delPicchia L.A.Lotta:None.I.Stewart:None.S.Sharp:None.F. Conclusions: We report sibling cases manifesting with Day: None. S. Burgess: None. J. Luan: None. L. Cai: severe cardiac dysfunction possibly due to digenic MYH7 None. L. Wittemans: None. N. Kerrison: None. K. and RYR2 mutations. Digenic mutations may cause severer Khaw: None. M. McCarthy: Other; Signiﬁcant; Grants clinical manifestation than that caused by each mutation. from Eli Lilly, Roche, AstraZeneca, Merck, Janssen, M. Nagasaka: None. M. Taniguchi-Ikeda: None. H. Servier, Novo Nordisk, Sanoﬁ-Aventis, Boehringer Ingel- Inagaki: None. I. Morioka: None. H. Kurahashi: None. heim,Pﬁzer,andTakeda;andhonorariafromNovoNordisk K. Iijima: None. and Pfzier. S. O'Rahilly: Other; Signiﬁcant; Personal fees from Pﬁzer, AstraZeneca, iMed, and ERX Pharmaceuticals P05.29A for serving on advisory boards and scientiﬁc panels. R. Increasing the number of genes in the genetic screening of Scott: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Full- dilated cardiomyopathy: is more actually more? time employment with GSK.. D. Savage: None. J. Perry: None. C. Langenberg: None. N. Wareham: None. E.Vanhoutte,J.Verdonschot,G.Claes,A.vandenWijngaard, A. Helderman-vanden Enden,M.Hazebroek, S.Heymans, P05.28D H.Brunner, I.Krapels Digenic mutations of MYH7 and RYR2 in siblings manifesting with severe cardiac dysfunction Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands M.Nagasaka1,2, M.Taniguchi-Ikeda1,3,4,H.Inagaki4, I.Morioka1,H.Kurahashi4, K.Iijima1 Background: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is char- acterized by systolic dysfunction with dilatation of the left 1Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School ventricle and/or right ventricle. The Dutch Society for of Medicine, Kobe, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Genetic Laboratory Diagnostics (VKGL) pre- Neonatology,Takatsuki General Hospital, Takatsuki, Japan, viously recommended genetic testing in DCM patients 3Division of Genetic Counseling, Kobe University Hospital, using a core panel of 47 cardiomyopathy-associated genes Kobe, Japan, 4Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute for (including TTN, MYH7, PLN and LMNA). However, DCM Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, is a complex multifactorial disorder involving multiple Toyoake, Japan genes. Other genes are probably involved in the pathogen- esis. Therefore, a panel containing 347 genes involved in Introduction: Mutations in the Myosin heavy chain 7 cardiac disorders was composed. (MYH7)areassociatedwithinheritedcardiomyopathies.On Aims: To determine the yield of genetic variants in gene the other hand, mutations in the Ryanodine receptor 2 panel testing involving 347 heart related genes in 100 (RYR2) are associated with fatal arrhythmias such as cate- genetically unsolved DCM patients in a Dutch population. cholaminergicpolymorphicventriculartachycardia.Bothof Methods: 100 DCM patients without (likely) pathogenic them exhibit autosomal dominant patterns of inheritance. mutations in the 47 core cardiomyopathy genes were Case Report: The proband was born at 34 weeks of offered genetic analysis through whole exome sequencing gestation with a birth weight of 2452g. He presented with using a targeted ﬁlter consisting of 347 heart related genes. severe cardiac dysfunction at birth and needed strict Results: In 51 patients, genetic analysis of the 347-heart intensive care. At 3 years-old, he had intractable epilepsy gene panel has been completed. Variants of unknown and severe neurodevelopmental impairment. An elder signiﬁcance, likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants were brotherwhowasbornat39weeksofgestationdiedshortly detected in 15 (29%), 3 (6%) and 0 (0%) patients after birth because of cardiac failure. There were strong respectively. So far, likely pathogenic variants were family history of sudden cardiac death in the father’s trait. identiﬁed in ANK2, KCNQ1 and FLNC. The gene with The mother manifested with heart failure after the delivery the highest yield is FLNC. Mutations in FLNC are of the proband and presented with tachycardia during associated with myopathy and cardiomyopathies. ANK2 treadmill stress test. Whole-exome sequencing identiﬁed and KCNQ1 are associated with inherited primary twovariantsinthesiblings,aheterozygousmissensevariant arrhythmias. in MYH7 (c.728G>A) inherited from the father, and in Conclusions: It is likely that FLNC has a major role in RYR2 (c.5428G>C),inherited from themother. The variant the pathogenesis of DCM. Therefore, FLNC should be part inMYH7wasreportedasapathogenicallele.Thevariantin of the core panel of cardiomyopathy genes. Furthermore, RYR2 was considered likely to be pathogenic since PHRD- variants in primary arrhythmia genes might explain a small like scaled Combined Annotation-Dependent Depletion number of patients. (CADD) score suggested deleteriousness (25.9).Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 145 E. Vanhoutte: None. J. Verdonschot: None. G. Claes: Slegtenhorst5,R. H.LekanneDeprez6,M.W.Wessels5, None. A. van den Wijngaard: None. A. Helderman-van M.Michels7,A. C.Houweling8,E.T. Hoorntje9,P.J.T.M. den Enden: None. M. Hazebroek: None. S. Heymans: Helderman-van denEnden3, D.Q.M. C.Barge-Schaapveld10, None. H. Brunner: None. I. Krapels: None. J.vanTintelen6,M.P.vandenBerg4,A.A.M.Wilde6,H.Ploos vanAmstel1,E. A.M.Hennekam1,F.W. Asselbergs1,E.J. G. P05.30B Sijbrands5,D.Dooijes1 A targeted 18 gene panel approach detects a likely genetic cause in25% ofScottish Dilated Cardiomyopathypatients 1University Medical Center Utrecht, University Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands,2Academic MedicalCentre, Amsterdam, J.Dean1,E. Cleary2,C.McWilliam3,R. McGowan4,W. Lam2, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical Centre, D.O'Sullivan1, S.Tennant1 Maastricht, Netherlands, 4University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Erasmus Medical 1NHS Grampian, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 2NHS Lothian, Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Academic Medical Center, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3NHS Tayside, Dundee, United Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Erasmus Medical Centre, Kingdom, 4NHS Greater Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9University Medical Centre Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is aetiologically hetero- Groningen,UniversityofGroningen,Groningen,Netherlands, geneous, and up to 35% of cases are found to be familial 10Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands after investigation of ﬁrst degree relatives. Amongst those withgeneticDCM,truncatingmutationsinTTNarethought Background:TruncatingTitinvariants(TTNtv)areamajor to be the most common cause, being found in around 30% cause of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), a major cause of of familial cases in most series. In Scotland, patients heart failure. TTNtv are also frequently present in the referredforgeneticinvestigationofdilatedcardiomyopathy general population and associated with a variable pheno- aretested using2genepanels,onewith 13genesencoding type. The prognosis of asymptomatic TTNtv carriers is components ofthesarcomereincluding TTN,andtheother poorly understood. Objectives: To assess the clinical rele- including 5 genes also associated with cardiac disorders vance of TTNtv by analysing TTNtv associated all-cause with an arrhythmia phenotype (SCN5A, ABCC9, PLN, mortalityinhistoricalpedigreesandinpresent-daypatients. DES and LMNA). The 5 gene arrhythmia panel came into Methods: Haplotype analysis identiﬁed ﬁve recurrent A- use in 2017. We report an audit of the outcome of this band TTNtv as founder mutations. Three multigenerational approach.In2017,106patientswithDCMwerereferredfor pedigreesweretracedbackto18thcenturyancestors.Using genetic testing in Scotland (population ~5.4 million). Only the Family Tree Mortality Ratio method, standardized 25% had a genetic variant likely to cause DCM, 8% being mortality ratios (SMR, standardized for sex, age and associated with truncating mutations in TTN. The majority calendar-period) were calculated. Similarly, SMR was (17%) had variants in other cardiac genes (including 5% in calculated in parents of 128 present-day DCM patients TNNT2, 4% in ABCC9 and 2% in MYH7, other genes with a TTNtv using the reverse parent-offspring method. contributed a smaller number to the total). This real world Subgroups were compared with Poisson regression. data from the Scottish Laboratory Consortium Molecular Results: In 20,522 person-years, overall mortality was Diagnosticservice suggeststhatinScotland, TTNaccounts not signiﬁcantly increased in three historical pedigrees for fewer cases than might be expected from the literature. compared to the general population (SMR 1.06, 95% CI A 25% overall detection rate nevertheless suggests that 0.95-1.18,p=0.162).However,mortalitywassigniﬁcantly targeted gene panel testing using genes for which good increased in subjects living after 1965 (SMR 1.27, 95% CI genotype-phenotype data is available remains a useful way 1.04-1.53, p=0.009), and subjects aged ≥60 (SMR 1.17, to investigate for inherited DCM. 95% CI 1.01-1.35, p=0.02). Mutation-speciﬁc differences J.Dean:None.E.Cleary:None.C.McWilliam:None. in mortality were observed. Reverse parent-offspring R. McGowan: None. W. Lam: None. D. O'Sullivan: analysis showed excess mortality (SMR 1.26, 95% CI None. S. Tennant: None. 1.07-1.48, p=0.003), driven by subjects aged ≥60. Conclusion: The natural history of TTNtv showed a P05.31C relatively mild phenotype with signiﬁcant excess mortality Mortality Risk associated with Truncating Founder after 1965 and in subjects aged ≥60 years. Increased Mutations in Titin mortality above 60 years was also seen in parents of present-day patients. With increasing life expectancy, M.Jansen1, A.F. Baas1,K. Y.van Spaendonck-Zwarts2, A.S. TTNtv-associated mortality will likely become more Ummels1,A.vandenWijngaard3,J.D.H.Jongbloed4,M.A.van prevalent.146 J.delPicchia M. Jansen: None. A.F. Baas: None. K.Y. van and also with heart failure severity and ACE inhibitors Spaendonck-Zwarts: None. A.S. Ummels: None. A. van intake. den Wijngaard: None. J.D.H. Jongbloed: None. M.A. Conclusions: DNA methylation changes in unstable vanSlegtenhorst:None.R.H.LekanneDeprez:None.M. CAPs are associated with activation of immune response W. Wessels: None. M. Michels: None. A.C. Houweling: and impaired remodeling of artery wall, which can reﬂect None. E.T. Hoorntje: None. P.J.T.M. Helderman-van the underlying processes of plaque destabilization on denEnden:None.D.Q.M.C.Barge-Schaapveld:None.J. epigenetic level. The study is supported by a grant of van Tintelen: None. M.P. van den Berg: None. A.A.M. Russian Scientiﬁc Foundation (16-15-10150). Wilde: None. H. Ploos van Amstel: None. E.A.M. A.V. Markov: None. M.S. Nazarenko: None. A. Hennekam: None. F.W. Asselbergs: None. E.J.G. Zarubin: None. D.V. Sharysh: None. A.N. Kazantsev: Sijbrands: None. D. Dooijes: None. None. O.L. Barbarash: None. V.P. Puzyrev: None. P05.32D P05.33A DNA methylation changes in destabilization of carotid FABP4 gene expression in epicardial adipose tissue is atherosclerotic plaque related to obesity associated coronary heart disease A. V.Markov1,M.S. Nazarenko1,2,3, A.Zarubin1,2,D.V. V.Miroshnikova1,A.Panteleeva2,E.Polyakova3,I.Pobozheva4, Sharysh2, A.N.Kazantsev3, O.L. Barbarash3, V.P. Puzyrev1,2 N.Razgildina4,O.Belyaeva3,E. Baranova3, O.Berkovich3, S. Pchelina4 1ResearchInstituteofMedicalGenetics,TomskNRMC,Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State Medical University, 1Petersburg nuclear physics institute, Gatchina, Russian Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute for Complex Federation, 2Petersburg nuclear physics institute, NRC, Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Gatchina, Russian Federation, 3First Pavlov State Medical Federation University, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Petersburg nuclear physics institute, NRC "Kurchatov Institute", Introduction: Destabilization of carotid atherosclerotic Gatchina, Russian Federation plaque (CAP) is known to be the cause of cerebrovascular ischemia and stroke, but epigenetic framework for this Objective: The fatty acid-binding protein 4 (FABP4) has complexprocessispoorlyinvestigated.Ourstudyaimedto been described as a biomarker for adiposity. Being comparegenome-wideDNAmethylationproﬁlesincellsof expressedbybothadipocytesandmacrophagesittakespart stable and unstable atherosclerotic plaques of carotid in intracellular lipid trafﬁc and acts as an important adipo- arteries. cytokine. Increased circulating FABP4 level is associated Materials and Methods: CAPs were obtained from 16 with obesity, insulin resistance and atherosclerosis. How- patients (10 males, 6 females, aged 65 ± 6 years) and ever, little is known about FABP4 gene expression in epi- divided into histologically stable (n=8) and unstable cardialadiposetissue(EAT)duringobesityanditspotential (n=8) samples. CpG methylation in specimens was inﬂuence on coronary atherosclerosis development. estimated using Inﬁnium MethylationEPIC BeadChip The aim of this study was to evaluate FABP4 mRNA (Illumina) and analyzed in R/Bioconductor. expression in EAT in patients with obesity and coronary Results: After discard of sex chromosome-mapped, heart disease (CHD). polymorphic, cross-hybridized and poorly detected micro- Methods: We analyzed: 1) group of 50 patients with array probes, of remained 775836 sites, 1829 CpG-sites CHD which consisted of 26 obese persons and 24 normal showed differential methylation (|Δβ|>0.15) according to weight persons; 2) control group of 12 individuals without CAP instability (p<0.05) and located commonly beyond CHD which consisted of 6 obese persons and 6 normal CpG-islands. Hypomethylated 1194 sites were overrepre- weight persons. EAT samples were obtained from CHD sented genes functioning in immune cells and participating patients during coronary bypass surgery and from control in different biological processes associated with immune personsduringheartvalvesurgery.Atherosclerosisseverity response (i.e. leukocyte activation, T-cell differentiation, was evaluated by coronary angiography. FABP4 and etc.). Other 635 sites with elevated methylation level in macrophage marker CD68 mRNA levels in EAT were unstable plaques resided within genes largely involved in determined by real-time RT-PCR. morphogenesis and developmental processes (i.e. cytoske- Results:FABP4mRNAlevelsweresigniﬁcantlyreduced leton organization, cell adhesion, etc.). Unsupervised inobese CHD patientswhen comparedwithobese controls analysis revealed moderate correlation of the ﬁrst principal (p<0.01). Among normal weight persons there was no components with measures of lipid core and cap of CAPs, difference in FABP4 expression between patients withAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 147 CHD and corresponding controls without CHD. FABP4 10.34 (95% CI: 9.56-11.17; p<0.0001), 6.51 (95% CI: mRNA levels within obese subgroups were highly corre- 5.65-7.51; p<0.0001) and 6.93 (95% CI: 5.89-8.16; lated with proinﬂammatory macrophage marker CD68 p<0.0001) respectively. These hazard ratios remained mRNA levels (r=0.602, p<0.01). signiﬁcant after adjusting for known CVD risk factors. Conclusions: Our results indicate that FABP4 gene Conclusion: Individuals with clinical FH have signiﬁ- expressioninEATisassociatedwithcoronaryheartdisease cantlyhigherriskofcoronaryheartdisease,stroke/transient developed on obesity background. ischaemic attack and peripheral vascular disease over time. V. Miroshnikova: None. A. Panteleeva: None. E. Funder: NIHR HTA Programme Grant Polyakova: None. I. Pobozheva: None. N. Razgildina: B.Iyen:None.S.Weng:None.R.Akyea:None.J.Kai: None. O. Belyaeva: None. E. Baranova: None. O. None. J. Leonardi-Bee: None. S.E. Humphries: B. Berkovich: None. S. Pchelina: None. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already P05.34B received); Modest; Steve E Humphries was funded by the The incidence and risk of cardiovascular disease outcomes British Heart Foundation (BHF PG08/008) and by the in patients with Familial Hypercholesterolaemia: a NIHRUCLHBRC.F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest; matched survival analysis using a large UK primary care Steve E Humphries was a member of the NICE Familial prospective cohort Hypercholesterolaemia Guideline Development group (2016–2017). Other; Modest; Medical Director and minor- B. Iyen1,S.Weng1,R. Akyea1, J.Kai1, J.Leonardi-Bee2,S.E. ity shareholder of a UCL spin-out company called Humphries3,P. Roderick4,N.Qureshi1 StoreGene, which uses a 20 SNP genetic test in combina- tion with the classical risk proﬁle, to estimate individual 1Division of Primary Care, University of Nottingham, CVD risk. P. Roderick: None. N. Qureshi: F. Consultant/ Nottingham, United Kingdom, 2Division of Epidemiology and Advisory Board; Modest; Nadeem Qureshi was a member Public Health, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United of the NICE Familial Hypercholesterolaemia Guideline Kingdom, 3Cardiovascular Genetics, Institute of Development group (2016–2017). Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 4Faculty of Medicine, Primary care and P05.35C Populationsciences,UniversityofSouthampton,Southampton, Improving identiﬁcation of familial hypercholesterolaemia United Kingdom in primary care using FAMCAT (Familial Hypercholesterolaemia Case Ascertainment Tool): Introduction: Heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia validation in a large population database (FH) is the most common inherited cause of raised LDL- cholesterol and is associated with an increased risk of cor- W.Stephen, J.Kai,R. Akyea,N.Qureshi onaryheartdisease(CHD).Thisstudyaimedtodetermineif FH is associated with other cardiovascular diseases (CVD) University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom including transient ischaemic attack (TIA), stroke and per- ipheral vascular disease (PVD). Introduction: Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a Material and methods: Using routine primary care data common inherited cause of raised cholesterol. However, from the UK Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD), over80%ofpeoplewithFHarestillnotidentiﬁed,leading we used primary care disease codes to select subjects with tomanyavoidableheartattacksandearlydeaths.Thisstudy clinicalFHdiagnoseswhowerefreefromCVDatbaseline, assessed the validity of a new FH case-ﬁnding algorithm and matched them with population controls according to (FAMCAT), intended for application to patients’ primary age, sex and general practice. Cox proportional hazards health care records, in a large population cohort. regressionmodelsstratiﬁedonthematchedpairs,wereused Material and Methods: Analysis of 747,194 patients’ to determine hazard ratios (HR) for CVD (up to 10 years datafromQRESEARCH,aUKprimarycaredatabase,was follow-up)betweenFHpatientsandtheirmatchedcontrols. conducted by applying FAMCAT regression equations to Results:Theincidence ratesofCVDinpatientswithFH predict probability of FH. There were 1,397 patients (n=14073; 4,481 CVD events) and in the controls diagnosed with deﬁnite FH. Prediction accuracy of (n=42,130; 1,767 CVD events) were 25.8 and 3.1 per FAMCAT, determined by the area under the receiver 1000 person-years respectively. Compared with controls, operatingcharacteristicscurve(AUC),wascomparedtouse thehazardratioforCVDamongthosewithclinicalFHwas of established Simon-Broome and Dutch Lipid Clinic 8.87(95% CI:8.31-9.47,p<0.0001). Thehazardratiosfor criteria for FH. coronary heart disease (CHD), TIA/stroke and PVD were148 J.delPicchia Results: FAMCAT resulted in an overall AUC of 0.805 without genetic predisposition. 16,8% of women with high (95% conﬁdence interval [CI] 0.793 - 0.817), performing LDL-c carried mutations causing familial hypercholester- signiﬁcantly better in identifying FH than Simon-Broome olemia, whereas 21% were predisposed to high LDL-c (SB) criteria (0.692, 95% CI 0.680 - 0.705) or Dutch Lipid based on polygenic risk-scores. Women without such Clinic (DLC) criteria (0.716, 95% CI 0.703 - 0.729). genetic predisposition exhibited a signiﬁcantly unfavorable PredictionofFHbyminorityethnicgroupresultedinAUCs lifestyle. rangingfrom0.755(95%CI0.626-0.885)forAsian/Asian Conclusions: Our study demonstrates the need for early British to 0.871 (95% CI 0.808 - 0.934) for Black/Black assessment of cardiovascular risk proﬁles in apparently British/African. healthy young women to identify those with LDL Conclusions: The FAMCAT algorithm offers signiﬁcant cholesterol levels above the 99th percentile for their age: improvement for identifying FH compared to DLC or SB 1) 17% of the cases appeared molecularly diagnosed with criteriainUKprimarycarepractice.FAMCATmayrequire familial hypercholesterolemia; 2) our data indicate that an recalibration in, and for use other international and unfavorable lifestyle is signiﬁcantly associated with severe ethnically diverse population groups. Further research hypercholesterolemia in genetically unaffected women, assessing the clinical utility of FAMCAT with genetic test which may need further evaluation and advice to prevent diagnosis is recommended. future cardiovascular complications. W. Stephen: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Grants: CVON2011-2016; CVON2017-2020; FP7- roadtohealth ltd. J. Kai: None. R. Akyea: None. N. 603091; NHS 2015T068 Qureshi: None. A. Rimbert: None. J. Balder: None. X. Zhang: None. M.Viel:None.R.Kanninga:None.F.vanDijk:None.P. P05.36D Lansberg: None. R.J. Sinke: None. J. Genetics, lifestyle and cholesterol in young women Kuivenhoven: None. A. Rimbert1,J. Balder1,2, X.Zhang3,M.Viel4,R. Kanninga4, P05.37A F. vanDijk4,P. Lansberg1,R. J.Sinke4,J. Kuivenhoven1 Fibromuscular dysplasia: Identifying potential genetic causal variants by whole-exome sequencing 1Department of Pediatrics, Section Molecular Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of E. Vanhoutte,G.Claes, I.Krapels, P.deLeeuw, H.Brunner, Groningen,Groningen,Netherlands,2DepartmentofVascular A. Kroon Medicine,UniversityMedicalCenterGroningen,Universityof Groningen,Groningen,Netherlands,3DepartmentofVascular Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Medicine,AcademicMedicalCenter,Amsterdam,Netherlands, Netherlands 4Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands Background: Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a nonin- ﬂammatory, nonartherosclerotic disorder of medium-sized Introduction: Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL- arteries. FMD leads to arterial stenosis, occlusion, aneur- c),a causal risk factorfor atherosclerosis, ismostly studied ysms and dissection, most commonly involving renal and upon clinical events. Women are usually affected later in internal carotid arteries. Clinical manifestations commonly life than men and are underdiagnosed and undertreated in include hypertension, dizziness and pulsatile tinnitus. cardiovascular investigations. This study addresses genetic The etiology of FMD remains unknown. Since FMD and lifestyle factors affecting LDL-c in young women. occurs in families in approximately 10%, a genetic origin Methods: Premenopausal women with LDL-c ≤ 1st seems plausible. percentile (≤ 50 mg/dl; n=119) and ≥ 99th percentile (≥ Aims: To identify genetic variants involved in FMD. 186 mg/dl; n=121) were selected from a Dutch Methods: So far, genetic analysis through whole exome population-based cohort(Lifelines).Weappliedaone-step, sequencingwasperformedinﬁvepatientswithFMD.Only novel NGS-basedgene-paneltoestablishgeneticorigins of rare and novel truncating, missense and deletion variants hypo-andhypercholesterolemia.A“healthylifestylescore” predicted to be conserved and deleterious are considered to was extracted from questionnaires. be of interest. Results: 15,7% of women with low LDL-c carried Results: In one patient, we identiﬁed a missense variant mutations causing monogenic hypocholesterolemia and in COL4A1, a nonsense variant in COL4A2 and an 85kb 49,6% were genetically predisposed to low LDL-c based deletioninACTA2.Intwootherpatients,amissensevariant on extremely low weighted genetic risk-scores. A healthier inJAG1andamissensevariantinCOL4A2wereidentiﬁed lifestyle was not associated with low LDL-c in women respectively.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 149 ThecollagenIVnetworkseemstobecriticalforstructural strong evidence of heterogeneity in allelic effects on T2D integrityinthebasementmembrane.COL4A1andCOL4A2 (p <1.5x10-4, Bonferroni correction) correlated with HET mutations are associated with multisystem disorders with ancestry at 16% of signals, including LEP (rs7778167, abnormalities in the vasculature and other organs. p =4x10-25, East Asian speciﬁc) and multiple associa- HET Mutations in JAG1 causes Alagille syndrome in which tions at/near KCNQ1 and TCF7L2 (representing ethnic- vascular anomalies including bilateral renal artery stenosis speciﬁc/-differentiated effects). T2D-associated variants leading to hypertension and internal carotid artery aneur- showed signiﬁcant enrichment (odds-ratio range 1.90-6.63; ysms have been reported. p<0.05) in coding exons, pancreatic islet enhancers and Literature reports one mutation in ACTA2 causing promoters, adipose enhancers, and binding sites for tran- dilatation of proximal internal carotid artery, occlusive scriptionfactors,includingNKX2.2andFOXA2.Increased disease of terminal internal carotid artery, and abnormally sample size, population diversity, and annotation-informed straight course of intracranial arteries. ﬁne-mapping substantially improved localisation of poten- Conclusions: FMD is likely to be a multifactorial tial causal variants compared with previous efforts, and disorder, however vascular and connective tissue genes highlighted 76 signals with a single variant accounting for might be involved in the pathogenesis of FMD. >80% of the posterior probability of association (PPA); of E.Vanhoutte:None.G.Claes:None.I.Krapels:None. these 35 signals had PPA of >99%. Clustering of signal- P.deLeeuw:None.H.Brunner:None.A.Kroon:None. speciﬁcannotationenrichmenthighlighteddistinctcladesof T2D associations driven by different underlying molecular P05.38B processes. These analyses represent the most comprehen- Discoveryandﬁne-mappingoftype2diabetessusceptibility sive view of the genetic contribution to T2D to date and, loci in diverse populations using more than a million throughintegrationwithexpressionquantitativetraitlociin individuals disease-relevant tissues, point to previously unreported effector genes and mediating molecular mechanisms at A.Mahajan1,2,H.Kitajima1,X.Sim3,M.C.Y.Ng4,W.Zhang5, several loci. J.E. Below6,K. J.Gaulton7,A. P.Morris1,8, onbehalfof the A. Mahajan: None. H. Kitajima: None. X. Sim: None. DIAMANTE Consortium M.C.Y. Ng: None. W. Zhang: None. J.E. Below: None. K.J. Gaulton: None. A.P. Morris: None. 1Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and P05.39C Metabolism, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Copy number variation analysis in cardiac congenital Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Saw Swee Hock School of septal defects Public Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 4Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine G.Crauciuc1, F.Tripon1, L.Gozar2, R.Togănel2,C.Bănescu3 Research, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, Winston-Salem, NC, United States, 5School of Public Health, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tîrgu Mures,̧ Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 6Human Romania, 2Emergency Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases GeneticsCenter,UniversityofTexasHealthScienceCenterat and Transplantation, Tîrgu Mures,̧ Romania, 3Genetics Houston, Houston, TX, United States, 7Department of Laboratory,CenterforAdvancedMedicalandPharmaceutical Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, Research,UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy,TîrguMures,̧ United States, 8Department of Biostatistics, University of Romania Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom Congenital cardiac septal defects (CCSD) are the most To discover type 2 diabetes (T2D) loci and enhance ﬁne- frequently type of congenital heart malformation, often mappingresolution,weconductedthelargestmeta-analysis occurs sporadically, without an obvious cause in most ofgenome-wideassociationstudiesofthediseasetodateby cases. Recent studies demonstrated the involvement of aggregating 171,262 cases and 1,075,072 controls from several genes variation in cardiac development process, diverse populations (45% non-European ancestry). We factors that have been underestimated in the past. The aim identiﬁed208loci atgenome-widesigniﬁcance (p<5x10-8), of our study was to evaluate if the CCSD patients present including41mappingoutsideregionspreviouslyimplicated copy number variations (CNVs) and establish whether the in T2D (accounting for those discovered in European- CNVsinvestigationshouldbeperformedinmanagementof speciﬁc component of this study). Across these loci, con- this patients. A number of 26 pediatric patients were ditional analyses revealed a total of 342 distinct signals of enrolled. The CNVs were determined using the multiplex association (locus-wide signiﬁcance, p<10-5). We observed ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) technique150 J.delPicchia and P234-A3 SALSA MLPA probemix which contain Introduction: Familial Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy probeforGATA3andGATA4geneanalysis.TheMLPA (HCM) is a multigenic heart condition characterized by analysis revealed CNVs in two patients. Both of them hypertrophyofthecardiacmuscle.TheprevalenceofHCM present a duplication located in 10p14 (GATA 3 gene, is estimated at 1:500 in the general population.The aim of exons 4 and 5). Several patients present a high ratio for ourstudywasevaluationofcomplexgeneticproﬁleofnext 8p23.1(GATA4gene)andalowratiofor10p14(GATA3 generation sequencing (NGS) results in Turkish patients gene) but the signals were statistically insigniﬁcant. Six with HCM. patientspresentlowratioforﬂankingprobe(CELF2probe, Methods: We designed a targeted cardiac panel of 68 accordingtothemanufacturerCNVsofﬂankingprobesare genes using NGS technology on Iontorrent PGM. unlikely to be related to the condition tested). Twenty Results:Analysesof25HCMpatientsrevealedatotalof patients received recommendation for target sequencing of 54 variants in cardiac genes of which 9 (16,7%) were different exons. Based on our results, we may consider the pathogenic,5(%9,2)werepotentiallypathogenic,34(63%) mentioned MLPA kit as a ﬁrst step in CCSD patient’s werevariantofunknownsigniﬁcance(VUS)and6(11,1%) management. were likely benign. Only one of the patient (4%) had no G. Crauciuc: None. F. Tripon: None. L. Gozar: None. suspicious variant in examined genes. 10 patients (40%) R. Togănel: None. C. Bănescu: None. carried at least one pathogenic/potentially pathogenic mutations in MYH6, MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNI3, TNNT2, P05.41A DSP, DPP6, JUP, KCNQ1 and SCN5A genes, while other Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) panel revealed new 14 patients (56%) had at least one VUS variant. A total of candidate genes and variants in 25 Hypertrophic 12 novel variants were identiﬁed, which consist of 1 Cardiomyopathy patients frameshift insertion in JUP gene, 1 frameshift deletion in DPP6 gene and 9 missense variants in DPP6, MYH7, B. Turkgenc1,S.G.Temel2,3,F. Uysal4,S. UganAtik5, MYH6, GJA5, NKX2-5, TMPO and TRDN genes. An F. Oztunc5,A. Sulu6,F. Ekici7,C.Ayabakan8,E. Odemis9, interestingﬁndingisco-occurrenceofdominantpathogenic/ A. Saygili10, A.Koka5,I. OzkanAkinci11, Y. Alanay12,13, likely pathogenic variants indifferent genes, as inthethree A. Celiker14,A. Ozer15,M.C. Yakicier16 cases explains the complexity and severity of the observed phenotypes. 1Acibadem Genetic Diagnostic Center, Istanbul, Turkey, Conclusion: Identiﬁcation of pathogenic/potentially 2DepartmentofMedicalGenetic,FacultyofMedicine,Uludag pathogenic variants and novel candidate variants/genes University, Bursa, Turkey, 3Department of Histology and has led to new opportunities for prevention and therapy of Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa, lethalHCM.Acknowledgements:Thestudywassupported Turkey, 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of by SANTEZ Grant (0253. STZ.2013-2), Turkey. Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa, Turkey, 5Department of B.Turkgenc:None.S.G.Temel:None.F.Uysal:None. Pediatric Cardiology, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul, S. Ugan Atik: None. F. Oztunc: None. A. Sulu: None. F. Turkey, 6Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of Ekici: None. C. Ayabakan: None. E. Odemis: None. A. Medicine, Gaziantep University, Gaziantep, Turkey, Saygili:None.A.Koka:None.I.OzkanAkinci:None.Y. 7Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Alanay: None. A. Celiker: None. A. Ozer: None. M.C. AkdenizUniversity,Antalya,Turkey,8DepartmentofPediatric Yakicier: None. Cardiology, Baskent University Istanbul Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 9Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Acibadem P05.43C University, Acibadem Atakent Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, Identiﬁcation of a novel homozygous loss-of-function 10Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Medical Faculty of variantinJPH2intwounrelatedfamiliesaffectedbylethal Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey, 11Department of Neonatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Anesthesiology and Reanimation, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul,Turkey,12DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Acibadem R. Marooﬁan1,N.Mazaheri2,3, M.Zamani2,3,G.Shariati2,3, University, Istanbul, Turkey, 13Department of Pediatric A. Sedaghat2,3,Y. Jamshidi1,H.Galehdari2,3 Genetic, Acibadem Maslak Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 14Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, 1Molecular and Clinical Sciences Institute, St George's Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey, 15Department of Medical University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2Department Biology and Genetics, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey, ofGenetics,FacultyofScience,ShahidChamranUniversityof 16Department of Molecular Biology and Genetic, Acibadem Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Narges Medical University, Faculty of Science, Istanbul, Turkey Genetics and Prenatal Diagnosis Laboratory, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic ofAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 151 Pediatric cardiomyopathies represent a clinically and Introduction: Mutations in the gene encoding the low- genetically heterogeneous group of disorders affecting the density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) are involved in the ventricular myocardium, with an annual incidence of ~ 1.5 molecular etiology of autosomal dominant familial per 100,000 children. They are associated with substantial hypercholesterolemia (FH), an hereditary condition asso- morbidity and mortality: up to 40% die or undergo trans- ciatedwithcoronaryheartdiseaseandtheriskofpremature plantation. Here we studied two unrelated consanguineous death. Based on FH prevalence among Caucasians, it is families from the same geographic region of Iran, with 4 expected that >80,000 cases are present in Argentina, less children who died due to infantile cardiomyopathy. Affec- than1%ofwhichhavebeenidentiﬁedsofar.Previously,in ted offspring presented with severe hypertrophic cardio- a cohort of Argentinian FH patients we detected eight myopathyandrightatriumenlargementinutero,atbirth,or unreportedLDLRsinglenucleotidevariants(SNVs).Sixof in early childhood. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of themarelocated inthecodingregionsofthegeneandlead DNA from the proband of the ﬁrst family led to identiﬁ- toanaminoacidsubstitution.Toassessthepathogenicityof cation of a novel homozygous frameshift variant (p. each SNV, we performed a functional investigation of the Glu641*) in JPH2. The parents of the proband and a corresponding variant of the receptor proteins. healthy sibling were heterozygous. Echocardiography Materials and Methods: Binding, uptake, and degrada- revealed no abnormalities in the carriers. Due to unavail- tion of 125-I-labeled LDL by cultured CHO cells expres- ability of samples WES could only be carried out for the sing wild-type and mutant LDLR proteins were compared parents of the second family, however the same hetero- inthepresenceandabsenceofanexcessofunlabelledLDL. zygous frameshift variant was identiﬁed in both parents. Levels of LDLR mRNA expression were determined by The variant is novel and absent from population databases qRT-PCR 48 h after transfection with plasmids. including gnomAD, the ethnically-matched GME variome, Results: Four out of the six LDLR mutants showed a Iranome,andin~1000WESin-housecontrolsubjectsfrom markedlyreducedinvitroreceptoractivity,suggestingtheir thesamegeographicregionasthefamiliesinvestigated.The role in the pathogenesis of FH. variantoccursintheproteinC-terminalregionofJPH2,just Conclusions: According to in silico predictions and upstream of a 22-amino acid transmembrane anchor conservation analysis in multiple species, two of the six responsible for binding of the protein to the sarcoplasmic/ identiﬁed LDLR variants are likely benign SNVs. The endoplasmic reticulum, thereby potentially disrupting remaining four variants can be categorized as “pathogenic binding. Our ﬁndings add to the growing evidence that variants” that expand the spectrum of FH-linked LDLR mutationsinJPH2playaroleinHCM;andsuggestthatthis mutations in the Argentinian population. novel biallelic truncating mutation can give rise to severe, A. Gómez: None. G. Giunta: None. L. Helman: None. early-onset pediatric cardiomyopathy. A. Pontoglio: None. L. Kaeser: None. U. Toscanini: R. Marooﬁan: None. N. Mazaheri: None. M. Zamani: None. R. Colombo: None. L. Cuniberti: None. None. G. Shariati: None. A. Sedaghat: None. Y. Jamshidi: None. H. Galehdari: None. P05.45A ExomesequencinginRussianfamilieswithnoncompaction P05.44D cardiomyopathy Functional analysis of six novel LDLR mutations in the Argentinian population A. N.Meshkov1,O.V.Kulikova1, R.P. Myasnikov1,N.V. Shcherbakova1,A. A. Zharikova1,S. N.Koretsky1, A.V. A.Gómez1,G.Giunta2,3,L.Helman2,A.Pontoglio4,L.Kaeser1, Kiseleva1,A. I.Ershova1,M. S.Kharlap1,E. N.Basargina2, U.Toscanini1,R. Colombo4,5,L. Cuniberti3 N.A. Sdvigova2,E.A. Mershina3,V. E. Sinitsyn3, O.M. Drapkina1, S.A. Boytsov1 1PRICAI-FUNDACIÓNFAVALORO,BuenosAires,Argentina, 2Unidad Metabólica, Hospital Universitario Fundación 1National Medical Research Center for Preventive Medicine, Favaloro (HUFF), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Laboratorio de Moscow, Russian Federation, 2National Medical Research Lípidos y Aterosclerosis, IMETTYB‒Universidad Favaloro‒ Center of Children's Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Center for the Study of 3Federal Center of Treatment and Rehabilitation, Moscow, RareHereditaryDiseases,NiguardaCa'GrandaMetropolitan Russian Federation Hospital, Milan, Italy, 5Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University and Policlinico Introduction: Left ventricular noncompaction cardiomyo- Agostino Gemelli, Rome, Italy pathy (LVNC), a relatively rare cardiomyopathy, is char- acterized by a high incidence of serious complications and earlydeath.Over60genesassociatedwiththedevelopment152 J.delPicchia of family cases of LVNC are described, in most cases the variantsfrom 73patientswithLQT.Forallpatients wedid inheritance type is autosomal dominant. However, causal exome sequencing using Agilent Focused Exome enrich- variants in these genes are detected in less than 50% of mentpanelandIlluminaHiSeq2500.Forvariantcallingand families. The search for new genes is actual. pathogenicity scoring we followed ACMG guidelines. We Materials and Methods: We formed the cohort of also conﬁrmed all mutations by Sanger sequencing. No patientswithLVNCandtheirrelativesof1and2degreesof disease-causing mutations were identiﬁed in 14 cases sug- kinship.Theenrollmentofparticipantswasdonebycascade gesting new genes might be involved in pathogenesis. 59 and reverse-cascade methods in the heart failure center. patientshad91disease-causingvariantsinLQTandcardiac Probands should have met echocardiographic and cardiac arrhythmiasassociatedgenes.27patientshadmorethanone MRI criteria for noncompaction. Molecular testing was variantinthosegenes.Wediscovered22newvariants,that performed using exome sequencing for members of 14 were not reported previously in dbNSFP, Clinvar, OMIM, families (43 participants). We searched for pathogenic and HGMD, 1000Genomes and ExAC . In almost half cases probably pathogenic variants in 66 genes associated with (46) we discovered pathogenic variants in KCNE1, LVNC and additionally in 122 genes associated with other KCNH2,KCNQ1orSCN5Agenes.Inremainingcases(45) cardiomyopathies. wefoundpathogenicvariantsin18othergenes,including7 Results: In 8 out of 14 families pathogenic or probably variants in ANK2, which are rarely reported in LQT pathogenic variants of the nucleotide sequence were patients.This work was funded by Fundamental Scientiﬁc identiﬁed. Only 4 variants were found in genes associated Research Program of the Russian Academy of Sciences for with LVNC - 2 pathogenic variants in TTN and 2 probably 2013-2020. pathogenic inMYBPC3andTPM1.Onepathogenic variant E.G. Okuneva: None. A.A. Kozina: None. K. Tsuka- wasfoundinVCLand3probablypathogenicvariantswere nov:None.A.Krasnenko:None.P.Shatalov:None.T.A. found in DES, TBX1 and FHOD3 associated with other Troﬁmova: None. V.M. Solovyev: None. V.V. cardiomyopathies. Ilinsky: None. Conclusions: The data obtained may indicate the detection of 4 new genes (DES, VCL, TBX1, FHOD3) P05.47C associated with LVNC. The reported study was funded by Lymphedema distichiasis syndrome: dominant FOXC2 RFBR according to the research project #17-04-00521. mutations causing protein aggregation and loss of A.N. Meshkov: None. O.V. Kulikova: None. R.P. transcriptional activity Myasnikov: None. N.V. Shcherbakova: None. A.A. Zharikova: None. S.N. Koretsky: None. A.V. Kiseleva: D.Tavian1,S. Missaglia1,P. E.Maltese2,S. Michelini3, None. A.I. Ershova: None. M.S. Kharlap: None. E.N. M.Bertelli2 Basargina: None. N.A. Sdvigova: None. E.A. Mershina: None. V.E. Sinitsyn: None. O.M. Drapkina: None. S.A. 1University, Milan, Italy, 2Magi-onlus, Rovereto, Italy, 3San Boytsov: None. Giovanni Battista Hospital, Rome, Italy P05.46B Introduction: Forkhead transcription factor FOXC2 is Long QT syndrome mutation spectrum in Russians essential for the correct development and maintenance of lymphatic system. Mutations in the FOXC2 gene are asso- E. G.Okuneva1,A.A. Kozina1,2,K. Tsukanov1,A. Krasnenko1, ciated with primary lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome P. Shatalov3,T. A.Troﬁmova3,V. M.Solovyev3,V. V. Ilinsky1 (LD),acongenitalautosomaldominantdisorderthatcauses a dysfunction of the lymphatic vessels. It has been 1Genotek Ltd.(Genotek IT.), Moscow, Russian Federation, demonstrated that FOXC2 variations can either reduce or 2Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russian increase protein function. To clarify the molecular Federation,3TheResearchandClinicalInstituteforPediatrics mechanism through which FOXC2 mutations can affect named after Academician Yuri Veltischev of the Pirogov transcriptional activity, we analyzed two missense muta- Russian National Research Medical University of the Russian tions (p.L80F and p.R121H), two frameshift variations (p. Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation H199Pfs264* and p.M276Dfs186*) and one nonsense mutation (p.Y109*), previously identiﬁed in LD patients. Mutations in more than 16 genes can cause long QT syn- Material and Methods: To investigate subcellular drome (LQT). Detection of variants in these genes is localization,HeLa cellshave beentransfectedwith FOXC2 necessaryfordiagnostics,targetedgenetherapy,behavioral mutant plasmids, expressing FOXC2 with GFP at the N- management, family screening and prophylaxis of sudden terminus, and immunoﬂuorescence analysis has been cardiac death. We report frequencies of disease-causing performed. Subsequently, transactivation activity has beenAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 153 evaluated by a Luciferase assay. Finally, the effects of associated with a markedly increase on cell proliferation missense and nonsense mutations on FOXC2 protein and migration. M13 phage-RGD characterized a strong structure have been evaluate using bioinformatics tools. increaseinMMP-9,eNOSandVEGF-AmRNAsaswellas Results: p.L80F, p.R121H, p.H199Pfs264* and p. leading to higher expression level of VEGF-A protein, M276Dfs186*wereabletocorrectlylocalizeinthenucleus, MMP-9activityandNOreleaseinHUVECsincomparison buttheyproducedFOXC2proteinaggregatescharacterized to other surfaces. bypartialortotallossoftranscriptional activity.Moreover, Conclusion: Beneﬁcial effect of M13 phage-RGD p.H199Pfs264* and p.M276Dfs186 protein aggregation propose these nanostructures as an advantageous and involvedalsochromatinstructure.Thep.Y109*alsocaused potential biomaterial in order to promote angiogenesis, the formation of protein aggregates, even though it was which are becoming feasible therapeutic applications for mainly localized in the cytoplasm. Finally, the analysis of variety of ailments. FOXC2 protein structure revealed that missense and Z. Safari: None. M. Sadeghizadeh: None. nonsense mutations dramatically modiﬁed the DNA binding-site conformation. P05.50B Conclusions: In Lymphedema-distichiasis, FOXC2 mis- The role of genetic variation in phenotype variability and localization,structure modiﬁcationandnuclearorcytoplas- response to treatment in Marfan syndrome micaggregatesformationcanbeconsideredthemaincause of loss of protein function B. Loeys1,J.Meester1,E. Franssen1,G.Vandeweyer1, D. Tavian: None. S. Missaglia: None. P.E. Maltese: A. Verstraeten1,H.C. Dietz2,L. VanLaer1,Marfantrial - None. S. Michelini: None. M. Bertelli: None. Pediatric Heart Network investigators P05.48D 1Center for Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp/Antwerp Induction of angiogenesis by M13 bacteriophage-RGD University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2McKusick Nathans nanoﬁbrous surfaces on human umbilical vein endothelial Institute for Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, cells Baltimore, MD, United States Z. Safari,M. Sadeghizadeh In a large cohort of 300 clinically diagnosed MFS patients, weaddressedthefollowingquestions:Whichproportionof TMU, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of classic MFS patients has an FBN1 mutation? Are there genotype-phenotype correlations? Does the nature of the Introduction:Theabilitytocreate,remodelingandregulate FBN1 mutation predict cardiovascular treatment outcome? the human blood system holds wide range of medical uti- Next-generationtargetedresequencingofFBN1andrelated lization and carries possible therapeutic effects on patients genes was followed by deletion/duplication testing. Patho- withvarietyofcardiovasculardiseases.Commonly,Clinical genic FBN1 mutation was identiﬁed in 94% of patients use of autologous vessels has been reported; However, (including15del/dups).ThreepercentofMFSpatientshad transplant rejection unfortunately occurs in most patients. non-FBN1mutations.Asimilarsmallfractionhadnocausal Likewise, biomaterial tissue engineering on vascular variant but was clinically indistinguishable from the FBN1 replacement devices has been recently improved. mutation positives. We conﬁrm prior literature that muta- Materials and Method: In the following study, compar- tions creating or deleting cysteines are signiﬁcantly asso- ing the ability of M13 Bacteriophage, M13 bacteriophage- ciated with lens dislocation (p=10-7). Premature RGD and Gelatin surfaces to enhance the angiogenic termination codons are more often associated with skeletal potential of human umbilical vein endothelial cells ﬁndings, but not with cardiovascular severity. We did not (HUVECs) was investigated, The response of HUVECs observe a correlation between mutations in the middle cells to surfaces were studied through cell apoptosis, cell regionofFBN1andphenotypicalseverity.Mutationsatthe proliferation, growth factors secretion (VEGF), and C-andN-terminal(exons 1-16/60-66)endtend toleadtoa angiogenic-endogenic-associatedgenes(Matrixmetallopep- milder cardiovascular phenotype (p=0.047). We observed tidase 9 (MMP9),Endothelial nitric oxide synthaseeNOS). no difference in aortic root size or progression nor in Real Time-PCR, ELISA, Nitric Oxide assay and Zymo- treatment outcome comparing dominant negative with graphy was operated on samples. After 2 days of cell haploinsufﬁcient mutations. No effect of mutation location seeding, Gene and Protein expression data were analyzed on treatment outcome could be detected. Patients that star- and compared by two-way analysis of variance. ted treatment before age 10 had less aortic growth than Result:OurresultsshowthatM13phage-RGDappeared older patients, irrespective of treatment type. A compre- Non-cytotoxic to the cells. Furthermore, these result was hensive molecular analysis identiﬁes an FBN1 mutation in154 J.delPicchia the overwhelming majority of MFS patients. With one The chosen technology is reliable for SNV and CNV exception, no major genotype-phenotype correlations can detectionandﬂexiblesincethetargetedgenescaneasilybe beidentiﬁed.Importantly,earlystartoftreatmenthasbetter adapted as scientiﬁc knowledge develops. outcome with regards to aortic root growth. P. Arnaud: None. N. Hanna: None. L. Benarroch: B. Loeys: None. J. Meester: None. E. Franssen: None. None. M. Reocreux: None. K. Diallo: None. S. Gazal: G. Vandeweyer: None. A. Verstraeten: None. H.C. None.M.Langeois:None.L.Gouya:None.G.Jondeau: Dietz: None. L. Van Laer: None. None. C. Boileau: None. P05.51C P05.52D Next generation sequencing in the diagnosis of Marfan Genotype-phenotype correlations in Marfan-syndrome for syndrome and related disorders: an efﬁcient global the prediction of severe cardiovascular manifestations approach in the SNV/CNV detection A.Bors1,P.Kövy1,R.Stengl2,K.Benke2,3,B.Ágg2,3,M.Pólos2,3, P. Arnaud1,2,N.Hanna1,2,L. Benarroch2,M.Reocreux3, N.Daradics2,G.Mátyás4, Z.Szabolcs2,3,H.Andrikovics1 K.Diallo3,4,S.Gazal5,4,M.Langeois6,L.Gouya6,G.Jondeau6,2, C. Boileau1,2 1Central Hospital of Southern Pest - National Institute of Hematology and Infectious Diseases, Budapest, Hungary, 1Département de Génétique, AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, PARIS, 2Heart and Vascular Center, Semmelweis University, France, 2INSERM U1148, Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Hôpital Budapest, Hungary, 3Hungarian Marfan Foundation, Bichat, PARIS, France, 4INSERM U1137, Paris, France, Budapest, Hungary, 4Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and 5Harvard University, Department of Epidemiology, Boston, Gene Diagnostics, Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland MA, United States, 6Centre National Maladies Rares, Syndrome de Marfan et pathologies apparentées, AP-HP, Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal- Hôpital Bichat, PARIS, France dominant, systemic connective tissue disorder, with a pre- valence of ~1:5000. The most important, life-threatening Introduction: The Genetic Laboratory in Bichat-Hospital complicationisaorticdissection,thereforetheidentiﬁcation (Paris) receives each year samples for approximatively 600 andthefollow-upofaorticdilatationaswellasprophylactic probandssuspectedforMarfanSyndrome(MFS)orRelated surgeryisessential.Inmostcases,heterozygousFBN1gene Disorders (RD) nationwide. Genetic heterogeneity is high mutations are responsible for the disease, leading to the and new genes are regularly discovered. Initially, the reduction (haploinsufﬁciency=HI) or to the abnormal strategy for molecular diagnosis was based on successive structure (dominant negative type mutation=DN) of the Sanger sequencing of the main genes, associated with ﬁbrillin-1 protein. MLPA analysis. The objective was to evaluate on these Aims: We examined the association of FBN1 sequence probandsaNGScapturepanelstrategy,targeting25known variations with cardiovascular (CV) involvement. disease causing genes. Methods: Phenotypic evaluation was carried out accord- Material and Methods: Sequencing was carried out on ing to the revised Ghent nosology, while molecular genetic MiSeq (Illumina). Bio-informatical analysis was performed analysis of the FBN1 gene was performed using next- onCLCGenomicsWorkbenchsoftware;SingleNucleotide generationsequencingandSanger-sequencingtechniquesin Variants (SNV) annotation was completed with a Python 35 MFS patients. script.CopyNumberVariation(CNV)weresoughtthrough Results:Pathogenicmutationswereidentiﬁedin20cases comparison of coverage depths, standardized for each (57%; DN-type: 9 missense and 11 HI-type: 5 nonsense, 2 amplicon to those of a group of controls. frameshift,3splicemutationsand1largedeletionaffecting Results: To date, more than 600 probands have been exons2-4).Therewasnosigniﬁcantdifferencebetweenthe sequenced on this capture panel; a potentially pathogenic occurrence of major CV symptoms (aortic dilatation and/or variantwasfoundinapproximatively200patients.Thisled dissection) in the patient cohorts with or without FBN1 us to identify the disease causing variation in new genes in mutations (60% vs. 85%, p=0.13). There was no familiesinwhichthemostfrequentgeneshadalreadybeen signiﬁcant difference between the effect of DN and HI excluded. This global approach enabled us to expand the mutationsonthemajorCVtraits(66%vs.100%,p=0.07). phenotypic spectrum of pathogenic variants in some genes. Among patients with non-cysteine missense mutations, CV Moreover, several pathogenic CNV have been pinpointed, symptoms occurred with signiﬁcantly lower probability eitherinsomegenesthatwerenotscreenedforCNVbefore. comparedtoDNmutationsaffectingcysteineresiduesorHI Conclusions: NGS technologies enable us to have a mutations (25% vs. 100%, p<0.01). uniquestrategyinthemoleculardiagnosisofMFSandRD.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 155 Conclusion: The identiﬁcation of disease-causing FBN1 (miR-101-3p, miR-199a-5p, miR-125a-5p) were hypoex- mutationsin MFS patients can improve theaccuracy ofthe pressed in unstable plaques. These results are well riskestimationofaorticdisordersandplanningprophylactic explained by microRNA-associated pathological processes aortic root reconstruction surgeries. described in atherosclerosis. Principal component and A. Bors: None. P. Kövy: None. R. Stengl: None. K. cluster analyses showed similar results. Two ﬁrst principal Benke: None. B. Ágg: B. Research Grant (principal components accounted for 99% of data variability and investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants showed a ﬁne division of samples by stability, which can as well as grants already received); Modest; Hungarian indirectlyindicatethattheselectedmicroRNAscharacterize National Research, Development and Innovation Ofﬁce; the development of the pathological process. (grant number NVKP_16-1- 2016-0017), New National Conclusions: Of 161 microRNAs identiﬁed to be ExcellenceProgramoftheMinistryofHumanCapacitiesof differentiallyexpressedbetweenstableandunstablecarotid Hungary”; (ÚNKP-17- 3-I- SE-31; BÁ). M. Pólos: None. plaques, nine microRNAs can reliably be associated with N.Daradics:None.G.Mátyás:None.Z.Szabolcs:None. destabilization of atherosclerotic lesion. The study is H.Andrikovics:B. Research Grant(principal investigator, supported by RSF №16-15-10150. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as A.A. Zarubin: None. A.V. Markov: None. M.S. grants already received); Modest; Janos Bolyai Research Nazarenko:None.D.V.Sharysh:None.A.N.Kazantsev: Scholarship of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. None. O.L. Barbarash: None. V.P. Puzyrev: None. P05.53A P05.54B MicroRNA expression in the setting of stability of human Genotype-phenoype correlation in probands with three atherosclerotic lesion recurrent (founder) mutations in the MYH7 gene (V964L, M982T and G1057S) A. A.Zarubin1,2,A.V. Markov1,M.S. Nazarenko1,2,3,D.V. Sharysh2, A.N.Kazantsev3, O.L. Barbarash3, V.P. Puzyrev1,2 K.J.A.F.vanKaam1,M.B.Hoos1,C.M.Marcelis2,J.G.Post3, R. M.Oldenburg4,Y. M.Hoedemaekers5,F. A.M. Duijkers6, 1ResearchInstituteofMedicalGenetics,TomskNRMC,Tomsk, F. H.J.vanTienen1,A. vandenWijngaard1,I.P. C. Krapels1 Russian Federation, 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute for Complex 1MUMC+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Radboud UMC, Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands, Federation 4Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 6AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands Background:MicroRNAshavebeenreportedtoparticipate in atherogenesis and to serve as markers of atherosclerosis, Aims: MYH7 is one of the most frequently mutated genes but the involvement of microRNAs in destabilization of in different types of cardiomyopathies. We aimed to gain atherosclerotic plaque is under-investigated. Objective: moreinsightinthegenotype-phenotypecorrelationofthree Identiﬁcation of microRNAs differentially expressed in the recurrentmutations(twofoundermutationsandonehotspot cells of carotid atherosclerotic plaques depending on the mutation)intheS2structuralsubdomainoftheMYH7gene degree of its stability. (V964L, M982T and G1057S). Moreover, we aimed to Material and Methods: The samples of carotid athero- reach national consensus on the interpretation and classiﬁ- sclerotic plaque were obtained from 14 patients. After cation of these three mutations. histological analysis, all samples were divided into stable Methods: We retrospectively collected information on (n=8) and unstable (n=6) atherosclerotic plaques. clinical and cardiologic characteristics as well as additional MicroRNA expression was analyzed by massive parallel risk factors possibly inﬂuencing the phenotype of 55 sequencing (miRNA-seq). probands with one of the three recurrent mutations V964L Results and Discussion: We found 161 microRNAs to (n=30),M982T(n=16)andG1057S(n=9)inMYH7.If be differentially expressed between stable and unstable available, results of segregation analysis in (ﬁrst degree) atherosclerotic plaques. After disposal of microRNAs with family members were retrieved. lowexpressionlevel(<10CPM)inallsamplesandhavinga Results: Probands with one of the mutations V964L and strong correlation with clinical features (including drug M982T displayed varying types of CMP whereas probands intake and other diseases), only 9 microRNAs showed with the G1057S mutation all had a diagnosis of HCM. In signiﬁcant differences. Six of them (let-7b-5p, miR-7704, the majority of these probands additional risk factors (most miR-328-3p, miR-1291, miR-370-3p, miR-148a-5p) often hypertension) and/or a mutation in a second showedincreasedlevelofexpression,andthreemicroRNAs156 J.delPicchia sarcomeric gene were identiﬁed. The limited amount of Methods:Whole-exomesequencing(WES)andgenome- segregation data are inclonclusive at this point in time. wide genotyping data, derived from an Italian cohort of ~1,600 early-onset myocardial infarction (MI) cases and MYH7mutation V964L(n=30) M982T(n=16) G1057S(n=9) 1,600 controls, were analyzed to test whether rare/common variants affecting the expression levels of the F10 gene, Second 7(23%) 5(31%) 1(11%) encoding FX, are associated with MI risk. sarcomericgene Results: Bioinformatics analyses, measurements of mutation plasma FX levels, and data mining in publicly-available Hypertension 5(17%) 4(25%) 5(56%) databases were used to assess the pathogenicity of the rare Secondmutation 4(13%) – – variantsidentiﬁedbyWESintheF10gene.Anenrichment AND hypertension in the burden of potentially-deleterious variants was Otherriskfactors 1(3%) 2(13%) – observed among controls (OR=0.47, P=0.02), thus high- lighting a reduced MI risk in subjects carrying one F10 Noriskfactors 13(43%) 5(31%) 3(33%) inactivating mutation. Moreover, the case-control associa- tionanalysisperformedoncommonpolymorphismsknown Conclusion: The high number of additional risk factors toinﬂuenceF10levels(GTExdata)evidencedasigniﬁcant (mainlysecondsarcomericgenemutationsand/orhyperten- protectiveeffectofthers4907485T>Gvariant.Inparticular, sion) in probands with the mutations V964L, M982T and theGGgenotypeassociatedwithloweredF10expressionin G1057S in MYH7 supports the notion that these variants theGTExdatabasewasenrichedamongcontrols(37.7%vs may be not be causal by themselves, but are possibly 33.2%; OR=0.92, CI=0.84-1.02, P=0.0093), again sug- modiﬁers of disease. gesting that lowered F10 levels are protective against the K.J.A.F. van Kaam: None. M.B. Hoos: None. C.M. disease. Marcelis: None. J.G. Post: None. R.M. Oldenburg: Conclusion: We showed for the ﬁrst time that variants None. Y.M. Hoedemaekers: None. F.A.M. Duijkers: lowering FX levels are associated with reduced MI risk, None. F.H.J. van Tienen: None. A. van den Wijngaard: thus supporting, on a genetic basis, clinical trials’ results None. I.P.C. Krapels: None. showing that FX inhibition is beneﬁcial for the treatment/ prevention of atherothrombotic events. P05.55C E.Paraboschi:None.S.Kathiresan:B.ResearchGrant GeneticvariantsloweringthelevelsofcoagulationfactorX (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and are protective against myocardial infarction pending grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Bayer. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; E. Paraboschi1,S. Kathiresan2,L. Gigante3,F. Peyvandi4,5, Catabasis. L. Gigante: None. F. Peyvandi: F. Consultant/ D.Ardissino3,R.Asselta1,6,S. Duga1,6 Advisory Board; Modest; Ablynx, F. Hoffmann-La Roche. D. Ardissino: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, 1Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, Italy, 2Center for collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Astra Zeneca, Bayer, MA, United States, 3Division of Cardiology, Azienda Glaxosmithkline,EliLilly&Company,Pﬁzer,Novartis.R. Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Parma, Parma, Italy, 4Angelo Asselta: None. S. Duga: None. Bianchi Bonomi Haemophilia and Thrombosis Centre, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore P05.56D Policlinico, and Luigi Villa Foundation, Milan, Italy, Familystudyshowsthephenotypicandgeneticspectrumof 5Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, familial noncompaction cardiomyopathy Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 6Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Italy J.I.vanWaning1,K.Caliskan1,M.Michels1,A.F.L.Schinkel1, M.Dalinghuis1,Y. M.Hoedemaekers2,M.W. Wessels1, Background: Coagulation factor X (FX) plays a pivotal I.Kardys1,A. IJpma1, R.M.W. Hofstra1,M.A. van role in the clotting process, being responsible for thrombin Slegtenhorst1,D.Majoor-Krakauer1 generation; emerging evidence suggests its involvement also in non-hemostatic processes, including inﬂammation. 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2UMCG, Groningen, Recent data demonstrated that FX inhibition reduces the Netherlands risk of recurrent atherothrombotic events in patients with acute coronary syndrome. Introduction:Noncompactioncardiomyopathy(NCCM)is aheterogeneouscardiomyopathycharacterizedbyexcessiveAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 157 trabeculation of the left ventricle (LV). Patients diagnosed Spain, 7Servicio de Neumología, Complejo Hospitalario de with NCCM, may also have a dilated left ventricle or a Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain hypertrophic septum. Purpose: Indentify if index cases and affected relatives Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a rare and pro- had similar NCCM phenotypes, and if cardiac phenotypes gressive disease characterized by vascular remodeling and were linked to genotypes. the increase of vascular resistance that leads to right heart Methods: A retrospective family study assessed the failure and, ultimately, death. PAH genetic basis has been familial cardiac phenotype and genotype in 114 families of slowly uncovered during the last decades. After screening consecutively diagnosed cases with NCCM. with a sequencing panel for PAH related genes, several Results: Family screening identiﬁed 109 relatives with a mutations were detected in the ATP-Binding Cassette cardiomyopathy from 58 (51%) families. More affected transporter subfamily C member 8 (ABCC8) (Exon 3 c. relativeswereidentiﬁedinfamilieswithamutation(29%vs G298A p.E100K, Exon3 c.2694+1G>A, Exon 11 c. 15%; p<0.001). 33% of the mutation carriers did not have C1643T p.T548M, Exon 26 c.3288_3289del pL1096fs, a cardiomyopathy. Clinical features in relatives were less Exon 27 c.G3384A p.D1132N), a gene widely related to severe than in index cases, 51% of the relatives diagnosed congenital hyperinsulinism. DNA fragments, wild type and with NCCM were asymptomatic (p<0.001). The non- mutatedsequence,wereclonedintothepSPL3vector.After dilatedphenotypeofNCCMsegregatedinfamiliesofindex PCR and Sanger sequencing to conﬁrm the fragment NCCM cases with normal LV dimensions, and the dilated insertion into the plasmid, pSPL3 was transfected into the NCCMphenotypepredictedriskofhavingadilatedLVfor COS-7 cell line by triplicate. 48 hours’ post-transfection, relatives (p=0.002). Dilated NCCM were older (p=- RNA was isolated and cDNA was generated using RT- 0.017),hadmoreoftenLVsystolicdysfunction(p<0.001), PCR.Lastly,ahighﬁdelitypolymerasewasusedtoperform RV systolic dysfunction (p=0.012), MACE (p=0.007) a PCR using primers surrounding vector’s exon trap, the and was associated with mutations in the tail of MYH7 product was analyzed via electrophoresis and the bands of (p<0.001). Hypertrophic NCCM was associated with interest were sequenced. In silico analysis predicted a MYBPC3 mutations and HCM in the family (p=0.006). moderate ANNOVAR effect in 3/5 mutations, high in 1/5 HCMorDCMwithouttrabeculationinthefamilyincreased and no effect in the last one. Our experimental results risk for MACE in NCCM patients (p=0.05). showedanalteredsplicingpatternin1/5mutationschecked. Conclusion: From the phenotype of the index case, the Sequencingisinprogresstoconﬁrmthedifferentialpattern. familial mutation and the phenotypes of relatives, predic- In conclusion, minigene assay is a simple and effective tions can be made on risk for phenotype and outcome in method to check for splicing alterations and pathogenicity relatives. of the variants detected. Nonetheless, analysis of patient´s J.I. van Waning: None. K. Caliskan: None. M. RNA will be deﬁnitive to conﬁrm our results. Michels: None. A.F.L. Schinkel: None. M. Dalinghuis: M. Lago-Docampo: None. J. Tenorio: None. P. None. Y.M. Hoedemaekers: None. M.W. Wessels: None. Escribano:None.A.Baloira:None.P.Lapunzina:None. I. Kardys: None. A. IJpma: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: D. Valverde: None. None. M.A. van Slegtenhorst: None. D. Majoor- Krakauer: None. P05.58B Landscape of mutations found by gene panel routine P05.57A sequencing for pulmonary hypertension Splicing mechanism evaluation of NGS detected variants using hybrid minigenes F. Soubrier1,M.Eyries1,B. Girerd2,D.Montani2, M.Levy3, D.Bonnet3,A.Bourdin4,R.Trésorier5,A.Chaouat6,V.Cottin7, M.Lago-Docampo1,2,3,J.Tenorio4,5,P.Escribano6,A.Baloira7, C. Sanﬁorenzo8, G.Prévot9,M.Reynaud-Gaubert1010, P. Lapunzina4,5, D.Valverde1,2,3 C. Dromer11,A. Houeijeh12,M.Humbert2 1University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación 1Département de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, Sanitaria Galicia Sur (IIS-Galicia Sur), Vigo, Spain, 3Centro France, 2Centre de Référence de l’Hypertension Pulmonaire de Investigación Biomédica (CINBIO), Vigo, Spain, 4Instituto Sévère, Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital de Bicêtre, DHU de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital thorax Innovation, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 3M3C- Universitario La Paz-IdiPaz, Universidad Autónoma de Cardiologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-enfants malades, Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 5CIBER de enfermedades Raras Paris,France,4DépartementdePneumologieetAddictologie; (CIBERER), Insitituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, CHU Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 5Service de 6Servicio de Cardiología, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, cardiologie maladies vasculaires, CHU Gabriel Montpied,158 J.delPicchia Clermont-Ferrand, France, 6Département de Pneumologie- I.Ntalla1,2,L. Weng3,4, H.R. Warren1,5,Y. Jamshidi6, P.B. CHRU Nancy-Université de Lorraine, Vandoeuvre-les-nancy, Munroe1,5,S. A.Lubitz3,4,7,theCHARGE EKG consortium France, 7Service de pneumologie, CHU de Lyon HCL - GH Est-Hôpital Louis Pradel, Bron, France, 8Service de 1William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and The London pneumologie, Hôpital Pasteur-CHU Nice, Nice, France, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of 9Service de pneumologie, Hôpital Larrey, Toulouse, France, London, London, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Genomic 10ServicedePneumologie,CHUNorddeMarseille,Marseille, Health, Queen Mary University of London, London, United France, 11- Service de pneumologie, CHU de Bordeaux Kingdom, 3Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Hôpital Haut-lévêque, Pessac, France, 12Service de Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United Cardiologie Infantile et Congénitale, CHRU Lille-Hôpital States, 4Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts Cardiologique, Lille, France General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5National InstituteforHealthResearchBartsCardiovascularBiomedical Introduction: Since the discovery of BMPR2 mutations in Research Unit, Queen Mary University of London, London, 2000, mutations in several other genes, related or not to United Kingdom, 6Genetics Unit, Cardiovascular and Cell BMPR2 signaling, have been discovered, making pulmon- Sciences Institute, St George's University of London, London, aryhypertension(PH)aheterogenousgeneticdisease.Here, UnitedKingdom,7CardiacArrhythmiaService,Massachusetts wesought todeterminethegenetic architecture ofPHgene General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States mutations in the french PH cohort. Methods: We analyzed 227 patients with a clinical Introduction: The electrocardiographic PR interval repre- diagnosis of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) or sents cardiac atrioventricular conduction, a critical physio- pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD), by a targeted logical process that is associated with arrhythmias and all- capture panel including known PH genes. cause mortality. Yet the biological determinants of the PR Results: Following clinical examination, 159 subjects intervalremainincompletelyunderstood.Weconductedthe were classiﬁed as idiopathic PAH (iPAH), 11 as familial largest genetic association study of the PR interval to date. PAH (fPAH), 7 as drugs or toxin induced PAH and 50 as Methods:Wecombinedgenome-wideassociationresults PVOD.Amutationwasidentiﬁedin42ofthe227analyzed for the PR interval from 55 studies encompassing 293,051 subjects: 27 in iPAH, 7 in fPAH and 8 in PVOD. No individuals (271,570 European, 8,173 African, 12,823 mutation was identiﬁed in patients with drugs or toxin Hispanic, and 763 Asian ancestry) using ﬁxed-effect induced PAH. meta-analysis. Analyses included ~12 million variants Weidentiﬁed23mutationsinBMPR2,2inACVRL1,5in (minor allele frequency, MAF>0.1%) imputed using the TBX4,1inGDF2,1inSMAD9and9biallelicmutationsin 1000 Genomes Project reference panel. EIF2AK4. No pathogenic mutation was identiﬁed in Results:Weidentiﬁed217regions(152novel)associated KCNK3 or CAV1. However 1 variant of unknown with PR interval exceeding genome-wide signiﬁcance signiﬁcance was identiﬁed in each of these genes. (p<5x10-8). Among novel regions, we identiﬁed 3 Conclusions:GenepanelNGSsequencingisanefﬁcient missense variants annotated as deleterious and/or possibly tooltoimprovetheknowledgeofPAHgeneticarchitecture. damaging in KIAA1755, ARHGEF40, and SPSB3; and 7 In our cohort, the major gene remains BMPR2, however variants in high LD (r2>0.8) with missense variants in mutationsinotherPHgenes accountfor asmallnumberof DERL3, DUSP13, DNAH11, C10orf71, ACCN4, CHPF, cases. Identiﬁcation of these mutations allows the involve- OBSL1 and DALRD3. Expression quantitative trait locus ment of these genes in PH to be conﬁrmed since only few (eQTL) analysis using the GTEx portal revealed 5 variants cases were previously reported in the literature. associated with gene expression levels in right atrial F. Soubrier: None. M. Eyries: None. B. Girerd: None. appendage (TRAK1, SMARCB1, SYNE2, DEK, DNAH11). D. Montani: None. M. Levy: None. D. Bonnet: None. A. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis including only the Bourdin: None. R. Trésorier: None. A. Chaouat: None. nearest genes to both known and novel variants indicated V.Cottin:None.C.Sanﬁorenzo:None.G.Prévot:None. further enrichment of biological processes involving heart M. Reynaud-Gaubert10: None. C. Dromer: None. A. andcardiacmuscletissue development with theadditionof Houeijeh: None. M. Humbert: None. the newly identiﬁed genes. Conclusions: Our results implicate speciﬁc genes which P05.59C determine PR interval and highlight the complex polygenic Multi-ancestry genome-wide association meta-analysis of nature of atrioventricular conduction. Future analyses will 293,000 individuals identiﬁes 217 regions for the assesstherelations betweengeneticdeterminantsofthePR electrocardiographic PR interval interval and cardiac arrhythmias.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 159 I. Ntalla: None. L. Weng: None. H.R. Warren: None. J. Tenorio: None. M. Orcholsky: None. I. Hernández: Y. Jamshidi: None. P.B. Munroe: None. S.A. None. P. Navas: None. P. Arias: None. E. Shamskhou: Lubitz: None. None. K. Yuan: None. E. Granda: None. V. De Jesús- Pérez: None. P. Escribano-Subías: None. P. P05.60D Lapunzina: None. Identiﬁcation of causative genes or phenotype modiﬁers variants associated with Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension P05.61A Genome-wide association analysis of recurrent myocardial J.Tenorio1,M.Orcholsky2,I.Hernández3,P.Navas4,P.Arias5, infarctioninUKBiobankidentiﬁessuggestiveevidencefor E. Shamskhou2,K. Yuan2,E.Granda1,V. DeJesús-Pérez2, association to twenty seven loci P. Escribano-Subías3, P.Lapunzina1 O.Giannakopoulou1,2,S. Kanoni1,2,P. Giardoglou3, 1INGEMM,Madrid,Spain,2StanfordUniversity,Stanford,CA, K. Kelaidoni3,UKBiobankCardioMetabolic Consortium CHD UnitedStates,3HospitalUniversitario12deOctubre,Madrid, workinggroup, G.Dedoussis3,P. Deloukas1,2,4 Spain, 4Hospital Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain,5InstituteofMedicalandMolecularGeneticist,Madrid, 1William Harvey Research Institute, Barts &the London Spain Medical School, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Genomic Health, Queen Mary Background: Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a University of London, London, United Kingdom, 3Department rare disease of unclear etiology that is associated with of Nutrition-Dietetics, Harokopio University, Athens, Greece, abnormally increased pulmonary pressures and chronic 4Princess Al-Jawhara Al-Brahim Centre of Excellence in right heart failure. Use of whole exome sequencing (WES) Research of Hereditary Disorders (PACER-HD), King has led to the discovery of gene variants linked to PAH Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia pathobiology. The main aim of this project was to perform WESanalysisof56unrelatedPAHpatientstoidentifygene Background: Despite the decline in their incidence rates, variants potentially involved in PAH. the recurrent myocardial infarction (MI) events are asso- Material and Methods: Bioinformatic and in silico ciated with signiﬁcant morbidity, short- and long- term analysis was applied to WES data from patients with mortality. Relative to our understanding of risk for ﬁrst idiopathic, heritable and secondary induced PAH. Expres- events, the aetiology of recurrent MI is poorly understood. sion of WES candidate genes was assessed in pulmonary Methods: We used UK-Biobank, a large prospective microvascular endothelial cells (PMVECs) from healthy cohort of 500,000 individuals, to investigate the genetic donors and PAH patients. Functional gene analysis was predisposition of recurrent MI. We performed a GWAS in carried via tube formation and scratch assays. 3386 UK-Biobank participants admitted to hospital due to Results: A mutation in CRIPAK was found in a high MIatleasttwicewithinaperiodof28days-1.5yearsand signiﬁcantpercentageinPAHpatientscomparetocontrols. 8567 controls with one unique hospital record with MI CRIPAK is the key protein responsible for regulation of diagnosis or MI hospital admissions, which occurred PAK1,amajorsignalingmediatorofVEGFresponsiblefor outside the aforementioned period. promoting proliferation, migration and survival of Results: In total, 215 variants representing 27 loci PMVECs. PAH PMVECs lysates demonstrated signiﬁcant reached a suggestive signiﬁcance level of 10-5. Among reduction in CRIPAK protein levels along with concomi- these, 17 loci have been implicated in coronary artery tantly increased phosphoPAK1 levels. PAH PMVECs disease (CAD) and other cardiovascular phenotypes (eg. exhibit impaired tube formation and motogenic responses KCNN2, KLF4, CACNB2, ADIPOR2, KLF5, PKD1L3), in culture. Thus, transfection of CRIPAK siRNA into known CAD risk factors (blood pressure, CACNB2; lipid healthyPMVECssigniﬁcantlyreducedangiogenicresponse levels, ABHD4),cardiacremodelling (MAP3K5,SEMA3A), to VEGF-A, as evidenced by reduced tube network and abnormalities in platelets and coagulation (GRM7, formation and gap closure in matrigel and scratch assays, KALRN,P2RY1).Fiveoftheidentiﬁedgenes(CHD7,IST1, respectively. KIAA1958, MAP3K5, UBFD1) were also found to be Conclusion: WES analysis has identiﬁed CRIPAK as a differentially expressed six months after a MI in 39 MI potential modiﬁer gene in PAH. Reduced CRIPAK could survivors (Greek Recurrent Myocardial Infarction Cohort) contribute to PAH by reducing endothelial viability, that had not experienced any recurrent event during that promoting small vessel loss and accelerating vascular period (p-adj ≤10-5). remodeling. Conclusions: We identiﬁed 27 loci associated with increased risk of recurrent MI. We aim to identify160 J.delPicchia independent datasets to replicate our ﬁndings, aiming to a aswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;Independent greater understanding of recurrent MI determinants. Sup- Research Grant from AMGEN. porting British Heart Foundation grant to O.G (FS/14/66/ 31293) P05.63C O. Giannakopoulou: None. S. Kanoni: None. P. Rarecopynumbervariantsinvolvingcardiacfunctionand Giardoglou: None. K. Kelaidoni: None. G. Dedoussis: development genes detected in earthquake induced None. P. Deloukas: None. takotsubo cardiomyopathy patients P05.62B K.Doudney1,C.J.Lacey2,P.G.Bridgman1,R.T.Mulder2,J.J. Patient variation in cholesterol response and the risk of Zarifeh1,B. Kimber2,M.Cadzow3, M.A. Black3, T.R. cardiovascular disease: A UK population-based cohort Merriman3, K.Lehnert4,V. Bickley1,J.F. Pearson2, V.A. study Cameron2,M. A.Kennedy2 R. K.Akyea,B. Iyen, N.Qureshi,J. Kai,S. Weng 1Canterbury District Health Board, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2University of Otago Christchurch, Christchurch, Division of Primary Care, Nottingham, United Kingdom New Zealand, 3University of Otago Dunedin, Dunedin, New Zealand, 4University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand Introduction: Statins are recommended to prevent cardio- vascular disease (CVD). In many patients, statins do not Biological mechanisms underlying stress cardiomyopathy achieve optimal cholesterol lowering effects due to clinical (SCM, also known as Takotsubo cardiomyopathy), are and genetic factors. This large population-based cohort poorly understood. SCM can occur sporadically, often in study assessed LDL cholesterol response to statins and its association with a stressful event, or in clusters after major association with future incidence of CVD. natural disasters. Our primary study cohort consisted of 28 Material and Methods: 200,225 patients (mean age of women who suffered SCM as a result of two devastating 62.8 years; 47.5% females), with at least 2 cholesterol earthquakes that struck the city of Christchurch, New measurements and without prior CVD at baseline, were Zealand, in 2010 and 2011. Since then, a further 5 cases followed from their ﬁrst statin prescription date, in a arisingfromtheKaikoura2016eventhavealsobeenadded population-based cohort using electronic health records to the CNV analysis cohort, bringing the total case number fromtheUKClinicalPracticeResearchDatalink.Agreater to 33. To seek possible underlying genetic factors, array than 40% reduction in baseline cholesterol level within comparativegenomichybridisationwascarriedoutonthese 24 months was classiﬁed optimal statin response in line subjects.Themoststrikingﬁndingfromtheseanalyseswas with national guidelines. Cox regression models were used the observation of a high rate of rare, heterogeneous copy todeterminehazardratiosforincidentCVDeventsbetween numbervariants(CNV)ofuncertainclinicalsigniﬁcance(in optimal and non-optimal statin responders. 13/33subjects).SeveraloftheseCNVsclearlyimpactedon Results: A total of 97,377 (48.6%) of patients were genes of cardiac relevance including RBFOX1, GPC5, optimal statin responders. During the follow-up, 21,973 KCNRG, CHODL, and GPBP1L1. There is no physical incident CVD events occurred (10,310 in optimal respon- overlap between the CNVs, and the genes they impact do ders and 11,663 in non-optimal responders). The rate of not fall into a clear pathophysiological pathway. However, CVDwas18.8and16.5per1000person-lifeyearsfornon- the recognition that SCM cases display a high rate of optimal and optimal responders respectively. In optimal unusual CNV, and that SCM predisposition may therefore responders, compared with non-optimal responders, the be associated with these CNVs, offers a novel perspective hazard ratio (95% CI) for incident CVD was 0.87 (0.84 – and a new approach by which to understand this proble- 0.89; p<0.0001). The association was not confounded by matic and enigmatic condition. family history and other CVD risk factors. K.Doudney:None.C.J.Lacey:None.P.G.Bridgman: Conclusions: Optimal response to statins within None. R.T. Mulder: None. J.J. Zarifeh: None. B. 24 months after initiation was associated with a decreased Kimber: None. M. Cadzow: None. M.A. Black: None. risk of CVD in UK general population. Further pharmaco- T.R. Merriman: None. K. Lehnert: None. V. Bickley: genetic studies may indicate reasons for non-optimal None. J.F. Pearson: None. V.A. Cameron: None. M.A. response. Kennedy: None. Funder: AMGEN Independent Research Grant R.K.Akyea:None.B.Iyen:None.N.Qureshi:None.J. P05.64D Kai: None. S. Weng: B. Research Grant (principal Should the minor genes be included in NGS panels for investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants inherited cardiac diseases?Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 161 V. Novelli1,2, D.F.Tiziano2,C. M.Russo2,F. Perella2, Brompton and Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London, F. Crea2,1,P. Zeppilli2,1,M.Genuardi2,1 United Kingdom 1Fondazione Policlinico A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy, 2Catholic Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is one of the commonest University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy causes of mortality in infants and older individuals. Many cases are a result of pathogenic variants in cardiac ion- Introduction: Genetic testing in inherited cardiac diseases channel and cardiomyopathy-related genes; however has been revolutionized by NGS technology: the NGS- numerouscasesremainunexplained.Kennedyetal.(2016) based panel approach, indeed, has enabled to test a large andGuimieretal.(2016)(bothAmJHumGenet)reported number of genes simultaneously, differently from the tra- cases of both infantile and alcohol-induced SCD caused by ditional Sanger, limited to the most prevalent and char- bi-allelic variants in the PPA2 gene, which encodes a acterized genes. Therefore, recently, so called “minor mitochondrial pyrophosphatase essential for cell phosphate genes” have been included in diagnostic NGS panels, metabolism. Here, we report further cases of infantile and causing interpretative issue, related to the high prevalence possible alcohol-induced SCD caused by compound het- of variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS), not clearly erozygosity for PPA2 variants. Family 1 involved the sud- associated to the disease. Here, we report our experience denunexplaineddeathoftwoinfantsagedlessthan1year. with expanded gene panels for genetic testing. Post-mortem revealed a structurally normal heart in both. Materials and Methods: 82 consecutive patients, Exome sequencing detected two likely pathogenic PPA2 19 suspected Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM), 29 variants in both: p.(Ser61Phe) (previously reported by Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy Guimier et al.) and p.(Arg127Leu) (previously reported by (ARVC), 12 Long QT syndrome (LQTS), 16 Brugada Kennedyetal.).Bi-parentalinheritancewasconﬁrmed,and syndrome (BrS) and 6 Idiopathic Ventricular Fibrillation wewereabletoprovidepredictivegenetictestingforathird (IVF) patientshavebeenanalyzedusing3 different custom healthy infant.Family 2 involved the SCD of a 14-year old sequencing panels, including 11 genes for HCM, 9 for whose heart showed ﬁbrosis at post-mortem. Two variants ARVC, 12 for LQTS and IVF and 4 for BrS. were detected in PPA2 by Sanger sequencing: a likely Results: 28 probands carried at least one potentially pathogenicvariant,p.(Glu172Lys)(previouslydetectedina pathogenic variant (34%). According to the ACMG guide- family where acute sensitivity to alcohol manifested as lines, the majority of the identiﬁed variants (70%) were myocardial ﬁbrosis (Kennedy et al.) and a VUS, p. VUS, while 18% were Likely Pathogenic (LP) and 12% (Thr159Met) (not previously reported). Functional studies Pathogenic (P). 30% of the VUS have been identiﬁed in of p.(Thr159Met) are on-going. These ﬁndings add to the minor genes, 8 in the LQTS/IVS and 1 in the HCM panel, previous reports of autosomal recessive SCD caused by respectively. On the other hand, no LP or P variant was pathogenic variants in PPA2, and expand the diagnostic identiﬁed in minor genes. pathways available to investigate SCD. Conclusions: These data showed that the inclusion of M. Edwards: None. S. Wilkinson: None. F. van den minor genes in the genetic screening does not signiﬁcantly Broek: None. L. Brett: None. J. Till: None. J.A. Mayr: increase the detection rate, while it is associated with an None. T. Homfray: None. D. Morris-Rosendahl: None. increase in the rate of VUS. V. Novelli: None. D.F. Tiziano: None. C.M. Russo: P05.66B None.F.Perella:None.F.Crea:None.P.Zeppilli:None. Missense variants in genes connected with cardiovascular M. Genuardi: None. diseases in supercentenarians P05.65A D.N.Nikolova1,D.Serbezov1,L. Balabanski1,M. Mihaylova1, Sudden cardiac death caused by bi-allelic variants in the V.Damyanova1,Z.Hammoudeh1,D.Nesheva1,S.Karachanak- PPA2 gene Yankova1,R.Staneva1,O.Antonova1, R.Vazharova2, S. Hadjidekova1,D.Toncheva1 M.Edwards1, S.Wilkinson1,F. vandenBroek2,L. Brett1, J.Till3,J.A. Mayr2, T.Homfray1,D.Morris-Rosendahl1 1Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Soﬁa University” St.Kliment Ohridski”,Faculty of Medicine,Department of 1Clinical Genetics & Genomics Laboratory, Royal Brompton Biology, Medical Genetics and Microbiology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria and Hareﬁeld NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University Introduction: During the last decades, mankind suffers Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 3Paediatric Cardiology, Royal unprecedented demographic changes as a result of decreased/controlled birthrates. Cardiovascular,162 J.delPicchia neurodegenerative and malignant diseases are mostly Introduction: Heart transplantation is the best therapeutic responsible for populations’ mortality. Twin studies show option for selected patients with end-stage heart failure. genetic factors play crucial role in longevity. Super- However,theimmunologicalbarrierbetweenthedonorand centenariansareindividualswhohavereached110ormore recipientstilllimitslong-termsurvival.Immunosuppressive years. The analysis of their genomes could help to clarify drugs are needed to avoid rejection, but cause an increased the role of genetic variants or reclassify others. incidenceofcancerandinfections.BesidesHLA,alsoother Materials and Methods: In publicly available database genetic factors play a role in graft rejection. We aim to of supercentenarians (Gierman HJ et al., 2014) are listed identifygeneticvariantsinthepatientandinthedonor that altogether 110,000 variants. We selected 216 genes are involved in rejection and survival after heart connected with atherosclerotic vessel changes, lipoprotein transplantation. signaling or cholesterol metabolism and analyzed the Methods: The iGeneTRAiN consortium consists of over nononsynonymous variants according to their clinical 30,000 solid organ transplant recipients and donors. We signiﬁcance (ClinVar). included 1,043 heart transplant recipients and 783 donors Results: 151 nonsynonymous variants in 216 cardiovas- from ﬁve different hospitals. We tested over 8 million high cular genesare found inthe list of supercentenarians. After quality variants for association with time to rejection, and applying ﬁltering criteria, we listed 35 variants in 21 genes time to death. We used a mixed models approach to take divided into three categories (,,Pathogenic,,,Conﬂicting relatedness and ancestry into account. interpretation of pathogenicity“, and,,Protective“). 8 var- Results: We identiﬁed nine loci that were signiﬁcantly iants are in APOB gene, followed by 3 variants in APOE associated with rejection (P<5x10-8); two in donors and gene. 16 of 35 variants have MAF<0,01%. Of them only seven in recipients. In addition, we identiﬁed one locus in rs769452 in APOE gene is absent in supercentenarians, recipients that was associated with survival. while seven others are absent in control group. Conclusion: We identiﬁed a total of ten loci that are Conclusion: We particularly focus on variants with associated with rejection and survival. We aim to increase unknownsigniﬁcanceinsupercentenarians.On thebasisof our sample of heart transplant donors and recipients in the our results we could speculate the pathogenic nature of near future. In addition, we will conduct cross-organ meta- rs769452 and possible protective role of the other seven analyses including lung, liver, and kidney transplants, variantsinthisstudy.Atthemomentweareundertaking“in maximizing statistical power to identify novel variants. silico” modeling in attempt to reclassify those as “patho- We ultimately aim to translate genetic data into clinical genic”or“benign”.Thusitwouldbeeasiertomakeclinical applications such as more optimal genomic compatibility decisions in the future. matching of donor-recipient pairs and immune suppression D.N. Nikolova: None. D. Serbezov: None. L. Bala- therapy dosing. banski: None. M. Mihaylova: None. V. Damyanova: J. van Setten: None. B. Chang: None. N. de Jonge: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. D. Nesheva: None. S. None. M.V. Holmes: None. C.C. Baan: None. O.C. Karachanak-Yankova: None. R. Staneva: None. O. Manintveld: None. A.M.A. Peeters: None. F. Domin- Antonova: None. R. Vazharova: None. S. Hadjidekova: guez: None. K.K. Khush: None. P. Garcia-Pavia: None. None. D. Toncheva: None. J.W.Rossano:None.R.A.deWeger:None.J.H.Moore: None. B. Keating: None. F.W. Asselbergs: None. P05.67C Trans-ethnic genome-wide association studies on time to P05.68D rejection and death in heart transplant donors and Whole exome sequencing in 186 sporadic transposition of recipients the great arteries cases reveals complex genetic etiology J.van Setten1, B.Chang2,N.deJonge1,M.V. Holmes2,C.C. W.CHEN, X. Liu,Y. Fu,Z. Zhou Baan3,O.C. Manintveld3,A. M.A. Peeters3,F. Dominguez4, K. K.Khush5,P. Garcia-Pavia4,J.W.Rossano2,R.A.de Fuwai Hospital Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Weger1,J.H.Moore2,B. Keating2,F. W.Asselbergs1 &Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, Introduction:Transpositionofthegreatarteries(TGA)isa 2University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, rare life-threatening congenital heart disease with little 3Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Puerta de Hierro known etiology. Some family-based genetic variants are University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 5Stanford University, seldom observed in sporadic TGA subjects, indicating a Stanford, CA, United States distinct genetic etiology in sporadic TGA. We sought toAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 163 explore the genetic etiology of sporadic TGA at different National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 8Division of levels including mutations, genes and pathways. Endocrine and Metabolism, Tri-Service General Hospital, Materials and Methods: 186 sporadic TGA cases and Taipei, Taiwan, 9Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, 182 obesity patients without cardiac disease phenotype NationalDefenseMedicalCenter,Taipei,Taiwan,10Graduate were submitted to whole exome sequencing. Variants Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, National calling and ﬁltering were performed according to GATK Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 11Department of Internal best practice pipeline. Single-variant association tests and Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, gene-based burden testing were performed to identify rare, Taiwan, 12Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, disruptivemutations.Wealsoaggregatedmutationsin4434 Taipei, Taiwan, 13Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Falk gene sets and performed gene-set based burden tests. CardiovascularResearchBuilding,StanfordUniversitySchool Results: Few single mutations and genes could achieve of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 14Los Angeles exome-wide signiﬁcance after multiple testing corrections. BiomedicalResearchInstitute,Harbor-UCLAMedicalCenter, However, 45 gene sets were found statistically signiﬁcant Torrance, CA, United States by gene-set based burden tests (adjust P-value <0.05). These gene sets were mainly involved in embryonic organ Introduction: Chromosome 12q23-q24 has been linked to development, cilium organization and cellular response to triglyceride levels by linkage studies, and it contains the stimulus,whichisconsistentwithourcurrentunderstanding Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) gene. However, asso- about the genetic basis underlying CHD. For example, ciation between IGF1 and triglyceride levels was not well there was a signiﬁcant enrichment of rare disruptive investigated and remained unclear. mutationsinTGA(5.95mutationsperindividual)compared MaterialsandMethods:Weinvestigatedtheassociation to control cohort (4.88 mutations per individual) in the between IGF1 and triglyceride levels by using two gene set GO_CILIUM_ORGANIZATION (adjust P-value- independent samples collected in Taiwan: the ﬁrst sample =4.36E-06). consists of 954 siblings in 397 families from the Stanford Conclusions: Our study revealed a polygenic burden of Asian Paciﬁc Program in Hypertension and Insulin rare disruptive mutations in sporadic TGA, implying an Resistance (SAPPHIRe); the second sample consists of extensive and complex genetic etiology underlying TGA. 13,193 unrelated subjects from theTaiwanbiobank(TWB) The ﬁndings of this study may help stratify patients for project. Five tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (tag- guiding the therapeutic management of their clinical care. SNPs) within IGF1 were analyzed. W. Chen: None. X. Liu: None. Y. Fu: None. Z. Results:First,basedontheSAPPHIResample,wefound Zhou: None. that one IGF1 tag-SNP was associated with triglyceride levels (β = -0.049, p = 0.0043). Then, subset analyses in P05.69A the TWB sample showed that this association appeared in IGF1 gene is associated with triglyceride levels in subjects subjects with a family history (FH) of hypertension (β = with family history of hypertension from the SAPPHIRe -0.045, p = 0.0000034), but not in subjects without an FH and TWB projects (p = 0.61). A re-examination of the SAPPHIRe sample conﬁrmedthatthisassociationappearedinsubjectswithan W.Wang1,2,Y.Chiu2,R.Chung2,C.Hwu3,4,I.Lee5,6,7,C.Lee8,9, FH of hypertension (β = -0.068, p = 0.0025), but not in Y.Chang10,11,12,K.Hung2,T.Quertermous13,Y.I.Chen14,C.A. subjects without an FH (p = 0.32). Hsiung2 Conclusions: The successful replication in two indepen- dent samples indicated that IGF1 is associated with 1The Ph.D. Program for Translational Medicine, College of triglyceride levels in subjects with an FH of hypertension Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, in Taiwan. Taipei, Taiwan, 2Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, This study was supported by the National Health Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes (PH-104-PP03, PH-105-PP03, PH-106- Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan, 3Section of PP03),theTaipeiMedicalUniversity(TMU101-AE1-B67), Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, and the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST 106- Taipei Veterans General Hospita, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Faculty of 2314-B-038-052-MY3) in Taiwan. Medicine, National Yang-Ming University School of medicin, W. Wang: None. Y. Chiu: None. R. Chung: None. C. Taipei, Taiwan, 5Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hwu:None.I.Lee:None.C.Lee:None.Y.Chang:None. Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung Veterans General K. Hung: None. T. Quertermous: None. Y.I. Chen: Hospital,Taichung,Taiwan,6SchoolofMedicine,ChungShan None. C.A. Hsiung: None. Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 7School of Medicine,164 J.delPicchia P05.70B 1Center for Vascular Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Exomesequencingindisclosingcausesofunexpecteddeath Cliniques universitaires Saint Luc, University of Louvain, in child - single genetic center experience Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Pediatric Hemato- oncology, Cliniques universitaires Saint Luc, University of M.Mijovic1,A.Miletic1,B.Dimitrijevic1,B.Peterlin2,A.Maver2, Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Dermatology Department, CHU J.RumlStojanovic1, M.Zivanovic1, G.Cuturilo1,3 Caen, University Caen Normandie, Caen, France, 4Department of Vascular Medicine, Amiens university 1University Children's Hospital, Department of Medical Hospital, Amiens, France, 5Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinical Institute of Medical Medical Centre - University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, Genetics, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, 6Department of Neuroradiology, Lariboisière Hospital, Paris, Slovenia, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, France, 7Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Montpellier, Belgrade, Serbia Montpellier, France, 8Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, University of Louvain, Introduction: In the period of last two years in genetic Brussels,Belgium,9DivisionofPediatricRadiology,Cliniques outpatientclinicinSerbiawehadsixfamilieswithafamily universitaires Saint Luc, University of Louvain, Brussels, history of unexpected death of a child. Belgium, 10Division of Interventional Radiology, Cliniques Methods: We performed exome sequencing for all. universitaires Saint-Luc, University of Louvain, Brussels, Results:Intwocases,therewaspolylethalitywithsudden Belgium, 11Institut of Statistics, Biostatistics, and Actuarial cardiovasculardeathinapreviouslyhealthychildandother Sciences, University of Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, family members. We found causativeRYR2 genevariantin 12Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, University of ﬁrst and two variants of unknown signiﬁcance in KCNA5 Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 13Institut Roi Albert II, and FBN1 gene in second family. Pathogenic variant in Department of Medical Oncology, Cliniques universitaires ABCD1 gene (X-linked adrenoleucodystrophy) explains Saint Luc, University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium fulminant and unexpected deathof boy during gastrointest- inal infection. MECP2 gene duplication (associated with Introduction: Venous malformations (VMs) are caused by infection susceptibility) was discovered by NGS in the boy activating, somatic TIE2 or PIK3CA mutations, activating with intellectual disabilities and epilepsy who died AKTandmTOR.Inapilotstudy,wedemonstratedefﬁcacy unexpectedly from pneumonia. The girl with undiagnosed ofsirolimusasapersonalisedtherapy.Wesubsequentlyset metabolicdiseasewithoutsignsofrespiratoryfailurediedin up a trial to assess the efﬁcacy and safety of sirolimus in a sleep;inhersiblingwefoundthepathogenicvariantsinthe larger cohort of patients (Vascular Anomaly - Sirolimus - SURF1 gene for COX IV deﬁciency. The boy with Europe, VASE). dysmorphic features, epilepsy and sudden death was Methods: VASE is a prospective, multicentric European diagnosed with hemizigot variant in the HUWE1 gene. phase III cross over clinical trial. 250 patients with various Conclusion: Many genetic diseases, not only cardiovas- vascularmalformationsrefractorytostandardtreatmentsare cular, increase risk for unexpected death during childhood. enrolled. Evaluation includes clinical history and examina- Early genetic referral, genomic testing and genetic counse- tion, QOL questionnaire, coagulation analysis, and MRI lig are crucial. beforeandafteroneyearoftreatment.Genotypingoftissue M. Mijovic: None. A. Miletic: None. B. Dimitrijevic: biopsies is performed. None. B. Peterlin: None. A. Maver: None. J. Ruml Results: During 2016-17, 44 patients (median age 44y; Stojanovic: None. M. Zivanovic: None. G. 2y-71y), including 31 VMs, 4 lymphatic malformations, 5 Cuturilo: None. capillary-venous malformations, and 4 syndromic patients, were enrolled. Sirolimus was well tolerated with mostly P05.71C mild and easily manageable side effects. There was no Precision therapy for venous malformations: efﬁcacy and completeresponse,but89%ofpatients(n=39)presenteda safety of sirolimus in vascular malformations, preliminary rapid clinical improvement with reduction of pain and/or results of a phase III clinical trial VASE coagulation abnormalities, decrease in size of lesions, and/ or improvement in quality of life (QOL). Currently, 29 L. Boon1,J.Hammer1,D.Steven1,A. VanDamme2, patients have been treated with sirolimus for ≥12 months A. Dompmartin3, M.Sevestre4,J. Rössler5,A. Bisdorff6, and 8 for ≥6 months. The 1-year radiological evaluation I.Quere7,S.Schmitz8,P.Clapuyt9,F.Hammer10,C.Legrand11, demonstrated VM reduction ≥10% in 45% of 21 evaluable M.Vikkula12, E.Seront13 patients. Conclusion: Sirolimus showed impressive efﬁcacy in slow-ﬂow vascular malformations with activation of theAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 165 PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway due to somatic mutations. It cardiac risk genes in a similar pattern and at a comparable reduced pain and improved functional restraint in the frequency. This study was supported by a grant from the majority of patients. This underscores the results of our Ministry Education and Science, Republic of Kazakhstan earlier pilot study on 20 VMs. (AP05134683). L.Boon:None.J.Hammer:None.D.Steven:None.A. A.R.Akilzhanova:None.C.Guelly:None.Z.Abilova: VanDamme:None.A.Dompmartin:None.M.Sevestre: None. S. Rakhimova: None. A. Akhmetova: None. U. None. J. Rössler: None. A. Bisdorff: None. I. Quere: Kairov: None. O. Nuralinov: None. G. Rashbayeva: None. S. Schmitz: None. P. Clapuyt: None. F. Hammer: None. S. Trajanoski: None. Z. Zhumadilov: None. M. None. C. Legrand: None. M. Vikkula: None. E. Bekbossynova: None. Seront: None. P05.73A P05.72D Deletion of a small fragment of chromosome 7q11.23 Mutation spectrum in a Kazakhstani cohort with containingELNgenemayberesponsibleforsupravalvular ventricular tachycardia: targeted sequencing study aortic stenosis with pulmonary stenosis and no other features of Williams syndrome A. R.Akilzhanova1,C. Guelly2,Z. Abilova1,S.Rakhimova1, A. Akhmetova1,U.Kairov1,O.Nuralinov3, G.Rashbayeva3, W.Bonda1, K.Bernatowicz2,A. Kashyap2,M. Kossowski1, S. Trajanoski2, Z.Zhumadilov1,M.Bekbossynova3 E. Studniak1,M.Ryłów1, C.Wleczyk1,M.Bryśkiewicz1, J.Pietrzak1,S. Zajączek2 1Center for life sciences, National Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev University, Astana, Kazakhstan, 2Center of 1Cytogenetic Unit, Department of Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical Research, MedicalUniversity ofGraz, Graz, Austria, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 3National Scientiﬁc Cardiac Surgery Center, Astana, 2DepartmentofGeneticsandPathology,PomeranianMedical Kazakhstan University, Szczecin, Poland Introduction: Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is a common Williams syndrome (Williams Beuren syndrome, MIM symptomincardiacdisordersofdifferent etiology.Aim:to 194050)isamultisystemdisorderwithvariablephenotypic investigate genetic basis of VT in patients with cardio- expression, caused by microdeletions of chromosomal myopathy in Kazakhstan using targeted NGS (design of region 7q11.23. Cardinal features of the syndrome are: new HaloPlex gene panel). supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS), mental retardation, Material and Methods: We enrolled 92 patients, and distinctive facial features, commonly known as ‘elﬁn diagnosedwitheithercoronaryheartdisease(CHD),dilated facies’.Sizeofthedeletionmayvary,mostlybetween1.5to cardiomyopathy (DCM) or idiopathic ventricular tachycar- 1.8 Mbp. Vast majority of cases contains deletion of mul- dia (iVT) in a study to evaluate the genetic proﬁle and tiple genes (>25) along with the ELN gene. variants in known 96 cardiac risk genes by targeted next Wereporta12montholdboywithcongenitalSVASand generation sequencing (NGS). pulmonarystenosis.Nodysmorphicfeatureswereobserved Results: By sequencing 92 clinically well diagnosed during several hospitalizations and visits in the genetic patients we observed a total of 168 mutations (61 distinct) clinics. Genitourinary, skeletal, skin and endocrine anoma- listed in the Human Genome Mutation Database (HGMD) lies were excluded, except of subclinical hypothyroidism. and another 256 rare/unique variants with elevated Growth parameters are normal. It is too early to determine pathogenic potential. The majority of CHD patients carried neurological development in this patient, however no known mutations and rare variants with high pathogenetic psychomotor retardation was diagnosed so far. potential in the same genes and at a comparable frequency MLPA testing for 7q11.23 region revealed a deletion in asobservedforDCMandiVTpatients.Themostabundant the exon 33 of ELN gene. Microarray (aCGH) analysis mutationsobservedfortheCHDgrouplocatetoMYBPC3, showeddeletionofapproximately68kbpcontainingpartof DMD, LAMA2, MYH6 and GAA. Mutations in the ELN gene and LIMK1 gene, that is adjacent to ELN. PRKAG2genewereoverrepresentedintheCHDsubgroup, Isolated SVAS is described as a separate nosological correlating to the prominent role of disturbed energy entity in OMIM (#185500). Part of the patients with this metabolism in CHD development and progression. diagnosiscarryaheterozygouspointmutation,orintragenic Conclusions: Our study indicates that individuals deletions in ELN gene. presenting with VT secondary to CHD, DCM or of 68kbdeletion inthe7q11.23ismuchsmallerthanallthe idiopathic etiology carry multiple rare mutations and other deletions reported in ISCA and Decipher database. potentially pathogenetic sequence variants in classical This report support the hypothesis that deletion in the166 J.delPicchia Williams syndrome region limited to ELN gene may cause consultant and pending grants as well as grants already nonsyndromic SVAS and pulmonary stenosis. received); Signiﬁcant; Zeclinics. W. Bonda: None. K. Bernatowicz: None. A. Kashyap: None. M. Kossowski: None. E. Studniak: None. M. Ryłów:None.C.Wleczyk:None.M.Bryśkiewicz: None. P06 Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders J. Pietrzak: None. S. Zajączek: None. P06.01A P05.74B Variants of human peptide transporter 2 (PEPT2) and ZECARDIO: A zebraﬁsh genetic screening platform for chronic kidney disease in acute intermittent porphyria cardiovascular disease association studies Spanish carriers V. DiDonato,S. Dyballa, J.Terriente M.Barreda-Sanchez1,J.Buendía2,C.Carazo-Díaz3, G.Glover4,5,6,M.C. Martínez-Romero4,5,1,6,M.J. Ballesta- ZeClinics, Barcelona, Spain Martínez7,1,5,6,V. López-González7,5,6,M. J.Sánchez-Soler7,5,1, L. Rodriguez7,R. Gil-Ferrer7,E. Guillén-Navarro7,5,6 Cardiovascular disease represents a heavy burden for societies and was responsible of the premature death of 17 1Universidad Católica de Murcia (UCAM), Murcia, Spain, million peopleworldwidein2015.Dilatedcardiomyopathy 2Servicio de Neurología. Hospital Comarcal del Noroeste, (DCM) is a common form of heart disease with high mor- Caravaca, Spain, 3Grupo Applied Statistical Methods in tality. It affects 1 in 250 people, principally young adults Medical Research. Universidad Católica de Murcia (UCAM), andchildren.DCMischaracterizedbyventriculardilatation Murcia, Spain, 4Centro de Bioquímica y Genética Clínica. andimpairedcardiacfunction,duetoadramaticdecreasein HospitalClínicoUniversitarioVirgendelaArrixaca,Murcia, ejection fraction. DCM is also associated with increased Spain, 5IMIB- Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 6CIBERER-ISCIII, risks for cardiac arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death. To Madrid, Spain, 7Sección Genética Médica. Servicio de achieve better patient stratiﬁcation and identify new drug- Pediatría. Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la gable targets, which might allow ﬁnding novel therapies, it Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain is crucial to identify genes associated to DCM progression. Different NGS studies have identiﬁed genetic variants with Introduction:Acuteintermittentporphyria(AIP)isahaem apossibleassociationtoDCM.However,theuseofanimal biosynthesis disorder, leading to an overproduction of δ- models is required to validate phenotypically their real aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG). impact in DCM progression. The genetic and physiologic AIPischaracterizedbyacuteneurovisceralattacks.Chronic homology between humans and zebraﬁsh allows perform- kidney disease (CKD) is a long-term complication, corre- ing functional genomic studies with this model organism. lated withthe frequency of attacks. Urinary ALA and PBG Hereby, we have developed an experimental platform that seem to promote renal tubular toxicity. Variants of human combines fast gene inactivation and robust cardiovascular peptidetransporter2(PEPT2),whichmediatesreabsorption phenotypinginzebraﬁsh:ZeCardio.ZeCardiocombinesthe ofALAinrenaltubularcells,predictCKDinAIP.Ouraim advantages of CRISPR/Cas9 for generating F0 mutant lar- was to analyse PEPT2 genotype and the onset of CKD in vae with a high mutagenesis efﬁciency rate (CRISPANTS) Spanish AIP carriers. and a high-throughput imaging system allowing morpho- MaterialsandMethods:PEPT2allelesweredetermined logical and functional analysis of cardiovascular pheno- by sequencing and haplotype analysis of two tag SNPs in types.Suchplatformrepresentsafastandreliablescreening exons13and15.UrinaryPBGandALAweremeasuredby method for validating novel DCM associated genes/ther- chromatography and spectrophotometry. Glomerular ﬁltra- apeutic targets and, eventually, for discovering novel tion rate was estimated with CKD-EPI Creatinine Equation therapies to treat this disease. This project has received (eGFR). fundingfromtheEuropeanUnion’sHorizon2020research Results: 50 AIP carriers, 52% symptomatic, were and innovation programme under grant agreement No included. Multiple lineal regression analysis showed no 755988. association between levels of urinary ALA and PBG and V. Di Donato: A. Employment (full or part-time); PEPT2 genotype. Carriers of at least one PEPT2*2 allele Signiﬁcant; ZeClinics. S. Dyballa: A. Employment (full showed higher eGFR (μ: 92,08 ml/min per 1.73 m2; or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ZeClinics. J. Terriente: A. SE:5.22)comparedwithPEPT2*1/*1carriers(μ:78.37ml/ Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ZeClinics. B. min per 1.73 m2; SE: 5.54), but with moderate statistical Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or evidence (p=0.07). 28.57% of PEPT2*1/*1 carriers, 16.67%of*1/*2carriersand0%of*2/*2carrierspresentedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 167 eGFR<60 (p=0.21). The occurrence of acute attacks was P06.03C associatedwithlowereGFRandhigherprevalenceofCKD 26 novel homogentisate 1,2, dioxygenase (HGD) gene (p<0.01). variants, in vitro splicing analysis and genotype-phenotype Conclusions: In our population, PEPT2 genotyping may correlations in the largest cohort of patients with be a useful tool to predict risk to CKD although the alkaptonuria (AKU) occurrence of acute attacks seems to be a more powerful predictor. M.Sekelska1,J. Kralovicova2,I.Sevcikova2,A.Soltysova1, M. Barreda-Sanchez: None. J. Buendía: None. C. B. Olsson3,D.B.Asher4,5,6, D.E.V. Pires5,6,L. Ranganath7, Carazo-Díaz: None. G. Glover: None. M.C. Martínez- A. Zatkova1 Romero:None.M.J.Ballesta-Martínez:None.V.López- González: None. M.J. Sánchez-Soler: None. L. Rodri- 1Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, guez: None. R. Gil-Ferrer: None. E. Guillén- Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Center of Biosciences, Institute of Navarro: None. Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Science, Bratislava,Slovakia, 3Clinical Development, Swedish P06.02B Orphan Biovitrum AB, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Aberrant regulation of the GSK-3β/NRF2 axis unveils a Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Institute, novel therapy for adrenoleukodystrophy University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 5Department of Biochemistry, Cambridge University, Cambridge, United A. Pujol,P. Ranea-Robles, N.Launay, M.Ruiz, S.Fourcade Kingdom,6InstitutoRenéRachou,FIOCRUZ,BeloHorizonte, Mg, Brazil, 7Department of Clinical Biochemistry and IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain Metabolism, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom NRF2,encodedbyNFE2L2gene,isthemasterregulatorof endogenous antioxidant responses. Oxidative damage is a We present the systematic analysis of the largest cohort of shared and early-appearing feature in X-linked adrenoleu- patients with the rare metabolic disorder alkaptonuria kodystrophy (X-ALD) patients and the corresponding (AKU). In 166 patients, including those from the SONIA2 mouse model (Abcd1- mouse). X-ALD is a rare neurome- (Suitability of Nitisinone in Alkaptonuria 2) and SOFIA tabolic disease caused by the loss of function of the per- (Subclinical Ochronotic Features In Alkaptonuria) studies, oxisomaltransporterABCD1.Inmice,Abcd1lossresultsin we identiﬁed 22 novel homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase aphenotypesimilartoadrenomyeloneuropathy(AMN),the (HGD) gene variants by DNA sequencing, and four novel most common X-ALD phenotype. Here, we identify an larger genomic deletions within HGD gene by MLPA impaired NRF2 antioxidant response caused by aberrant (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation). In activity of GSK-3β. We ﬁnd that GSK-3β inhibitors can addition, we analyzed by minigene reporter assay seven signiﬁcantly reactivate the blunted NRF2 response in novel or previously reported HGD variants predicted to patients’ ﬁbroblasts. In the mouse models (Abcd1- and affect splicing. Two of them were shown to cause exon Abcd1-/Abcd2-/- mice), oral administration of dimethyl skipping or cryptic splice-site activation. Thus, using DNA fumarate(DMF/BG12/Tecﬁdera),anFDA-approvedNRF2 sequencing, MLPA and in vitro splicing analysis we were activator, normalized i) mitochondrial depletion, ii) bioe- abletoidentifyAKU-causingmutationin328of332AKU nergeticfailure,iii)oxidativedamageandiv)inﬂammation, chromosomes (98.8%). However, in two patients, only one highlighting an intricate cross-talk governing energetic and HGDmutationwasfound,andinonecase,noHGDvariant redox homeostasis in X-ALD. Strikingly, DMF halted hasbeenidentiﬁed.Nopatient’scDNAisavailableinorder axonal degeneration and locomotor disability. Our results to verify whether some deep intronic HGD variants affect- indicate that therapies activating NRF2 hold therapeutic ing correct exon splicing represent an alternative mutation potential for X-ALD and other axonopathies with impaired mechanism in these cases. For the ﬁrst time in AKU, we GSK-3β/NRF2 axis. Supported by grants from the Spanish performed a genotype-phenotype correlation study for the Institute for Health Carlos III and ‘Fondo Europeo de four most frequent HGD mutations (G161R, M368V, DesarrolloRegional(FEDER),UnionEuropea,unamanera A122V,ivs1-1G>A),identiﬁedin139patientsparticipating de hacer Europa’ [PFIS FI12/00457] to P.R-R., FIS PI14/ in the SONIA2 study. We found no correlation of either 00410 to A.P., FIS PI15/00857 to S.F. urine excretion or serum HGA concentrations to a speciﬁc A. Pujol: None. P. Ranea-Robles: None. N. Launay: HGD genotype. Most probably, these parameters are not None. M. Ruiz: None. S. Fourcade: None. suitable for this kind of analysis, since they are affected by externalfactors,suchasrenalfunctionanddietaryintakeof tyrosine. (7FP- DevelopAKUre 304985)168 J.delPicchia M. Sekelska: None. J. Kralovicova: None. I. Sevci- P06.05A kova: None. A. Soltysova: None. B. Olsson: None. D.B. The ﬁrst manifesting case of Barth syndrome in a Asher: None. D.E.V. Pires: None. L. Ranganath: None. heterozygous female patient with normal karyotype A. Zatkova: None. M.B. Ivanova1,D.M.Avdjieva-Tzavella2,A. P. Todorova3, P06.04D H.M.H. M.Kathom2,I.T. Yordanova3, T.P. Todorov4, I.O. Farber disease (acid ceramidase deﬁciency): time to Litvinenko5, A.T. Dasheva-Dimitrova6,R. T. Tincheva2 diagnosis is inﬂuenced by disease severity, indicating that more slowly progressive disease may be underdiagnosed 1National Genetic Laboratory, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Soﬁa and Department of M.Rhee1,A. Solyom2 Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Soﬁa University “St. Kl. Ohridski”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 1Enzyvant, Boston, MA, United States, 2Enzyvant, Basel, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatric Switzerland Hospital, Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University and Introduction: Farber disease is an ultra-rare autosomal Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Soﬁa, recessive lysosomal storage disease characterized by deﬁ- Bulgaria,4MedicalUniversityandGeneticMedico-Diagnostic ciencyoftheenzymeacidceramidase,causedbymutations Laboratory “Genica”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 5Department of in the ASAH1 gene. Resulting accumulation of the pro- Neurology, University Pediatric Hospital, Medical University, inﬂammatory and pro-apoptotic sphingolipid ceramide Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 6Department of Pediatric Cardiology, causestypicalsymptomswithabroadspectrumofseverity. National Heart Hospital, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Materials and Methods: A review of 96 case studies of Farber patients revealed 64 patient cases where time to Introduction: Barth syndrome (BTHS) is an X-linked diagnosis could be estimated. recessive disease caused by mutations in tafazzin gene Results:Diagnosisisgenerallybasedonthetriadof(1) (TAZ) which lead to cardiolipin deﬁciency and mitochon- hoarse or weak voice, (2) joint inﬂammation and drial dysfunction. Male patients have variable clinical contractures, and (3) subcutaneous nodules. Patients with ﬁndings - cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, prepubertal a more severe, rapidly progressive, phenotype often short stature, neutropenia, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. manifest with the triad of symptoms in early infancy, Female carriers are usually asymptomatic. and also exhibit signs of central nervous system (CNS) Materials and Methods: We report male and female and respiratory involvement. Patients with more moder- siblingswithleftventricularnoncompactionandhypotonia. atelyprogressivephenotypesoftenpresentwithoneofthe At age of three months, female was found to have mild classic symptoms during early childhood and develop the aorticvalvestenosiswithincreasedtrabeculationsoftheleft full triad over months to years. The average and median ventricle. At age 9 years she had noted a mild persistent times to diagnosis (TTD) for severe phenotype patients muscle weakness and easy fatigability. The patient had a was signiﬁcantly shorter than the average and median normal female karyotype. No biochemical abnormalities. TTDs for moderate phenotype patients. Generally, the HeryoungerbrothershowedaseverephenotypeofBTHS emergence of all three typical symptoms led to the - dilated cardiomyopathy with noncompaction of the left suspicion of Farber disease and genetic and/or enzyme ventricle and endocardial ﬁbroelastosis, cyclic neutropenia, activity testing. muscleweakness.Metabolictestingshowedelevatedlevels Conclusions:TheanalysisindicatesthatTTDislongerin ofurine3-methylgultaconicacidand3-methylglutaricacid. those patients with more moderate and attenuated pheno- Results: The molecular genetic testing showed that both types, potentially due to the low index of suspicion in siblings carry a novel mutation: c.253insC, patients who may have not yet developed all three typical p. (Arg85Profs*54) in exon 3 of the TAZ gene. The symptoms, and points to the need for additional education heterozygousfemalepatientismanifestingcarrierwhilethe onthebroadphenotypespectrumandindicationsfortesting severely affected male proband was hemizygous for the X- of acid ceramidase deﬁciency. linked TAZ gene mutation. M.Rhee:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Conclusions: We identiﬁed a novel TAZ gene insertion Enzyvant. A. Solyom: A. Employment (full or part-time); thatisassociatedwithaclassicalphenotypeofBTHSinthe Signiﬁcant; Enzyvant. male sibling and a milder clinical presentation in his sister. This is the ﬁrst report of a manifesting female carrier of BTHS.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 169 M.B. Ivanova: None. D.M. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. Mitochondrialacyl-CoA dehydrogenase family member 9 A.P. Todorova: None. H.M. H. M. Kathom: None. I.T. (ACAD9)isanessentialassemblyfactorofmitochondrial Yordanova:None.T.P.Todorov:None.I.O.Litvinenko: respiratory chain complex I. The clinical presentation of None. A.T. Dasheva-Dimitrova: None. R.T. ACAD9 deﬁciency is dominated by cardiomyopathy. Tincheva: None. Other features are lactic acidosis, myopathy and devel- opmentaldelay.Herewedescribethegenetic,clinicaland P06.06B biochemical ﬁndings in a cohort of 70 patients, of whom Clinical, biochemical and genetic spectrum of 70 patients 29 previously unpublished. Among the disease-causing with ACAD9 deﬁciency: is riboﬂavin supplementation biallelic ACAD9 variants identiﬁed, 34 were known and effective? 18 previously unreported variants. No patients harbored biallelic loss of function mutations, indicating that this E. Mastantuono1,2,B. Repp1,C.L. Alston3,M.Schiff4, T.B. combinationisunlikelytobecompatiblewithlife.Forthe Haack1,2,A.Rötig5,A.Ardissone6,A.Lombes7,C.B.Catarino8, causal pathogenic variants distributed across the gene, no D.Diodato9,G.Schottmann10,J.Poulton11,A.Burlina12, obvious genotype-phenotype correlation was observed. A. Jonckheere13,A. Munnich5,D.Ghezzi6, D.Rokicki14, The majority of the patients presented in the ﬁrst year of D.Wellesley15,D.Martinelli16,E. Lamantea6,E. Ostergaard17, life. For this subgroup the survival was poor (50% not E. Pronicka14,G.Pierre18,H.J.Smeets19,I. Scurr20,I.F.De survivingtheﬁrsttwoyears)comparingtopatientswitha Coo21,I. Moroni6,J. Smet22, J.A. Mayr23, L.De Meirleir24, later presentation (more than 90% surviving 10 years). M.Schuelke10,M. Zeviani25,R. McFarland3,S. Seneca26, The most common clinical ﬁndings were cardiomyopathy T. Klopstock8,T. Meitinger2,1,T. M.Strom1,2, U.Herberg27, (85%),muscularweakness(75%)andexerciseintolerance W.Sperl23,M.Nassogne28,H.Ling29,F.Fang29,P.Freisinger30, (72%).Interestingly,severeintellectualdeﬁcitswereonly R. VanCoster31,R. W.Taylor3,J. Häberle32, J.Vockley33, reported in one patient and severe developmental delays H.Prokisch2, S.Wortmann1,23,2 in just four patients. The majority of the patients (70%) were able to perform normal daily-life activities. 1IHG, Helmholtz Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 2IHG, TUM, Remarkably, our results show that riboﬂavin treatment Munich,Germany,3WellcomeTrustCentre,Newcastle,United improves complex I activity for most of patient-derived Kingdom,4INSERM,Uni.Diderot,Paris,France,5UMR1163, ﬁbroblasts tested. This effect was also reported for the Uni. Descartes, Paris, France, 6Istituto Neurologico Besta, majority of the treated patients and is mirrored in the Milan, Italy, 7INSERM, Inst. Cochin, Paris, France, 8Neurol. survival data. In the patient group with disease-onset Dept., Friedrich-Baur-Inst., Munich, Germany, 9Dept. below one year of age, a statistically-signiﬁcant better Neurogen., Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 10NCRC, Charité, survival for patients treated with riboﬂavin was observed. Berlin,Germany,11NufﬁeldRepr.Health,OxfordUni.,Oxford, E. Mastantuono: None. B. Repp: None. C.L. Alston: United Kingdom, 12Inher. Met., Padova Uni., Padova, Italy, None. M. Schiff: None. T.B. Haack: None. A. Rötig: 13Ped. Dept., Antwerp Uni., Antwerp, Belgium, 14Med. Genet. None. A. Ardissone: None. A. Lombes: None. C.B. Dept., Children's Memorial Health Instit., Warsaw, Poland, Catarino: None. D. Diodato: None. G. Schottmann: 15Wessex Clin. Genet., Princ. Anne Hosp., Southampton, None. J. Poulton: None. A. Burlina: None. A. Jonc- United Kingdom, 16Genet. Div., Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, kheere: None. A. Munnich: None. D. Ghezzi: None. D. 17Clin. Genet., Copenhagen Uni., Copenaghen, Denmark, Rokicki: None. D. Wellesley: None. D. Martinelli: None. 18Metab.Dept.,BristolRoyal,Bristol,UnitedKingdom,19Clin. E. Lamantea: None. E. Ostergaard: None. E. Pronicka: Genet.Dept.,MaastrichtUni.,Maastricht,Netherlands,20Clin. None. G. Pierre: None. H.J. Smeets: None. I. Scurr: Genet. Dept., St Michael's Hosp., Bristol, United Kingdom, None. I.F. De Coo: None. I. Moroni: None. J. Smet: 21Neur. Dept, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 22Ped. None. J.A. Mayr: None. L. De Meirleir: None. M. Neurol., Ghent Uni., De Pintelaan, Belgium, 23Ped. Dept., Schuelke:None.M.Zeviani:None.R.McFarland:None. SALK+PMU, Salzburg, Austria, 24Repr. and Genet., Vrije S. Seneca: None. T. Klopstock: None. T. Meitinger: Uni., Brussel, Belgium, 25MRC, Cambridge, United Kingdom, None. T.M. Strom: None. U. Herberg: None. W. Sperl: 26Med. Genet., Vrije Univ., Brussel, Belgium, 27Ped. Cardiol. None. M. Nassogne: None. H. Ling: None. F. Fang: Dept., Uni. of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 28Univ. Catholique de None. P. Freisinger: None. R. Van Coster: None. R.W. Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 29Beijing Hosp., Bejiing, China, Taylor: None. J. Häberle: None. J. Vockley: None. H. 30Ped. Dept, Reutlingen Hosp., Reutlingen, Germany, 31Ped. Prokisch: None. S. Wortmann: None. Neurol., Ghent Univ., De Pintelaan, Belgium, 32Metab. Div., Children'Hosp.,Zurich,Switzerland,33Ped. Dept.,Pittsburgh Uni., Pittsburgh, PA, United States170 J.delPicchia P06.07C M.S. Balashova1,2,I.G.Tuluzanovskaya1, M.I.Filimonov1, The Beginning of the Neonatal Screening for Congenital N.A. Zhuchenko1,O.V. Solov'eva1,O.S. Glotov3,4,5, A.S. AdrenalHyperplasiainLithuania:Cut-offLimitsBasedon Glotov3,4,5,M.A. Fedyakov5,3, I.V.Polyakova3,5,A.M. 27175 Infants Sarana3,5,S. G.Shcherbak3,5, T.E. Ivashchenko6,Y.A. Barbitov3,O.V.Romanova5,T. M.Ignatova1,A. Y. Asanov1 M.Petkeviciene1,K. Sablauskas2,R. Marcinkute2, M.Smirnova1,J. Songailiene1,A. Utkus1 1Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Center of Genetics and Reproductive 1Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Medicine «Genetico», Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Saint Lithuania, 2Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russian Lithuania Federation, 4D.O.Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductology, Saint Petersburg, Russian Introduction: Setting population speciﬁc cut-off levels is Federation, 5City Hospital №40, Saint Petersburg, Russian essential in cost-effective newborn screening programs. Federation, 6Scientiﬁc Research Institute of Obstetrics and Thisstudydescribestheresultsobtainedintheﬁrstyearofa Gynecology by D.O.Otta of the Russian academy of medical public congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) screening sciences, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation program in Lithuania. Materials and Methods: 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone Wilson disease (WD) is a rare inherited disorder associated (17-OHP) concentrations in dry blood spots from 27175 with the copper accumulation in different organs. WD is neonatesweremeasuredusinganeonatalscreeningtest.17- caused by mutations in the ATP7B gene. The clinical phe- OHP concentrations were compared in accordance to notype of WD is modiﬁed by variants in other genes gender, gestation status, 5 gestational age (GA) categories, including COMMD1 and XIAP. Protein COMMD1 takes 6 gestational weight (GW) categories and the age at blood part in the transport of copper. XIAP is antiapoptotic pro- sampling (ABS). 95th percentile cut-off values were tein, whose activity depends on the cytoplasmic copper calculated for GA and GW categories and evaluated using concentration. Herebytheinteractionsofthese proteins can dataof4conﬁrmedCAHcases.Analysiswassigniﬁcantat be involved in a clinical polymorphism of the WD. P < 0.05. Materials and Methods: We examined 89 WD patients Results: A total of 27175 infants (13142 females, 13911 by NGS method. We designed targeted panel NimbleGen males, 122 unknown) were screened. 1469 (5,4%) new- SeqCap EZ Choice: 151012_HG38_CysFib_EZ_HX3 bornswerebornatpre-term(PT)and25706(94,6%)atfull- (ROCHE)foranalysisATP7B,COMMD1andXIAPgenes. term (FT). Mean 17-OHP concentrations were signiﬁcantly Different algorithms were used to predict the effects of the higher in PT vs FT group (28.99 ± 31,68 mmol/l vs 11,9 mutations. SD ± 9.0 mmol/l, P < 0.05). Mean 17-OHP was higher in Results:34mutationsinATP7Bgeneweredetected.Two males (13.46 ± 12.63 mmol/l vs 12.13 mmol/l, P < 0.05). most frequent mutations were c.3207C>A (48% of alleles) Lower GW and GA categories had higher mean 17-OHP andc.3190G>A(7%ofalleles).Singleraremutationswere concentrations (P < 0.05). No signiﬁcant correlation was found in 29% of cases. All our patients had mutations of foundbetweenABSand17-OHPconcentration.Finally,all bothcopiesoftheATP7B.Twopatientswereheterozygous 4 cases would be detected by proposed cut-off values. carriersofvariantsinCOMMD1(c.180+4C>T,c.340C>T). Conclusions: Birth at preterm, lower gestational age, Two patients had variants c.925G>C, c.355A>G in XIAP lower gestational weight and male gender were associated gene;benignvariantc.1268A>Cweredetectedinourgroup with higher 17-OHP concentration. The sensitivity and very often (63% of cases). speciﬁcity of the cut-off values needs to be evaluated by Conclusion: We discovered no signiﬁcant pathogenic further studies. mutations in the COMMD1 gene in patients but found two M. Petkeviciene: None. K. Sablauskas: None. R. polymorphisms. We have found 3 polymorphisms in the Marcinkute: None. M. Smirnova: None. J. Songailiene: XIAP. The meaning of these results remains unclear. The None. A. Utkus: None. study was implemented under the Russian Science Foundation grant №14-50-00069. P06.08D M.S. Balashova: None. I.G. Tuluzanovskaya: None. The frequency of mutations and polymorphisms in the M.I. Filimonov: None. N.A. Zhuchenko: None. O.V. genes involved in the metabolism of copper (ATP7B, Solov'eva: None. O.S. Glotov: None. A.S. Glotov: None. COMMD1 and XIAP) M.A. Fedyakov: None. I.V. Polyakova: None. A.M. Sarana:None.S.G.Shcherbak:None.T.E.Ivashchenko:Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 171 None. Y.A. Barbitov: None. O.V. Romanova: None. T. J.L. Santos: None. R. Cataldo: None. F. Rosso: None. M. Ignatova: None. A.Y. Asanov: None. C. Bravo: None. F. Allende: None. S. Solari: None. M.I. Hodgson: None. P06.09A Increased bile acid synthesis and near-absence of gut- P06.11C derived hormones in a patient with neonatal diabetes and Plasma and urinary metabolomic proﬁles of Down severe diarrhea caused by mutations in the neurogenin-3 syndrome correlate with alteration of mitochondrial gene metabolism J.L. Santos1,R. Cataldo1, F.Rosso1,C. Bravo1,F. Allende2, M.Caracausi1, V.Ghini2,3, C.Locatelli4,M.Mericio5, S. Solari2,M.I. Hodgson1 A. Piovesan1,F. Antonaros1,M. C.Pelleri1,L. Vitale1, R.A. Vacca6,F.Bedetti5,M.C.Mimmi7,C.Luchinat2,8,P.Turano2,8, 1DepartmentofNutrition,DiabetesandMetabolism.Schoolof P. Strippoli1,G.Cocchi5 Medicine. Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile, 2Departmento de Laboratorios Clínicos. School of 1Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine. Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Medicine, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Center of Chile MagneticResonance,UniversityofFlorence,SestoFiorentino, Florence, Italy, 3Consorzio Interuniversitario Risonanze Introduction: A Chilean proband diagnosed with perma- Magnetiche Metallo Proteine, Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, nent neonatal diabetes and severe malabsorptive diarrhea Italy, 4Neonatology Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, was found to carry two loss-of-function mutations in the Bologna, Italy, 5Neonatology Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi NEUROG3 gene (c.82G>T and 404T> C). Polyclinic, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Aim:tomeasuregut-derivedhormonesduringamealtest University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Institute of to gain insights on pathophysiological processes that may Biomembranes, Bioenergetics andMolecular Biotechnologies, explain the impaired intestinal function of the proband National Council of Research, Bari, Italy, 7Department of carrying NEUROG3 mutations. Medical and Biological Sciences, University of Udine, Udine, Subjects and Methods: Proband, parents and controls Italy,8DepartmentofChemistry,UniversityofFlorence,Sesto were submitted to a standardized Oral Liquid Meal Test Fiorentino, Florence, Italy (237 ml; 220 Kcal; 29 g CHO) with measures of plasma levels of Gastric Inhibitory Polypeptide (GIP), Glucagon‐ Introduction: Down syndrome (DS) is caused by the pre- Like Peptide‐1 (GLP-1), Pancreatic Polypeptide (PP), sence of a supernumerary copy of the human chromosome Fibroblast-Growth-Factor-19 (FGF-19), C-peptide, 7α- 21 (Hsa21) and is the most frequent genetic cause of hydroxy-4-cholesten-one (C4) and platelet serotonin. intellectual disability (ID). Key traits of DS are the dis- ResultsandDiscussion:Near-absenceofGIP,GLP1,PP tinctive facies and cognitive impairment. and C-peptide were found during the meal test in the MaterialsandMethods:Weconductedfortheﬁrsttime proband, incontrast to controls. FGF19 plasma levels were an analysis of the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)- extremely low in the proband (26.3 pg/ml versus 118±63 detectable part of the metabolome in plasma and urine pg/ml in n=7 controls), while C4 levels were very high samples, studying 67 subjects with DS and 29 normal (83.4 ng/ml vs 16.3±12 ng/ml in n=47 controls). subjects as controls selected among DS siblings. Interestingly, platelet serotonin levels, which reﬂects its Results: Multivariate analysis of the NMR metabolomic gut-derived production, were extremely low in the proband proﬁles showed a clear discrimination (up to of 80% (27 ng/109 platelets vs 772±239 in n=64 controls). accuracy) between the DS and the control groups. The Values of plasma C4 and platelet 5HT of the patient felt univariate analysis of plasma and urine revealed a outside the prediction limits for univariate normal signiﬁcant alteration for some interesting metabolites. distribution. Remarkably, most of the altered concentrations were Conclusion: The proband with loss-of-function muta- consistent with the 3:2 gene dosage model, suggesting tions in NEUROG3 gene displays extremely-low platelet effects caused by the presence of three copies of Hsa21 serotonin levels and plasma concentrations of gut-derived rather than two: DS/normal ratio in plasma was 1.23 incretins. The combination of low plasma FGF19 and very (pyruvate), 1.39 (fumarate), 1.47 (succinate), 1.33 (lactate), high C4 plasma levels suggests an increased hepatic 1.4 (formate). synthesis of bile acids as a contributor of the severe Conclusions:Severalsigniﬁcantlyalteredmetabolitesare malabsorptive diarrhea. FONDECYT 1150416. produced at the beginning or during the Krebs cycle. Accounting for sex, age and fasting state did not172 J.delPicchia signiﬁcantly affect the main result of both multivariate and Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, univariate analysis. Germany, 4Institut für Neurogenomik, Helmholtz Zentrum M. Caracausi: None. V. Ghini: None. C. Locatelli: München, Neuherberg, Germany, 5Institute of Medical None. M. Mericio: None. A. Piovesan: None. F. Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Antonaros: None. M.C. Pelleri: None. L. Vitale: None. Tübingen, Germany, 6Department of Neurology and Institute R.A.Vacca:None.F.Bedetti:None.M.C.Mimmi:None. of Neuropathology, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, C.Luchinat:None.P.Turano:None.P.Strippoli:None. Aachen, Germany, 7Department of Neurology, University G. Cocchi: None. HospitalsLeuvenandKULeuven,Leuven,Belgium,8Klinikfür Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Klinikum Frankfurt Hoechst, P06.13A Frankfurt, Germany, 9Department of Genetics, La Pitié- Hematopoietic stem cell transplant does not prevent Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, neurological deterioration in infants with Farber disease Paris, France, 10Center for Rare Childhood Disorders, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, A.Alayoubi1,2,C.Goudie1,P.Tibout3,M.Duval4,B.Maranda5, United States, 11Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw D.Mitchell1,J. Mitchell1 Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 12Department of Pathology, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Taibah Poland, 13Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolic University,Madinah,SaudiArabia,3LavalUniversity,Quebec Diseases, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, City, QC, Canada, 4University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Poland Canada,5Université deSherbrooke,Sherbrooke,QC, Canada Introduction: FDRX gene encodes the mitochondrial Farber disease (FD) is an inherited autosomal recessive membrane-associatedferredoxinreductase,thesoleenzyme disorderoflipidmetabolism.Thehallmarkofthediseaseis essential for the biosynthesis of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters systemic accumulation of ceramide due to lysosomal acid and heme formation. Fe-S clusters proteins are involved in ceramidase (ACDase) deﬁciency. The involvement of the enzymatic catalysis and gene expression, mitochondrial central nervous system is critical in this disorder leading to respiration, DNA replication, DNA repair, and iron home- rapid deterioration and death within a few years after birth. ostasis.Recently,FDXRdefectshavebeenshowntocausea Efforts to treat patients by hematopoietic stem cell trans- novel mitochondrial disease with auditory neuropathy and plant (HSCT) have resulted in favorable results in the optic atrophy. absence of neurological manifestations. We report the out- Patients and Results: Here, we describe nine novel comesofHSCTintwopatientswithFDwhoreceivedearly FDXR pathogenic variants revealed by whole exome HSCT and had neurological deterioration post-transplant. sequencing of 8 affected individuals from 6 families. The We also present a new understanding of the limitations of clinical presentation in these individuals is varied, and HSCTinFDmanagementbasedonourobservationsofthe includes families with more severe phenotypes then clinical course of the two patients after therapy. <!--End- previously described. Early-onset progressive leukoence- Fragment--> phalopathy and brain atrophy, Leigh syndrome, and A.Alayoubi:None.C.Goudie:None.P.Tibout:None. medullary and cerebellar atrophy are reported in three M. Duval: None. B. Maranda: None. D. Mitchell: None. families. Visual and hearing impairment, in keeping with J. Mitchell: None. the previously described phenotype in FDXR defects, is reported in four of ﬁve investigated families. P06.14B Functionaltestsperformedintwoavailableﬁbroblastcell Novel FDXR pathogenic variants expand the clinical lines conﬁrm reduction in the FDXR protein level on spectrum related to human ferredoxin reductase defects Western blot. Conclusions: Our study contribute to the further D.Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, S.L. Stenton2,3,M.Gusic2,3, delineation of molecular and clinical spectrum related to E. Ciara1, M.Wagner3,2,4, T. Haack3,2,5,K. G.Claeys6,7, FDRX defects. L.Schrod8,C.Nava9,V.Narayanan10,D.Jurkiewicz1,P.Halat- This study was partially supported by CMHI grants: Wolska1,M.Pelc1,K.Chrzanowska1,R.Płoski11,T.Meitinger3,2, S148/16, S145/16, 238/16, mitoNET(German Network for M.Pronicki12,E.Pronicka1,13,H.Prokisch2,3 Mitochondrial Diseases) and GENOMIT (European Net- work for Mitochondrial Diseases). 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Children’sMemorialHealth D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. S.L. Stenton: Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, None. M. Gusic: None. E. Ciara: None. M. Wagner: Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 3Institute of None. T. Haack: None. K.G. Claeys: None. L. Schrod:Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 173 None. C. Nava: None. V. Narayanan: None. D. O. Riess: None. M. Hoopmann: None. T. Haack: None. Jurkiewicz: None. P. Halat-Wolska: None. M. Pelc: M. Stampfer: None. None. K. Chrzanowska: None. R. Płoski: None. T. Meitinger:None.M.Pronicki:None.E.Pronicka:None. P06.16D H. Prokisch: None. Unusual diagnosis of inﬂammatory bowel disease in a patient with type 1 Gaucher disease P06.15C Prenatal exome sequencing identiﬁes compound M.Sabbadini1,R. Gallagher1,P. Bawa2 heterozygous GLB1-mutations in a fetus with ultrasound abnormalities 1University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2California State University, Stanislaus, S. Beck-Woedl1,K. Grundmann-Hauser1, R.Buchert-Lo1, Turlock, CA, United States A. Dufke1,M. Sturm1,O.Riess1,M.Hoopmann2, T.Haack1, M.Stampfer1 Gaucher disease [GD] is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease caused by mutations in the GBA gene 1Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, resulting in deﬁcient glucocerebrosidase activity and accu- Germany, 2Department of Gynecology, Tuebingen, Germany mulation of glucosylceramide [GL1] in reticuloendothelial cells. The pathophysiologic mechanism of GD is multi- Introduction: The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of prenatal factorial including cell engorgement, as well as a lipid- ultrasound diagnostics signiﬁcantly improved over the last speciﬁc immune response to accumulating GL1 and lyso- yearsandfetalanomaliesarecurrentlybeingdetectedinup GL1.Thenon-neuronopathicform,type1,ismorecommon to 3% of pregnancies. Exome sequencing is underway to in the Ashkenazi Jewish [AJ] population with an estimated become a routine assay in the downstream diagnostic prevalenceof~1:850.Wedescribe a16year oldmalewith algorithm. However, the clinical interpretation of identiﬁed paternal AJ ancestry who presented at age 3 with spleno- variantsremainschallengingduetolimitedandmostlynon- megaly. Reduced glucocerebrosidase activity and com- standardized prenatal phenotypic features for most disease- pound heterozygosity (N370S/L444P) in the GBA gene associated genes were consistent with a diagnosis of type 1 GD [GD1]. At We report on a fetus with multiple ultrasound abnorm- age12thepatientwasnotedtohaveanemia,hematochezia, alities including increased nuchal translucency, ascites, weight loss and diarrhea; he was diagnosed with inﬂam- hydropsfetalis,andleft-sidedhydrothorax.Thoracentesisof matory bowel disease (IBD). His father and paternal aunt thefetuswasperformedtorelievethefetallungandpleural also have IBD. This umbrella term refers to a state of effusion was used for genetic testing. Cytogenetic analysis chronic inﬂammation of the gastrointestinal tract with an showed a normal female karyotype. In addition, a fetal autoimmune etiology. The prevalence of IBD in the Wes- blood sample was used to exclude spherocytosis. The fetus tern world is >0.3% with a higher prevalence in the AJ had a highly increased number of reticulocytes. population. Surprisingly, despite the higher prevalence of Results:Prenatalexomesequencingidentiﬁedcompound both GD and IBD in the AJ population, to our knowledge heterozygous mutations in GLB1, a previously reported no case of co-occurrence of these two diagnoses has been pathogenic missense variant on the paternal allele and a reported. This suggests the possibility that the GD1 novel nonsense variant on the maternal allele. Recessive- inﬂammatory state may havean effect onthe expression of type GLB1 variants have been associated with the IBD. Relevant registry data will be reviewed anddescribed lysosomal storage disorder GM1 gangliosidosis which is and treatment implications will be discussed. characterized by progressive neurodegeneration. M.Sabbadini:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator, Conclusion: After the exclusion of aneuploidy, exome- collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as basedtrioanalysisisafastandcost-efﬁcientdiagnostictool grants already received); Modest; Sanoﬁ Genzyme. D. in cases with multiple unspeciﬁc fetal anomalies. On the Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, one hand establishing a diagnosis enables an informed and expert witness); Modest; Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Medscape. choice about future pregnancies and provides information F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Invitae. R. Galla- on the prognosis and the recurrence risk, on the other hand gher: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collabora- unclear results may cause uncertainty. Thus the challenge tor or consultant and pending grants as well as grants remains to offer trio-exome analysis in a responsible alreadyreceived); Modest; Sanoﬁ Genzyme. F. Consultant/ manner in prenatal diagnostic settings. Advisory Board; Modest; Horizon Pharma, Alexion. P. S. Beck-Woedl: None. K. Grundmann-Hauser: None. Bawa: None. R.Buchert-Lo: None.A.Dufke:None. M.Sturm: None.174 J.delPicchia P06.18B M.Militaru1,2,A.Maris3,M.Militaru3,M.�tefănu�2,M.Pop2, GlycogenstoragediseasetypeIII:identiﬁcationoftheﬁrst I.Blănaru2, D.Militaru1, E.Dronca1 case of uniparental disomy and two novel deletions 1IuliuHa�ieganuUniversityofMedicineandPharmacy,Cluj- E. Ponzi1,A. Maiorana1,V. Alesi2,F.Lepri2, S.Genovese2, Napoca, Romania, 2Genetic Center, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, S. Loddo2,M.Mucciolo2,A. Novelli2,C.Dionisi-Vici1 32nd Paediatrics Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Romania 1MetabolicUnit,DepartmentofSpecialistPediatrics,Bambino Hereditary fructose intolerance is a very rare autosomal Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Medical genetics recessive, metabolic disorder with unknown global pre- laboratory department, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, valence. Carrier frequency is estimated at 1 in 70 indivi- Rome, Italy duals, especially in those of Caucasian origin. The key enzyme in fructose metabolism is aldolase B produced by Introduction:GlycogenstoragediseasetypeIII(GSDIII)is the liver at low constant levels; when dietary fructose is causedbymutationsofAGLgenewithdebranchingenzyme ingested, the enzyme becomes active and metabolizes the deﬁciency. fructose-1-phosphate and 1,6-biphosphate to 3-phosphate- Materials and Methods: Molecular analysis of three glyceraldehyde. Due to mutations in the ALDOB gene GSDIII patients was performed through Sanger and Next (located on chromosome 9q31.1), the enzyme activity can Generation Sequencing; CGHarray e SNParray were used be drastically reduced (85-100%). In Europe, more than for further genetic investigations. Besides typical clinical 80%ofmutationsareA150P,A175DandN335K.Here,we features of GSDIII, patient 1 showed a severe growth presentacaseofa15monthsyearoldpatientwithahistory retardation (<3 SD), whereby endocrinological studies of liver insufﬁciency, currently with hepatomegaly, failure resulted negative. to thrive, fever and diarrhea. In evolution, the patient Results: Patient 1 showed the homozygous variant became comatose (Glasgow score 8) with severe hypogly- c.3904insA, patient 2 resulted in apparent homozygosity cemia but without ketonuria. Clinical and paraclinical test- for W1401X mutation, patient 3 carried a homozygous ingraisedthequestionofhereditaryfructoseintolerancevs. deletionoftheﬁrst4exonsofAGL.Sincediscordantresults hydroxyglutaric aciduria. Genetic testing revealed that the from segregation studies showed the carrier status in only patient was a compound heterozygote with A174D one parent of patients 1 and 2, further investigations (c.524C>A)mutationinexon5and4bpdeletioninexon3 revealed a paternal disomy of chromosome 1 (UPD1) in (c.113-1_115) of ALDOB gene. Subsequent genetic testing patient 1, and a paternal inherited 349 kb deletion of of parents showed that they were both heterozygotes: the chromosome 1 including AGL gene in patient 2. mother with A174D (c.524C>A) mutation and the father Conclusions: The genetic characterization of three with 4bp deletion in exon 3. The particularities of this case GSDIIIpatientsallowedtodescribetheﬁrstcaseofGSDIII are the presence of liver insufﬁciency and coma in a child, resulting from UPD1 and two new deletions of the AGL without ketonuria and neurological long-term con- gene. Moreover, UPD can play an important role even in sequences, that was eventually diagnosed as a rare case case of imprinted genes. Particularly, ARHI is a maternally hereditary fructose intolerance. imprintedtumorsuppressor gene,implicated ingrowthand M. Militaru: None. A. Maris: None. M. Militaru: oncogenesis. It could be speculated that ARHI overexpres- None. M. �tefănu�: None. M. Pop: None. I. Blănaru: sioncouldhavearoleinthesevereshortstatureofpatient1 None. D. Militaru: None. E. Dronca: None. with paternal UPD1. The study emphasizes the importance of parental segregation studies especially in patients with P06.20D recessive conditions to look for speciﬁc genetic causes of Clinical Manifestations and Molecular Aspects of disease and to estimate properly the risk of family Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate Synthetase Superactivity in recurrence. Females E.Ponzi:None.A.Maiorana:None.V.Alesi:None.F. Lepri: None. S. Genovese: None. S. Loddo: None. M. K. Hodaňová Mucciolo:None.A.Novelli:None.C.Dionisi-Vici:None. Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics P06.19C and Adolescent Medicine, Praha 2, Czech Republic ClinicalandGeneticAnalysisinaRareCaseofHereditary FructoseIntolerance Objectives: Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRPS) superactivity is an X-linked disorder characterized byurateoverproduction(OMIM300661).ThisconditionisAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 175 thought to rarely affect women, and when it does, the hemochromatosis and as a determinant in cases with pri- clinical presentation is mild. We describe a 16 year old mary iron overload. African-Americanfemalewhodevelopedprogressivetophi, Material and methods: 24 patients, belonging to 8 nephrolithiasis, and acute kidney failure due to urate over- distinct genealogies with type 4 hemochromatosis and production. Family history included a mother with tophac- showingbothhighinterfamilyandintrafamilyvariabilityin eous gout who developed end-stage kidney disease due to ironoverloaddegreewereinvestigatedforPCBP2variants. nephrolithiasis and an affected sister with At the same time, PCBP2 was studied in 30 unrelated polyarticular gout. individuals with hemochromatosis but not carrying muta- Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed in tionsintheHFE,TFR2,HAMP,HJVandSLC40A1genes. affected females and their fathers. The entire coding regionand theintron-exon boundaries of Results: Mutational analysis revealed a new c.520G>A PCBP2 were sequenced with Sanger method in these (p.G174R) mutation in the PRPS1 gene. The mutation patients. resulted in decreased PRPS inhibition by ADP. Results: Wedid notidentify anyPCBP2point variantin Conclusions: Clinical ﬁndings in previously reported the examined sample. females with PRPS superactivity showed a high clinical Conclusion: Our study was not able to conﬁrm the penetranceofthisdisorderwithameanserumuratelevelof hypothesis of PCBP2 as a modiﬁer gene in type 4 8.5±4.1 mg/dl (506±247 umol/L) and a high prevalence hemocromatosis. Also, PCBP2 did not appear to be of gout. These ﬁndings indicate that all women in families causative of our cases with non-molecularly characterized with PRPS superactivity should be genetically screened for hemochromatosis. We believe that the analysis should be a mutation (for clinical management and genetic counsel- expanded to more patients to get conclusive considerations ing). In addition, women with tophaceous gout, gout on PCBP2 as a gene possibly involved in iron overload presenting in childhood, or a strong family history of disorders. severe gout should be considered for PRPS1 mutational M. Valiante: None. S. Majore: None. G. Musci: None. analysis. M. Lipari: None. M.C. Bonaccorsi di Patti: None. I. K. Hodaňová: None. Bottillo: None. F. Polticelli: None. C. De Bernardo: None. A. Baiocchini: None. P. Grammatico: None. P06.21A Exploring the possible role of PCBP2 in hereditary P06.22B hemochromatosis InvivoeffectofpyridoxineadministrationonCBSmutants M.Valiante1,S. Majore1,G.Musci2,M.Lipari1,M.C. P.Jesina,V.Kozich,J.Sokolova,J.Krijt,T.Honzik,J.Zeman BonaccorsidiPatti3,I.Bottillo1,F.Polticelli4,C.DeBernardo1, A. Baiocchini5,P. Grammatico1 Dept. of Pediatrics, Prague, Czech Republic 1Medical Genetics, Sapienza University of Rome, S. Camillo- Introduction: Pathophysiology of pyridoxine responsive- Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Biosciences ness in patients with homocystinuria is elusive with a pos- andTerritory,UniversityofMolise,Pesche,Italy,3Department sible chaperoning activity of pyridoxal 5´-phosphate. of Biochemical Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, However, direct demonstration of in vivo effect on mutant Italy, 4Department of Sciences, University Roma Tre, Rome, enzyme activity is lacking. We described previously that Italy, 5LaboratoryofPathology, INMI "L.Spallanzani",Rome, cystathionine-beta-synthase (CBS) is released into circula- Italy tion from several organs, mostly from liver. Here we used this method to assess in vivo effect of pyridoxine adminis- Introduction: Over the last decade, many mechanisms tration on the rescue of CBS-mutant in 15 patients with orchestrating iron metabolism have been highlighted. A homocystinuria. number of molecules involved in iron homeostasis have Methods: We analyzed plasma CBS activity in 8 beenprogressivelyidentiﬁed,sheddinglightintohereditary pyridoxine non-responders (homozygotes/compound het- conditions leading to iron excess or deﬁciency. Among erozygotes for mutations p.A69fs*94; p.C165Y; p. them, the recently recognized iron chaperone poly(rC)- A71Pfs*24; p.V10Wfs*71; p.K211*; p.G246Dfs*52; p. binding protein 2 (PCBP2) seems to have a crucial role in W409_G453del; p.A155T; p.E144K) and 7 partial/full transferring intracellular iron to the iron exporter ferro- responders (homozygotes/compound heterozygotes carry- portin1. The aim ofthisstudy wastoinvestigate PCBP2 as ing mutations p.P145L; p.I278T; p.P49L; p.R336H; p. a candidate gene in disorders of iron metabolism. We ana- R336C on at least one allele). CBS activity was measured lysed PCBP2 as a possible modiﬁer in type 4 by LC-MS/MS.176 J.delPicchia Results: Plasma CBS activity ranged 0-0.7% of controls Conclusions: The mutation of exon 5 - c.511T>G is in non-responders even on combined therapy with methio- novel, never reported before in patients with Hunter nine restriction, pyridoxine and/or betaine. In contrast, syndrome and predicted to be pathogenic. plasma CBS activity in responders not taking pyridoxine N. Gusina: None. S. Miasnikov: None. E. Budzejka: was 5.1% (range 0-20.3%) and signiﬁcantly increased on None. A. Gusina: None. pyridoxine to 26.2% (range 7.3-72.1%) indicating in vivo rescue of the activity of mutant CBS in liver. P06.24D Conclusion: Pyridoxine administration partially rescued Thespectrumofpathologicalsequencevariantsinpatients in vivo enzyme activity of selected CBS-mutant. On the with lipid metabolism disorder in the Czech Republic other hand large doses of pyridoxine did not increase the activity of CBS in non-responsive patients. This study L. Tichý1,V.Soška2,M.Vrablík3,T. Honzík4,Z. Urbanová4, supports the recent recommendation, that pyridoxine H.Vaverková5,T. Freiberger6 therapy is not necessary in non-responsive patients with homocystinuria.SupportedfrominstitutionalprojectsRVO- 1Centre of molecular biology and gene therapy, University VFN64165 and ProgresQ26. Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of P. Jesina: None. V. Kozich: None. J. Sokolova: None. Biochemistry, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, J. Krijt: None. T. Honzik: None. J. Zeman: None. 3Third Medical Department, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General Faculty Hospital, Prague, P06.23C Czech Republic, 4Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent The genetic origin of Hunter syndrome in Belarus Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, N.Gusina,S. Miasnikov,E. Budzejka,A. Gusina 5Department of Internal Medicine III – Nephrology, Rheumatology and Endocrinology, University Hospital NationalResearchandAppliedMedicineCentre“Motherand Olomouc and Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky Child”, Minsk, Belarus University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 6Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Introduction: Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II; Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic Hunter syndrome; OMIM 309900) is a life –limiting, multisystemic disease with varying presentation and Introduction: Disorders of lipid metabolism are very severity.ThisX-linkedlysosomalstoragedisorderiscaused common. Hypercholesterolemia plays an important role in by mutations in IDS gene, encoding the lysosomal enzyme the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and can be effectively iduronate-2-sulfatase (EC 3.1.6.13). For clinical purposes, treated by lifestyle changes and drugs. Predominantly, the patients are generally considered to be in one of two cate- clinical phenotype is caused by mutations in the LDLR or gories according to the presence or absence of cognitive APOBgenes,butalsomutationsinothergenesrarelyresult impairment. Here we present the results of IDS gene in monogenic hypercholesterolemia. mutations analysis in Hunter patients from Belarus. Materials and Methods: Next generation sequencing of Materials and Methods: From early 1980-th 44 MPS II theLDLR,PCSK9andAPOEgenesandpartofAPOBgene patients were diagnosed in Belarus giving an estimated (exon 26) using ADH Master kit (Multiplicom, Belgium); incidence of 1.2 per 100,000 live births. Patients belong to Sanger sequencing of the ABCG5, ABCG8 and LDLRAP1 severalgenerationsof30familieswithfemale-carriers.The genes. DNA samples have been collected within the genomic DNA from blood leukocytes of the patients and framework of the MedPed project. carriers from17familieswasisolatedandtheentirecoding Results: We assessed a spectrum of mutations in more region and ﬂanking intronic sequences of IDS gene were than 3900 unrelated patients with clinical diagnosis of ampliﬁed by PCR. Ampliﬁed PCR products were puriﬁed hypercholesterolemia. Predominantly, we have found and sequenced directly by an ABI 3500 Genetic Analyzer. mutations in the LDLR gene (22.3%) and in the APOB Results: 10 different mutations were identiﬁed: exon 3 - gene(11.0%).208uniqueallelicvariantsintheLDLRgene c.236G>A (p.R88H), exon 5 - c.511T>G (p.C171G), exon have been detected. We have found also pathological 6 - c.788delC (p.Y264Tfs*17), exon 7 - c.1004A>G (p. variants in the PCSK9, ABCG5 and LDLRAP1 genes. H335R), exon 8 - c.1007-2delA, c.1035G>T (p.W345C), ACMG criteria were used for pathogenicity evaluation of c.1085_1086delTA (p.Y362Cfx*249), exon9 - c.1402C>T detected sequence variants. (p.R468W), c.1403G>A (p.R468Q), c.1425G>A (p. Conclusions: Our study presents a large spectrum of W475X). Only the mutations of exon 9 were revealed in causative mutations, including mutations in rarely involved more than one family, all others were unique. genes, in Czech patients with lipid metabolism disorders.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 177 We would like to thank the physicians from the national Conclusions: We presented the ﬁrst data of ALPL gene and regional centres of the Czech MedPed project. This mutationspectruminNorth-WesternregionofRussia.Most work was funded by the grants numbers AZV 16-29084A of identiﬁed mutations were heterozygous that conﬁrm and AZV 15-28277A. dominant-negative effect in late forms of HPP. Two novel L.Tichý:None.V.Soška:None.M.Vrablík:None.T. missense mutationsweredetected andassociated withmild Honzík:None.Z.Urbanová:None.H.Vaverková:None. phenotypeofdisease.ThisstudywassupportedbyRussian T. Freiberger: None. Science Foundation №14-50-00069. M.A. Fedyakov: None. Y.A. Eismont: None. T.E. P06.25A Ivaschenko: None. I.B. Sosnina: None. E.V. Snegova: Two novel mutations in ALPL gene associated with mild None. N.Y. Shved: None. A.M. Sarana: None. S.G. phenotype of hypophosphatasia in Russia cohort study Scherbak: None. N.Y. Kalinchenko: None. T.M. Pervu- nina: None. E.Y. Gurkina: None. O.S. Glotov: None. M.A. Fedyakov1,2, Y.A. Eismont1,T. E.Ivaschenko3,I.B. Sosnina4,E.V.Snegova4,N.Y.Shved1,3,A.M.Sarana1,2,S.G. P06.26B Scherbak1,2, N.Y. Kalinchenko5,T. M.Pervunina6,E.Y. Mutation of IARS2 causes cataracts, growth hormone Gurkina6, O.S.Glotov1,2,3 deﬁciency, sensorimotor polyneuropathy, sensorineural hearing loss, short stature, and type II esophageal 1City Hospital 40, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, achalasia: expanding the clinical phenotype 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3D.O.Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, E. GhayoorKarimiani1,2,B. Vona3,T. Haaf4, R.Marooﬁan2, Gynecology and Reproductology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian S. Shahrokhzadeh1,N.Ahangari1,B. Vona4,A. Alahmad5, Federation, 4Consultative and diagnostic center for children, L.He6,K.Thompson7,R.W.Taylor7,J.Movaffagh8,N.Amiri8, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5Endocrinology M.Doosti1,R. Boostani9 Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation, 6Almazov National Medical Research Centre, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 1Next Generation Genetic Clinic, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Federation Republic of, 2Genetics and Molecular Cell Sciences Research Centre, St George’s University of London,, London, United Introduction: Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare heritable Kingdom, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Maximilians metabolic disorder characterized by defective mineraliza- University, Würzburg,, Germany, 4Institute of Human tionofboneand/orteethinthepresenceofreducedactivity Genetics, Julius Maximilians University, Würzburg, Germany, of unfractionated serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Late 52Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of forms of HPP (childhood, adult, odontohypophosphatasia) Neuroscience,, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, are predominantly caused by heterozygous and compound- United Kingdom, 6Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial heterozygous missense-mutations in ALPL gene and often Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, remainundiagnosed.Geneticanalysisprovidesdetermining ewcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 7Wellcome Centre for of diagnosis in cases with suspected HPP. Furthermore it Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle expands our knowledge of mutation spectrum in mild and University,NewcastleUniversity,NewcastleuponTyne,United latent forms of the disease. Kingdom, 8Targeted Drug Delivery Research Center, Materials and Methods: We analyzed genomic DNA Pharmaceutical Technology Institute, Mashhad University of samples from 55 unrelated individuals with signs of HPP. Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Minimal criteria’s to include in study were recurrent low 9Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad levels of ALP and low growth. Primers’ system for Sanger University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic sequencing was designed and validated for 2-12 exons of Republic of ALPL gene. First exon of this gene was excluded because it’s non-coding and GC-rich region. The gene IARS2 encodes a mitochondrial isoleucyl-tRNA Results: Among cohort of patient we detected 9 synthetase, a highly conserved nuclear encoded enzyme pathogenic mutations (16,4% detection rate): seven in required for the synthesis of charged tRNA for translation. heterozygous and two in compound-heterozygous. Most of Recently, an extended French-Canadian family and a identiﬁedmutationswerep.E191K(6times).Furthermore2 Danish proband have associated biallelic pathogenic var- novelmissensemutationweredetected-p.N323Iinexon9 iants in IARS2 with a rare autosomal recessive syndrome (heterozygous) and p. Y101C in exon 5 (compound abbreviated CAGSSS characterized by cataracts, growth heterozygous with p.E191K in patient with childhood form hormone deﬁciency, sensorineuropathy, sensorineural of HPP). hearingloss,andskeletaldysplasia.GenomicDNAfroman178 J.delPicchia Iranian proband with distinctly overlapping features to WES was performed using SureSelect V5 kit and CAGSSS was subjected to whole exome sequencing and HiSeq1500 sequencing. Results were avaible after 5-14 bioinformatics analysis. This revealed a novel homozygous days and a genetically conﬁrmed diagnose was made for missensevariantinexon21(c.2625C>T,p.Pro909Ser)that every patient (3 in life,1 postmortom). The following was included in a 14.3 Mb run of homozygosity affecting disorders were diagnosed: Leigh syndrome, Alpers syn- the same proline residue described in the original French- drome, pyruvate carboxylase deﬁciency and in one patinet Canadian kindred. This study reveals an expansion of the with suspicion of MD two heterozygous mutations in CAGSSS phenotypic spectrum to include type II esopha- TRMT10Cwereidentiﬁed.Theresultsallowedtoestabilish geal achalasia and proposes the bone phenotypes of this prognosis, therapical decissions (in 3 of them hospis care syndrome may also appear as a mild manifestation. Fur- was taken) and familial councelling. thermore, patient-derived ﬁbroblasts showed normal MDs are severe, progressive and often because of their respiratory chain enzyme activity, as well as unchanged multi-systemiccharacterleadtoearlydeath.Lackoftimeis OXPHOS protein subunits and IARS2 levels. A compara- the biggest problem for physicians and parents, that’s why tive in silico protein structural analysis provides a possible Rapid WES is a unique diagnostic tool and should be explanation for the comparatively mild phenotype com- performed in cases where a MD is suspected in critical ill pared to the other reported patients with IARS2 pathogenic children hospitalized in the intensive care units with rapid variants. Our ﬁndings provide further support that biallelic progressionofsevere,life-threateningsymptoms,todeﬁnite mutations in IARS2 result in an extremely rare but dis- diagnosis on the genetic level. tinctive and clinically recognisable phenotype in human. E.GhayoorKarimiani:None.B.Vona:None.T.Haaf: Onsetof 1day 3month 5month 1day None.R. Marooﬁan: None. S. Shahrokhzadeh:None.N. symptoms(age) Ahangari: None. B. Vona: None. A. Alahmad: None. L. Death(age) 1,5month 10month – 6week He: None. K. Thompson: None. R. W. Taylor: None. J. Suspected Mitochondrial Leigh-like Leigh- Mitochondrial disorder disorder,Vander syndrome like disorder Movaffagh: None. N. Amiri: None. M. Doosti: None. R. KnapporCanavan syndrome Boostani: None. disease Performed – Panelofgenes(selected – genetictests exons)responsiblefor P06.27C beforeWES LeighandLeigh-like syndromes Rapid whole-exome sequencing (WES) in the critically ill TimeforWES 14days 7days7days 5days infants hospitalized in the intensive care units results Gene PC POLG1 SCO2 TRMT10C M.Biela1,K. Szmyd2, M.Bloch1,E. Szmida3, A.Walczak4, Diagnosis Pyruvate Alpers Leigh Mitochondrial carboxylase syndrome syndrome disorder G.Kostrzewa4,J. Kosinska4, M.Rydzanicz4,P. Stawinski4, deﬁciency A. Biernacka4,M.M. Sasiadek3,R.Ploski4,R. Smigiel1 1Department of Paediatrics and Rare Disorders, Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland, 2Lower Silesia M. Biela: None. K. Szmyd: None. M. Bloch: None. E. Children's Hospice, Wrocław, Poland, 3Department of Szmida: None. A. Walczak: None. G. Kostrzewa: None. Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland, J. Kosinska: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawinski: 4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,WarsawMedicalUniversity, None. A. Biernacka: None. M.M. Sasiadek: None. R. Warsaw, Poland Ploski: None. R. Smigiel: None. Among congenital metabolic diseases mitochodrial dis- P06.28D orders (MD) are the most common. This highly hetero- Molecular assessment of variants in inherited geneous (genetically and clinically) group of disorders is lipodystrophy genes: prevalence and clinical impact in a caused by mutations in the mitchondrial or the nuclear large clinical care cohort genome. Every organ or tissue could be affected, althought the symptoms from the CNS and skeletal muscles are the C. Gonzaga-Jauregui1,J.Altarejos2,J.Staples1,T.M. most common. Teslovich1, Geisinger-Regeneron DiscovEHR Collaboration, WepresentfourunrelatedinfantswithMDmanifestedby A. Baras1, J.Gromada2,O.Gottesman1,F. Dewey1 multi-systemic failures and where ealier metabolic and genetic examinations haven’t conﬁrmed the diagnosis, for 1RegeneronGeneticsCenter,RegeneronPharmaceuticalsInc., which Rapid WES was perfomed. Tarrytown, NY, United States, 2Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Tarrytown, NY, United StatesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 179 Introduction: Inherited Lipodystrophies are disorders E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other characterized by loss of adipose tissue accompanied by intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceu- metabolic dysregulation. They are divided into Congenital ticals. J. Gromada: A. Employment (full or part-time); Generalized Lipodystrophies (CGLs) and Familial Partial Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Lipodystrophies (FPLs). Lipodystrophies are considered Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual rare genetic disorders with reported prevalences ranging property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. O. from 1 in 10 million for CGLs, to 1 in 1 million for FPLs. Gottesman:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Methods: We interrogated the electronic health record Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. F. Dewey: A. Employment (EHR) information for ~1.6 million individuals in the (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. Geisinger Health System for lipodystrophy/lipoatrophy E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other diagnosis codes. We performed genetic analyses of intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron individuals with available genetic data from our Pharmaceuticals. Geisinger-Regeneron DiscovEHR collaboration to identify likely causative variants of lipodystrophy in these patients. P06.29A Results: Of 18 lipodystrophy-diagnosed patients with Clinical characterization of a novel (Asp116Gly) mutation available genetic data, we identiﬁed potentially pathogenic in PPARgamma gene identiﬁed in a large Polish family variants in known genes in 8 individuals. Of these, 4 individuals carry the pathogenic variant in LMNA (p. M.Szopa, B. Zapala,A. Jamsheer, A. Ludwig-Galezowska, R482Q) associated with Dunnigan FPL. There were M.Malecki additional 12 individuals harboring a molecular ﬁnding for the condition but no documented diagnosis of JUMC, Krakow, Poland lipodystrophy.EHR review of these individuals showed that they have metabolic abnormalities consistent with Introduction: PPARG encodes peroxisome proliferator- lipodystrophy including diabetes, dyslipidemia, and pan- activated receptor gamma, a nuclear hormone receptor creatitis. We surveyed the DiscovEHR cohort for patho- which plays a crucial role in both glucose and lipid genicandlikelypathogenicvariantsinlipodystrophygenes metabolism. and evaluated the clinical and metabolic proﬁles of variant MaterialsandMethods:Genetictestingina44-yearold carriers. We observed a burden of metabolic dysregulation female patient with familial partial lipodystrophy was in these patients. performed by targeted NGS sequencing using a panel of Conclusions: Our data show that partial lipodystrophy is 28 monogenic diabetes genes. Conﬁrmation of the p. an underdiagnosed condition and that its prevalence might [(Asp116Gly)];c.[347A>G]PPARGgenevariantaswellas be higher than previously reported.Carriers of veriﬁcation of potential carriers in the family were lipodystrophy-associated variants show metabolic abnorm- subsequently performed using Sanger sequencing in alities in the spectrum of lipodystrophy disease, however 3130xl Genetic Analyzer. Clinical characteristics was they are often diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and subsequently assessed for the mutation carriers. unspeciﬁed metabolic syndrome. Results: Two programs were utilized in order to assess C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. Employment (full or part- the impact of the detected missense variant on protein time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Owner- function:SIFT(SortingIntolerantFromTolerant)[http://sift. ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other bii.a-star.edu.sg/www/SIFT_intersect_coding_submit.html] intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceu- and PolyPhen-2 (Polymorphism Phenotyping v2) [http:// ticals. J. Altarejos: A. Employment (full or part-time); genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/]. These analyses supported Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership the deleterious character of the mutation by revealing a Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual PROVEAN score of -4,982. The amino acid position of property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. J. 116Asp was also demonstrated to have a high degree of Staples: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; conservationbetween species.Weconﬁrmedthisvariantin Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, 7 (out of 20) family members. They were diagnosed with stock options, patent or other intellectual property); diabetes, dyslipidemia, ischemic heart disease and suffered Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. T.M. Teslovich: from myocardial infarctions before the age of forty. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Additional family members have been recruited to further Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock explore the impact of the mutation on the phenotype. options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Conclusion: We assessed a family with autosomal Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. A. Baras: A. Employment dominantlipodystrophy related toanewPPARGmutation. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. The potential utility of NGS was conﬁrmed for the180 J.delPicchia identiﬁcation of families with rare forms of lipodystrophy, S. J.Pickett1,J.P. Grady1,Y. Shiau Ng1,C. L.Alston1, withthepotentialforconsequentlytailoringearlytreatment E. Blakely1,S.A. Hardy1, C.L. Feeney1,A. A.Bright1,A.M. and prevention of IHD to prolong life expectancy. Schaefer1,R.J.Q.McNally2,I.J.Wilson3,H.J.Cordell3,G.S. M.Szopa:None.B.Zapala:None.A.Jamsheer:None. Gorman1,R. W.Taylor1, D.M. Turnbull1,R. McFarland1 A. Ludwig-Galezowska: None. M. Malecki: None. 1Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle P06.31C University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Institute Development of an antisense-mediated exon skipping of Health and Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon therapeutic strategy for Mucolipidosis II Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom L. Matos,R. Vilela,F. Coutinho,P. Gaspar,S.Alves Introduction: m.3243A>G, the most common pathogenic National Health Institute Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Porto, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutation, is associated with Portugal arangeofclinicalfeatures,whichprogressatvariablerates, makingprognosisdifﬁculttopredict.Weaimedtodescribe Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are a class of inherited and understand the cause of this heterogeneity. metabolic diseases caused by mutations in proteins critical Methods: We examined the phenotypic proﬁle of 238 for lysosomal function. Among them is ML II, which is m.3243A>G carriers from the UK MRC Mitochondrial caused by the deﬁciency of the GlcNAc-phosphotransfer- Disease Patient Cohort using the Newcastle Mitochondrial ase, a key enzyme for the trafﬁcking of lysosomal hydro- Disease Adult Scale and evaluated which commonly lases to the lysosome. GlcNAc-phosphotransferase is assayed tissue (blood, urine, skeletal muscle) represents encoded by two genes: GNPTAB and GNPTG. One of the the m.3243A>G mutation load and mtDNA copy number most frequent mutations is a deletion on exon 19 of the moststronglyassociatedwithdiseaseburden.Wemodelled GNPTABgenethatdisruptsthereadingframeimpairingthe the role of risk factors and additive nuclear genetic factors production of an active enzyme and the targeting of lyso- in the development of speciﬁc phenotypes within 46 somal enzymes. Despite broad understanding of the mole- pedigrees from the cohort. cularcausesbehindthisandotherLSDs,thesameprogress Results: Age and m.3243A>G heteroplasmy level are hasnotbeenobservedinthedevelopmentoftherapies,with associated with disease burden in all three tissues (R2 current treatments still mostly symptomatic. Therefore, range=0.18-0.27, P<0.001); a greater proportion of the alternativeoptionsshouldbeinvestigated.Onepossibilityis variation in disease burden is explained if mtDNA copy in the modulation of splicing by antisense oligonucleotides skeletal muscle is included (R2=0.40, P<0.001). Common (AOs) with the purpose of altering the mature mRNA and phenotypicfeaturesincludehearingimpairment,psychiatric theﬁnalprotein.ThisworkintendstodevelopaRNA-based involvement and ataxia; age and heteroplasmy levels are therapeutic agent through the use of AOs capable of indu- poor predictors of phenotypic severity. We found high to cing the skipping of exon 19 of the GNPTAB gene and moderate heritability estimates for psychiatric involvement, circumvent the effects of this ML II mutation. Different cognition, ataxia, migraine and hearing impairment (h2 2’O-Methyl AOs were designed and tested. We have range=0.40-0.76, P<0.05). already succeeded in inducing the skipping of exon 19 in Conclusion: Our results indicate that m.3243A>G control and ML II patient ﬁbroblasts. At biochemical level, heteroplasmy, skeletal muscle mtDNA copy number and 48 hours following transfection, enzyme activity suffered a age explain some of the variation in m.3243A>G-related small increaseinpatientsﬁbroblasts for all enzymestested, disease burden suggesting that nuclear genetic factors eveniftheresultsarestillmuchlowerthantheobservedfor inﬂuence clinical outcomes, paving the way for future controls. work identifying these. Financing: FCT/ PTDC /BBB-BMD/6301/2014 and This work is supported by a Wellcome Trust Fellowship Asociación Nour de Mucolipidosis (204709/Z/16/Z) to SJP and the Wellcome Centre for L.Matos:None.R.Vilela:None.F.Coutinho:None.P. Mitochondrial Research (203105/Z/16/Z). Gaspar: None. S. Alves: None. S.J. Pickett: None. J.P. Grady: None. Y. Shiau Ng: None.C.L. Alston: None.E. Blakely: None. S.A. Hardy: P06.32D None. C.L. Feeney: None. A.A. Bright: None. A.M. Heterogeneity in m.3243A&gtG-related mitochondrial Schaefer: None. R.J.Q. McNally: None. I.J. Wilson: disease: The role of mtDNA heteroplasmy, copy number, None. H.J. Cordell: None. G.S. Gorman: None. R.W. age and nuclear factors Taylor: None. D.M. Turnbull: None. R. McFarland: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 181 P06.34B P06.35C Analysis of mtDNA mutations in Serbian patients with Biallelic mutations in MRPS34 lead to instability of the Leber hereditary optic neuropathy small mitoribosomal subunit and Leigh syndrome P. Dawod1,2, B.Rovcanin2,M.Brankovic2,3,A.Marjanovic2,3, N.J.Lake1,2, B.D.Webb3,4,D.A.Stroud5,T. R. Richman6, M.Jankovic3,2,I. Novakovic2,3,I. Dujmovic3,2,J.Jancic4,2, B. Ruzzenente7,A.G.Compton8,2,H. S.Mountford1,2,9, V. Kostic3,2 J.Pulman7,C.Zangarelli7, M.Rio10,N.Bodaert11, Z. Assouline10,M. D.Sherpa3,12,E. E.Schadt3,12,S.M. 1Faculty of Medicine, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of Medicine, Houten3,12,J. Byrnes13,E. M.McCormick13, Z. Zolkipli- Belgrade, Serbia, 3Neurology Clinic, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Child Cunningham13,14,K.Haude15,Z. Zhang15, K.Retterer15, and Adolescent Neurology and Psychiatry Clinic, Belgrade, R. Bai15,S.E. Calvo16,17,18,V. K.Mootha19,17,18, Serbia J.Christodoulou1,2,A.Rotig20,A.Filipovska6,21,I.Cristian22,23, M.J. Falk13,24,M.D.Metodiev25,D.R. Thorburn1,2,26 Introduction: Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is now regarded as the most frequent neurological disorder 1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s caused by mutations in a mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, characterized by selective degeneration of retinal ganglion University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Department cells,opticatrophy,andcentralvisionloss.Besidesprimary of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine mutations number of secundary DNA changes affect phe- at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 4Department of notype.Aimofthisstudywastoinvestigatethepresenceof Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New mutations in mtDNA among Serbian patients affected York, NY, United States, 5Department of Biochemistry and with LHON. Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Material and Methods: Individuals included in this Monash University, Clayton Campus, Melbourne, Australia, study were recruited from the Child and Adolescent 6Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and Centre for Neurology and Psychiatry Clinic and from Neurology Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Perth, Clinic CCS,Belgrade,Serbia.Allexaminedindividualsfor Australia, 7Institute Imagine, Paris, France, 8Murdoch 17 unrelated familes had characteristic clinical presentation Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, suggestingthepresenceofLHON.MultiplesegmentalPCR Melbourne, Austria, 9Department of Biological and Medical amplicons of mtDNA have been sequenced by Sanger’s Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, Oxford Brookes method and the obtained results were compared with the University,Oxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,10Departmentsof referent mtDNA sequence. Pediatric, Neurology and Genetics, Hospital Necker-Enfants- Results: The most frequent primary mutations mt.3460 Malades, Paris, France, 11Pediatric Radiology Department, G>A in ND1 and mt. 11778 G>A in ND4 was found in 6 Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, AP-HP, University Rene outof15and in10outof15families,respectively. LOHN Descartes, PRES Sorbonne Paris Cite, INSERM U1000 and primary mutation 11778 G>A was associated with ND1 UMR1163,InstituteImagine,,Paris,France,12IcahnInstitute mt.3394 T>C secondary mutation caused the evolutionary for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Conserved tyrosine to histidine (Y30H). The presence of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, both 11778 G>A and 3394 T>C mutations appear to 13Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The contribute to higher penetrance of LHON. Many other Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,United mutations were detected in various parts of mitochiondrial States,14DivisionofNeurology,DepartmentofPediatrics,The genome. Some of haplotype variants were linked prefer- Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,United ential to primary mutations. States,15GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD,UnitedStates,16Howard Conclusion: Both primary and secondary mutations in Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, mtDNA need to be better characterized in light of their Massachusetts General Hospital,, Boston, MA, United States, association with clinical manifestations and progression of 17Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy. Boston, MA, United States, 18Broad Institute of MIT and P. Dawod: None. B. Rovcanin: None. M. Brankovic: Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 19Howard Hughes None. A. Marjanovic: None. M. Jankovic: None. I. Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, Novakovic:None.I.Dujmovic:None.J.Jancic:None.V. Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Kostic: None. 20NSERMU1163,ParisDescartesUniversity-SorbonneParis Cite, Institute Imagine, Paris, France, 21School of Molecular Sciences,UniversityofWesternAustralia,,Crawley,Australia, 22Nemours Children’s Hospital,, Orlando, FL, United States,182 J.delPicchia 23Division of Genetics, Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children, part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. R. Bai: A. Employment Orlando, FL, United States, 24University of Pennsylvania (full orpart-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. S.E. Calvo: None. PerelmanSchoolofMedicine,Philadelphia,PA,UnitedStates, V.K. Mootha: None. J. Christodoulou: None. A. Rotig: 25INSERM U1163, Paris Descartes University - Sorbonne None.A.Filipovska:None.I.Cristian:None.M.J.Falk: Paris Cite, Institute Imagine, Paris, France, 26Victorian None. M.D. Metodiev: None. D.R. Thorburn: None. Clinical Genetic Services, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia P06.36D Mutations in NDUFAF8 cause Leigh syndrome with an The synthesis of all 13 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)- isolated complex I deﬁciency encoded protein subunits of the human oxidative phos- phorylation (OXPHOS) system is carried out by mito- C. L.Alston1,2,M. T.Veling3,4,J. Heidler5,L. S.Taylor6, chondrial ribosomes (mitoribosomes). Defects in the L. He6,2,A. Broomﬁeld7,J. Pavaine8,H.Prokisch9,10, stability of mitoribosomal proteins or mitoribosome S. Wortmann9,10,11,P. E.Bonnen12,R.McFarland1,2, assembly impair mitochondrial protein translation, causing I.Wittig5,13,14, D.J. Pagliarini3,4, R.W.Taylor1,2 combined OXPHOS enzyme deﬁciency and clinical dis- ease. Here we report four autosomal-recessive pathogenic 1Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle mutations in the gene encoding the small mitoribosomal University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2NHS subunit protein, MRPS34, in six subjects from four unre- Highly Specialised Service for Rare Mitochondrial Disorders, lated families with Leigh syndrome and combined Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Morgridge Institute OXPHOS defects. Whole-exome sequencing was used to for Research, Madison, WI, United States, 4Department of independently identify all variants. Two splice-site muta- Biochemistry,UniversityofWisconsin–Madison,Madison,WI, tions were identiﬁed, including homozygous c.321+1G>T United States, 5Functional Proteomics, Goethe-Universität, in a subject of Italian ancestry and homozygous c.322- Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 6Wellcome Centre for 10G>Ainaffectedsiblingpairsfromtwounrelatedfamilies Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle upon Tyne, United of Puerto Rican descent. In addition, compound hetero- Kingdom, 7Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St zygous MRPS34 mutations were identiﬁed in a proband of Mary'sHospital,ManchesterAcademicHealthScienceCentre Frenchancestry;amissense(c.37G>A[p.Glu13Lys])anda (MAHSC), Manchester, United Kingdom, 8Department of nonsense (c.94C>T [p.Gln32*]) variant. We demonstrated Paediatric Neuroradiology, Royal Manchester Children's that these mutations reduce MRPS34proteinlevelsandthe Hospital, Central Manchester Foundation Trust, Manchester, synthesis of OXPHOS subunits encoded by mtDNA. United Kingdom, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Examination of the mitoribosome proﬁle and quantitative Universität München, München, Germany, 10Institute of proteomicsshowedthatthemitochondrialtranslationdefect Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, was caused by destabilization of the small mitoribosomal Germany, 11Department of Pediatrics, Salzburger subunit and impaired monosome assembly. Lentiviral- Landeskliniken (SALK), Paracelsus Medical University mediated expression of wild-type MRPS34 rescued the (PMU), Salzburg, Austria, 12Department of Molecular and defect in mitochondrial translation observed in skin ﬁbro- Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, blasts from affected subjects, conﬁrming the pathogenicity United States, 13Cluster of Excellence “Macromolecular of MRPS34 mutations. Our data establish that MRPS34 is Complexes”, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, requiredfornormalfunctionofthemitoribosomeinhumans Germany, 14German Center for Cardiovascular Research and furthermore demonstrate the power of quantitative (DZHK), Partner site RheinMain, Frankfurt, Germany proteomic analysis to identify signatures of defects in spe- ciﬁc cellular pathways in ﬁbroblasts from subjects with Introduction: Mitochondrial diseases are clinically and inherited disease. genetically heterogeneous metabolic conditions. Complex I N.J. Lake: None. B.D. Webb: None. D.A. Stroud: deﬁciency is the most common biochemical diagnosis, None. T.R. Richman: None. B. Ruzzenente: None. A.G. particularly prevalent in paediatric patients. Mitochondrial Compton: None. H.S. Mountford: None. J. Pulman: disease is caused by mutations affecting the mitochon- None. C. Zangarelli: None. M. Rio: None. N. Bodaert: drion’sowngenome(mtDNA)oroneofthe~1150nuclear- None. Z. Assouline: None. M.D. Sherpa: None. E.E. encoded mitoproteome components. The limited genotype: Schadt: None. S.M. Houten: None. J. Byrnes: None. E. phenotypecorrelationinmitochondrialdiseasemeansnext- M. McCormick: None. Z. Zolkipli-Cunningham: None. generation sequencing methodologies are critical for the K. Haude: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; rapid genetic diagnosis of patients. GeneDx. Z. Zhang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Materials and Methods: Whole exome and targeted Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. K. Retterer: A. Employment (full or next-generation sequencing was performed for threeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 183 subjects with suspected mitochondrial disease. Functional Introduction: Mitochondrial diseases are a clinically het- evaluation of identiﬁed variants was undertaken using erogeneousgroupofdisorderscausedbydysfunctionofthe subject ﬁbroblasts and/or muscle biopsy, including cDNA mitochondrial respiratory chain. Some mitochondrial dis- studies, complexome proﬁling, complementation studies orders affect a single organ, while many involve multiple and assessment of steady-state levels. systems such as skeletal muscle, brain, heart and liver, Results: We describe three unrelated individuals who leading to diagnostic difﬁculties. Here we present three harbourbiallelicvariantsinNDUFAF8,arecentlyidentiﬁed patients who were originally suspected to have a primary ancillary factor required for assembly of the complex I disease of skeletal muscle, leukodystrophy and brain holoenzyme.Weprovidefunctionalevidencetosupportthe malformation. pathogenicity of these NDUFAF8 variants and unequivo- Materials and methods: Patients were recruited from cally establish this gene as a cause of complex I deﬁciency threepaediatricneurologyclinicsinTurkey:Izmir,Malatya in association with an exclusively Leigh-like clinical and Diyarbakir. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was presentation. performed using Illumina exome capture (38 Mb target). Conclusions:Functionalexperimentationincludingcom- Dataanalysiswascarried outontheRD-Connect Genome- plementation studies and complexome proﬁling of subject Phenome Analysis Platform. Standard ﬁltering criteria with cell lines establishes NDUFAF8 as the twelfth complex I MAF<1% and high/moderate VEP were used, as well as a assembly factor associated with human disease and list consisting of >5,000 medically interpretable genes. validates the importance of orphan gene characterisation. Results: We identiﬁed a homozygous frameshift variant Acknowledgements: NIHR doctoral fellowship (NIHR- (p.Glu41GlyfsTer10) in NDUFA12 and a homozygous HCS-D12-03-04); Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial missensevariant(p.Gln85His)inNDUFS3,bothassociated Research(203105/Z/16/Z);MRCCentreforNeuromuscular with Leigh syndrome due to mitochondrial complex I Diseases (G0601943); NHS Highly Specialised Service for deﬁciency (OMIM# 256000), and a homozygous nonsense Rare Mitochondrial Disorders; The Lily Foundation; variant (p.His158ProfsTer8) in TACO1 associated with Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft: SFB 815/Z1; BMBF mitochondrial complex IV deﬁciency (OMIM# 220110). mitoNET: 01GM1113B. The views expressed are those of All the variants were highly pathogenic and were absent in the author(s) and not necessarily the NHS, NIHR or DoH. the control population, suggesting they were disease- C.L. Alston: None. M.T. Veling: None. J. Heidler: causing. Critical clinical review and metabolic analysis None. L.S. Taylor: None. L. He: None. A. Broomﬁeld: conﬁrmed the mitochondrial deﬁciency. None. J. Pavaine: None. H. Prokisch: None. S. Wort- Conclusions: Next generation sequencing has the mann: None. P.E. Bonnen: None. R. McFarland: None. advantage of allowing an unbiased genetic diagnosis. We I. Wittig: None. D.J. Pagliarini: None. R.W. described three cases that had been initially diagnosed as Taylor: None. myopathy, brain malformation and leukodystrophy, and WES resulted in the diagnoses of mitochondrial disorders. P06.37A Importantly,thiswillallowforappropriateclinicalmanage- Unexpected genetic diagnosis of mitochondrial disease in ment of these patients. three consanguineous Turkish families A. Topf: None. Y. Oktay: None. S. Balaraju: None. E. Yılmaz:None.E.Sönmezler:None.A.Yaramis:None.S. A. Topf1,Y. Oktay2,3,S.Balaraju1, E.Yılmaz2,E.Sönmezler2, Güngör: None. S. Laurie: None. S. Beltran: None. I. A. Yaramis4,S. Güngör5,S.Laurie6,7, S.Beltran6,7,I.Gut6,7, Gut: None. H. Lochmüller: None. S. Hiz: None. R. H.Lochmüller1, S.Hiz8,R. Horvath1 Horvath: None. 1Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 2Izmir P06.38B Biomedicine and Genome Center, Dokuz Eylul University Innovative Next Generation Sequencing strategy for Health Campus, Izmir, Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylul University, screening mitochondrial DNA mutations as a robust School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, alternative of conventional methods Turkey, 4Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Diyarbakir Memorial Hospital, Diyarbakir, Turkey, 5Inonu University, Faculty of A. Legati,N.Zanetti, C. Péron,E. Lamantea,D.Ghezzi Medicine, Turgut Ozal Research Center, Department of Paediatric Neurology, Malatya, Turkey, 6CNAG-CRG, Centre Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico ‘Carlo Besta’, Milan, for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Italy Technology, Barcelona, Spain, 7Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 8Dokuz Eylul University, School of Human mitochondria produce ATP and metabolites to Medicine, Department of Paediatric Neurology, Izmir, Turkey support development and maintain cellular homeostasis.184 J.delPicchia Mitochondria harbor multiple copies of a maternally Introduction: The Malta BioBank (BBMRI.mt) partici- inherited non-nuclear genome (mtDNA) and defects in its pated in the BBMRI-Large Prospective Cohort (BBMRI- replicationornucleotidemetabolismcausepointmutations, LPC) whole exome sequencing (WES) call with a colla- deletions,ordepletionofmtDNA.Thesegeneticalterations borativeresearchprojectwithHacettepeUniversity,Turkey can lead to multi-system syndromes, including neuromus- to sequence a total of 50 exomes from patients with cular and neurodegenerative diseases. To date, approaches genetically undiagnosed mitochondrial disorders. basedonSangertechnologyandSouthernblothaveformed MaterialsandMethods:TheMaltesecohortincluded13 the basis of mtDNA screening but these technologies are probands (7 children and 6 adults) and 2 unaffected inherently hampered by limitations in speed, throughput, relatives. Whole exome sequencing and bioinformatics resolution, and associated costs. analysiswerecarriedoutattheCentroNacionaldeAnálisis In this study, we describe a robust strategy for screening Genómico (CNAG-CRG) in Barcelona. Phenotypic data of mtDNA alterations through a PCR free NGS approach in each participant was recorded on PhenoTips. Exome data order to assess with high accuracy point mutations and was analysed on the RD-Connect Genome-Phenome single or multiple large deletions in both homoplasmic or Analysis Platform. heteroplasmic state. Mitochondrial DNA is extracted from Results: A comparative analysis of rare autosomal biological samples with the Mitochondrial DNA Isolation recessive mutations shows that some patients share the Kit (Abcam), processed according to Nextera XT DNA same variants. Rare missense mutations in the mitochond- library Prep Kit (Illumina), and sequenced on MiSeq rially encoded cytochrome B gene (MT-CYB) at positions benchtop sequencer (Illumina). The output obtained for 14766and 15326were presentin6 and11oftheprobands eachsampleanalyzedisrepresentedbythefullsequenceof respectively. The mtDNA mutation at position 15326 mtDNA at an high depth of coverage. We developed an (rs2853508) was not present in the reference Maltese innovative bioinformatic analysis of deep NGS data to Exome database, whereas that at position 14766 detect mitochondrial haplogroups, heteroplasmic mutations (rs57236041) had a frequency of 59%. and large mtDNA deletions with higher accuracy and Conclusion:Theexomesequencedatageneratedthrough sensitiveness respect to standard techniques. In addition, this collaborative research will aid in establishing a genetic thisapproachallowsustopreciselymapandquantifylarge diagnosis for these rare disease patients. heteroplasmic mtDNA deletions from the analysis of NGS Theresearchleadingtotheseresultshasreceivedfunding coverage data, avoiding the bias introduced by polymerase from the European Community’s Seventh Framework ampliﬁcation for shorter mtDNA molecules that character- Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. ize the NGS approaches published in the literature so far. 2012-305444, the 2016 BBMRI-LPC WES call and the A.Legati: None. N.Zanetti: None. C.Péron:None. E. Malta Government Scholarship Scheme. Lamantea: None. D. Ghezzi: None. J.Vella:None.J.Borg:None.D.Soler:None.N.Vella: None. J. Aquilina: None. E. Said: None. I. Borg: None. P06.39C A.E. Felice: None. Diagnosis of mitochondrial disorders by whole exome sequencing P06.40D High-throughput sequencing of the whole mitochondrial J.Vella1,2,J.Borg1,3,D.Soler4,N.Vella5,J.Aquilina5,E.Said6, genome in 974 patients with mitochondrial disease: New I.Borg6,7,A. E.Felice1,2,6 insights and challenges for the interpretation of mitochondrial DNA variants 1Malta BioBank (BBMRI.mt), Centre of Molecular Medicine and Biobanking, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, C. Bris1,2,D.Goudenège1,2, V.Desquiret-Dumas1,2, M.Charif2, 2Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of N.Gueguen1,2,S. Belal2, C.Verny3,2,G.Lenaers2, Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, D.Bonneau1,2,P. Reynier1,2,P. Amati-Bonneau1,2, 3DepartmentofAppliedBiomedicalScience,FacultyofHealth V. Procaccio1,2 Sciences, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 4Department of Paediatrics, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 5Department 1Biochemistry and Genetics Department, Angers University of Neuroscience, Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, Hospital,Angers,France,2UMRCNRS6015-INSERMU1083, 6DepartmentofPathology,MaterDeiHospital,Msida,Malta, UniversityofAngers,Angers,France,3Neurologydepartment, 7Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France University of Malta, Msida, Malta Mitochondrial diseases owe their clinical heterogeneity to the dual origin of mitochondrial proteins: nuclear andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 185 mitochondrial genomes (mtDNA). We used whole mtDNA Here, we report an abnormal processing of precursor analysisbyNextGenerationSequencing(NGS)inacohort proteins in human mitochondria by the mitochondrial of 974 patients with suspected mitochondrial disease. Our intermediate peptidase (MIPEP) leading to mitochondrial study demonstrated the power of our strategy, especially disease. Most nucleus-encoded mitochondrial proteins are using uroepithelial cells as source of mtDNA, with the synthesized inthe cytosol as precursor proteins carrying an identiﬁcation of a pathogenic variant in 130 patients N-terminaltargetingsignalthatiscleaveduponimportinto (13.3%).However,massiveparallelsequencingusedraised mitochondriabythematrixprocessingpeptidase(MPP)and severalissuessuchas:1.LowpathogenicmtDNAvariant in some cases by other processing peptidases, like MIPEP loads. The identiﬁcation of low mutation rates contributes to ensure protein stability and functionality. Using exome to improved diagnosis, especially among relatives. How- sequencing,weidentiﬁedmutationsintheMIPEPgeneina ever,evaluatingtheclinicalrelevanceoftheselowmutation patient presenting psychomotor retardation, cerebellar rates in probands is complex, as for the m.3243A> G, syndrome and axonal neuropathy. MRI shows hyperinten- detected at low levels for 16 patients.2. Pathogenic var- sities in the bilateral atrophic putamen. iants unrelated to patient phenotype. Nevertheless, some Western immunoblotting of patient ﬁbroblast extracts ofthemcouldberegardedas"actionablemutations”calling revealed strong decease of the mutant MIPEP protein and for speciﬁc recommendations in patient management.3. anaccumulationoftheunprocessedprecursorofMRPL12– Variants of unknown signiﬁcance. A novel variant was a bonaﬁdeMIPEPsubstrate. Analysisof theassemblyand identiﬁed in 3.7% of the patients highlighting the difﬁculty function of OXPHOS using blue-native (BN) PAGE and in prioritizing them, because of the weakness of in silico respirometry,respectively,showeddefectsinthebiogenesis tools and databases, and the lack of guidelines.4. Inte- and activity of complexes I, IV and V in subject’s grative analysis. Currently, diagnostic laboratory do not ﬁbroblasts. We carried out functional complementation use information such as mitochondrial haplogroups or rare experiments in patient ﬁbroblasts stably expressing wild co-occurrences of mtDNA variants, for explaining pheno- typeMIPEPprotein,whichshowedrestorationofMRPL12 typic differences within patients carrying the same muta- processing and OXPHOS assembly and function thereby tion. Our study shows that mtDNA screening by NGS conﬁrming that MIPEP is the disease-causing gene. Our signiﬁcantly improves the diagnosis of mitochondrial dis- studies further expand the genotypic and phenotypic orders.However, thetechnique increases thecomplexityof heterogeneity of MIPEP-linked mitochondrial disease and appreciating the variants identiﬁed, thereby posing new provide important insights into its pathophysiology. challenges in the molecular diagnosis of mitochondrial J. Pulman: None. B. Ruzzenente: None. L. Bianchi: diseases. None. C. Bole-Feysot: None. P. Nitschké: None. A. C. Bris: None. D. Goudenège: None. V. Desquiret- Munnich: None. A. Rötig: None. M.D. Metodiev: None. Dumas: None. M. Charif: None. N. Gueguen: None. S. Belal: None. C. Verny: None. G. Lenaers: None. D. P06.43C Bonneau: None. P. Reynier: None. P. Amati-Bonneau: MutationsinMRPS14causeintellectualdisability,neonatal None. V. Procaccio: None. lactic acidosis, cachexia and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with distinct dysmorphic features P06.42B Mutations in the mitochondrial intermediate peptidase C. B.Jackson1, M.Huemer2,3, R.Bolognini4, F.Martin5, (MIPEP)causemultipleOXPHOSdeﬁciency,psychomotor B. Donner6, G.Szinnai7, J.Nuoffer8, A.Wartiovaara9, retardation, cerebellar syndrome and axonal neuropathy A. Schaller4 J.Pulman1,B.Ruzzenente1, L.Bianchi1, C.Bole-Feysot1, 1Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University P. Nitschké1,A. Munnich2,1, A.Rötig1,M.D.Metodiev1 Children's Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3Division of Metabolism and Children’s Research Center, Zürich, 1UMR1163, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Switzerland, 4Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, Institut IMAGINE, Paris, France, 2Departments of Pediatrics, 5Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6Division of Radiology and Genetics, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Cardiology, Basel, Switzerland, 7Division of Pediatric Paris, France Endocrinology, Basel, Switzerland, 8Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bern, Switzerland, 9Biomedicum Helsinki, Bern, Mitochondrial diseases represent a large group of rare and Finland heterogeneous genetic disorders that are associated with different disease mechanisms. Introduction: Multiple respiratory dysfunction is asso- ciated with defects in mitochondrial replication and186 J.delPicchia translation.Possibly,duetotheirdetrimentaleffect,defects Introduction: Complex III (CIII) presents the center of the of the mitochondrial ribosome are rare. Here we report that mitochondrial respiratory chain. Its deﬁciency is one of the a mutated essential mitochondrial small ribosome subunit least common oxidative phosphorylation defects associated causes mental retardation, cachexia, muscle hypotonia, with mitochondrial disease, with pathogenic variants in 10 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with elevated lactate in a genes encoding complex III subunits or assembly factors Turkish girl born to consanguineous parents. identiﬁed and associated with a broad phenotypical Materials and Methods: DNA from blood was used for spectrum. Next Generation Sequencing via MitoExome panel. Mito- Material and methods: Two unrelated individuals with chondrialrespiratorychainfunctionwasassessedinskeletal early-onsethypertrophiccardiomyopathyandlacticacidosis muscleviaenzymaticactivityandinprimaryﬁbroblastsvia underwent genetic analysis (whole exome sequencing, RT- oxymetricmeasurementsandnativemitochondrialcomplex PCR, Sanger sequencing). Functional studies were per- assembly. Ribosomal RNA stability was analysed by formed in proband derived ﬁbroblasts. Northern-blotting and qPCR in ﬁbroblasts. Mitochondrial Results: We identiﬁed biallelic mutations in UQCRFS1, translation capacity was determined in ﬁbroblasts by 35S- encoding the ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase, Rieske methionine incorporation into newly synthesized proteins iron-sulfur polypeptide 1, a catalytic subunit of the CIII. and separated on SDS-PAGE. For complementatio, wild- One proband carried homozygous intronic splice-site typeMRPS14cDNAwasclonedintoalentiviralvectorand variant. Splicing analysis revealed deletion of 30 nucleo- stable lines generated via antibiotic selection. tides. The other proband had two compound heterozygous Results: Targeted next generation sequencing revealed a missense variants. Proband derived ﬁbroblasts showed homozygous variant in mitochondrial small ribosomal deﬁcient oxygen consumption rate. Western blot analysis protein 14 (MRPS14). Biochemical characterisation of isolated mitochondria showed a reduction of UQCRFS1 revealed an enzymatic complex IV deﬁciency in skeletal inaffectedprobands,aswellasadecreaseofCIIIassembly muscle with total mitochondrial translation greatly factor UQCC2. We also observed reduction of complex I decreased in ﬁbroblasts alongside all mitochondrially subunit NDUFS4. Furthermore, Blue-Native gel electro- encoded respiratory subunits. Lentiviral complementation phoresis of digitonin-solubilized mitochondria showed conﬁrmed the pathogenicity of the novel variant. decrease of both complex III and complex I. Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst mutation in any mitochon- Conclusions: Until now, variants in UQCRFS1 and drial ribosomal protein so far reported not affecting impaired complex III activity have only been reported in ribosomalstability,butdrasticallydecreasingmitochondrial relation with gastric and breast cancer. Here we present translation capacity. evidence that biallelic variants in UQCRFS1 can cause C.B. Jackson: None. M. Huemer: None. R. Bolognini: mitochondrialdiseasewithearlyonsetcardiomyopathyand None. F. Martin: None. B. Donner: None. G. Szinnai: lacticacidosis.CombinedcomplexIII/Ideﬁciencyseemsto None. J. Nuoffer: None. A. Wartiovaara: None. A. be the common pattern of complex III subunit/assembly Schaller: None. factor defects. M. Gusic: None. G. Schottmann: None. R.G. Feich- P06.44D tinger: None. M. Wagner: None. J.A. Mayr: None. C. Recessive mutations in UQCRFS1, encoding the Rieske Du:None.C.Lee:None.N.Lorenz:None.E.Gill:None. iron-sulfur protein, are associated with mitochondrial S. Morales-Gonzales: None. D.M. Panneman: None. A. complex III deﬁciency, lactic acidosis and cardiomyopathy Rötig: None. R.J.T. Rodenburg: None. S.B. Wortmann: None. H. Prokisch: None. M. Schuelke: None. M.Gusic1,2,G.Schottmann3,R.G.Feichtinger4,M.Wagner1,2, J.A. Mayr4, C.Du5,C.Lee3,N.Lorenz6,E. Gill3, S.Morales- P06.45A Gonzales3, D.M. Panneman7,A.Rötig8,R. J.T. Rodenburg7, Homozygosity mapping in maple syrup urine disease S. B.Wortmann1,2,4,H.Prokisch1,2,M. Schuelke3 patients from Iran: Identiﬁcation of novel, recurrent mutations and in silico analysis of novel mutations 1HelmholtzZentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany, H.SaeiAhan1,M.Alaei2,S.DabaghBagheri3, H.Bagherian3, 3Charité–Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, A. Setoodeh4,M.Abiri1,3,S. Zeinali2,3,5 4Salzburger Landeskliniken (SALK) and Paracelsus Medical University (PMU), Salzburg, Austria, 5Medizinische 1MedicalGeneticandMolecularBiologyDepartment,Faculty Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 6Municipal ofMedicine,IranUniversityofMedicalScience,,Tehran,Iran, Hospital Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 7RadboudUMC, Islamic Republic of, 2Pediatric Endocrinology and Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Institut Imagine, Paris, France Metabolism, Moﬁd Children’s Hospital, Shahid BeheshtiAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 187 University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Mitochondrial diseases can result from mutations in either Republic of, 3Dr. Zeinali’s Medical Genetics Laboratory, the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or the nuclear DNA Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center,, Tehran, Iran, (nDNA). The most commonly used techniques to detect Islamic Republic of, 4Department of Pediatrics, Tehran single nucleotide variants in the mtDNA are Sanger University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Iran, Islamic sequencing of certain mutations or next generation Republic of, 5Department of Molecular Medicine, sequencing of the whole mtDNA. With the introduction of Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran,, exomeandgenomesequencing,itisnowpossibletodetect Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of variants on both the nDNA and the mtDNA with one comprehensive approach. We performed an analysis of the Introduction: Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is a rare mtDNA on exome sequencing data from leucocyte derived inborn error of metabolism of branched-chain amino acid DNAof1,692individualsforwhichexomesequencingwas metabolism.Thediseaseprevalenceishigherinpopulations performed in a diagnostic setting with various indications. with the higher rate of consanguineous marriage like Iran In total, 26 (likely) clinical relevant variants in the mtDNA (38.6%).Differentmutationshavebeenpreviouslyreported were detected. This resulted in 40 conclusive diagnoses in BCKDHA, BCKDHB, DBT, and DLD is known to be equalinganoveralldiagnosticyieldof~2.4%.Lookingonly responsible for MSUD phenotype. at the solved cases, 5.7% had disease due to mutations in Materials and Methods: In this study, two sets of themtDNA.Ofthe26differentvariants,threewerelistedas multiplex polymorphic STR (short tandem repeat) markers “reported” in MitoMap and we conﬁrmed pathogenicity by linked to the above-mentioned genes were used in functional tests and/or segregation analysis. An additional homozygositymappinginordertoﬁndprobablepathogenic eightnovel,todateunpublishedvariantswereidentiﬁed.Of changes in 40 studied families. The families who showed note, we did not only identify causative mutations in homozygous haplotypes for BCKDHA, BCKDHB and patients with suspected mitochondrial disease. However, DBT genes were subsequently sequenced. read-depthofthemtDNAwasnotenoughtoreliablydetect Results: Our ﬁndings revealed that exon 2, 4 and 6 of deletions in the mtDNA and exome sequencing should be BCKDHA gene contained most of the mutations which complementedbye.g.long-rangePCRincertaincases.This were novel. The changes include one reported point studyshowsthatmutationsinthemtDNAcanbefoundina mutation (c.890G>A (p. R297H)), 7 nucleotide insertion signiﬁcantproportionofpatientswithsuspectedmonogenic (c.355-356Ins7nt(p.D355Dfs))andasplicesitemutation disorders. Exome sequencing can reliably detect those (c.288G>A). In BCKDHB gene we identiﬁed one reported variants resulting in a high diagnostic yield. (c.853 C>T (p. R285X)) and two novel point mutations M. Wagner: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers [(c.599 C>T (p. P200L), c.484 A>G (p. N162D)]. In DBT bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Bayer gene we found novel homozygote deletion of exon 5,6 and Vital.B.Alhaddad:None.R.Berutti:None.H.Prokisch: 7 in one patient as well as a point mutation and deletion None. T. Strom: None. S.B. Wortmann: None. (c.363delCT/ c.1238T>C). Conclusion: Computational approaches were used to P06.47C analyze these novel mutations in terms of their impact on Common facial phenotype of patients with Mucolipidosis protein structure. Computational structural modeling indi- type IV: a clinical observation reafﬁrmed by facial cated that these mutations might affect structural stability dysmorphology novel analysis technology and multimeric assembly of branched-chain keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC). B. Pode-Shakked1,2,Y. Levi1,N.Fleischer3,L. Wolf3, H. Saei Ahan: None. M. Alaei: None. S. Dabagh Y. Finezilber1,2,L. Greenbaum1,2, S.Putter1,2,A. Raas- Bagheri:None.H.Bagherian: None.A.Setoodeh:None. Rothschild1,2 M. Abiri: None. S. Zeinali: None. 1Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty P06.46B ofMedicine,Tel-AvivUniversity,Tel-Aviv,Israel,3FDNAInc., Exome sequencing can reliably identify mtDNA variants Boston, MD, United States increasing the diagnostic yield in a diagnostic context Background: Mucolipidosis type IV (ML-IV) is a rare M.Wagner, B. Alhaddad,R.Berutti, H.Prokisch,T. Strom, autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease, caused by S. B.Wortmann mutations in the MCOLN1 gene. It manifests with non- speciﬁc symptoms of developmental delay, esotropia and Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany even corneal clouding. While the clinical phenotype, molecularbasisandunderlyingpathomechanismhavebeen188 J.delPicchia described, the diagnosis of ML-IV remains elusive and variantswerereported.Bioinformaticsanalysiswasdoneby patients are often misdiagnosed. Our clinical observation SWISS-MODEL, the mutant proteins were generated by was that ML IV patients share common and identiﬁable homology from the wild-type GALNS 4FDI template facialfeatures,whichhaveyettobeincludedintheclinical obtained from PDB database and visualization was phenotype as described in the literature to date. Objective performed using Swiss-PdbViewer. The predictive analysis and methods: In order to validate these ﬁndings using an was run in PolyPhen-2 software (Polymorphism Phenotyp- objectiveanddigitaltool,two-dimensional facialimagesof ing v2) and SIFTS human protein v1.03 software. ten patients with ML-IV, obtained at various ages, were Results: 79% of the cohort was homozygous and 21% analyzed using facial dysmorphology novel analysis werecompoundheterozygous.Themutationc.901G>Twas (FDNA). This technology utilizes various measurements the most frequent mutation with 74% of the alleles 10,5% extracted from automatically-detected facial points from followed by mutation c.1156C>T. In addition, 1 novel facial photographs, to recognize distinct dysmorphic fea- mutation was described in c.214T>A predictive analysis turesandanalyzetheirsimilaritiestoknownfacialpatterns, identify it as pathogenic variant. termed gestalts. Conclusion:Thisstudyrevealsthemutation spectrumof Results: When analyzed in comparison to a control MPS IVA in the Colombian population. The mutation cohort of unaffected cases (n=100) and a cohort of cases spectrum data for MPS IVA disorder in the Colombian diagnosedwithsyndromesotherthanML-IV(n=100),the population are not yet completely characterized. The high ML-IV cohort showed a mean area-under-the-curve (AUC) prevalenceofthec.901G>Tmutationsuggestitisafounder of 0.77 (SD, 0.19) and 0.87 (SD, 0.05), respectively. effect cause diseases in this particular region, and In Conclusions: We describe for the ﬁrst time recognizable addition as a migration process in the Andean region. This facial features typical in patients with ML-IV. Reafﬁrmed spectrum data will be useful in the provision of better by the objective FDNA technology, the described common genetic counseling, and prenatal diagnosis. facial gestalt adds to the tools currently available for H. Pachajoa: None. E. Candelo: None. G. Caicedo: clinicians and may thus assist in reaching an earlier None. G. Porras: None. D. Ramirez: None. L. diagnosis of this rare and underdiagnosed disorder. Diaz: None. B. Pode-Shakked: None. Y. Levi: None. N. Fleischer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc. P06.49A L. Wolf: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Biallelic missense and deep intronic NDUFAF6 variants, FDNA Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, unraveled by exome sequencing and mRNA analysis, in patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; FDNA patients with Leigh syndrome Inc.Y.Finezilber:None.L.Greenbaum:None.S.Putter: None. A. Raas-Rothschild: None. A. Catania1,A.Ardissone1, D.Verrigni2, A.Legati1,A. Reyes3, E. Lamantea1,D.Diodato2,I.Moroni1,E. Bertini2, P06.48D A. Robinson3,R. Carrozzo2,M.Zeviani3,D.Ghezzi1,4 MolecularCharacterisationofMPSIVApatientsinAndean region of Colombia 1FoundationIRCCSNeurologicalInstituteBesta,Milan,Italy, 2“Bambino Gesù” Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, H.Pachajoa1,E.Candelo1,G.Caicedo1,G.Porras2, 3Medical Research Council - Mitochondrial Biology Unit, D.Ramirez1, L.Diaz1 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4University of Milan, Milan, Italy 1Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia, 2COMFAMILIAR Clinic, Pereira, Colombia Introduction: NADH dehydrogenase complex I assembly factor 6 (NDUFAF6) gene encodes a mitochondrial protein Introduction: Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are a group which is essential for early assembly stages of mitochon- of inherited metabolic lysosomal storage disorders. A sub- drial respiratory complex I. Biallelic mutations in NDU- group of this is Morquio disease, an autosomal recessive FAF6 have been identiﬁed as responsible for cases of condition which overall incidence is 0.68 per 100,000 live autosomal recessive Leigh syndrome associated with births.InColombia,studiessuggestthatMPSIVAislikely mitochondrial complex I deﬁciency. Patients and Methods: the highest prevalence worldwide. we studied two siblings and two unrelated subjects with Materials and Methods: Sixteen families and nineteen Leigh syndrome. Whole exome sequencing (WES), quan- patients from a different region of the country were tested titative PCR and sequencing on NDUFAF6 transcript were for mutation identiﬁcation, the sequence was compared to performed on patients’ biological specimens the GALNS reference sequence NM_000512.4, and geneAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 189 Results: By WES, we found a variant in NDUFAF6 had a genetic diagnosis identiﬁed, resulting in improved (c.532G>C:p.A178P) in two siblings and a singleton treatment for 620 patients. unrelated subject, all affected by Leigh syndrome. The Further testing by whole-genome (N=69) or whole- samemissensemutationwasrecentlydescribedinapatient exome (N=24)sequencing deﬁned thegeneticdiagnosis in presenting Leigh syndrome and complex I deﬁciency, 34 individuals and identiﬁed 14 novel causes of NDM. associated with an almost monoallelic expression of the Elevenpatientshadpathogenicvariantsindiseasegenesfor mutated allele at transcriptional level; nevertheless, the which neonatal hyperglycaemia had not been previously secondpathogenicmutationremainedunidentiﬁed.Herewe reported as part of the phenotype (COQ2, COQ9, LPL, provideevidencethatthesecondallelicmutationconsistsof OXCT1,NARS2,TARS2).Pathogenicvariantsinfourgenes a deep intronic variant present in all affected individuals, thought to cause diseases unrelated to NDM were found in including the previously published case. Through mRNA 69 patients in our cohort (GATA6, STAT3, LRBA, WFS1). analysis we demonstrated that the identiﬁed intronic Four novel disease genes were identiﬁed in 14 patients. mutation is responsible for the formation of an alternative Our integrated diagnostic and research approach deﬁned splice site, leading to production of an aberrant transcript. the genetic cause of NDM in 88.7% of patients (with Conclusions: A detailed analysis of whole exome improved treatment for 19%) and identiﬁed 14 novel sequencing data together with functional validation based genetic causes of NDM. on mRNA analysis may reveal pathogenic variants even in E. De Franco: None. M.N. Wakeling: None. M.B. non-exonic regions. Acknowledgments: Telethon Grant Johnson:None.S.E.Flanagan:None.S.Ellard:None.A. GGP15041; Mariani Foundation; MRC-QQR (2015-2020) T. Hattersley: None. grant; the ERC advanced grant FP7-322424, NRJ-Institut de France grant; Italian Ministry of Health. The Telethon P06.51C Biobank(grantGTB12001J)suppliedbiologicalspecimens. Targeted next generation sequencing utility in diagnosis of A. Catania: None. A. Ardissone: None. D. Verrigni: complex metabolic and neurological disorders None. A. Legati: None. A. Reyes: None. E. Lamantea: None. D. Diodato: None. I. Moroni: None. E. Bertini: D.L. Kachakova1, K.Mihova1,I.Popov1,I.Dimova2, None. A. Robinson: None. R. Carrozzo: None. M. E. Simeonov3,A. Kadum4,I.Kremensky1,V.Mitev1,R.P. Zeviani: None. D. Ghezzi: None. Kaneva1 P06.50B 1Laboratory of Genomic Diagnostics, Molecular Medicine Integration of research within clinical care identiﬁes 14 centre, Department of Medical Chemistry and biochemistry, novel genetic causes of neonatal diabetes Medical Faculty, MU- Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Laboratory of GenomicDiagnostics,MolecularMedicinecentre,Department E.DeFranco,M.N.Wakeling,M.B.Johnson,S.E.Flanagan, ofMedicalchemistryandbiochemistry,DepartmentofMedical S. Ellard,A. T.Hattersley Genetics, Medical Faculty, MU- Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Pediatric clinic „Alexandrovska University Hospital“, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Department of Clinical genetics, Specialized Hospital for active treatment of Neonatal diabetes (NDM) is diagnosed before 6 months of pediatric diseases “Prof. Ivan Mitev”, Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria age and has >25 known genetic causes. Since 2000 the Exeter laboratory hasoffered free genetic testing to anyone Introduction: Metabolic and neurological conditions are a diagnosed with NDM. Testing of all known genetic causes huge group of disorders and syndromes, characterized by of NDM using Sanger sequencing, methylation-speciﬁc- clinical variability and extreme genetic heterogeneity. Tar- MLPA and targeted next-generation-sequencing is per- geted next generation sequencing (tNGS) provides possi- formed by the Exeter Genetics laboratory using the same bility for precise genetic diagnosis of metabolic and pipeline and quality parameters of diagnostic tests. Patients neurological disorders. without a genetic diagnosis are tested by whole-exome/ Materialsandmethods:Sixpatientswithmetabolicand/ genome sequencing as part of the novel genetic aetiologies orneurologicalsymptomswerereferredin2016/2017tothe research study. Laboratory of Genome Diagnostics for performing tNGS. Weassessedthesuccessrateofthis approachinterms of The analysis was implemented on MiSeq Illumina with 1) the proportion of patients with a genetic diagnosis TruSight One kit. Resutls: In one of the patients with identiﬁed; 2) how many novel genetic causes were found. neurodegenerative disease and congenital defect in glyco- 1673 NDM patients referred from 93 countries had sylation we did not ﬁnd clinically relevant variants leading comprehensive genetic testing. 1484 individuals (88.7%) to the observed phenotype. In two of the patients with190 J.delPicchia clinicaldiagnosisglycogenosistypeIXaandmethylmalonic Results: A proven diagnosis was obtained in 78% of acidemia genetic testing conﬁrmed the diagnosis and we patientsinSCG,in49%inMCGandin33%inNCG.The found mutations in PHKA2 and ММАА respectively. The diagnostic yield was 48% for HI, 66% per FAOD and mutation in PHKA2 was new frameshift variant. In two ketogenesis defects, 59% for GSDs and other carbohydrate patients with epilepsy the genetic testing clariﬁed the disorders, and 67% for mitochondrial disorders. diagnosis. In one of these patients homozygous pathogenic Conclusions: This approach provided a diagnosis in mutation leading to severe reduction of PRODH activity about 50% of patients in whom clinical and laboratory wasfound.Thetestchangedthediagnosisfromepilepsyto evaluation did not allowed to identify a single candidate hyperpolinemia, type I. In the second patient with epilepsy gene, overtaking genetic heterogeneity and clinical varia- and progressive muscular hypotonia a new pathogenic bility. Remarkably, a diagnosis was established in 33% of frameshift variant in SLC16A2 gene mutation was found patientsbelongingtothenocandidategeneclass.Ourstudy leading to Allan-Herndon-Dudley syndrome. shows that NGS technique is cost-effective compared to Conclusions: Our results prove that tNGS is cost Sanger sequencing of multiple genes, and represents a effectiveandefﬁcientmethod,whichallowsamoreprecise powerful tool for the diagnosis of inborn errors of diagnosistobemadeformanycomplexdisordersandcould metabolism presenting with persistent hypoglycemia be considered earlier in the diagnostic practice. Acknowl- E. Ponzi: None. A. Maiorana: None. F. Lepri: None. edgements:TheresearchwassupportedbygrantDUNK01- M. Mucciolo: None. A. Novelli: None. C. Dionisi- 2/2009 by NSF, Ministry of Education and Science. Vici: None. D.L. Kachakova: None. K. Mihova: None. I. Popov: None. I. Dimova: None. E. Simeonov: None. A. Kadum: P06.53A None. I. Kremensky: None. V. Mitev: None. R.P. Polymorphisms in PPARG gene: association with obesity- Kaneva: None. related metabolic traits in a Serbian adolescent population P06.52D M.M.Peić1,N.Maksimović1,V.Vidović2,S.Vidovic2,B.Jekić1, Persistent hypoglycemia in children: contribution of NGS T. Damnjanović1, M.Grk1,M.DuanovićPjević1,I.Novaković1 in diagnosis of inborn errors of metabolism 1Institute of Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of E. Ponzi1,A. Maiorana1,F. Lepri2,M.Mucciolo2,A. Novelli2, Medicine, University of Banja Luka, Banja Luka, Bosnia and C. Dionisi-Vici1 Herzegovina 1MetabolicUnit,DepartmentofSpecialistPediatrics,Bambino Introduction: The peroxisome proliferator-activated Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Medical genetics receptor γ (PPAR-γ) is a candidate gene for obesity and laboratory department, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, type 2diabetesmellitus. Protein productPPAR-γisalipid- Rome, Italy activated transcription factor that has a main role in the expression of genes involved in adipocyte differentiation Introduction: Hypoglycemia is an important cause of and function. Although theassociation of acommon single pediatric morbidity and is often due to inborn errors of nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the PPAR-γ gene, metabolism (IEM) that present with clinical, biochemical Pro12Ala (34C>G, rs1801282), with obesity has been and genetic heterogeneity. We have developed a rapid and reported in various populations, these data are not con- accurate strategy for the molecular diagnosis of hypogly- clusive. Similarly, conﬂicting results, were obtained cemia- associated IEMs. regarding the association between metabolic phenotypes MaterialsandMethods:64patientsweretestedthrough andanotherfrequentvariant,asilentmutationofthePPAR- a custom gene panel of 65 genes, which included ﬁve γ gene, His477= (1431C>T, rs3856806). disease categories: hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (HI), This study aimed to estimate whether the PPAR-γ fatty acid-oxidation (FAOD) and ketogenesis defects, rs1801282 and PPAR-γ rs3856806 SNPs are linked with ketolysis defects, glycogen storage diseases (GSDs) and obesity-related metabolic traits in a Serbian adolescent other disorders of carbohydrate metabolism, and mitochon- population. drialdisorders.Moleculardatawerecomparedwithclinical Materials and Methods: Anthropometric and biochem- and biochemical data. Patients, investigated through an ical parameters were measured in 84 adolescent patients at extensive workup, were divided in 3 diagnostic classes: a) the age of 15, whose BMI was over 85th percentile. Body single candidate gene (SCG-9/64), b) multiple candidate massindex(BMI),fastingglucose,triglyceride,systolicand genes (MCG-43/64) and c) no candidate gene (NCG-12/ diastolic blood pressure and total cholesterol were mea- 64). sured.SubjectsweregenotypedforPro12Alaand1431C>TAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 191 SNPs by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism Patient 2. Epileptic encephalopathy (8y, male); moderate analysis. OXPHOS decrease and novel detected homozygous muta- Results: The Pro12Ala variant was associated with tion (FASTKD2). Functional analyses revealed decreased higher diastolic blood pressure in male subjects carrying protein expression and respiratory rate/ATP production, G allele (p=0,041). The 1431C>T variant was associated with increased glycolytic capacity (ﬁbroblasts). with higher systolic blood pressure in male subjects Patient 3. Case of CPEO (62y, female); multiple carrying T allele (p=0,002). OXPHOSdeﬁciencies(muscle)andtwomtDNAalterations Conclusions: Results of our preliminary study indicate (m.7486G>A,MT-TS1;mt-tRNASer(UCN),4,977bpdeletion) that a rare variant Pro12Ala (allele G), and 1431C>T rare [Bacalhau et al. Neuromuscular Disorders, in press]. variant (allele T) appear as risk factors for higher diastolic Diverse functional studies unveiled the energy failure andsystolicbloodpressure,respectively,inoverweightand cellular causes. obese male adolescents. Conclusion: We present three cases of OXPHOS M.M. Peić: None. N. Maksimović: None. V. Vidović: diseases due to different genetic causes: 1 novel nuclear None.S.Vidovic:None.B.Jekić:None.T.Damnjanović: mutation in a gene affecting a known protein (surfeit 1, None. M. Grk: None. M. Duanović Pjević: None. I. assembly factor of complex IV); 1 novel nuclear mutation Novaković: None. in a gene affecting a recently known protein; 2 mtDNA alterations(1known,1unclassiﬁed).LimitationsofNGSin P06.54B mutation detection and evaluation of OXPHOS activity as Functional genomics' studies are mandatory for clarifying the only functional parameter are addressed. pathogenicity ofnovelgeneticvariantsdetected byNGS in In all cases, the functional genomics’ approach was OXPHOS disorders essential for clarifying pathogenicity, with implications for genetic counselling. M.Grazina1,2, M.Simões1, M.Bacalhau1,2,C. Ribeiro1,M.J. Financial Support: Feder funds through the Operational Santos1,2,M.C. Macário3, J.Durães3,L. Diogo3,P. Garcia3, Competitiveness Program – COMPETE2020. M.Rocha4,A.Vincent4,S. Hardy4,A. C. Rego1,2,H.Girão5, M. Grazina: None. M. Simões: None. M. Bacalhau: L. Wong6,R.W. Taylor4 None. C. Ribeiro: None. M.J. Santos: None. M.C. Macário: None. J. Durães: None. L. Diogo: None. P. 1Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Coimbra, Garcia: None. M. Rocha: None. A. Vincent: None. S. Portugal, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Hardy: None. A.C. Rego: None. H. Girão: None. L. Coimbra, Portugal, 3Reference Centre of Inherited Metabolic Wong: None. R.W. Taylor: None. Diseases, MetabERN - Coimbra Hospital and Universitary Centre, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Wellcome Centre for P06.55C Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, The Sequentialapproachtoidentifydiseasecausingvariantsin Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, patients with mitochondrial dysfunction of a Hungarian United Kingdom, 5iCBR - Institute for Biomedicine and cohort Research, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Mitochondrial Diagnostic Laboratory, Baylor College of V. Molnár,A. Gézsi, A.Illés, P. Balicza,B. Berta, D.Csabán, Medicine, Houston, TX, United States I.J.Jimoh, A. Gál,M. J.Molnár Introduction: Genetic causes of OXPHOS disorders Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, includemutationsinmitochondrialand/ornucleargenomes. Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary Withthesigniﬁcantincreaseofgeneticdiagnosesfollowing NGS techniques, demonstrating the pathogenicity of novel Genetic diagnosis of disorders with mitochondrial dys- variants became a challenging issue. function is often challenging due to the phenotypic varia- We present 3 patients with novel genetic variants in bility and considerable genetic heterogeneity. Here we whom functional studies were mandatory for illuminating would share our experiences on analysis of 192 individual pathogenicity. WES data using phenotype-driven prioritization or candi- Case reports: Patient 1. Leigh syndrome (40y, male); date genes-based ﬁltering. Patients with positive family complex IV deﬁciency (29.7% activity) and novel homo- historywereenrollediftargetedgenetictestsfailedtoyield zygous deletion (c.-11_13del, SURF1 gene) [Ribeiro et al. conclusive results. Multisystemic and neurodegenerative Mitochondrion31(2016)84–88],detectedbySangersequen- diseases were preferred with high-quality health records. cing and not by NGS, demonstration of complex IV Phenotype proﬁles were reconstructed from clinical doc- assembly (ﬁbroblasts). umentation using HPO (#14.5+/-10.7terms/patient). The192 J.delPicchia selected cases were classiﬁed into disease-groups based on phenylalanine (Phe) levels: classic, moderate and mild the main presenting symptoms: 27%mitochondrial/multi- PKU, and mild hyperphenylalaninemia (MHP). For each systemic disease, 12%early-onset Parkinson, 7%dementia genotypic combination, the predicted phenylalanine hydro- and 11%NBIA/dystonia syndromes. Besides these groups, xylase (PAH) residual activity (PRA) and the sum of 24% unclassiﬁed and 19% were used as unaffected relative arbitraryassignedvalues(AV)weredetermined.Genotype- or healthy control; 128 as singletons, 64 individuals as based predictions of responsiveness to BH were also 4 members of 26 examined families were analyzed, respec- analyzed. tively. WES was performed on Illumina HiSeq2500 plat- Results: A strong relationship between genotypic sever- form. For interpretation, the Exomiser algorithm was ity, according to the level of PRA, and the inverse of pre- applied at ﬁrst, using variant and HPO descriptors, to rank treatment Phe levels was observed (t=4.79, P<0.0001). variants based on predicted pathogenicity and semantic The observed phenotype matched the AV predicted similarity to known phenotypes. Secondly, multi-gene- phenotype in 48% of the cases. A BH -responsiveness rate 4 panelanalysiswasfocusedtodisease-relatedgenesthatare of 37.0% was estimated. presumptive to the pathogenesis (e.g. neurodegeneration). Conclusions: The high degree of discordance found Therankedvariantswerefurtherﬁlteredusingin-housedata when the AV sum prediction system was employed fell to warehouse. After screening known causal variants of can- 33%oncethephenotypesreportedattheBIOPKUdatabase didate genes a large number of annotated features were werealsoconsidered.Weestimatedthat81%ofthepatients considered to ﬁne-tune the hypothesis about causality of a werepotentialcandidatesforaBH loadingtest.Analyzing 4 given variant to reach cc. 30% diagnostic rate. To assess the functionally hemizygous patients, we found that the candidates, item-level similarity of phenotypic terms and moderate common mutations, p.R261Q, p.V388M, and p. reverse-phenotyping of hallmark symptoms were often I65Tcontributeddecisivelytothehighgenotype-phenotype needed to complement clinical data with the typical, but discordance. Despite these discrepancies, genotype con- routinely not tested manifestations of the possible inherited tinues to be the main determinant of metabolic outcome in disorder. mostpatientswithPKU,anticipatingtheirdietaryneedsand V. Molnár: None. A. Gézsi: None. A. Illés: None. P. BH responsiveness. 4 Balicza: None. B. Berta: None. D. Csabán: None. I.J. E. Vieira Neto: B. Research Grant (principal investiga- Jimoh: None. A. Gál: None. M.J. Molnár: None. tor,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellas grants already received); Modest; Coordination for the P06.56D Improvement of Higher Level Personnel (Capes) of the Genotype-phenotype correlations and BH predicted Ministry of Education, Brazil. F. Laranjeira: None. D. 4 responsiveness in patients with phenylketonuria from Rio Quelhas: None. I. Ribeiro: None. A. Seabra: None. N. de Janeiro, Southeast Brazil Mineiro:None.L.M.Carvalho:None.L.Lacerda:None. M.G. Ribeiro: None. E. Vieira Neto1,2,F.Laranjeira3,D.Quelhas3,I. Ribeiro3, A. Seabra3,N.Mineiro3,L. M.Carvalho4,L. Lacerda3,M.G. P06.57A Ribeiro2 Mutation analysis of the PAH gene in phenylketonuria patients from Rio de Janeiro, Southeast Brazil 1Agência Nacional de Saúde Suplementar, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de E. V.Neto1,2, F.E. R.Laranjeira3,D.Quelhas3,4,A. Seabra3,5, Janeiro, Brazil, 3Centro de Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto N.Mineiro3, I.Ribeiro3,4, L.M. Carvalho6,L. Lacerda3,M. G. Magalhães,Porto,Portugal,4InstitutoEstadualdeDiabetese Ribeiro2 Endocrinologia Luiz Capriglione, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 1Agência Nacional de Saúde Suplementar, Gerência de Introduction: The clinical phenotypes of phenylketonuria Monitoramento Assistencial, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, (PKU) are highly variable. This has been attributed to 2Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Instituto de genetic heterogeneity and frequent compound hetero- Puericultura e Pediatria Martagão Gesteira, Serviço de zygosis. The correlations between phenotypic character- Genética Médica, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3Unidade de istics, BH predicted responsiveness, and the causative Bioquímica Genética, Centro Genética Médica Jacinto 4 mutations found in PKU patients from Rio de Janeiro, Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar Porto, Porto, Portugal, Brazil, were evaluated. 4Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigação Biomédica, Porto, Materials and Methods: A total of 102 completely Portugal, 5Faculdade de Ciências / Instituto de Ciências genotyped patients were included. They were assigned to Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, oneofthefollowingphenotypesaccordingtopre-treatmentAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 193 Portugal, 6Instituto de Diabetes e Endocrinologia Luiz 4Kawsar Human Genetics research Center, Tehran, Iran, Capriglione, Serviço de Metabologia, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Islamic Republic of, 5Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Iran University of Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive disease Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of resulting from mutations in the PAH gene. Most of the patients are compound heterozygotes, and the combination Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an inborn error of amino acid ofmutationsisamajorfactorindeterminingthephenotypic metabolism caused by mutations in phenylalanine hydro- differences foundamongthem.Themutationalspectrumof xylase (PAH). Herein, we reported that among the 772 PKU in the state of Rio de Janeiro, Southeast Brazil, was patients diagnosed with PKU, there are 635 classic (82%) analyzedbysequencingthe PAHgenefrom genomicDNA and 137 previously reported non-classic subtypes (18%) of 102 patients. Deletions and duplications were also from all ethnicities of 31 provinces in Iran. The disease screened using MLPA analysis. Both mutated alleles were causing mutations were found in 611 out of 635 classic identiﬁed in all patients. Nine (8.8%) homozygous and 93 (with a diagnostic detection rate of 96%) and in 97 out of (91.2%) compound heterozygous patients were found. The 137non-classicpatients(withadiagnosticdetectionrateof spectrum included 37 causative mutations, including a new 71%).Tothebestofourknowledge,thisreportisthemost mutation - p.G312C. Missense, nonsense, and splicing comprehensive study of the molecular genetics of PKU in variants corresponded to 63.7%, 2.9% and 22.6% of the Iran, identifying 100 distinct mutations in the PAH gene, mutant alleles, respectively. Large (1.5%), and small dele- including15previouslyunreportedmutations.Interestingly, tions, inframe (5.4%) and with frameshift (3.9%), com- we found unique cases of PKU with uniparental disomy, prised theremainder.The most frequentmutations were: p. germline mosaicism and co-inheritance with another Men- V388M (12.7%), p.R261Q (11.8%), IVS10-11G>A delian single-gene disorder that provides new insights for (10.3%), IVS2+5G>C (6.4%), p.S349P (6.4%), p.R252W improvingthegeneticcounseling,prenataldiagnosis(PND) (5.4%), p.I65T (4.4%), and p.T323del (4.4%). The Iberian and/orpre-implantationgeneticdiagnosis(PGD) forinborn Peninsula, especially Portugal, is the major source of PAH error of metabolism group of disorders. mutations in Rio de Janeiro. Mutations that have other S. Zeinali: None. T. Shirzad: None. A.H. Saeidian: geographicalorigins,suchasIVS2+5G>C,p.G352Vfs*48, None. H. Bagherian: None. M. Abiri: None. and IVS12+1G>A were also detected. Genetic drift and founder effect may be responsible for the high frequencies P06.59C ofthemutationsp.S349Pandp.T323del inthis population. PMM2-CDG patients gestalt: is recognizable enough? Grant from "Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Level Personnel (Capes) of the Ministry of Education, A. Martinez-Monseny, M.Bolasell, C.Arjona, N.Fleischer, Brazil’ F. Palau,M.Serrano E.V. Neto: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Sant Joan de Deu Hospital, Barcelona, Spain grants already received); Modest; FBM Indústria Farm- acêutica Lda., Anápolis, Goiás, Brasil, Danone Lda., São Background: Phosphomanomutase deﬁciency (PMM2- Paulo, Brasil. F.E.R. Laranjeira: None. D. Quelhas: CDG, MIM#212065) is the most frequent congenital dis- None. A. Seabra: None. N. Mineiro: None. I. Ribeiro: orderofglycosylation.InitiallyPMM2-CDGwasdeﬁnedas None. L.M. Carvalho: None. L. Lacerda: None. M.G. a combination of systemic involvement, developmental Ribeiro: None. delay due to cerebellar atrophy, peculiar fat pads and inverted nipples. It seems to be mild and not speciﬁc dys- P06.58B morphic facial features that may change with age. We aim Molecualr genetics of a cohort of more than 770 cases of to describe the dysmorphic facial traits and draw a recog- PKU in a consanguineous population nizable facial pattern. Methods: We evaluated the frequency of occurrence of S. Zeinali1, T.Shirzad2,A. H.Saeidian3,H.Bagherian4, clinical symptoms and analysed the performance of facial M.Abiri5 gestalt computer-assisted image analysis in PMM2-CDG patients. We used the Research application of the 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Face2Gene tool (FDNA Inc. Boston, MA, USA). It 2Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Iran, generated a classiﬁcation model on three groups of frontal Islamic Republic of, 3Department of Dermatology and photos: the group-PMM2, unaffected and Angelman Cutaneous Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas Syndrome, because it was the most frequent syndrome- Jefferson University,, Philadelphia, PA, United States, match offered by the automated tool.194 J.delPicchia Results: We included 34 patients, 20 boys and 14 girls, and Regulation) gene network. In all tested Pompe patients aged 6-18, of Caucasian ethnicity. The confusion matrix we observe a 6-10 fold transcriptional upregulation of the describing a multiclass comparison of actual class as DEPTOR mRNA, which is an inhibitor of the mTOR compared to a predicted class showed a true positive rate pathway. Additionally, an mRNA downregulation of sev- for each group with values signiﬁcantly better than a eral mTOR activating genes including GAS6, Rhes and random assignment of photos. The area under the receiver MC4R was detected as well, further hinting to an overall operating characteristics curve (AUC of ROC) demon- inhibitionofthemTORpathway.Theseresultssuggestthat strated values p>0,85 (p-value<0,05) in all binary cells of Pompe patients initiate a compensatory response to comparisons. trytorestorethedisturbedlysosomalfunctionality.Whether Conclusions: Facial features of PMM2-CDG patients this cell intrinsic restoration mechanism is speciﬁc for present a recognizable and differentiated gestalt. As far as Pompe patients or is common for lysosomal storage dis- this application is open access and easily available, it is eases in general remains to be investigated. considered a useful tool for daily clinical practice. Further A. Gheldof: None. S. Seneca: None. K. Stouffs: None. studies will study these dysmorphic features in early ages L.VoNgoc:None.A.Jansen:None.M.DeRademaeker: and its correlation with neurological involvement and None.H.Laeremans:None.A.Jonckheere:None.L.De genotype. Meirleir: None. A. Martinez-Monseny: None. M. Bolasell: None. C. Arjona: None. N. Fleischer: None. F. Palau: None. M. P06.61A Serrano: None. A biallelic novel mutation in the COQ5 C- methyltransferasegenegivesadiagnosisofanewsub-type P06.60D of primary CoQ10 deﬁciency RNASeq proﬁling of Pompe disease patients reveals a compensatory transcriptional response centered around A.Eliyahu1,2,M.ChristineV.Malicdan3,4,T.Vilboux4,5,B.Ben- mTOR inhibition Zeev6,2, B.Pode-Shakked1,2,7, A.Dori7,2,8,N.Shelestovich2,9, D.Marek-Yagel1,2,H.Pri-Chen4,10,I.Blatt11,L.He12, A. Gheldof1,S. Seneca1, K.Stouffs1,L. VoNgoc1,A.Jansen2, Y. Anikster1,2,13 M.De Rademaeker1,H. Laeremans3,A. Jonckheere4,L.De Meirleir5 1Metabolic Disease Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 1Centre of Medical Genetics, UZBrussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 2Centre Paediatric Neurology, UZBrussel, Brussels, Belgium, Israel, 3NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, 3Flemish Center for Detection of Metabolic Diseases, Hôpital Ofﬁce of the Director, NIH and National Human Genome Erasme, Brussels, Belgium, 4Centre of Paediatric Neurology, Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, UZAntwerpen, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Centre of Paediatric 4MedicalGeneticsBranch,NationalHumanGenomeResearch Neurology, UZBrussel, Brussels, Belgium Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Inova Translational Medicine Institute, Falls Church, Pompe disease is a lysosomal storage disorder which is VA,UnitedStates,6PediatricNeurologyUnit,EdmondandLily caused by alpha-glucosidase deﬁciency and leads to accu- Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel- mulation of glycogen in the lysosomes. The disease phe- Hashomer, Israel, 7The Dr. Pinchas Borenstein Talpiot notype is mainly characterized by muscle weakness and Medical Leadership Program, Sheba Medical Center, Tel- hypotonia,ﬁnallyresultinginrespiratorydifﬁculties.While Hashomer,Israel,8JosephSagolNeuroscienceCenter,Sackler the clinical manifestations of the disease have been well Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, documented, it remains unclear what the consequences of 9Center for Mitochondrial and Epigenomic Medicine, the excessive glycogen storage are at the transcriptional Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute,, level. For this purpose, we performed RNAseq on ﬁbro- Philadelphia, PA, United States, 10Graduate Partnership blasts of four Pompe patients and compared this to four Program(GPP), National Institute of Health (NIH), Bethesda, controls.Transcriptionalproﬁlingrevealedthepresenceofa MD,UnitedStates,11DepartmentofNeurology,ShebaMedical compensatory effect of the cells to increase lysosomal Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 12Wellcome Centre for functionality which seems to be centered around inhibition Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, The of the mTOR (mammalian Target of Rapamycin) pathway. Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, It has been shown that inhibition of the mTOR pathway United Kingdom, 13The Wohl Institute for Translational leads to nuclear localization of TFEB and subsequent acti- Medicine, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel vation of the CLEAR (Coordinated Lysosomal ExpressionAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 195 Primary Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10; MIM# 607426) deﬁ- anestimatedtotalbirthfrequencyofatleast1:500.In2017, ciencies are an emerging group of inherited Mitochondrial the European Commission established the non-proﬁt net- disorders with heterogeneous clinical phenotype. Over a work MetabERN, which connects 69 health care providers dozengenesareinvolvedinthebiosynthesisofCoQ10,and in 18 EU countries and delivers care to approximately mutations in several of these are associated with human 43,000 patients with IMDs. An important instrument to disease. However, mutations in COQ5 (MIM# 616359), improve diagnosis, treatment and wellbeing of patients is a catalyzing the only C-methylation in the CoQ10 Synthetic systematic collection of data in a registry. pathway,havenotbeenimplicatedinhumandisease.Here, Project description: The Uniﬁed European Registry for wereportthreefemalesiblingsofIraqi-Jewishdescent,who Inherited Metabolic Disorders (U-IMD) project started in had varying degrees of cerebellar ataxia, encephalopathy, February 2018. The project has three major activities: a/to seizures, and cognitive disability. We describe the remark- establish a patient registry for the MetabERN based on the able mechanism of this molecular mutation and outline common data elements of the European Platform on Rare some of the major challenges in diagnosis via molecular Disease Registration; U-IMD will be the ﬁrst uniﬁed analysis. In the cases described, a duplication in a non- European registry that encompasses all IMDs, b/to upgrade coding region of the CoQ5 gene was not diagnosable by already existing IMD registries to the standard of U-IMD, WES, and only through WGS with targeted focus of a starting with the registry of the International Working suspicious area, was it possible to reach a diagnosis of a Group on Neurotransmitter Related Disorders (iNTD) and new disease with treatment potential. Duplications in the c/todevelopastandardforminimalcoredatasetssharedby COQ5 gene, lead to reduced levels of CoQ10 in peripheral the MetabERN and the European Rare Kidney Disease white blood cells of all affected individuals and reduced Reference Network (ERKNET). The diverse nature of the CoQ10 levels in the only muscle tissue available from one heterogeneousetiologicalandclinicalspectrumoftheIMDs affected proband. CoQ10 supplementation led to clinical necessitates collection of a minimal set of common data improvementandincreasedtheconcentrationsofCoQ10in elements and the usage of controlled and standardized blood. This is the ﬁrst report of primary CoQ10 deﬁciency vocabularies such as Human Phenome Ontology or WHO causedbylossoffunctionofCOQ5,withdelineationofthe ATC classiﬁcations for the description of the clinical clinical, laboratory, histological, and molecular features, phenotype and treatment strategies, respectively. and insights regarding targeted treatment with Acknowledgement: The U-IMD is supported by EU CoQ10 supplementation. Early diagnosis of this disease project 777259 from CHAFEA. may be of great value for for successful treatment and S. Kölker: None. F. Gleich: None. T. Opladen: None. intervention strategies. M. Scarpa: None. C. Dionisi Vici: None. A. Garcia- A. Eliyahu: None. M. Christine V.Malicdan: None. T. Cazorla: None. V. Kozich: None. Vilboux: None. B. Ben-Zeev: None. B. Pode-Shakked: None. A. Dori: None. N. Shelestovich: None. D. Marek- P06.63C Yagel: None. H. Pri-Chen: None. I. Blatt: None. L. He: RNA-seqofwhole-bloodinAsianextremechildhoodobese None. Y. Anikster: None. subjects indicates defects in oxidative phosphorylationand mitochondrial pathways P06.62B U-IMD:UniﬁedEuropeanRegistryforInheritedMetabolic R. Dorajoo1,S.Ooi2,W. Liu1,L. Wang1, J.Kang1,J. Liu1,3,4, Disorders as a patient database for MetabERN Y. Lee2,5,6 S.Kölker1,F.Gleich1,T.Opladen1,M.Scarpa2,C.DionisiVici3, 1Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, A. Garcia-Cazorla4,V. Kozich5 TechnologyandResearch,Singapore,Singapore,2Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 1Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3Saw Swee 2Helios Dr. Horst Schmidt Kliniken Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden, Hock School of Public Health, National University of Germany, 3Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesu, Rome, Italy, Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 4Department of Medicine, 4Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Pediatric Research Institute and Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 5Department of Pediatrics and Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 5Singapore Institute for Adolescent Medicine, General Faculty Hospital in Prague, Clinical Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology, and Prague, Czech Republic Research, Singapore, Singapore, 6Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Khoo Teck Puat-National University Introduction: Inherited metabolic disorders (IMD) are a Children's Medical Institute, National University Hospital, prominent group of over 700 monogenic rare diseases with National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore196 J.delPicchia Introduction: Whole-blood transcriptomics have high- Sanﬁlippo C syndrome is a rare lysosomal storage disorder lighted novel disease pathways. We aimed to evaluate for caused by mutations in the HGSNAT gene, which encodes differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in whole-blood an enzyme involved in heparan sulphate (HS) degradation. between 34 extreme obese and 30 normal weight children. It is characterized by a severe and progressive neurode- We further evaluated the role of identiﬁed DEGs with generation for which no effective treatment exists. diabetes related phenotypes in 138 independent childhood Previously, we demonstrated the usefulness of siRNAs samples. targeting EXTL2 genes (involved in HS synthesis) as an Methods: Extreme childhood obesity was deﬁned as effective short-term substrate reduction therapy (SRT), on onset <10 years of age and BMI ≥98th percentile. Normal Sanﬁlippo C patients’ ﬁbroblasts. Now, we use different weightsubjectsweredeﬁnedasaBMIbetween18.5kg/m2 lentiviral vectors encoding shRNAs targeting EXTL2 to and 24.5 kg/m2. Whole-blood was collected in Paxgene analysetheirlong-termeffect.Weobserveaclearreduction tubes.RNA were library-prepped using Illumina Truseq v2 inEXTL2mRNAlevelssixtydaysaftertransductionandan kits and sequenced on the Hiseq4000 in 15-plexes. evident decrease of the HS amounts. Sequenced reads were QCed using Illumina chastity ﬁlters Due to the good results obtained, now we are using and FastQC. QCed reads were mapped to HG19 using neurons derived from patients’ induced pluripotent stem tophat and transformed to CPM and normalized between- cells(iPSC)asacellularmodel.Weareusinganestablished samples using log2 transformation. All association tests protocol to differentiate those iPSC into neurons within a were performed in Deseq2, adjusted for age, sex, ethnicity week. Neurons show mature signatures and functional and sequencing batches. propertiesafteronemonth.Thistechniquewillprovidenew Results: Mean reads of samples were 20.5 million reads. insights in the usefulness of this treatment in the main Analysis for DEGs between obese and normal weight affected cell type. To evaluate this therapeutic option, we children identiﬁed 34 DEGs (Bonferroni adjusted-p<0.05 are analysing the neurons, focusing on aspects such as the and fold-change >1.4 or <-1.4). DEGs were over- inhibition of the EXTL2 gene at the mRNA level or the representedinoxidativephosphorylationandmitochondrial accumulation of HS over time by immunocytochemistry. pathways (COX7C, NDUFS5, NDUFS4 and UQCRB). We Our preliminary results in patients’ ﬁbroblasts indicate further evaluated the role of DEGs with multiple diabetes thatshRNAscouldbealong-termSRTandopenadoorfor related traits in an additional 138 samples and identiﬁed the development of a promising therapeutic approach for nominally signiﬁcant associations with fasting glucose, Sanﬁlippo C syndrome. fasting insulin and HOMA-IR levels (p between 0.044 and Fundings:CatalanGovernment(2014SGR932),Spanish 0.0006, EMILIN2, HMGB2, NDUSF4, NDUSF5, PVRL2, Government (SAF201456562R), Asoc. Stop Sanﬁlippo STAB1 and TXN). (Spain), MPS España. Conclusion: Whole-blood RNA-seq analyses identiﬁed N. Benetó: None. E. Creus-Bachiller: None. M. genes in oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial García-Morant: None. D. Grinberg: None. L. Vilageliu: pathways associated with extreme childhood obesity that None. I. Canals: None. may also play a role in diabetes-related pathways. R. Dorajoo: None. S. Ooi: None. W. Liu: None. L. P06.65A Wang:None.J.Kang:None.J.Liu:None.Y.Lee:None. Characterization of genetic variants in centenarians associated with obesity, metabolic syndrome and P06.64D hypertriglyceridemia Substrate reduction therapy approach for Sanﬁlippo C syndrome: use of iPSC and iPSC-derived neurons from M.Mihaylova1,V. Damyanova1,L. Balabanski1,D.Serbezov1, patients as cellular models D.Nikolova1,S. Karachanak-Yankova1,D.Nesheva1, Z. Hammudeh1,S.Hadjidekova1,O.Antonova1,R. Staneva1, N.Benetó1,E. Creus-Bachiller1,M.García-Morant1, R. Vazharova2,D.Toncheva1 D.Grinberg1,L. Vilageliu1,I.Canals2,1 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical 1DepartmentofGenetics,MicrobiologyandStatistics,Faculty University of Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2 “Zdrave” s, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, ofBiology,University ofBarcelona,CIBERER, IBUB,IRSJD, 2Department of Biology, Medical Genetics and Microbiology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Stem Cells, Aging and Neurodegeneration Faculty of Medicine, Soﬁa University” St.Kliment Ohridski”, Group, Lund Stem Cell Center, University Hospital, Lund, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Sweden Introduction: It is likely that the supercentenarian’s gen- ome will not contain pathogenic variations or it’s possibleAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 197 to have some protective alleles. The aim of this study is to 20-30%oftype2diabetes(T2D)patientsaremorelikelyto characterize genetic variations associated with obesity, develop DN. Genetic vulnerability has been anticipated as metabolic syndrome and hypertriglyceridemia. an important factor for the development and progression of MaterialsandMethods:Ouranalysiswasperformedon diabeticnephropathyandvariousresearcheffortshavebeen a group of 17 supercentenarians and 34 controls. We used executed worldwide to identify the susceptible genes for the publicly available whole-genome sequence database diabetic nephropathy. Several single nucleotide poly- (Gierman HJ et al., 2014) and focused our attention on morphisms (SNPs) have been observed in different genes genetic variations at 25 genes associated with obesity and which have been found to play a major role in the genetic metabolic syndrome. susceptibilitytoDN.InthisstudyﬁveSNPs,eachfromﬁve Results: We identiﬁed 5 variations in genes TAS1R2, candidategeneslikeELMO1,CD2AP,VEGFA,HLA-Gand CLOCK, FABP2, ADRB2, TCF7L2 with pathogenic or TERF1 have been evaluated to study the susceptibility of protective effect, distributed unequally between the two these genes in the development of DN. 1260 subjects (374 studiedgroups.Twoofthevariations,ingenesCLOCKand diabetic nephropathy samples and 886 healthy controls) FABP2, can be discussed as polymorphisms of probably have been included in this study. Genotyping was per- protective signiﬁcance because their frequency is higher in formed, using High throughput AGENA MassArray tech- the group of the supercentenarians. The variations in genes nique. Four SNPs, ELMO1 (rs741301), VEGFA ADRB2,TCF7L2arewithpathogenicsigniﬁcanceandtheir (rs2010963), HLA-G (rs1063320) and TERF1 (rs2010441) frequencyisagainhigherinthegroupofsupercentenarians, showed strong association with the development of DN, which means that it is possible to refer to gene interactions whereasonemarkerrs1485780(CD2AP)didnotshowany that determine different penetrance or to impacts of other association. The study highlights that risk of diabetes- genetic mechanisms. According to some data, the TAS1R2 associated renal ailment may be enhanced by risk alleles at gene polymorphism is risky for diabetes and dyslipidemia. different susceptibility loci, in the presence of hyperglyce- Discussion: The data for the higher frequencies of the mia. The grant to Gurvinder Singh by UGC-UPA Scheme possible protective variants in the CLOCK and FABP2 and and the grant No. F.8-2/2008(NS/PE),UGC,India to AJS low frequencies of pathogenic variants in the TAS1R2 and Bhanwer through CPEPA has been acknowledged. ADRB2genesinthegroupofsupercentenariancomparedto G.Singh:None.P.Raina:None.H.S.Sandhu:None.I. the control group is in line with our hypothesis but they Sharma: None. V. Sharma: None. I. Sethi: None. R. need further research. Kapoor: None. V. Vig: None. E. Rai: None. S. Sharma: M. Mihaylova: None. V. Damyanova: None. L. None. A. Bhanwer: None. Balabanski: None. D. Serbezov: None. D. Nikolova: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. D. Nesheva: P06.67C None. Z. Hammudeh: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. O. Homozygous mutation p.Arg192Cys of the TALDO1 gene Antonova: None. R. Staneva: None. R. Vazharova: causes primary amenorrhea and hepatosplenomegaly None. D. Toncheva: None. without liver cirrhosis in an adult woman P06.66B D.Ilencikova1,F. Laccone2,R.Braun1,H.C. Duba1 Association study of candidate genes with diabetic nephropathy in North Indian Population 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Linz, Austria, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Wien, Austria G.Singh1,2,P.Raina1,H.S.Sandhu1,I.Sharma2,V.Sharma2, I.Sethi2,R.Kapoor3,V.Vig4,E.Rai2,S.Sharma2,A.Bhanwer1 Introduction: Transladolase deﬁciency (TALDO, OMIM 606003) represents a recently recognized error of the pen- 1DepartmentofHumanGenetics,GuruNanakDevUniversity, tose phosphate pathway. Until now, it has been reported in Amritsar, India, 2Human Genetics Research Group, School of only 11 children, but there are no data about adult patients Biotechnology, Shri Mata Vaishno Devi University, Katra, with this disorder India, 3Heart Station and Diabetes Clinic, Amritsar, India, Material and Methods: We report about an 32-year-old 4Dr. S.B. Sohan Singh Eye Hospital, Amritsar, India Austrianwomanwithcongenitalhepatosplenomegaly,liver dysfunction, gonadal streaks and mild facial dysmorphia. Diabetic Nephropathy (DN) or Diabetic Kidney Disease She was born with neonatal oedema and atrial septum (DKD)ischaracterizedbyfunctionalandstructuralchanges defect. In the neonatal period, she experienced sepsis with with the predominant changes in mesangial expansion, leucopenia and thrombocytopenia. At the age of one year, glomerular sclerosis and Glomerular Basement Membrane an inhomogenityof liverparenchyma was seenwithout the (GBM)thickening.Ithasbeenobservedthatapproximately typical signs of cirrhosis. As the parents declined liver198 J.delPicchia biopsy at that time, it was performed in adulthood because referencegenome(GRGh37/hg19)andvariantswerecalled of bleeding from oesophageal varices. Histology didn´t using Freebayes. show features of cirrhosis and no portal hypertensia was Results: The c.95A>G variant was sequenced with a diagnosed, however pulmonal-arterial hypertension was mean-coverage of 83 and 23 in the WB and DBS samples, present. Cholelithiasis and pancytopenia persist until now, respectively. Father and child were heterozygous (A/G) for without any serious clinical problems. At the age of 32 the variant, while the mother was homozygous (A/A), years her liver is 6 cm, her spleen 12 cm large and the sex which was consistent for DBS and WB. hormone status is comparable to that of a Conclusion:DBScanbeusedformutationidentiﬁcation climacteric woman. whenWBisunavailable.Linked-readsmaybeessentialfor The diagnosis of TALDO was set using EXOM detection of speciﬁc diplotypes when compound hetero- sequencing focusing primarily on hepatospenomegaly in zygosity plays a role in the pathogenesis.Funding: The the search for potential candidate genes. project is funded by the Danish and Faroese Governments. Results: The homozygous mutation p.Arg192Cys of the L. Lydersen: None. Ó. Mortensen: None. B. á Steig: TALDO1 Gene, as found in our patient, was already None. G. Andorsdóttir: None. N.O. Gregersen: None. reportedin a2 year oldchildwithliver ﬁbrosisand speech delay (Wamelink et al., 2008). P06.71C Conclusions: In summary, this is the ﬁrst report ever Next generation sequencing (NGS) for mitochondrial about an adult woman with Transladolase deﬁciency respiratory chain disorders (MRCD): new genes, describing her speciﬁc clinical course. cautionary tales and lessons learnt D. Ilencikova: None. F. Laccone: None. R. Braun: None. H.C. Duba: None. L. G.Riley1,2, M.J.Cowley3, V.Gayevskiy3,T. Roscioli3, S. Balasubramaniam4,D.R.Thorburn5,6,M. Bahlo7,6, C.M. P06.70B Sue8,3,2,D.Coman9,10, M.Kava11,K. Bhattacharya1,C.J. Whole-exomesequencingofacase-unaffectedparent’strio Ellaway1,2,J. Christodoulou5,6,2,1 using barcoded DNA from dried blood spots 1Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, L.Lydersen1,Ó.Mortensen1,B.áSteig2,G.Andorsdóttir1,N.O. 2University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Garvan Institute of Gregersen1 MedicalResearch,Sydney,Australia,4TheChildren’sHospital atWestmead,Sydney,Australia,5MurdochChildrensResearch 1Genetic Biobank of the Faroe Islands, Tórshavn, Faroe Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 6University of Melbourne, Islands, 2General Medical Department, National Hospital of Melbourne, Australia, 7The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of the Faroe Islands,, Tórshavn, Faroe Islands Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 8Kolling Institute of MedicalResearch,Sydney,Australia,9LadyCilentoChildren’s Introduction: The National Hospital of the Faroe Islands Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 10Wesley Hospital, Brisbane, hasscreenednew-bornsforheritabletraitssince1986using Australia, 11Perth Children’s Hospital, Perth, Australia blood samples collected on ﬁlter paper. To use the current 22.000 ﬁlter cards for genetic research has retrospect Introduction:MRCDdiagnosisisanarduousjourney,with advantages, however, challenging due to degraded samples early NGS being a logical diagnostic approach. We report andthelimitedquantitiesofDNAobtainedfromeachcard, our extensive analysis of trio whole genome sequencing which may be inadequate for next-generation sequencing (WGS) in 40 children with suspected MRCD, focusing on (NGS) analyses. As NGS introduces it´s own limitations genes not previously associated with MRC function. with short reads, we investigate the possibility to use dried Methods: Trio WGS was performed at the Kinghorn blood spot (DBS) samples together with linked-reads for Centre for Clinical Genomics using the Illumina HiSeq X detection of a disease causing mutation (c.95A>G) in sequencingplatform:95%ofthenucleargenomecoveredto carnitine-transporter deﬁciency disease, and whether this > 15× depth; mitochondrial genome covered to >3,000× approach may replace the trio information for true haplo- depth. We identiﬁed SNVs and INDELS using GATK, type detection. copy number and structural variation using ClinSV and Materials and Methods: The case-unaffected parent’s mitochondrial DNA variants using mity. trio, was whole-exome sequenced using DNA obtained Results: Overall diagnostic yield was > 60% (most from DBS and whole blood (WB). DNA was barcoded involving nuclear genes), including three putative new usingtheChromiumTMGenomeKit.Exomeswerecaptured disease genes. Six cases with clinical, biochemical and/or usingtheSureSelectXTHumanAllExonkitandsequenced enzymatic features consistent with a MCRD disorder had on the NextSeq 500. The linked-reads were aligned to the mutations in “non-MRCD” genes, including ARX (twoAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 199 affected half-brothers), SLC39A8 (two sibs with Leigh expressed relevant hepatic markers analyzed by immuno- disease),andsinglecaseswithmutationsinHRAS(Costello ﬂuorescence. Finally, the hepatocytes generated were used syndrome), EPG5 (Vici syndrome), SKIV2L (Trichohepa- for evaluation of potential pharmacological chaperones toentericsyndrome)andG6PC(GlycogenStorageDisorder previously described (N-{[(4-chlorophenyl)carbamothioyl] type 1a). amino]-2-phenylacetamide and 4-(4-(4-ﬂuorophenyl)-5- Conclusions:SuspectedMRCDmightbeassociatedwith methyl-1H-pyrazol-3-yl)benzene-1,3-diol)) in combination “non-MRCD”genes,withpotentialexplanationsincluding: withhydroxocobalamin,providingevidencesofitspositive clinical picture is a phenocopy of MRCD (MRC abnorm- effect on the activity of the mutant ATR hepatocytes. alities arearedherring); functional MRC abnormalitiesare Hence,ourﬁndingsprovideanexperimentalsuitablemodel real,indicativeofapreviouslyunrecognisedcontributionto fortheinvestigationofthehepatotoxicityofnewdrugsand the phenotype; the phenotype may be “blended” reﬂecting the pathogenesis of this severe disease serving also as contributions from two disease genes. These ﬁndings ex vivo platform for organoids generation and therapeutic highlight the importance of vigilance for “non-MRCD” applications. genes as the genetic aetiology in certain cases, and the PI13/01239 ISCIII; Fundación Isabel Gemio; LCF/PR/ beneﬁtofcomprehensive,unbiasedWGS.Researchfunded PR16/11110018 Fundación la Caixa by a NSW OHMR Sydney Genomics Collaborative grant. E.Richard:None.Á.Briso-Montiano:None.S.Brasil: L.G. Riley: None. M.J. Cowley: None. V. Gayevskiy: None. L. R. Desviat: None. M. Ugarte: None. B. None. T. Roscioli: None. S. Balasubramaniam: None. D. Pérez: None. R.Thorburn:None.M.Bahlo:None.C.M.Sue:None.D. Coman: None. M. Kava: None. K. Bhattacharya: None. P06.73A C.J. Ellaway: None. J. Christodoulou: None. Optimization process of potential pharmacological chaperone development: Looking for a PMM2-CDG P06.72D therapy Methylmalonic Aciduria cblB type cellular model: HepatocytedifferentiationfromiPSCandpharmacological Á. Briso-Montiano1,A. Gámez1,S.Brasil1,L. R.Desviat1, chaperones evaluation M.Ugarte1, J.García-Fernández2, C.Pérez-Cerdá1,B. Pérez3 E. Richard, Á.Briso-Montiano, S. Brasil,L. R. Desviat, 1CentrodeBiologíaMolecular(CBM)"SeveroOchoa",Centro M.Ugarte, B. Pérez de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Ciberer, Madrid, Spain, 2Instituto de CentrodeBiologíaMolecular(CBM)"SeveroOchoa",Centro Investigaciones Químicas, CSIC, Sevilla, Spain, 3Centro de de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Universidad Biología Molecular (CBM), Madrid, Spain Autónoma de Madrid, Ciberer, Madrid, Spain The functional characterization of Phosphomannomutase 2 The understanding of the cellular and molecular mechan- (PMM2) disease-causing mutations has suggested that isms underlying inherited metabolic disorders (IMDs) is PMM2-CDG could be a conformational disease. Therapies essential for developing new strategies for their prevention to ameliorate clinical symptoms could be addressed andtreatment.DuetothegenotypevariabilityofIMDsand improvingtheproteinfoldingtorestoretotalorpartiallyits the upcoming of personalized medicine has prompted the native state. In this sense, from a 10,000 compound library emergenceofdevelopingnewmodels.Theaimofthiswork screening the compound 1-(3-chlorophenyl)-3-3-bis(pyr- was the generation of a hepatic model of methylmalonic idine-2-yl)urea (compound VIII) stood out, based on its aciduria cblB type by hepatocyte differentiation of induced pharmacochemical properties, enhancing the enzymatic pluripotentstemcells(IPSCs)generatedbyreprogramming activity and stability of a number of destabilizing PMM2 of patient-derived ﬁbroblasts. This organic aciduria is mutations. These results provided a promising chemical caused by the deﬁciency of ATP: cob(I)alamin adenosyl- structure as a starting lead for new therapeutic agents transferase(ATR) encoded bytheMMABgene.Fibroblasts againstthissevereorphandisease.Theaimofthisworkwas from a patient bearing a hypomorphic destabilizing muta- setting-up an optimization process by methodological tion in this gene (p.Ile96Thr) were reprogrammed using a sequential rounds from a battery of chemical analogs of commercial kit based on Sendai virus vectors. After the compound VIII in order to improve the physicochemical molecular and functional characterization of the iPSC line, properties and cytotoxicity: Up to 795 analogs were eval- these cells were differentiated in vitro into deﬁnitive uated and results showed 165 analogs that passed every endodermandthenincubatedwithspeciﬁcfactors,aimedat reactivity ﬁlter by in silico SmartsFilter analysis. In a ﬁrst hepatocyte differentiation. IPSC-derived hepatocytes selection of 25 analogs for in vitro analysis, 4 of these200 J.delPicchia 25 structures have shown no concentration-dependent WeusedanEscherichiacoligeneticassaysystemtoassess inhibitory effect on enzymatic activity, a mild stability the function of the mutant Hsp60(L47V) protein. Pre- improvementandhigherPMM2activityinamutantcellular viously, we showed by complementation that E. coli cells model bearing a destabilizing mutation (p.T237M). This expressing the wild-type human Hsp60 protein and its co- workﬂow for developing a potential therapy for PMM2- chaperone Hsp10 protein can survive deletion of the CDG has shown a dynamic progression from a promising otherwise essential and homologous groESgroEL genes of pharmacological chaperone to 4 new compounds that pas- E. coli. Here, we found that co-expression of the wild-type sed critical selection points, allowing the process to move human Hsp10 and mutant Hsp60(L47V) does not support forward to the next screening levels in another cellular growth of these E. coli cells. Our results demonstrate that models which will provide new potential structures with the function of the mutant Hsp60(L47V) protein is pharmacological effects. compromised, at least when expressed in E. coli. This case PI16/00573MINECO-FEDER;FundaciónIsabelGemio; highlightsapossiblenovelautosomaldominantmechanism LCF/PR/PR16/11110018 Fundación la Caixa for HLD4. Á. Briso-Montiano: None. A. Gámez: None. S. Brasil: L. Brick: None. P. Bross: None. D. Ang: None. C. None. L. R. Desviat: None. M. Ugarte: None. J. García- Cömert: None. J. Palmfeldt: None. B.F. Meaney: None. Fernández: None. C. Pérez-Cerdá: None. B. M. Kozenko: None. C. Georgopoulos: None. Pérez: None. P06.74B P07 Immunology and hematopoietic system DenovoheterozygousHSPD1variants:Anovelmechanism in hypomyelinating leukodystrophy type 4? P07.01A Association study of TNFAIP3 gene polymorphisms in L. Brick1,P. Bross2,D.Ang3, C.Cömert2,J.Palmfeldt2,B.F. three different autoimmune diseases Meaney4,M. Kozenko1,C. Georgopoulos3 A. Latini1, C.Perricone2,P. Conigliaro3, S.Colafrancesco2, 1Department of Genetics, McMaster Children's Hospital, G.Novelli1,P. Borgiani1,C.Ciccacci1 Hamilton, ON, Canada, 2Research Unit for Molecular Medicine,AarhusUniversityandUniversityHospital,Aarhus, 1DepartmentofBiomedicineandPrevention,GeneticsSection, Denmark, 3Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 2UOC School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, Reumatologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità 4Division of Pediatric Neurology, McMaster Children's Mediche,SapienzaUniversitàdiRoma,Rome,Italy,3Clinicof Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada Rheumatology, Allergology and Clinical Immunology, Department of Medicina dei Sistemi, University of Rome Tor Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy type 4 (HLD4) (OMIM Vergata, Rome, Italy 612233) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder char- acterized by hypotonia, psychomotor delay, acquired Introduction: Autoimmune diseases (AIDs) are complex microcephaly, mental retardation, and seizures. Typically, diseasesthatshareseveralsusceptibilitygeneticloci.Tumor the condition onsets in infancy and is fatal within the ﬁrst necrosis factor alpha inducible protein 3 (TNFAIP3) two decades. Brain MRI is consistent with diffuse hypo- encodes the ubiquitin-modifying enzyme A20, that down- myelination. Some patients have increased urinary ethyl- regulatesinﬂammationbyrestrictingNF-kB,atranscription malonic acid. HLD4 is attributed to autosomal recessive factorthatregulatesexpressionofvariouspro-inﬂammatory mutations in the HSPD1 gene, encoding the mitochondrial genes. Variants in TNFAIP3 gene have been described as Hsp60 chaperonin. associated with susceptibility to several AIDs. Here, we We present a 4 year-old boy with speech and motor analyzed two TNFAIP3 polymorphisms in Italian patients delays. Brain MRI showed diffuse hypomyelination of the with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid cerebral and cerebellar white matter. Examination revealed arthritis (RA), and Sjögren’s syndrome (pSS), to verify if anormalheadcircumference,briskreﬂexes,mildataxiaand TNFAIP3isinvolvedingeneticpredispositiontoAIDsalso bilateral postural tremor. Urine metabolic screening in Italian population. detected increased ethylmalonic acid. Whole exome Methods: We recruited 315 SLE patients, 196 pSS sequencing was completed, and detected a de novo patients, 187 RA patients, and 236 healthy controls. heterozygous HSPD1 variant (c.139T>G, p.L47V). Genotypingofrs2230926andrs6920220inTNFAIP3gene Mass spectrometry analyses indicated similar amounts of was performed by allelic discrimination assay. We carried mutant and wild type proteins in our patient’s ﬁbroblasts.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 201 out a case/control association study and a genotype/ (38.48%). This suggests a strong relationship between the phenotype correlation analysis. genetic alteration and the observed phenotype. However, Results: Higher risk to develop SLE was observed for further studies of the segregation pattern of the variant are rs2230926 (P=0.02, OR=1.92). No association was needed, as well as functional validation. observed with the pSS susceptibility, but the variant allele Conclusion: Target sequencing is a suitable approach to seems to confer a higher risk to develop lymphoma in pSS detect likely causativegenetic variants inautoinﬂammatory patients. In RA patients, the presence of RF and ACPA disease patients. The use of NGS techniques in clinical resulted signiﬁcantly associated with rs2230926 variant immunology will lead to several beneﬁts in basic science allele. We observed a signiﬁcant association between the and clinical practice. variant allele of rs6920220 and SLE (P=0.03, OR=1.53), This study was funded by grants SAF2012-35025 and pSS (P=0.02, OR=1.69) and RA (P=0.00001, OR=2.58) SAF2015-68472-C2-2-R from the Ministerio de Economía susceptibility. Furthermore, SLE patients carrying the y Competitividad (Spain) and FEDER to FC. rs6920220 variant allele showed a higher risk to develop L. Batlle-Masó: None. A. Mensa-Vilaró: None. M. pericarditis, pleurisy and kidney complications. Solís-Moruno: None. M. Tormo: None. T. Marquès- Conclusion: Our results support the importance of the Bonet: None. J.I. Aróstegui: None. F. Casals: None. TNFAIP3genevariantsroleinthedevelopmentofdifferent autoimmune diseases. P07.03C A. Latini: None. C. Perricone: None. P. Conigliaro: Investigation of Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells None. S. Colafrancesco: None. G. Novelli: None. P. (PBMC) Proteome Proﬁle in Behcet’s Disease Borgiani: None. C. Ciccacci: None. A. KirectepeAydın1,Y. Özgüler2, D.Ucar2,E. Seyahi2, P07.02B H.Yazici2,E. TahirTuranli1 Application of clinical exome sequencing panel in early onset autoinﬂammatory disease patients 1ITU,Istanbul,Turkey,2CerrahpasaMedicalSchool,Istanbul, Turkey L. Batlle-Masó1, A.Mensa-Vilaró2,3,M. Solís-Moruno1, M.Tormo4,T. Marquès-Bonet1,J.I.Aróstegui2,3,F. Casals4 Normal 0 false false false EN-US JA X-NONE /* Style Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"- 1InstitutdeBiologiaEvolutiva(UPF-CSIC),Barcelona,Spain, Table Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-col- 2Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Sant band-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99; Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei de Genòmica (UPF), mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0cm 5.4pt 0cm 5.4pt; Barcelona, Spain mso-para-margin:0cm; mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font-size:12.0pt; font- Introduction: Autoinﬂammatory diseases are usually dif- family:Cambria; mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii- ﬁculttodiagnoseduetotheirhighphenotypicheterogeneity theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; and variable expression. In some cases, diagnosis difﬁcul- mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;} ties can be resolved using genetic testing. Next-generation Introduction: Behçet’s disease (BD) is a systemic sequencing (NGS) is a cost-effective approach to identify inﬂammatorydisorder.Investigationoftheproteomeproﬁle likelycausativegeneticvariants.Thisidentiﬁcationcanlead will facilitate our understanding of disease processes. We to a better understanding of the disease and increase the aimed to identify proteins speciﬁc to BD and related number of diagnosed patients. According to this, the main pathways throughproteomicanalysesperformedonPBMC goalofthisstudywastouseNGStodetectgeneticvariants samples. likely to be causative of the disease in pediatric patients Methods: Study groups were composed of active BD with autoinﬂammatory symptoms. (N=33), inactive BD(N=26), and healthy controls(N=28). Materials and Methods: We performed target sequen- PBMC protein samples from each group were pooled and cing (TruSight™ One panel) in 26 samples from patients thenseparatedusing2D-DIGE.Proteinspotswithatleast2 with clinical suspicion of autoinﬂammatory disease. Next, times differentially-expressed were compared among we performed bioinformatics analysis to detect likely groups, and identiﬁed by MALDI-TOF-MS. Bioinformatic causativegenetic variants. Forthemost relevant candidates pathway analyses were carried out through KEGG, we corroborate our ﬁndings using Sanger sequencing. PANTHER and STRING databases. Results: We evaluated the performance of the kit to Results: A total of 369 protein spots were detected by captureautoinﬂammatorycandidategenes.Wefoundlikely 2D-DIGE.115foractivevsinactiveBD,118foractiveBD causative genetic variants of the disease in 10 patients vs healthy controls, 129 spots for inactive BD vs healthy202 J.delPicchia controlswereidentiﬁed.Thestrongest45spotswerefurther MaterialsandMethods:humanmacrophages andTHP- analyzedthroughMALDI-TOF-MS.Fructose-bisphosphate 1celllinehavebeenusedtocharacterizedtheCHRFAM7A aldolase-C, calreticulin, ﬁcolin-1, ﬁbrinogen alpha chain, regulatory region. ﬁbrinogen beta chain, ﬁlamin-A, FUSE-binding protein-1, ResultsandConclusions:weprovideadetailedanalysis phosphoglycerate kinase-1, stathmin, vinculin, hnRNP-M, of the CHRFAM7A gene regulatory region and its pro- WD repeat-containing protein-1, HSPA8, myosin light inﬂammatory stimuli responsiveness. Furthermore, given polypeptide-6, talin-1 and tropomyosin alpha-3 chain were the anti-inﬂammatory potential of the acetylcholinesterase differentially expressed between groups. inhibitor donepezil, we investigated the CHRFAM7A Conclusion: We identiﬁed proteins that involve in expression proﬁle in macrophages treated with donepezil, glycolysis,complement/coagulationandcoagulationactiva- showing an unexpected up-regulation of both CHRFAM7A tion pathways. The expression of proteins involved in ER and CHRNA7 gene, thus highlighting a possible role for protein processing (calreticulin, HSPA8, GRP78-BiP) were CHRFAM7Ageneproductinthecontrolandmodulationof down-regulated in BD patients compared to healthy the cholinergic anti-inﬂammatory pathway, and/or in the controls, which raised the importance of ER stress in modulation of CHRNA7 function. Behcet disease pathogenesis. <!--EndFragment--> Funding: CNR Research project on aging A.KirectepeAydın:None.Y.Özgüler:None.D.Ucar: A. Maroli: None. S. Di Lascio: None. S. Cardani: None. E. Seyahi: None. H. Yazici: None. E. Tahir None.L.Drufuca:None.M.Locati:None.D.Fornasari: Turanli: None. None. R. Benfante: None. P07.04D P07.05 The human-restricted duplicated form of the α7 nicotinic AmiRNA-146aandmiRNA-155-5pinCMLpatientsbefore receptor, CHRFAM7A: expression and transcriptional and after initiation of TKI therapy regulation in inﬂammatory cells Z. Litwinska1,A. Pietrzyk2,K.Luczkowska1, A.Sobus1, A. Maroli1,S.Di Lascio1,S.Cardani1, L.Drufuca1,2, E. Paczkowska1, G.Helbig3,B.Machalinski1 M.Locati1,2,D.Fornasari1,3,R. Benfante3,1 1Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical 1Dept. of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University,Szczecin,Poland,2CytogeneticUnit,Departmentof Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Humanitas Laboratory Diagnostics, Pomeranian Medical University, Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Italy, 3CNR - Szczecin, Poland, 3Department of Hematology and Bone Neuroscience Institute, Milan, Italy Marrow Transplantation, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland Introduction: The α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRNA7) plays a role in the modulation of the inﬂam- Introduction: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are the matory response through the activation of the “cholinergic ﬁrst-linetherapyformostchronicmyeloidleukemia(CML) anti-inﬂammatory pathway”. In humans, a recombination patients, however some are unresponsive to it or develop eventinvolvingtheexon5to10ofCHRNA7gene,fusedto resistance. Recently, microRNAs (miRNAs) have been four novel exons A, B, C and D (FAM7A), gave rise to the implicatedintheprogressionofCMLandthedevelopment CHRFAM7A gene. This hybrid gene, located on chromo- of TKI resistance. miRNA-146a and miRNA-155-5p are some 15q13-q14, 1.6 Mb apart from CHRNA7, is highly involvedinMAPKsignalingpathway,cellproliferationand expressed in inﬂammatory cells, where it can regulate the apoptosis. In this study we aimed to investigate expression anti-inﬂammatory effects of α7 activation. Acute treatment of miR-146a and miR-155-5p in CML patients and, where ofmacrophageswithLPSdown-regulatesCHRFAM7Abya possible, to identify how TKI treatment affects this mechanism driven by NF-κB, paralleled by CHRNA7 up- expression. regulation. As studies are emerging, which identify Materials and Methods: Bone marrow (BM) samples CHRFAM7A expression alteration in inﬂammatory or were obtained from newly diagnosed CML patients (n=- infective pathologies, the regulation of its expression may 16) and healthy controls (n=18). From one patient we become a key step in the modulation of inﬂammation. took 3 samples: one before TKI therapy initiation and two However, the region driving the transcriptional regulation samplesafter(6,12months).Quantitativeassessmentofthe of CHRFAM7A gene in human immune tissues is largely expression of miRNA-146a and miRNA-155-5p was unknown. performedbyqRT-PCR using qScript™ microRNA cDNA Synthesis Kit, speciﬁc primers, iQ™ SYBR® GreenAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 203 Supermix and Bio-Rad CFX96 Real-Time PCR Detection identiﬁedseveralpreviouslyundescribedcandidatevariants System. that could explain the hyperosinophilia driven auto- Results: miRNA-146a expression was signiﬁcantly immunity phenotype. We have also performed immunolo- elevated in CML patients (p= 0,006), expression of gical assays to validate these variants. We conclude that miRNA-155-5p did not differ between groups. Both tested WGS is the best investigation in rare cases of hyper- miRNAs showed constant decrease in expression in 6 and eosinophilia driven autoimmunity. This test improves time 12 month after TKI therapy initiation. to diagnosis, helps rule out known chromosomal/single Conclusions: miRNAs, including miRNA-146a, gene causes and identiﬁes novel intronic variants that are miRNA-155-5p, are promising biomarker candidates for overlooked by exome testing alone. CML diagnosis and prognosis. The evident drop in A.Marwaha:None.G.Latino:None.R.Laxer:None. expression levels of these miRNAs after TKI therapy E.Grunebaum:None.V.Kim:None.E.Pope:None.M. suggests that they might also be viable targets for Kirby-Allen: None. R. Schneider: None. M. Weinstein: monitoring drug response. However, the precise contribu- None. A. Naqkvi: None. R. Berard: None. L. Dupuis: tion of miRNA-146a and miRNA-155-5p to CML patho- None. R. Jobling: None. J. Stavropoulos: None. A. genesis remains to be further elucidated. Muise: None. T. Eiwegger: None. R. Mendoza: None. Z. Litwinska: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. K. Lucz- kowska: None. A. Sobus: None. E. Paczkowska: None. P07.08D G. Helbig: None. B. Machalinski: None. LossofthephosphatasePTPRJcausesmigrationdefectsof megakaryocytes and thrombocytopenia P07.06B Whole Genome Sequencing in a cohort of children with C. Marconi1, M.Faleschini2,F. Palombo3,4,R. Bottega5, hypereosinophilia driven autoimmunity V. Bozzi6,P. Noris6,A. Balduini7,T. Pippucci1,A. Savoia5,2, C. L.Balduini6, N.Katsanis8,A. Pecci6,M. Seri1 A. Marwaha,G.Latino, R.Laxer,E. Grunebaum, V.Kim, E.Pope,M.Kirby-Allen,R.Schneider,M.Weinstein,A.Naqkvi, 1University of Bologna -Department of Medical and Surgical R. Berard, L.Dupuis, R.Jobling, J.Stavropoulos, A. Muise, Sciences, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Medical Sciences, T. Eiwegger,R. Mendoza University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3Unit of Neurology, Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada (DIBINEM), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences, Bologna, Italy, 5IRCCS Hypereosinophilliaisacommon,oftentransient,phenotype Burlo Garofolo Mother and Child Institute, Trieste, Italy, with a broad differential. However, there exists a small 6Internal Medicine Department, University of Pavia – IRCCS subset of patients that have a constitutively increased Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 7Department eosinophil count, resulting in severe end organ auto- of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, immunity and requiring ongoing immunosuppressive ther- 8Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University apy. Previously described genetic causes for these rarer Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States forms of hypereosinophilia include; chromosomal rearran- gement promoting bone marrow eosinophil production, Inherited thrombocytopenias (IT) are characterized by TCR clonality or recently described single gene disorders decreased circulating platelets that can be associated with (e.g. STAT3 and MALT1). We present a cohort of three other phenotypes (bone marrow aplasia, haematological children who presented with dysmorphic features and tumors, renal failure). hypereosinophilia driven autoimmunity of the skin and Throughexomesequencingweidentiﬁedanewrecessive gastrointestinal system. These children all had extensive ITduetolossofPTPRJ(ProteinTyr-Phosphatase,Receptor genetic testing including; microarray, TCR clonality stu- type J). dies, chromosomal rearrangement FISH studies and exome In two affected siblings we observed two heterozygous sequencing, however, only variants of uncertain sig- variants causing a premature stop insertion on both alleles niﬁcance were identiﬁed. We therefore performed whole and the loss of mRNA and protein, as we observed in genome sequencing (WGS) with the hypothesis that an patients’ platelets. PTPRJ is a transmembrane tyrosine- intronic regulatory variant is responsible for the hyper- phosphatasehighlyexpressedinmegakaryocytes(Mks)and eosinophilia driven autoimmunity observed. We present platelets. A mouse model of PTPRJ inactivation shows here a detailed phenotyping of this cohort, the variants of defects in Mk migration, platelet production, platelet uncertain signiﬁcance that were identiﬁed by microarray activation and aggregation. The two probands with PTPRJ andexomesequencingandtheresultsoftheWGS.Wehave mutations presented with thrombocytopenia and moderate204 J.delPicchia spontaneous bleeding. Patients’ platelets showed defective Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common activationandaggregationandaglobaldecreaseintyrosine hematologic malignancy that forms in plasma cell. phosphorylation after stimulation with a GPVI agonist Recently, we identiﬁed ELL2 as a susceptibility gene for associated with reduced activation of the tyrosine kinase MM.Tounderstanditsmechanismofaction,weperformed Src. Mks differentiated in vitro from patients’ blood expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) analysis in + progenitors showed impaired maturation and defective CD138 plasma cells from 1,630 MM patients from four migration. Exploiting a zebraﬁsh line with ﬂuorescently populations.WeshowthattheMMriskallelelowersELL2 labeled thrombocytes, we demonstrated a signiﬁcant expression in these cells (P =2.5×10-27; β =- combined combined decrease of the circulating thrombocytes in the PTRPJ 0.24 s.d.), but not in peripheral blood or other tissues. A KO with morpholino and the phenotype rescue through total of 67 single-nucleotide polymorphisms and 5 small injection with human wt mRNA. Moreover, silencing of insertions/deletions are highly correlated with the best- PTPRJ in the human Mk cell line Dami cells induced the supported sentinel MM risk variant (rs1423269) and the migrationandmaturationdefectsobservedinpatients’Mks. strongest ELL2 expression variant (rs9314162) (r2 > 0.8). In summary, we discovered a novel form of IT. Usingbioinformaticapproachesweidentiﬁed8variantsthat Pathogenetic mechanisms include impaired Mk migration might alter the efﬁciency of ELL2 transcription. We made and maturation. These abnormalities may be mediated by luciferase vectors for each of these variants and transfected reducedactivationofSrc,whichisthereforerecognizedasa them into three MM plasma cell lines (L363, OPM2, and target of PTPRJ in humans. RPMI-8226) and two cell lines representing other hemato- C. Marconi: None. M. Faleschini: None. F. Palombo: logic lineages (K562 and MOLM-13). Among those, three None.R.Bottega:None.V.Bozzi:None.P.Noris:None. riskvariants(rs3777189-C,rs3777185-Candrs4563648-G) A. Balduini: None. T. Pippucci: None. A. Savoia: None. yielded decreased luciferase activity relative to their corre- C.L.Balduini:None.N.Katsanis: None.A.Pecci:None. sponding protective variantsin plasma cell lines, but notin M. Seri: None. non-plasmacelllines.Furtheranalysisrevealsthat theMM risk allele associates with upregulation of gene sets related P07.09A to ribosome biogenesis, and knockout/knockdown and The multiple myeloma risk allele at 5q15 lowers ELL2 rescue experiments in plasmocytoma cell lines support a expression and increases ribosomal gene expression in cause-effect relationship. Our results provide mechanistic malignant plasma cells insight into MM predisposition. This work was supported by the Swedish Foundation for M.Ali1,R.Ajore1,A.Wihlborg1,A.Niroula1,B.Swaminathan1, Strategic Research (KF10-0009), the Knut and Alice E. Johnsson1,O.Stephens2, G.Morgan2, T.Meissner3, WallenbergFoundation(2012.0193),theSwedishResearch I.Turesson1,H.Goldschmidt4,5,U.Mellqvist6,U.Gullberg1, Council (2012-1753), Cancerfonden (2017/265). M.Hansson1,7,K. Hemminki8,9,H.Nahi10,A. Waage11, M. Ali: None. R. Ajore: None. A. Wihlborg: None. A. N.Weinhold2,B. Nilsson1,12 Niroula: None. B. Swaminathan: None. E. Johnsson: None. O. Stephens: None. G. Morgan: None. T. 1Lund University, Hematology and Transfusion Medicine, Meissner: None. I. Turesson: None. H. Goldschmidt: DepartmentofLaboratoryMedicine,Lund,Sweden,2Myeloma None. U. Mellqvist: None. U. Gullberg: None. M. InstituteforResearchandTherapy,UniversityofArkansasfor Hansson: None. K. Hemminki: None. H. Nahi: None. Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States, 3Avera A. Waage: None. N. Weinhold: None. B. Nilsson: None. Cancer Institute, Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Sioux Falls, SD, United States, 4Department of P07.10B Internal Medicine V, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, GenomicandfunctionalevaluationoftheroleofTNFSF14 Germany, 5National Center for Tumor Diseases, Ulm, gene in susceptibility to multiple sclerosis Germany, 6Section of Hematology, South Elvsborg Hospital, Borås, Sweden, 7Hematology Clinic, Skåne University M.Zuccalà*1,N.Barizzone*1,C. Basagni*1,E. Boggio*1, Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 8German Cancer Research Center, L. Gigliotti*1,M.Sorosina*2,R. Bordoni3,F. Clarelli2, Heidelberg, Germany, 9Center for Primary Health Care S.Anand3,E.Mangano3,D.Vecchio4,F.Esposito2,E.Corsetti1, Research, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden, 10Center for G.Predebon1,R.Cantello4,V.Martinelli2,G.Comi2,M.Leone5, HematologyandRegenerativeMedicine,KarolinskaInstitutet, G.DeBellis3,U.Dianzani*1,F. Martinelli-Boneschi*2,6, Stockholm, Sweden, 11Department of Cancer Research and S. D'Alfonso*1 Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, 12Broad Institute, 7 1University of Eastern Piedmont-Department of Health Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA, United States Sciences, Novara, Italy, 2Laboratory of Human Genetics ofAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 205 Neurological Diseases, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, P07.11C Milano,Italy,3NationalResearchCouncilofItaly,Institutefor Single-celltranscriptomicsuncoverscellularandmolecular Biomedical Technologies, Milano, Italy, 4MS Centre, SCDU determinants of tissue myeloid cell heterogeneity in Neurology, AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy, 5SC homeostasis and cancer Neurologia, Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia), G.Barbiera1,M.Genua1,F. Cilenti1, D.Iodice1,E. Dugnani2, Italy, 6Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, A.Citro2,A.Capotondo3,M.Milani1,A.Cantore1,N.Coltella1, University of Milan, Milano, Italy L. Barbarossa1,G.Martino3,L. Piemonti2,L. Naldini1, R. Ostuni1 Over 200 multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility genes were identiﬁed. Among these, the strongest non-HLA 1San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy, Milan, signal in the Italian population maps in the Tumor Italy, 2Diabetes Research Institute (DRI), San Raffaele Necrosis Factor (ligand) superfamily member 14 Hospital, Milan, Italy, 3Institute for Experimental Neurology (TNFSF14) gene encoding for LIGHT, a transmembrane (INSPE), IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy glycoprotein expressed on various immune cells and involved in dendritic cells (DC) maturation. We demon- Introduction: The innate immune system is highly com- strated through a ﬁne-mapping approach that an intronic plex and comprises cell populations with organ-speciﬁc variantistheprimarilyassociatedone.Cis-eQTLanalysis properties. Key open questions include how the tissue of from different databases showed that carriers of MS risk origin shapes the phenotype of myeloid cells and how this allele have a lower TNFSF14 RNA expression in EBV- heterogeneityisalteredinpathologicalconditions.Here,we transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (Geuvadis, Bio- combine single-cell (sc)RNA-Seq and immunophenotypic portal, Gtex) and in PBMCs (Gtex). These data are con- analysestobuildacomprehensiveviewofthetissuemouse sistent with the imbalance against the risk allele observed myeloid cell landscape, at steady state and in models of in heterozygous individuals (p<0.0001, RNAseq on 97 pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC). + + lymphoblastoid cells, Geuvadis). Consistently, in PBMC Methods:Tissue-residentmyeloidcells(CD45 CD11b ) of84ItalianMSand80healthycontrols(HC),individuals were isolated from 9 tissues in healthy mice (blood, bone with MS risk genotype produced lower levels of marrow (BM), spleen, lung, liver, pancreas, brain, colon TNFSF14 transcript (p=1.1e-4) and MS patients were and intestine) and subjected to scRNA-Seq. Ortho- or the minor producers (p=0.031). Analysis on peripheral hetero-topic PDAC models were established by intrapan- blood of HC(N=37) with ﬂow cytometry showed that in creatic or subcute injection of DT6606 cells in C57/BL6 myeloid DC (CD11c+) the homozygous individuals for mice. Tumor-inﬁltrating, circulating and BM myeloid cells the risk allele had a higher percentage of LIGHT positive were analysed throughout disease progression by scRNA- cells (p-value = 0.04). In conclusion, we propose that an Seq, immunophenotypic and histological analyses. alteredTNFSF14expressioninimmunecellsdrivenbyan Results: scRNA-Seq analysis shows tissue-speciﬁc intronic variant can contribute to MS pathogenesis. Par- heterogeneity in monocytes, neutrophils, dendritic cells ticularly, this variant seems to be associated with a low and macrophages populations at the steady state and TNFSF14 RNA expression in a mixed population of identiﬁed putative gene networks underlying this organ PBMCs and with a higher percentage of LIGHT positive specialization. Pancreatic cancer had a dramatic impact on cells in myeloid dendritic cells, suggesting a cell speciﬁc thecompositionandtranscriptionalheterogeneityoftumor- inﬂuence of this variant on LIGHT expression at the inﬁltrating and circulating pools of monocytes and protein level. neutrophils, and also affected BM myelopoiesis at the M. Zuccalà*: None. N. Barizzone*: None. C. single-cell level. Differential gene expression analysis in Basagni*: None. E. Boggio*: None. L. Gigliotti*: None. tumor-associated vs. steady-state myeloid cells revealed M. Sorosina*: None. R. Bordoni: None. F. Clarelli: transcriptional programs aberrantly activated in the PDAC None. S. Anand: None. E. Mangano: None. D. Vecchio: immune microenvironment. None. F. Esposito: None. E. Corsetti: None. G. Pre- Conclusions: Our analyses link cellular and molecular debon:None.R.Cantello:None.V.Martinelli:None.G. alterations in the immune microenvironment to the Comi: None. M. Leone: None. G. De Bellis: None. U. progression of PDAC. These results have implications for Dianzani*: None. F. Martinelli-Boneschi*: None. S. the design of cell and gene therapy strategies aiming at D'Alfonso*: None. stimulating anti-tumor immunity in pancreatic cancer. G.Barbiera:None.M.Genua:None.F.Cilenti:None. D. Iodice: None. E. Dugnani: None. A. Citro: None. A. Capotondo: None. M. Milani: None. A. Cantore: None.206 J.delPicchia N. Coltella: None. L. Barbarossa: None. G. Martino: all genes. We noted a lower pathogenic variant load and a None. L. Piemonti: None. L. Naldini: None. R. higher fraction of variants with unknown or unsolved Ostuni: None. clinical signiﬁcance in the MEFV gene. Conclusion:Applyingaconsensusdrivenprocessonthe P07.12D pathogenicity assessment of experts yielded rapid classiﬁ- A new workﬂow for classiﬁcation of genetic variants cation of almost all variants of four HRF genes. The high- pathogenicityappliedtohereditaryrecurrentfeversbythe throughput database will profoundly assist clinicians and InternationalStudyGroupforSystemicAutoInﬂammatory geneticists in the diagnosis of HRFs. The conﬁgured Diseases (INSAID) MOLGENIS platform and consensus evolution protocol are usable for assembly of other variant-pathogenicity M.E. vanGijn1,2,I.Ceccherini3,Y. Shinar4,E. C. Carbo1, databases. The MOLGENIS software is available for reuse M.Slofstra5,J.I.Arostgui6,G.Sarrabay7,D.Rowczenio8, at http://github.com/molgenis/molgenis, and the speciﬁc E. Omoyımnı9,B.Peynircioglu10, F.Milhavet11,M.A. Swertz5, HRF conﬁguration is available at http://molgenis.org/said/. I.Touitou11 TheHRFpathogenicity-classiﬁcationswillbepublicallyon the INFEVERS database at http://fmf.igh.cnrs.fr/ISSAID/ 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, infevers/. Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Laboratory of Translational M.E. van Gijn: None. I. Ceccherini: None. Y. Shinar: Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, None. E.C. Carbo: None. M. Slofstra: None. J.I. Netherlands, 3DUOC Medical Genetics, Giannina Gaslini Arostgui: None. G. Sarrabay: None. D. Rowczenio: Institute, Genova, Italy, 4Laboratory of FMF and None. E. Omoyımnı: None. B. Peynircioglu: None. F. autoinﬂammatory diseases, Sheba Medical center, Tel Milhavet: None. M.A. Swertz: None. I. Touitou: None. Hashomer, Israel, 5Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, P07.13A 6Department of Immunology, Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS, Atypical paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria presenting Barcelona, Spain, 7Laboratory of rare and autoinﬂammatory with autoinﬂammatory symptoms is caused by germline diseases, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 8National and somatic mutations involving PIGT Amyloidosis Centre, Division of Medicine, UCL, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 9UCL Great Ormond Y. Murakami1,T. Hirata1,S. Murata1, T.Kinoshita1, Street Institute of Child Health (ICH), London, United M.Kawamoto2, S.Murase2,H.Yoshimura2, N.Kohara2, Kingdom, 10Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, N.Inoue3,M.Osato4, J.Nishimura4,Y. Ueda4,Y. Kanakuru4, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, P. M.Krawitz5,A. Knaus5,M.Jäger6,R. Flöttmann6, 11Laboratory of rare and autoinﬂammatory diseases, CHU T. Eggermann7, B.Hoechsmann8,M.Anliker8, Montpellier, Monpellier, France H.Schrezenmeier8 Background: Hereditary recurrent fevers (HRF) are rare 1Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, inﬂammatory diseases sharing similar clinical symptoms, Osaka, Japan, 2Department of Neurology, Kobe City Medical and effectively treated with anti-inﬂammatory biological CenterGeneralHospital,Kobe,Japan,3OsakaMedicalCenter drugs. Accurate diagnosis of HRF relies heavily on genetic for Cancer, Osaka, Japan, 4Department of Hematology and testing, yet in the big data era the clinical signiﬁcance of Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, most gene variants remains unsolved or controversial. Osaka, Japan, 5Institute for Genomic Statistics and Methods:WeconﬁguredaMOLGENISweb-platformto Bioinformatics - University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, share and analyze pathogenicity classiﬁcations of the 6Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité variants, and to manage a consensus-based classiﬁcation University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 7Institute for process. Four experts in HRF genetics submitted indepen- HumanGenetics,RWTHAachen,Aachen,Germany,8Institute dent classiﬁcations of 858 variants of 4 well known HRF of Transfusion Medicine, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany genes: MEFV, TNFRSF1A, NLRP3 and MVK. Classiﬁca- tions were driven to consensus by recruiting 4 more expert Paroxysmalnocturnalhemoglobinuria(PNH)isanacquired opinions and by targeting discordant classiﬁcations in 5 disorder of the blood-forming system. Typically, affected iterative rounds. hematopoetic stem cells (HSCs) in PNH harbour a single Results: A consensus classiﬁcation was reached for 804/ somatic loss-of-function mutation in the X-linked PIGA 858 variants (94%). None of the unsolved variants (6%) gene. Herein we report four cases of this new subgroup: A remained with opposite classiﬁcations (e.g. pathogenic predisposing germline mutation in PIGT, which is an versus benign). New mutational hotspots were found in autosomal gene of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 207 anchor synthesis pathway, is followed by a second somatic real-time TaqMan assay. Cytokine concentration in sera hit. Deep sequencing and array-CGH identiﬁed acquired was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. deletions on chromosome 20q in PNH cells that include Localization of PAD4 and PAD2 protein was indicated by PIGT and a commonly deleted region in myelodysplastic immunohistochemistry. We also generate Padi2−/− mice syndromes, that is known to be differentially methylated. andperformedexperimentalarthritis.Wedemonstratedthat This results in a complete loss of expression of certain the clinical disease score was signiﬁcantly decreased in genesatthislocuswhichisalsothoughttocontributetothe Padi4−/− mice and Padi4 expression was induced by CII clonal expansion. The deﬁciency of GPI-anchored proteins immunization. In Padi4−/− mice sera, serum anti-type II on PNH cells results in a lack of complement regulation.In collagen (CII) IgM, IgG, and inﬂammatory cytokine levels contrasttoclassicalPNH,PIGTmutationsimpairloadingof were also signiﬁcantly decreased compared with those in substratetotheanchorandthusresultinanaccumulationof wild-type mice sera. Interestingly, Padi2 expression was unbound GPI molecules.This difference in the pathophy- compensationally induced in CD11b+ cells of Padi4-/- siology can also be visualised by FACS analysis of blood: mice. We also demonstrated that the clinical disease score While CD55 and CD59 expression is reduced in all PNH was signiﬁcantly decreased in Padi2−/− CIA mice. cells, the atypical PNH cells can be discriminated by a ItappearsthatPadi4andPadi2enhancecollagen-initiated speciﬁc antibody that binds free GPI anchors. Besides inﬂammatory responses. Our results revealed that PAD4 classical PNH symptoms of anemia, thrombosis, and affected on expression of various cytokines and also hemolysis,patientswithPIGT-mutationsalsomanifestwith controlled Padi genes. additional autoinﬂammatory symptoms. It is hypothesized A. Suzuki: None. Y. Kochi: None. K. thatthefreeGPI-anchorthataccumulatesinaffectedcellsis Yamamoto: None. causally related to autoinﬂammation. Based on these ﬁnd- ings, we propose the new entity of atypical PNH. P07.15C Y. Murakami: None. T. Hirata: None. S. Murata: Rare regulatory variant in the MEF2D gene is associated None. T. Kinoshita: None. M. Kawamoto: None. S. with SLE in Swedish patients and contributes to the gene Murase: None. H. Yoshimura: None. N. Kohara: None. regulation and splicing N.Inoue:None.M.Osato:None.J.Nishimura:None.Y. Ueda: None. Y. Kanakuru: None. P.M. Krawitz: None. S. V.Kozyrev1, F.H.G.Farias1,2,J.Dahlqvist1, D.Leonard3, A. Knaus: None. M. Jäger: None. R. Flöttmann: None. M.Wilbe4,5, S.N.Abramov1,6,A. Alexsson3,G.R. Pielberg1, T. Eggermann: None. B. Hoechsmann: None. M. H.Hansson-Hamlin7,G.Andersson4, K.Tandre3,M.L. Anliker: None. H. Schrezenmeier: None. Eloranta3,L. Rönnblom3,K. Lindblad-Toh1,8 P07.14B 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Functional study of Peptidylarginine Deiminase genes in UppsalaUniversity,Uppsala,Sweden,2TheGenomeInstitute, arthritis model mice Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States, 3Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala A. Suzuki,Y.Kochi, K. Yamamoto University,Uppsala,Sweden,4DepartmentofAnimalBreeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan (SLU), Uppsala, Sweden, 5Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Previously,peptidylargininedeiminasetype4(PADI4)was Sweden, 6Institute of Fundamental Medicine and Biology, identiﬁed as a susceptibility gene for Rheumatoid arthritis Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russian Federation, (RA) by genome-wide association studies. Peptidyl citrul- 7Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of line is a target antigen of anti-citrullinated peptide anti- Agricultural Sciences (SLU), Uppsala, Sweden, 8Broad bodies (ACPAs), and only PADs (translated protein from Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States PADI genes) can provide peptidyl citrulline via modiﬁca- tion of protein substrates. Also the distribution of PADI4 Introduction: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an and PADI2 has overlap in immune cells. The aim of this autoimmune disorder with heterogeneous clinical manifes- study was to investigate the relationship between PADI4 tations and complex etiology. The common associated gene and PADI2 gene in the progression of RA. SNPs explain only a small part of disease heritability sug- Padi4−/− DBA1J and wild-type mice were immunized gesting the contribution from rare genetic variants, unde- with bovine type II collagen (CII) to develop collagen- tectable in GWAS. We searched for novel rare variants inducedarthritis(CIA).Expressionofvariousinﬂammatory associated with SLE. cytokines and Padi genes in immune cells was detected by208 J.delPicchia Materials and Methods: 144 SLE patients and 17 members:fourofthemshowingsignsofthrombocytopenia, controlswereusedfortargetedre-sequencingofcodingand two healthy family members and one family member with conserved regulatory regions within and around 215 borderline platelet count. Exome libraries were prepared candidate genes. The variant enriched in cases was accordingtotheprotocolforNimblegenSeqCapEZExome validated by genotyping in additional 360 patients and v3andsequencingwasperformedonNextSeq500forallof 822 healthy controls. Fisher’s exact test and logistic them.Foundvariantsofindividualswiththrombocytopenia regression were used for genetic association analysis. The phenotype were compared to variants of healthy family regulatoryeffectofthenovelvariantwasstudiedbyEMSA, members. luciferase reporter assays and minigenes. Results: Whole-exome sequencing identiﬁed a hetero- Results: We identiﬁed a novel rare regulatory variant zygous single-nucleotide change in GP1BA (exone2: rs200395694 located in the MEF2D gene encoding for the c.176T>G), encoding a p.Leu59Arg substitution in the N- myocyte-speciﬁc enhancer factor 2D transcription factor terminaldomain,segregatingwithmacrothrombocytopenia. associated with SLE in Swedish patients (total 504 SLE This is until recently undescribed variant. In this study, we patients and 839 healthy controls, p=0.013, CI=1.1-10). also analysed structural effect of found sequence variant in The risk allele was strongly associated with the triad of silico. In particular, we used crystal structure of N-terminal disease manifestations including Raynaud’s phenomenon, domain of human platelet receptor GPIb-alpha. Replace- anti-RNPandanti-Smantibodies(p=0.00046,CI5.05-∞). ment of aliphatic amino-acid Leu 59 with charged, polar The region has properties of an active cell-speciﬁc and larger arginine most probably disrupts the protein enhancer, differentially affected by the alleles of structure. rs200395694. In addition, the risk allele exerts inhibitory Conclusions: A germinal GP1BA mutation (exone2: effect on the splicing of the alternative tissue-speciﬁc c.176T>G) disrupts the molecular structure of the protein isoform, and thus may modify the target gene set regulated and is the reason of hereditary thrombocytopenia in this by this isoform. family. Conclusions:Wepresentevidenceofgeneticassociation Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, ofanovelrareregulatoryvariantrs200395694withSLEin grant nr. 16-29447A. All rights reserved. Swedish patients. K. Staňo Kozubik: None. J. Trizuljak: None. M. S.V. Kozyrev: None. F.H.G. Farias: None. J. Dahlq- Peová: None. K. Pál: None. K. Réblová: None. L. vist: None. D. Leonard: None. M. Wilbe: None. S.N. Radová: None. Š. Pospíšilová: None. M. Doubek: None. Abramov: None. A. Alexsson: None. G.R. Pielberg: None. H. Hansson-Hamlin: None. G. Andersson: None. P07.17A K. Tandre: None. M.L. Eloranta: None. L. Rönnblom: A novel susceptibility locus CD53 in tuberculosis identiﬁed None. K. Lindblad-Toh: None. by pathogen lineage-based genome-wide association study P07.16D K. Tokunaga1, Y.Omae1,L. Toyo-oka1,H.Yanai1, A novel germline mutation in GP1BA gene in family with S. Wattanapokayakit2,N.Smittipat3,P. Paliittapongarnpim3, hereditary macrothrombocytopenia N.Wichukchinda2,T. Mushiroda4, S.Mahasirimongkol2 K. Staňo Kozubik1,2,J.Trizuljak1,2,M.Peová1,K. Pál1, 1Dept Human Genetics, Grad Sch Medicine, Univ Tokyo, K. Réblová1,L. Radová1,.Pospíilová1,2,M. Doubek1,2 Tokyo, Japan, 2Medical Life Sciences Institute, Department of Medical Sciences, Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi, 1Central European Institute of Technology, Brno, Czech Thailand, 3National Center for Genetic Engineering and Republic,2UniversityHospitalandFacultyofMedicine,Brno, Biotechnology, Pathum Thani, Thailand, 4RIKEN Center for Czech Republic Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan Introduction: Hereditarythrombocytopeniasarearare and Tuberculosis(TB)isamajorglobalinfectiousdiseasethatis heterogeneous group of disorders, associated with caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb) and TB approximately 30 causal genes involved in the process of onsetisknowntobeaffectedbyhostgeneticfactors.Inthis megakaryopoesis and thrombopoesis. Pathological muta- study, we focused on the heterogeneity of M. tb lineages tions lead to disruption of these processes and origin of and assessed its possible interaction with host genetic fac- thrombocytopenia. tors. Genome-wide association analyses stratiﬁed by Materials and Methods: We identiﬁed a family with pathogenlineageinformationandageatonsetrevealedthat autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia and increased two SNPs on chromosome 1p13 were speciﬁcally asso- platelet volume. We performed analysis of eight family ciatedwithnon-BeijinglineageinfectedoldageonsetcasesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 209 (p=4.86E-08, OR=1.72 [95%CI=1.41-2.09], n=314), impaired,with selective deﬁcitofB-memory cellsandIgM but were not associated with Beijing lineage infected old production. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a shared age onset cases (p=0.0870, OR=1.26 [95%CI=0.97- heterozygous frameshift variant (c.1285dupC;p.Leu429- 1.64], n=155),whenwe comparedthemtothepopulation ProfsTer73) affecting POU2F2 (19q13.2), a non-OMIM matched782 healthycontrols. TheseSNPs were associated gene with low tolerance to loss-of-function variations with both East-African Indian (EAI) and Euro-American (pLI=0.97), encoding the transcription factor OCT2 (octa- lineagesinthenon-Beijinglineagegroup.TheseSNPswere mer-binding protein 2) that regulates immunoglobulin located near CD53, which encodes a leukocyte surface expression in germinal center B-cells. The variant was glycoproteinandhasnotbeenreportedtobeassociatedwith unreported in gnomAD and was shown to segregate in the TB onset. However, interestingly, one of the signiﬁcant family and to have occured de novo in the mother. Impor- SNPs was previously reported as a cis-expression quanti- tantly, heterozygous knock-out mice show a pathological tative trait locus (eQTL) of CD53 expression level in den- phenotype restricted to immune/hematopoietic system with dritic cells infected by M. tb. This is the ﬁrst report of TB reduction of B-cells and IgM, thus recapitulating our pathogenlineage-basedgenome-wideassociationstudyand patients’ phenotype. Analysis of mRNA from B-LCLs and successfully identiﬁed a TB-associated locus at a genome- ﬁbroblastsofbothcarriersrevealedastablemutanttrascript wide signiﬁcance level. The present results indicated that and excluded mRNA decay, suggesting a dominant- host genetic risk in TB is affected by pathogen genetic negative effect; in contrast, somatic POU2F2 ampliﬁca- background and demonstrate the importance of analyzing tions, leading to demonstrated overexpression, have been the interaction between host and pathogen genomic described in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Further variations. functional assays showed severe deﬁciency of switched K. Tokunaga: None. Y. Omae: None. L. Toyo-oka: memory B-cells and reduced surface and intracellular None. H. Yanai: None. S. Wattanapokayakit: None. N. immunoglobulinexpressioninbothpatients.Inconclusion, Smittipat: None. P. Paliittapongarnpim: None. N. our preliminary ﬁndings identiﬁed a novel gene likely Wichukchinda: None. T. Mushiroda: None. S. involved in B-cell anergy and highlighted POU2F2 as an Mahasirimongkol: None. attractivetargetforenhancinghumoralimmuneresponseto vaccination. P07.18B E. Errichiello: None. A. Licari: None. P. Merli: None. Non-response to vaccines: still an enigma? B-cell R.Carsetti:None.P.Comoli:None.G.Marseglia:None. transcriptionfactorPOU2F2/OCT2isapotentialcandidate O. Zuffardi: None. E. Errichiello1, A.Licari2,P. Merli3,R. Carsetti4,P. Comoli5, G.Marseglia2,O.Zuffardi1 P08 Intellectual Disability 1Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Medicine, P08.01A University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, Targeted NGS of the TSC1/TSC2 genes Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Pediatric Hematology- R.Polli1,E.Bettella1,E.Leonardi1,M.Aspromonte1,F.Cesca1, Oncology, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, S. Rossato2,I. Toldo3, A.Murgia1 Italy, 4B Cell Physiopathology Unit, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5Cell Factory, Pediatric 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment, Haematology/Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Padua, Italy, 2Pediatrics Unit,San Bortolo Hospital, Vicenza, Matteo, Pavia, Italy Italy, 3Neuropediatrics Unit,Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Padua, Italy Unresponsiveness to vaccines affects 2-10% of individuals, representing an extraordinary limitation for infection pre- Tuberous sclerosis TSC (MIN:191100,613254) is an auto- vention worldwide. Genetic determinants are still mainly somal dominant disorder characterized by benign tumor unknown, although in recent years GWAS identiﬁed growthsinmultipleorgansystems.In75-90%ofcasesTSC potentialsusceptibility loci (HLA-DQ,HLA-DR,CXCR5). isduetomutationsintheTSC1(OMIM#605284)orTSC2 We investigated a patient and her daughter with unrespon- (OMIM# 191092) genes. Somatic mosaicism potentially siveness to vaccines (tetanus, diphtheria, hepatitis B, account for up to 26% of TSC cases. We report the results poliovirus) and intermittent infectious episodes, but other- ofNGSanalysisin3familialand8sporadicunrelatedcases wise unremarkable clinical history. Lymphocyte prolifera- referred with clinically diagnosed (9) or highly suspected tion assay to tetanus and diphtheria toxoids was highly TSC (2). DNA samples from peripheral blood leukocytes210 J.delPicchia and oral mucosa were analyzedby AmpliSeqcustompanel Theselattertwocasesandpublishedfeaturesofindividuals covering the coding sequence of the two genes. NGS was with even larger 13q31.3 overlapping duplications sug- performed on theIon Torrent PGM platform. Data analysis gested that gene expression imbalance of GPC5 could be was performed with ION Torrent Suite v.5; median read causative. The limited extent of the rearrangement and the depth was ≥ 500x. Variants were annotated with wAN- normal expression level of GPC5 in cells of our proband, NOVAR and ﬁltered based on MAF (<1%), phylogenetic however, provides evidence against this hypothesis. conservationandCADDscore;pathogenicitywasevaluated Our results suggest that duplication of the miR-17~92 by 12 in silico tools and Sanger sequencing validation cluster is linked to a new syndrome characterized by performedforalltheﬁlteredlikelypathogenicvariants.We features mirroring those of Feingold syndrome type 2, identiﬁed 6 heterozygous seemingly germ-line mutations, which is associated with haploinsufﬁciency of the region. two of which novel, in cases with a deﬁnite clinical diag- Whereas deletion of the region is linked with short stature nosis: 2 TSC2 frameshift deletions (NM_000548: and microcephaly,duplication is on thecontrary associated c.5076delG;c.935delT) and1 TSC2 splice-mutation with overgrowth and macrocephaly. Similar dosage depen- (NM_000548:c.2221-2A>C), 2 TSC1 rare single nucleo- dent mirror phenotypes on BMI and head circumference tide variants (NM_000368:c.569 C>G;c.647 T>C) and 1 havebeenpreviouslyreportedfordeletionandduplications frameshiftdeletion(NM_000368;c.709_716del).Thelatter of the 1q21.1, 2p15, 16p11.2 BP4-BP5, 16p11.2 BP2-BP3 was present in the DNA of the proband's father as mosaic and 17p11.2 CNVs. mutation at about 10% of mutant allele frequency. Five E. Siavriene: None. E. Preiksaitienė: None. Z. Mal- subjectsremainedwithoutamoleculardiagnosis;weplanto dzienė: None. L. Ambrozaitytė: None. L. Gueneau: extend our NGS analysis in negative samples with the None. A. Reymond: None. V. Kučinskas: None. inclusion of TSC1 and TSC2 promoter, UTRs and intronic regions P08.03C R. Polli: None. E. Bettella: None. E. Leonardi: None. 15q13.3 microdeletion and microduplication in patients M. Aspromonte: None. F. Cesca: None. S. Rossato: with neurodevelopment disorders None. I. Toldo: None. A. Murgia: None. E. Dagytė1,2,A. Matulevičienė1,2,L. Ambrozaitytė1,2, P08.02B R. Laimutė2,B.Aleksiūnienė1,2,B. Burnytė1,2, A.Utkus1,2 Microduplicationofthe13q31.3miR17-92clusterresultsin asyndrome withfeatures oppositetothoseassociated with 1InstituteofBiomedicalSciences,FacultyofMedicine,Vilnius Feingold syndrome 2 University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, E.Siavriene1,E.Preiksaitienė1,Z.Maldzienė1,L.Ambrozaitytė1, Lithuania L. Gueneau2,A. Reymond2, V.Kučinskas1 Theproximallongarmofchromosome15containsacluster 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of of low copy repeats (LCRs), located at breakpoints BP1- Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, BP5. These mediate various deletions and duplications via Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, non-allelic homologous recombination. BP4-BP5 micro- University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland deletion/duplication syndrome may include features of ASD,avarietyofneuropsychiatric disorders,andcognitive Deletion of the miR17~92 cluster is associated with Fein- impairment. We report two patients with a deletion within gold syndrome type 2 (OMIM: #614326) characterized by BP3-BP5 and two patients with smaller duplication within short stature, microcephaly, skeletal abnormalities, and BP4-BP5.A15q13.2-13.3microdeletion(chr15:30955149- intellectual disability. 32515681) which encompasses seven protein-coding genes In the present study, we report a female individual (ARHGAP11B, FAN1, MTMR10, TRPM1, KLF13, presenting with opposite features such as tall stature and OTUD7A,CHRNA7)wasdetectedforthe1stpatient1yboy macrocephaly, besides developmental delay, skeletal and with hypotonia, psychomotor retardation and dysmorphic digital abnormalities and a de novo ~840kb duplication of features. 2nd patient 8 y boy has a 15q13.1-13.3 deletion 13q31.3 (91166748-92010901) encompassing only (chr15:29247469-32515681) which encompasses 17 miR17~92 cluster. Two individuals carrying overlapping protein-coding genes (APBA2, FAM189A1, NDNL2, TJP1, duplications of the miR17~92 cluster including the GOLGA8J, GOLGA8T, CHRFAM7A, GOLGA8R, GOL- proximal GPC5 were previously described. They similarly GA8Q, GOLGA8H, ARHGAP11B, FAN1, MTMR10, present with macrocephaly, developmental delay, skeletal TRPM1, KLF13, OTUD7A, CHRNA7). The patient was and digital abnormalities as well as growth abnormalities. referred to clinical geneticist due to psychomotorAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 211 retardation, ASD and dysmorphic features. 3rd patient with (ASD), attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), expressivelanguageimpairmentandattentionproblemshas intellectual disability (ID) and schizophrenia. In our cohort 307 kb size duplication at 15q13.3 (chr15:32018731- of 1500 patients, with ID, ASD and congenital anomalies, 32325676). Duplication region encompasses part of studied by Agilent 180K oligonucleotide array-CGH, we OTUD7A gene and part of CHRNA7 gene. 4th patient with have identiﬁed 17 patients with 16p13.11 CNVs (9 dele- psychomotordelayandshortstaturehas194kbduplication tions and 8 duplications). The majority of the patients (chr15:32114055-323208134) involving a distal part of showed high clinical variability with a wide range of phe- OTUD7A gene. The differential diagnosis of the 15q13.3 notypic manifestations: developmental delay, autism, microdeletion/microduplication comprises an extensive speech delay, learning difﬁculties, behavioural problems, spectrumofdiseases.Thereisnoconsistentorrecognizable epilepsy, microcephaly and physical dysmorphisms. In our phenotype. The BP4-BP5 microdeletion/microduplication data, an higher male:female 16p13.11 CNV ratio has not events span CHRNA7, a candidate gene for seizures. been detected. In 66% of the cases, the alteration was However, none of these patients reported here have epi- inherited from unaffected parents conﬁrming that duplica- lepsy.BothdeletionandduplicationencompassesOTUD7A tions and deletions at 16p13.11 represent incomplete gene which is critical gene for brain function. penetration but that predispose to a range of neurodeve- E. Dagytė: None. A. Matulevičienė: None. L. Ambro- lopmental disorders. zaitytė:None.R.Laimutė:None.B.Aleksiūnienė:None. M.Val:None.I.M.Carreira:None.L.M.Pires:None. B. Burnytė: None. A. Utkus: None. J.Ribeiro:None.N.Lavoura:None.S.I.Ferreira:None. M. Venancio: None. F. Ramos: None. J.B. Melo: None. P08.04D Array-CGH cohort of 1500 patients with P08.05A NeurodevelopmentalDisorders:CopyNumberVariationin Novel ADAT3 variants associated with RNA modiﬁcation 16p13.11 defects and autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorders M.Val1,I.M. Carreira1,2,3,L. M.Pires1,J. Ribeiro1,2,3, N.Lavoura1, S.I.Ferreira1,2,M. Venancio4,F. Ramos4,J.B. A. Thuresson1, J.Ramos2,J.Halvardson1,E. Kuchinskaya3, Melo1,2,3 R. Marooﬁan4,E. GhayoorKarimiani4,N.Mazaheri5, H.Galehdari5, G.Shariati6,D.Fu2,L. Feuk1 1Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2University of 2iCBR-CIMAGO- Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States, 3Linköping Genética e Oncobiologia, Faculdade de Medicina da University, Linköping, Sweden, 4University of London, Universidade Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3CNC- IBILI, London, United Kingdom, 5Shahid Chamran University of Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Serviço de Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 6Ahvaz Jundishapur Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal of Chromosomal region 16p13.11 is structurally complex, Post-transcriptional modiﬁcations of tRNAs are important subdivided into three single-copy sequence blocks called fortheregulationandefﬁciencyoftranslationaswellasfor intervals I, II and III. Each block is ﬂanked by low-copy ﬁdelityandstabilityofthetRNAstructure.Defectsinthese repeats (LCRs) with highly homologous DNA sequences modiﬁcationshavebeenimplicatedinhumandiseasessuch making it prone to non-allelic homologous recombination as neurological and mitochondrial disorders, diabetes and (NAHR) being a major source of de novo genomic rear- cancer. rangements. 16p13.11 copy number variants (CNVs) have Theconversionofadenosine(A)toinosine(I)oftheﬁrst variablesizes(0,8to3,3Mb),encompassingoneormoreof base in the anticodon of tRNA enables alternative pairing the three intervals. Interval II (chr16:15.48-16.32Mb, with U, C or A at the wobble position of mRNA codons. GRCh37/hg19) CNVs, have the higher number of patients The A to I conversion is catalysed by a heterodimeric reported so far, involving a set of eight genes, including adenosine deaminase complex consisting of the ADAT2 NDE1, referred as a strong candidate gene for neurodeve- and ADAT3 subunits. To date, only a single homozygous lopmental disorders. Clinical features of patients with founder mutation, c.430G>A; p.Val144Met, has been microdeletions or microduplications at chromosome detected in ADAT3. The main features of these patients 16p13.11, have been associated with a range of neurode- are cognitive impairment, strabismus, hypotonia and velopmental disorders including autism spectrum disorders spasticity or epilepsy.212 J.delPicchia Using exome sequencing, we identiﬁed novel compound Parkville,Victoria,Australia,16ChildHealthResearchCentre, heterozygous variants in ADAT3 in two different non- The University of Queensland, South Brisbane, Queensland, consanguineous families, and the homozygous founder Australia mutation in one consanguineous family. The variants c. [587C>T];[820C>T] (p.[Ala196Val];[Gln274*] were Introduction: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodeve- detected in three affected siblings, and c.[928_936del]; lopmental disorder characterised by moderate to severe [946C>G] (p.[Cys310_Met312del];[His316Asp] in a single developmental delay, absent or near absent speech, gait case.Allfourcasessharemanyofthefeaturespresentedby ataxia, microcephaly and seizures. Deﬁcient expression or the previously detected founder mutation. The mutated functionofthematernallyinheritedUBE3Aalleleresultsin amino acids are highly conserved, and Sanger sequencing AS. Approximately 5-10% of patients with a presumed of cDNA from the three affected siblings shows a diagnosis of AS do not have an identiﬁable molecular signiﬁcantly lowered expression of the allele harbouring cause. A proportion of these patients may have a defect of the nonsense variant. Further functional studies are on- maternal UBE3A expression which is not detectable by going to investigate the pathogenicity of these variants. current test methods. However, there are other rare syn- A. Thuresson: None. J. Ramos: None. J. Halvardson: dromes which have clinical features that overlap with AS. None. E. Kuchinskaya: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. E. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) may have diagnostic uti- Ghayoor Karimiani: None. N. Mazaheri: None. H. lity in these patients. Galehdari: None. G. Shariati: None. D. Fu: None. L. Methods: Singleton WES was performed on a retro- Feuk: None. spective cohort of 37 patients with a clinical diagnosis of AS or a syndromic intellectual disability with clinical P08.06B feature(s)incommon with AS.Noneofthepatientshadan Whole-exome sequencing of patients with Angelman-like identiﬁedUBE3Aaberration,andallhadnormalmicroarray phenotypesandnoaberrationdetectedintheUBE3Agene test results. Variant analysis was restricted to a curated list of 812 genes associated with Angelman syndrome, M.Williams1,2,3,J.Harraway3,J. McGaughran4,2,C. Patel4, intellectual disability and related neurodevelopmental S. Mehta4,5,A. Harris6,7,M.Lipke8, J.Pinner9,10,H.Goel11,12, disorders. B. Hanna11,C. Stutterd13,14,15,T.Y.Tan13,15,S.White13,15, Results: Using ACMG-AMP variant-interpretation A. Yeung13,H.Heussler1,16,6 guidelines, a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant was identiﬁed in the 14/37 patients (37.8%). Variants were 1Mater Research Institute – The University of Queensland, detected in the ARID1B, BCL11A (2 patients), CDKL5, Woolloongabba,Queensland,Australia,2FacultyofMedicine, DEAF1, GABRA1, HDAC8, HIVEP2, KAT6A, NEXMIF The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland, (KIAA2022), PIGN, POGZ, PURA and TRAPPC9 genes. Australia, 3Genetic Pathology, Mater Pathology, South Conclusion:Resultsfromthiscohortadvocatetheutility Brisbane,Queensland,Australia,4GeneticHealthQueensland, of WES, following microarray and UBE3A testing, for Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Herston, Queensland, patients with Angelman-like phenotypes or neurodevelop- Australia, 5Clinical Genetics Department, Addenbrookes mental disorders with unclear or atypical clinical Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Child Development phenotypes. Program, Lady Cilento Children’s Hospital, South Brisbane, M. Williams: None. J. Harraway: None. J. McGaugh- Queensland, Australia, 7School of Clinical Medicine - ran: None. C. Patel: None. S. Mehta: None. A. Harris: Children's Health Queensland, The University of Queensland, None. M. Lipke: None. J. Pinner: None. H. Goel: None. South Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, 8Queensland B. Hanna: None. C. Stutterd: None. T.Y. Tan: None. S. MetabolicMedicineLifespanService,LadyCilentoChildren’s White: None. A. Yeung: None. H. Heussler: None. Hospital,SouthBrisbane,Queensland,Australia,9Department of Medical Genomics, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, P08.07C Camperdown, New South Wales, Australia, 10Sydney Centre Whole exome sequencing identiﬁes new genes responsible for Clinical Genetics, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, for Angelman-like syndrome NewSouthWales,Australia,11HunterGenetics,Waratah,New South Wales, Australia, 12University of Newcastle, Callaghan, C. Aguilera1,A.Ruiz1,E. Gabau2,N.Baena1,N.Capdevila2, New South Wales, Australia, 13Victorian Clinical Genetics A. Ramírez2,V. Delgadillo2,S. Ourani2,C. Brun2,S. Derdak3, Services, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, S. Laurie3,M.Guitart1 Victoria, Australia, 14Department of Neurology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 1Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic.Parc Taulí 15Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Hospital Universitari. Institut d’Investigació i Innovació ParcAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 213 Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona., Sabadell, Cowley6,7, M.E.Dinger6,7,J.A. Rosenfeld8,R. Xiao8,M.T. Spain, 2Paediatric Unit. ParcTaulí Hospital Universitari. Cho9,L. B. Henderson9,M.J. GuillenSacoto9,A. Begtrup9, Institutd’InvestigacióiInnovacióParcTaulíI3PT.Universitat M.Hamad10,M.Shinawi11,M.Andrews11,M. C.Jones12, Autònoma de Barcelona., Sabadell, Spain, 3CNAG-CRG, K. Lindstrom13,S.Kayani14,M.Snyder15,M.Villanueva16, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of A. Schteinschnaider16,T. Roscioli2,17,E. P.Kirk2,18,A. Bye2,18, Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain J.Merzaban4,L. Jaremko4,M.Jaremko4,R. K.Sachdev2,18, F. S.Alkuraya5,19,20,S. T.Arold4 Introduction: Approximately 10% of patients with an Angelman syndrome (AS) phenotype remain without a 1Genetics of Learning Disability (GoLD) Service, Waratah, molecular diagnosis. Some of these AS-like syndrome Australia, 2Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, Australia, patients may harbor alternative genetic defects that present 3School of Women's andChildren's Health,University of New overlapping clinical features with AS. Whole-exome South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 4King Abdullah University sequencing (WES) has been successfully applied to iden- of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia, tify the genetic bases of intellectual disability and autism. 5Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Materials and Methods: 17 patients who met the Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 6The Kinghorn consistent clinical features of AS and lack a molecular Cancer Centre, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, diagnosiswereselected.WESwasperformedin17parents- Darlinghurst, Australia, 7St Vincent’s Clinical School, patient trios in a Hiseq2000 platform (Illumina) using the University of New South Wales, Darlinghurst, Australia, SureSelectXT Human All Exon V5+UTR (Agilent). 8Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor Variants were ﬁltered according to their allele frequency College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 9GeneDx, in the ExAC database and their effect on the protein. Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 10King Khalid University Pathogenicity of missense variants was evaluated using Hospital, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, bioinformatics tools. 11Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Washington Results: Candidate variants were identiﬁed in 14 of 17 University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States, patients. Ten of those variants were de novo. According to 12DivisionofGenetics,DepartmentofPediatrics,Universityof the recommendation of the ACMG/AMP, six pathogenic California, San Diego, CA, United States, 13Division of variants were identiﬁed in SATB2, SYNGAP1, ASXL3, Genetics and Metabolism, Phoenix Children's Hospital, SLC6A1,SPTAN1andSMARCE1geneswhereasfourlikely Phoenix,AZ,UnitedStates,14UniversityofTexasSouthwestern pathogenic missense variants were identiﬁed in other Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States, 15Department of neurodevelopmental genes. Clinical reevaluation is being Neurology, Children's Health, Dallas, TX, United States, performed in those patients with pathogenic and likely 16Fundación para la Lucha contra las Enfermedades pathogenic variants. Neurológicas de la Infancia, Buenos Aires, Argentina, Conclusion: Exome sequencing has proved a valuable 17Neuroscience Research Australia, Randwick, Australia, tooltoidentifythegeneticdefectinAS-likepatients.Newly 18SchoolofWomen’sandChildren’sHealth,UniversityofNew identiﬁed genes should be added to the expanding list of South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 19Department of Anatomy differential diagnoses for patients presenting with AS-like and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, features. We thank Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI16/ Riyadh,SaudiArabia,20SaudiHumanGenomeProgram,King 01411), Asociación Española de Síndrome de Angelman Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi and Fundació Parc Taulí-Institut d’Investigació i Innovació Arabia ParcTaulí I3PT for their ﬁnancial support. C.Aguilera:None.A.Ruiz:None.E.Gabau:None.N. Polyglutamine expansions in the transcriptional co- Baena:None.N.Capdevila:None.A.Ramírez:None.V. repressor ATN1, at 12p13.31, have been linked to the Delgadillo: None. S. Ourani: None. C. Brun: None. S. neurodegenerative condition dentatorubral-pallidoluysian Derdak: None. S. Laurie: None. M. Guitart: None. atrophy (DRPLA) via a proposed toxic gain of function. We present detailed phenotypic information on seven P08.08D unrelated individuals with de novo missense and in-frame De novo variants disruting the HX repeat motif of ATN1 insertion variants within an evolutionarily conserved 16 cause a non-progressive neurocognitive disorder with amino acid ‘poly HX repeat’ motif of ATN1. The subjects recognisable facial features and congenital malformations have severe cognitive impairment, hypotonia, a recogni- sable facial gestalt and variable congenital anomalies but E.E.Palmer1,2,3,S.Hong4,F.AlZahrani5,M.OmarHashem5, lack the progressive symptoms typical of DRPLA. We F.A.Aleisa5,H.M.JalalAhmed4,T.Kandula2,3,R.Macintosh2, show that a variant in ATN1’s HX repeat is sufﬁcient to A. Minoche6,C. Puttick6,V.Gayevskiy6,A. P. Drew6,M. J. perturb the structural features of the repeat with several214 J.delPicchia effects. It alters ligand binding, including the binding to 1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, several proteins which are important in ribosomal function University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Child andregulationofgeneexpression.Inaddition,themutation Neuropsychiatric Unit - Epilepsy Center, S. Paolo Hospital, affects the nuclear localization of the HX repeat motif. Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Thesedatasuggestthatthevariantaffectsthetranscriptional Milano,Milano,Italy,3DepartmentofPathology,Universityof repressionactivityofATN1,leadingtoanapparentgain of Utah,SaltLakeCity,UT,UnitedStates,4ARUPLaboratories, function effect. Our study provides valuable insights into Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 5Division of Medical the function of the HX repeat motifs and ATN1’s primary Genetics, Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada, roles regulating neuronal and other organ system develop- 6Department of Pediatrics and Neurology & ment. This research provides an example of phenotypically Neurotherapeutics, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, distinct allelic disorders in humans, revealing the power of TX, United States, 7Department of Pediatrics, University of unbiased genomic technologies and international colla- Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 8Clinical Genetics/ borations in providing diagnoses for individuals with Dysmorphology, University of California San Diego/Rady complex congenital disorders. Children’s Hospital, San Diego, CA, United States, Grants: National Health and Medical Research; King 9Ambulantes Gesundheitszentrum Humangenetik, Charité Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology; King Salman Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany Center for Disability Research; Saudi Human Genome Program and the King Abdullah University of Science and Introduction:Dias-Logansyndromeisarecentlydescribed Technology. condition characterized by intellectual disability (ID) and E.E. Palmer: None. S. Hong: None. F. Al Zahrani: persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HbF). It is caused by None.M.OmarHashem:None.F.A.Aleisa:None.H.M. haploinsufﬁciency of BCL11A (2p16.1), encoding a tran- Jalal Ahmed: None. T. Kandula: None. R. Macintosh: scription factor of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling None. A. Minoche: None. C. Puttick: None. V. Gayevs- complex. kiy: None. A.P. Drew: None. M.J. Cowley: None. M.E. Methods: We reviewed the medical records of our Dinger: None. J.A. Rosenfeld: B. Research Grant patientswithchangesinBCL11Aandthoseintheliterature, (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and and assessed the frequency of the main manifestations. pending grants as well as grants already received); Results: Our patients (2-11 y) presented with hypotonia Signiﬁcant; Baylor Genetics Laboratory. R. Xiao: B. (6/6),ID(6/6),persistenceofHbF(3/3),brainabnormalities Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or (4/6), strabismus (4/6), and seizures (2/6). No birth defects consultant and pending grants as well as grants already were observed. Two had de novo deletions and four had a received); Signiﬁcant; Baylor Genetics Laboratory. M.T. de novo pathogenic variant in BCL11A. Cho: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; By review of the literature, we found 16 additional GeneDx. L.B. Henderson: A. Employment (full or part- individuals with point mutations and 25 with 2p15p16.1 time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. M.J. Guillen Sacoto: A. microdeletions. Including our patients, the most frequent Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. A. manifestations were ID (100%), varying from mild to Begtrup: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; profound,persistentHbF (100%),distinctive facialfeatures GeneDx. M. Hamad: None. M. Shinawi: None. M. (95%), hypotonia (87%), microcephaly (67%), abnormal Andrews:None.M.C.Jones:None.K.Lindstrom:None. brain MRI (67%), consisting of cortical dysplasia, corpus S. Kayani: None. M. Snyder: None. M. Villanueva: callosum hypoplasia or cerebellar hypoplasia, and growth None.A.Schteinschnaider:None.T.Roscioli:None.E.P. delay (41%). Epilepsy was present in 16%: age at onset Kirk: None. A. Bye: None. J. Merzaban: None. L. ranged 2 m - 3 y, and seizures were mostly drug-resistant. Jaremko: None. M. Jaremko: None. R.K. Sachdev: Interestingly, in most of the patients the facial gestalt None. F.S. Alkuraya: None. S.T. Arold: None. resembledAlfaThalassemiaIntellectualDisability(ATRX), causedbymutationsinageneencodinganotherSWI/SNF- P08.09A like protein. Dias-Logan syndrome: delineating a newly recognized Conclusions: Our study expands the phenotype of disorder of transcriptional regulation BCL11A mutations to include early onset seizures and brain abnormalities, and the overlapping manifestations A. Peron1,2,C. Carlston3,4, J.Palumbos1,T. Tvrdik4, between Dias-Logan syndrome and ATRX suggest con- P. Ferreira5,D.Haffner6, P. Campeau7,L. Bird8, L.Graul- vergence on a common pathway of transcription regulation Neumann9,A. Openshaw4,A. Lamb3,4,P. Paulraj3,4, of hemoglobin genes. E. Andersen3,4,M. Rong3,4,J.C. Carey1,D.H.Viskochil1 A. Peron: None. C. Carlston: None. J. Palumbos: None. T. Tvrdik: None. P. Ferreira: None. D. Haffner:Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 215 None. P. Campeau: None. L. Bird: None. L. Graul- B. Augello1,C. Gervasini2,V. Massa2,G.M.Squeo1,E.A. Neumann: None. A. Openshaw: None. A. Lamb: None. Colombo2,D.Milani3,M.C.Gandini2,M.Castori1,E.DiFede2, P.Paulraj:None.E.Andersen:None.M.Rong:None.J. I.Adipietro1,N.Malerba1, G.Merla1 C. Carey: None. D.H. Viskochil: None. 1Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della P08.10B Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, TelomereshorteninginDownsyndromeandcerebralpalsy Dept. Health sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 3UOSD Pediatria ad alta intensità di cura, E. Bueno-Martínez1, J.J.Tellería2,3,C. Cieza-Borrella1,J.A. Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Mirón-Canelo4, R.González-Sarmiento5 Policlinico, Milano, Italy 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Departamento de Medicina, Introduction:Aberrantstructureandfunctionofchromatin, Salamanca, Spain, 2IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 3Hospital by altering various components of the epigenetic machin- ClinicodeValladolid,Valladolid,Austria,4Deppartamentode ery, causes a number of human diseases. Intellectual dis- Medicina Preventiva, Salud Pública y Microbiología Médica, abilityappearstobeacommonphenotypefeature,although Salamanca, Spain, 5IBSAL y IBMCC, Salamanca, Spain these disorders affect multiple organs. There is emerging importance recognition of this spectrum of disorders, that Intellectual disability has a global prevalence of 1-3%. we termed ‘chromatinopathies’. Down syndrome and Cerebral Palsy are two entities asso- Materials and Methods: We generated a targeted NGS ciated to intellectual disability with high impact in society custom-made gene panel to sequence 66 genes that are and easily diagnosed. In recent decades, life expectancy in causative of 54 chromatinopathies, including Kabuki, Au- people with intellectual disability has increased and has Kline, Charge, Wiedemann Steiner, Rubinstein-Taybi, beenaccompaniedbyprematureagingwhosegeneticcause Floating Harbor, and Cornelia de Lange syndromes. remains unknown. Telomere shortening is involved in the Results: To date we have NGS-sequenced 165 patients cellular and body aging. We have studied by quantitative andwefoundpathogenicvariantsin31%oftheallpatients. real time PCR the telomere length in subjects with Down Themainsub-groupisKabukisyndromepatientsforwhich syndrome(66 males, 47 females, age 11-69y, mean 37.2) we have analysed 83 patients ﬁnding 26 (16% of the total) and Cerebral Palsy (34 males, 20 females, age 11-80y, of them carrying KMT2D and KDM6A pathogenic point mean 32.7), and compared with a control group in order to pathogenic variants. Moreover we found pathogenic identifydifferencesthatcouldexplaintheacceleratedaging variants in 9/37 Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients, 3/11 of both pathological groups. We found differences in telo- Cornelia de Lange,syndrome 2/10 in Floating-Harbor mere length between subjects with Down syndrome and syndrome, 2/3 Sotos syndrome, and 1/1in Wiedemann- Cerebral Palsy for ages over 35y and when compared both Steinersyndrome.Thenweextendedouranalysissearching groups to healthy subjects matched by age for all ages (p for additional causative genes alteration in those patients <0.001) in all cases. The analysis of the genotype dis- with overlapping phenotypes, ﬁnding unexpected results tribution of two polymorphisms associated with a low tel- supportingtheneedofusingNGSforthisgroupofdiseases omerase activity: TERT -1327C>T (rs2735940) and TERC with molecular and clinical overlapping. -63G>A (rs2793607) did not show any difference between Conclusions:Thestudyofchromatinopathiesmayoffera groups. Analysis of telomere length in siblings with a unique opportunity to learn about the role of epigenetics in similar age to those of individuals with cerebral palsy as health and disease. Since the pathogenic sequences are well as those of their parents corrected for age showed unknownformostofthecases,wehighlighttheimportance shorter telomeres length than control subjects with similar to analyse them with NGS. age.Thesedatasuggestthatearlytelomereshorteningcould B.Augello:None.C.Gervasini:None.V.Massa:None. increase susceptibility tocerebral palsy or that both entities G.M. Squeo: None. E.A. Colombo: None. D. Milani: could share genetic predisposition factors. None. M.C. Gandini: None. M. Castori: None. E. Di E. Bueno-Martínez: None. J.J. Tellería: None. C. Fede: None. I. Adipietro: None. N. Malerba: None. G. Cieza-Borrella: None. J.A. Mirón-Canelo: None. R. Merla: None. González-Sarmiento: None. P08.12D P08.11C Ending the diagnostic odyssey by clinical whole exome / NGS panel for chromatinopathies, implications for genome sequencing (CWEW/CWGS) diagnosis and research C. Law,C. Lam216 J.delPicchia DepartmentofPathology,TheUniversityofHongKong,Hong Introduction: Microdeletions and microduplications Kong, China affecting CNTN6 have been described in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders. We aimed to ﬁnd out the Introduction: There are more than 7,000 rare diseases basic biological processes involved in the realization of affecting 300 million populations worldwide. Unfortu- pathogenic microdeletion effects in the central nervous nately,thediagnosisofrarediseasesischallengingandvery system(CNS)viaanalysisofdifferentiallyexpressedgenes often,thereisadelaybetweendiseaseonsetandthetimeof (DEG) in neurons, derived from induced pluripotent stem the correct diagnosis. This is also known as “diagnostic (iPS) cells of a patient with intellectual disability and odyssey”. Over the past years, we had closed a number of CNTN6 microdeletion. “diagnostic odysseys” in this locality and we realized there Materials and Methods: Two iPS cell clones with is a strong need to provide rare diseases diagnostic service. CNTN6microdeletionandthreewild-type(WT)cellclones For this reason, we developed the ﬁrst Undiagnosed Dis- with different genotypes were differentiated into cortical eases Program (UDP) in Hong Kong which was supported neurons.TheneuronalRNAwasexaminedusingSurePrint by the S. K. Yee Medical Foundation. G3 Human Gene Expression 8×60K Microarray Kit Materials and Methods: Clinical Whole Exome and (Agilent Technologies, USA). Empirical Bayes statistical Genome Sequencing (CWES and CWGS) were performed test was applied for bioinformatic analysis (p-value < 0.05; withbioinformaticsanalysisdoneusingin-housealgorithm. expressionlevelsdiffermorethan2times).Theenrichment The overall interpretation was based on the clinical, analysisforidentiﬁcationoffunctionalgroupsofgeneswas laboratory and imaging ﬁndings, and pathomechanism. performed. Results: Over 100 cases had been referred to us and the Results: The comparison of gene expression in WT and disease entities were heterogeneous. Some cases were CNTN6 microdeletion neurons revealed 756 DEG (142 potentially actionable, these include Allan-Herndon- downregulatedand614upregulatedgenes).Theenrichment Dudley syndrome, benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis analysis of the underexpressed genes revealed their (BRIC), coenzyme Q6 deﬁciency-related nephrotic syn- involvement in responses to glucocorticoid and corticoster- drome, coenzyme Q10 deﬁciency, osteogenesis imperfecta oid, astrocyte development, basic amino acid and trans- type VII, steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome, X-linked membranetransport.Overexpressedgeneswereinvolvedin adrenoleukodystrophy, etc. A new treatment for GNAO1- regulation of synaptic signalling, trans-synaptic signalling, related epilepsy was found by this group. Novel disease- anterograde trans-synaptic signalling, chemical synaptic causing genes were discovered, for example, AK9 in transmission, cell-cell signalling, nervous system and congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS) and EBF3 in neuron development, regulation of postsynaptic membrane Moebius syndrome. potential. Conclusions: Patients with undiagnosed disease Conclusions:ThetranscriptomeanalysisofiPSC-derived >3 months should undergo CWES/CWGS. The clinical neurons with the CNTN6 microdeletion revealed the interpretation of CWES/CWGS is not straightforward, and alteration of the expression of other genes signiﬁcant for requires in-depth knowledge in both advanced laboratory CNS functioning. This study was supported by Russian and clinical medicine. Therefore, it should be handled by Science Foundation, grant 14-15-00772. specialists with experience in clinical genomics. M.E. Lopatkina: None. V.S. Fishman: None. M.M. C. Law: None. C. Lam: None. Gridina: None. N.A. Skryabin: None. T.V. Nikitina: None. A.A. Kashevarova: None. L.P. Nazarenko: None. P08.13A O.L. Serov: None. I.N. Lebedev: None. The search of biological processes affected by CNTN6 microdeletioninneurons,derivedfrominducedpluripotent P08.14B stemcellsofapatientwithintellectualdisabilityand3p26.3 Expanding the phenotypeof CTNNB1-mutated individuals microdeletion and description of the fetal phenotype M.E. Lopatkina1,V. S.Fishman2, M.M.Gridina2,N.A. C. F.Wells1, S.Heide2,P. Charles3,I.Marey2,D.Héron2,4, Skryabin1,T. V. Nikitina1, A.A. Kashevarova1,L.P. C. Nava2,4,T. Courtin2,B. Isidor5,A. Piton6,7,B.Gérard7, Nazarenko1,O.L.Serov2, I.N.Lebedev1 J.Buratti8,M.Fradin9,C. Dubourg10,L. Pasquier11, L.Faivre12,13,N.Philip14,M.Milh15,G.Lesca16,17,P.Edery16,17, 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National D.Sanlaville16,17,A. Liquier18, A.Dieux19,T. Attié-Bitach20,21, Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation, E. Colin22,D.Bonneau22,23, B.Keren2, D.Geneviève1 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian FederationAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 217 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladie Rares et exome sequencing. We decribe new signs in CTNNB1- Médecine Personalisée, Centre de référence anomalies du mutated individuals and the fetal phenotype. Thirteen have développementetsyndromeMalformaifs,CHUdeMontpellier, SNVs and two have deletions. New signs include conden- Montpellier, France, 2APHP, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, sing bone anomalies, severe acne and reproductive organ Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 3APHP, GH Pitié- malformation.Onefetuswasdiagnosedafterterminationof Salpêtrière, Centre de Référence de Neurogénétique, Paris, pregnancy for agenesis of corpus callosum and gene panel France, 4Centre de Référence `Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de analysis. The other fetus had microcephaly (-3DS), array- CausesRares',Paris,France,5ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale, CGHwas performed andrevealedadeletion encompassing CHUdeNantes,Nantes,France,6DepartmentofTranslational CTNNB1. Medicine and Neurogenetics, Institut Génétique Biologie Conclusion: We expand the phenotype of CTNNB1- Moléculaire Cellulaire, Illkirch, France, 7Laboratoire de mutated individuals and describe the fetal phenotype and diagnostic génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, new mutations. More patients are needed to conﬁrm the Strasbourg, France, 8CNRS UMR 3571: Genes, Synapses and frequency of rarer signs. X-rays in both males and females Cognition,InstitutPasteur,Paris,France,9UnitédeGénétique and abdominal ultrasound in females should be carried out clinique, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 10Unité de to respectively assess bone anomalies and reproductive Génétique clinique, CHU de Rennes,, Paris, France, 11CHU organ malformations. Rennes, Service de Génétique Clinique, CNRS UMR6290, C.F.Wells:None.S.Heide:None.P.Charles:None.I. Université Rennes1,Rennes,France,12EquipeGAD,INSERM Marey: None. D. Héron: None. C. Nava: None. T. LNC UMR 1231, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Courtin: None. B. Isidor: None. A. Piton: None. B. Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 13Centre de Gérard: None. J. Buratti: None. M. Fradin: None. C. Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Dubourg: None. L. Pasquier: None. L. Faivre: None. N. Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l'Interrégion Philip: None. M. Milh: None. G.Lesca:None. P. Edery: Est, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, None. D. Sanlaville: None. A. Liquier: A. Employment 14Département de génétique médicale, Hôpital de la Timone, (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Biomnis.A.Dieux:None.T. APHM, Marseille, France, 15Service de neurologie Attié-Bitach: None. E. Colin: None. D. Bonneau: None. pédiatrique, Hôpital de la Timone, APHM,Marseille, France, B. Keren: None. D. Geneviève: None. 16Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de Génétique, Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement, Bron, France, P08.15C 17INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, UCB Lyon 1, Centre de DDX3X mutations in 11 french patients with intellectual Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, GENDEV Team, Lyon, disability : new phenotypic features France, 18Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Biomnis, Lyon, France, 19Service de génétique clinique Guy Fontaine CHRU V. Ruault1,2,C. Coubes2,P. Charles3,M.Vincent4,M.Nizon4, de Lille - Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 20APHP, C. Mignot3,A. Delahaye-Duriez5,C.Thauvin6, N.Jean- Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Service d'Histologie- Marçais6, A.Garde6, L.Faivre6, Y.Alembik7,A. Gouronc7, Embryologie-Cytogénétique,Paris,France,21INSERMU1163, B. Durand7, C.Nava3, B.Keren3,C. Depienne3,F.Tran Mau Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Institut Imagine, Paris, Them6,M. Willems2, B.Gérard7,D.Geneviève2,1 France, 22Département de biochimie et génétique, CHU d’Angers, Angers, France, 23Equipe MitoLab, CNRS UMR 1Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Service de 6015, Inserm U1083, Institut MitoVasc of Angers, CHU génétique clinique,CHUdeMontpellier, Montpellier, France, d’Angers, Angers, France 3Service de génétique de la Pitié Salpetrière, Paris, France, 4Service de génétique clinique, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, Introduction: CTNNB1 constitutional mutations were ﬁrst France, 5Service de génétique clinique Robert Debré, Paris, describedinintellectualdisabilitybyDeLigtetal.in2012. France, 6Centre de génétique CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, Thirty-one individuals have been reported so far and a 7ServicedegénétiqueCHUdeStrasbourg,Strasbourg,France further 16 non-published mutated individuals are reported by the Deciphering Developmental Disorders study. The Intellectual disability affects approximately 2.5% of CTNNB1 gene encodes for the highly-conserved beta-cate- humans. The prevalence of DDX3X (X-linked, MIM nine which has an major role in the Wnt-signalling *300160) mutations in intellectual disability (ID) is not yet pathway. known,buthavebeenreportedin45patientswithID.Other Results: Using French National networks, we collected symptoms included hypotonia, movement disorders, clinical data of 13 individuals (including one previously microcephaly, behavior problems and epilepsy. Several publishedpatient)from11centersand2fetuses.Individuals additional features were noted, including hyperlaxity, skin were diagnosed using array-CGH, gene panels, solo or trio abnormalities, cleft lip, cleft palate, hearing loss, visual218 J.delPicchia impairment, and precocious puberty. So far, all amino acid DeptPediatrics,DivisionofChildDevelopmentandBehavior, substitutions in females were de novo and localized in one University of California Davis Health, Davis, CA, United of the two protein subdomains : the helicase ATP-binding States, 10Dept Clinical Genetics, Nottingham University domain or the helicase C-terminal. We report 11 French Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom, females patients with DDX3X mutations, carrying 8 new 11Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals mutations, including one substitution outside those two NHS Foundation Trust; Institute of Human Genetics, domains : c.113A>G. We describe the ﬁrst case of mother- International Centre for LifeCentral Parkway, Newcastle- daughter transmission of DDX3X mutation : c.543+2_543 upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, 12Sydney Children’s Hospital, +3del. Those two patients are schizophrenics. All patients Randwick; School of Women’s and Children’s Health, UNSW presentID,withspeechandwalkdelay.Sixpresentfeeding Medicine, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, difﬁculties.Twopatientsareobese,twoothershavethyroid Australia, 13Division of Genetic Medicine, Dept Pediatrics, issues. One has ASD, another one had neuroblastoma in University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, young childhood. None of them present hearing loss.This 14Division of Genetic Medicine, Seattle Children’s Hospital, reportleadsto56patientswithDDX3Xmutationsreportin Seattle, WA, United States, 15Dept Human Genetics, David the litterature and expand the phenotypic spectrum Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA; Division of Medical of DDX3X. Genetics,DeptPediatrics,DavidGeffenSchoolofMedicineat V. Ruault: None. C. Coubes: None. P. Charles: None. UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 16Neuropediatrics, M.Vincent:None.M.Nizon:None.C.Mignot:None.A. Pediatrics, Bad Wildungen, Germany, 17Pediatric Genetics Delahaye-Duriez: None. C. Thauvin: None. N. Jean- Clinic, Schneider Children’s Medical Center of Israel, Petach Marçais: None. A. Garde: None. L. Faivre: None. Y. Tikva; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Alembik:None.A.Gouronc:None.B.Durand:None.C. Aviv, Israel, 18Dept Clinical Genetics, Ninewells Hospital and Nava: None. B. Keren: None. C. Depienne: None. F. Medical School; Clinical Genetics, University of Dundee, Tran Mau Them: None. M. Willems: None. B. Gérard: Dundee,Angus,UnitedKingdom,19DeptPediatricNeurology, None. D. Geneviève: None. Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 20Dept Neurology, Psychiatry&Pediatrics, University of California, P08.16D San Francisco, CA, United States Different mutations in DEAF1 lead to clinically distinct dominant and recessive forms of intellectual disability MutationsinDEAF1,encodingacrucialtranscriptionfactor in central nervous system development during early M.J.NabaisSá1,P.J.Jensik2,M.J.Parker3,N.Lahiri4,E.P. embryogenesis, were reported to lead to autosomal domi- McNeil5,K.Hibbs6,H.Y.Kroes7,C.T.R.M.Stumpel8,A.P.A. nant mental retardation 24 (MRD24; MIM 615828) and Stegmann8,R. J.Hagerman9,R. E. Harrison10,M. Splitt11, autosomal recessive dyskinesia, seizures, and intellectual T. Montgomery11,E. E.Palmer12, R.K. Sachdev12,H.C. developmental disorder (DYSEIDD; MIM 617171). We Mefford13,A. A. Scott14, J.A. Martinez-Agosto15,R. Lorenz16, aimed at understanding genotype-phenotype correlations of N.Orenstein17,J.N.Berg18,J.Cobben19,E.J.Marco20,B.B.A. 15 novel patients with likely pathogenic DEAF1 variants deVries1,A.T. Vulto-vanSilfhout1 identiﬁed by exome sequencing. In 13 cases, de novo DEAF1variantsresultedinsingleaminoacidchangesinthe 1Dept Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, SAND domain. Two unrelated patients had inherited com- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Dept Physiology, Southern Illinois pound heterozygous DEAF1 variants, which were located University Schoolof Medicine,Carbondale, IL,United States, outside the SAND domain and both consisted of a combi- 3Shefﬁeld Clinical Genetics Service, OPD2 Northern General nationofaloss-of-functionmutationwithamildermutation Hospital, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, 4Dept Clinical Genetics, on the other allele. Analysis of transcriptional repression St George’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust & St activity at the DEAF1 promoter showed that the tested de George’s, University of London, London, United Kingdom, novo variants impaired DEAF1 function, while this effect 5University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, could not be observed for recessive variants. De novo 6Dept Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, DEAF1 variants caused moderate/severe intellectual dis- University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, ability with limited or absent speech and behavioral pro- 7Dept Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, blems (mood swings, autism, self-aggression and sleep Netherlands, 8Dept Clinical Genetics and GROW-School for disturbance). Recessive DEAF1 variants resulted addition- Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University allyinmoreseverepsychomotordelay,movementdisorder Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 9Medical and MRI abnormalities. Epilepsy, occurring in recessive Investigation of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (MIND) patients and most of dominant patients, was frequently Institute, University of California Davis School of Medicine; difﬁcult to treat. Some patients used non-verbalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 219 communication methods, suggesting better receptive than spasms, focal and generalized seizures. Four remained expressive language. We provide further insight in the refractory to therapy. Three individuals did not attain genotype and phenotype spectrum of DEAF1-related walking skills by age eleven years or later. Movement dominant and recessive intellectual disability. Detailed disorders of dystonia or choreoathetosis were seen in two phenotype information, segregation and functional analysis individuals. Brain imaging revealed two individuals show- are fundamental to determine the pathogenicity of novel inggeneralizedvolumeloss.Inaddition,onecasepresented variants and to improve the care of these patients. with signs of a leukoencephalopathy. Further symptoms M.J.NabaisSá:None.P.J.Jensik:None.M.J.Parker: include microcephaly, ataxia, cortical visual impairment, None. N. Lahiri: None. E.P. McNeil: None. K. Hibbs: congenital myasthenia and congenital hip dysplasia and None.H.Y.Kroes: None. C.T.R.M. Stumpel: None. A.P. contractures. All causative variants constitute de novo A. Stegmann: None. R.J. Hagerman: None. R.E. missense variants located in the t-SNARE coiled-coil Harrison:None.M.Splitt:None.T.Montgomery:None. homology domain 1 & 2, both showing a signiﬁcantly E.E. Palmer: None. R.K. Sachdev: None. H.C. Mefford: reducednumberofmissensevariationincontrols,indicating None.A.A. Scott: None.J.A. Martinez-Agosto:None.R. a selective constraint. Lorenz: None. N. Orenstein: None. J.N. Berg: None. J. Conclusion: De novo variants in SNAP25 cause a Cobben: None. E.J. Marco: None. B.B.A. de Vries: spectrum of developmental and epileptic encephalopathy. None. A.T. Vulto-vanSilfhout: None. Further patients and studies are needed to improve our understandingofthephenotypicspectrumandelucidatethe P08.17A effects of the variants on protein function. De novo variants in SNAP25 cause a spectrum of K.Platzer:None.W.K.Chung:None.Z.Powis:None. developmental and epileptic encephalopathy E. Brilstra: None. M. McDonald: None. M. Mikati: None. M.T. Cho: None. A.C. Taylor: None. A. Wadley: K. Platzer1, W.K.Chung2,Z. Powis3,E. Brilstra4, None. J.A. Sullivan: None. V. Shashi: None. J.R. M.McDonald5,M.Mikati6,M. T.Cho7, A.C. Taylor8, Lemke: None. A. Wadley8, J.A.Sullivan5, V.Shashi5, J.R. Lemke1 P08.18B 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Hospitals The role of recessive inheritance in early-onset epileptic and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, encephalopathies:acombinedwhole-exomesequencingand Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, United high-resolution copy number study States, 3Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, 4Department of Genetics, Utrecht University Medical Center, S. Papuc1,2,L. Abela3,4,5,K. Steindl1,A. Begemann1, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Division of Medical Genetics, T. Simmons3,B. Schmitt3,4, M.Zweier1,B. Oneda1, E.Socher6, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, NC, L. Crowther3,G.Wohlrab3,L. Gogoll1,M.Poms3,M.Seiler7, UnitedStates,6DivisionofPediatricNeurology,Departmentof M.Papik1,R.Baldinger1,A.Baumer1,R.Asadollahi1,J.Kroell- Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, Seger8,R. Schmid9,T. Iff10, T.Schmitt-Mechelke11,K. Otten8, 7GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 8Section of A. Hackenberg3,M.Addor12,A.Klein13,S.Azzarello-Burri1, Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Oklahoma, H.Sticht6,P. Joset1,B. Plecko3,4,5,A. Rauch1,5,14 Oklahoma City, OK, United States 1InstituteofMedicalGenetics,UniversityofZurich,Schlieren- Introduction: Synaptosomal-associated Protein-25 Zurich, Switzerland, 2Victor Babes National Institute of (SNAP25), predominantly expressed in the brain, is part of Pathology,Bucharest,Romania,3DivisionofChildNeurology, the SNARE complex (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, factor attachment protein receptor) required for proper 4CRC Clinical Research Center University, Children’s presynaptic vesicle docking and fusion. Heterozygous de Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 5radiz—Rare Disease novo variants in SNAP25 have previously been separately InitiativeZürich,ClinicalResearchPriorityProgramforRare reportedinthreeindividualswithintellectualdisability(ID), DiseasesUniversityofZurich,Zurich,Switzerland,6Instituteof epilepticencephalopathy,ataxiaandcongenitalmyasthenia. Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen- Results:Wehavecollecteddetailedphenotypicdataonat Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany, 7Emergency Clinic, leastfouradditionalcaseswithdenovovariantsinSNAP25. University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, Combined with the three publishes cases, all seven 8Children’s department, Swiss Epilepsy Centre, Clinic Lengg, individuals presented with ID with three of them classiﬁed Zurich, Switzerland, 9Division of Child Neurology, as severe, three as moderate and one as mild. Five Kantonsspital Winterthur, Winterthur, Switzerland, 10County individuals developed seizures with a spectrum of epileptic Hospital of Triemli, Zurich, Switzerland, 11Division of Child220 J.delPicchia Neurology, Children’s Hospital, Lucerne, Switzerland, P08.19C 12Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier De novo truncating variants in the intronless IRF2BPL Universitaire Vaudois CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, gene are responsible for developmental epileptic 13Division of Child Neurology, University Children’s Hospital encephalopathy Basel and Berne, Berne, Switzerland, 14Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, F. TranMau-Them1,2,A. Vitobello1,2,L. Guibaud3,4, Switzerland L. Duplomb2,B. Keren5,K. Lindstrom6,I.Marey5, F. Mochel5,7,8, M.vandenBoogaard9, R.Oegema9,C. Nava5, Intoduction: Early-onset epileptic (EE) and combined A. Masurel10,T. Jouan1,2,F.Jansen11,M.Au12,A. Chen13, developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEE) M.Cho14,Y. Duffourd2, P.Dickson15,V. Moin15, represent a group of epilepsies characterized by generally A.Begemann16,M.Zweier16,B.Zieba17,T.Schmitt-Mechelke18, poor outcome. A few whole exome or genome sequencing K. vanGassen9, S.Nelson19,J.Graham12,J.Friedman20, studies have emphasized the causative role of de novo L. Faivre2,10,F. Ebstein17,H.Lin15,C.Thauvin Robinet1,2 mutations in a growing number of EE/DEE disease genes, yet leaving the majority of patients without etiological 1UF Innovation en diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, diagnosis.Theaimofthisstudywastofurtherelucidatethe CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 2INSERM UMR1231 GAD, F- genetic etiology of EE/DEE. 21000, Dijon, France, 3Université Claude Bernard Lyon I, Materials and Methods: We performed high-resolution CHUdeLyon,Lyon,France,4ServicedeRadiologie,Hôpital- chromosomal microarray analysis and whole-exome Femme-Mère-Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, sequencing in 63 independent patients with EE/DEE. 5Département de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière 47-83 Assessment of pathogenicity included molecular modelling Boulevard de l'Hôpital 75013, Paris, France, 6Division of of missense variants and untargeted plasma-metabolomics GeneticsandMetabolicPhoenixChildren'sHospital,Phoenix, in selected patients. AZ, United States, 7Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Results: We yielded a diagnosis in ~42% of cases with Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, Paris, France, causative copy number variants in 6 patients (~10%), 8UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, (likely) pathogenic sequence variantsin 14 known and two ICM, Paris, France, 9Department of Genetics, University newly conﬁrmed disease genes in 20 patients (~32%), Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 10Centre de Référence including compound heterozygosity for causative sequence maladies rares « Anomalies du Développement et syndrome andcopynumbervariantsinonepatient.38%ofdiagnosed malformatifs » de l’Est, Centre de Génétique, Hôpital caseswerecausedbyrecessivegenes,albeitwithoneallele d’Enfants, FHU TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, occurring de novo in two instances. Notably, the recessive France, 11Department of Child Neurology, Brain Center gene SPATA5 was found causative in 3% of our cohort but Rudolf Magnus, University Medical Center, Utrecht, was difﬁcult to detect and therefore may have been Netherlands, 12Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical underdiagnosed in previous studies. We further support Genetics, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and Harbor-UCLA candidacy of four previously described genes, three of MedicalCenter,LosAngeles,CA,UnitedStates, 13Divisionof which also followed a recessive inheritance pattern. PediatricNeurology,DepartmentofPediatrics,Harbor-UCLA Conclusion: Our results conﬁrm the importance of de Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 14GeneDx, novo causative gene variants in EE/DEE, but additionally Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 15Division of Medical illustrate the major role of mostly compound heterozygous Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Harbor-UCLA Medical orhemizygous recessiveinheritanceandconsequently high Center,, Torrance, CA, United States, 16Institute of Medical recurrence risk. Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 17Institut S. Papuc: None. L. Abela: None. K. Steindl: None. A. für Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Begemann: None. T. Simmons: None. B. Schmitt: None. Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, M. Zweier: None. B. Oneda: None. E. Socher: None. L. 18Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital, Crowther: None. G. Wohlrab: None. L. Gogoll: None. Lucerne, Switzerland, 1918. Departments of Human Genetics M. Poms: None. M. Seiler: None. M. Papik: None. R. andPsychiatry,DavidGeffenSchoolofMedicineatUCLAHU Baldinger: None. A. Baumer: None. R. Asadollahi: Dijon, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2019. Department of None. J. Kroell-Seger: None. R. Schmid: None. T. Iff: NeurosciencesandPediatricsUCSD/RadyChildren'sHospital None. T. Schmitt-Mechelke: None. K. Otten: None. A. San Diego, Rady Children's Institute for Genomic Medicine, Hackenberg: None. M. Addor: None. A. Klein: None. S. San Diego, CA, United States Azzarello-Burri: None. H. Sticht: None. P. Joset: None. B. Plecko: None. A. Rauch: None. Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are severe clinical conditions characterized by stagnation orAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 221 decline of cognitive and behavioural abilities preceed, Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 7Khyber Medical University, accompanied or followed by seizures. Because DEEs are Kohat, Pakistan clinically and genetically heterogeneous, next-generation sequencing-especiallyWholeExomeSequencing(WES)- The study of consanguineous families has proven valuable is becoming a ﬁrst-tier strategy to identify the molecular intheidentiﬁcationofnovelcausativegenesformonogenic etiologies of these disorders. By combining WES analysis disorders. In a large study of consanguineous families and international data sharing we identiﬁed 10 unrelated focusing in intellectual disability, we combined exome individuals with DEE and de novo heterozygous truncating sequencing and homozygosity mapping and identiﬁed two variants in the interferon regulatory factor 2-binding pro- consanguineousfamilieswithhomozygousloss-of-function tein-like gene (IRF2BPL). The 10 individuals allowed variants in FBXL3. In the ﬁrst family, from Lebanon, delineation of a consistent neurodevelopmental disorder FBXL3wastheonlygeneamongﬁvecandidateswithaloss characterized by disturbed/normal initial psychomotor offunctionvariant(NM_012158.2:c.445C>T:p.(Arg149*)); development followed by severe global neurological andinthesecondfamily,fromPakistan,theFBXL3variant regression, usually starting in childhood, and epilepsy with (NM_012158.2:c.884del:p.(Leu295Tyrfs*25))wastheonly non-speciﬁc EEG abnormalities and variable CNS anoma- one segregating in ﬁve affected individuals in two family liesincludingcerebralorcerebellaratrophy.IRF2BPL,also loops. In both families, the patients presented with intel- knownasenhancedatpubertyprotein1(EAP1), encodes a lectual disability, short stature and mild facial dysmorph- transcriptional regulator containing a C-terminal RING- ism,arelativelylargenosewithbulboustip.Fbxl3variants ﬁngerdomaincommontoE3ubiquitinligases.Thisdomain have been engineered in mice and are associated with dis- is required for its repressive and transactivating transcrip- turbancesofthecircadianrhythmandbehavioralproblems. tional properties. The variants identiﬁed are expected to Consanguinity provides the opportunity to identify novel encode for protein lacking the C-terminal RING-ﬁnger candidate genes for various phenotypes and enhance the domain. Taken together these data support the causative diagnostic yield of mendelian disorders. role of truncating IRF2BPL variants in paediatric neurode- P. Makrythanasis: None. S.A. Paracha: None. M. generation and expands the spectrum of transcriptional Ansar: None. A. Megarbane: None. F.A. Santoni: None. regulators identiﬁed as molecular factors implicated in M.Guipponi:None.E.Ranza:None.S.F.Shah:None.E. genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. Falconnet: None. M.T. Sarwar: None. J. Ahmed: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. Vitobello: None. L. S.E. Antonarakis: None. Guibaud: None. L. Duplomb: None. B. Keren: None. K. Lindstrom: None. I. Marey: None. F. Mochel: None. M. P08.21A van den Boogaard: None. R. Oegema: None. C. Nava: Diagnostic yield of exome trio analysis to identify the None. A. Masurel: None. T. Jouan: None. F. Jansen: genetic etiology in 404 undiagnosed cases None. M. Au: None. A. Chen: None. M. Cho: None. Y. Duffourd: None. P. Dickson: None. V. Moin: None. A. I.Diez,M.Martinez-Garcia,R.Sanchez-Alcudia,C.Rodriguez, Begemann: None. M. Zweier: None. B. Zieba: None. T. R. Perez-Carro,I.Sanchez-Navarro, E. Mata,E.Fernandez- Schmitt-Mechelke: None. K. van Gassen: None. S. Tabanera,M. Carcajona,L. Dela Vega,D.Rodriguez, Nelson: None. J. Graham: None. J. Friedman: None. G.Benito, N.Sánchez-Bolivar, P.Maietta, J. Botet,S. Alvarez L. Faivre: None. F. Ebstein: None. H. Lin: None. C. Thauvin Robinet: None. NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain P08.20D Background:Exometrioanalysisisaneffectivestrategyto FBXL3, novel candidate for autosomal recessive identify potentially causal variants, along with their intellectual disability inheritancepattern,onraregeneticdisorders.Thisapproach has entered the medical practice as an effective diagnostic P.Makrythanasis1,2,S.A.Paracha3,M.Ansar1,A.Megarbane4, test transforming the molecular diagnosis and clinical F. A.Santoni5,1,M. Guipponi6,E. Ranza6,S. F. Shah7, management of undiagnosed genetic diseases. E.Falconnet6,M.T.Sarwar1,3,J.Ahmed3,S.E.Antonarakis1,6 Material And Methods: We performed exome sequen- cing using Ion AmpliSeqTM Exome RDY technology (Life 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Biomedical Technologies) and SureSelectXT Human All Exon V6 ResearchInsitutionoftheAcademyofAthens,Athens,Greece, technology (Agilent Technologies). Sequencing reads were 3Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan, 4Institut analyzed using Torrent Suite software and an in-house Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France, 5University Hospital of pipeline, respectively. Trio annotated variants using ION Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6University Hospitals of222 J.delPicchia Reporter were prioritized with an in-house analytical non-consanguineous Japanese parents. She was hypotonic pipeline. and her development was delayed. She showed moderate Results:Wepresenttheanalysisof404triosreferredtoa ID. Physical examination revealed no dysmorphic features. single institution. Patients were mainly children with At6years ofage,sheshowedacceleratedgrowth.Shewas syndromic intellectual disability (46%). The genetic etiol- diagnosed with precocious puberty. (Patient 2) The 5-year- ogy was potentially elucidated in 129 probands harboring old female was the younger sister of patient 1. Her devel- 82 causal variants and 47 likely causative variants, opmentwas delayed. She stated towalk alone after 3years achieving a 32% genetic diagnostic rate. Among these old. She spoke no meaningful words. She showed severe patients, 80 harbored de novo variants, 12 hemizygous ID. Physical examination revealed no dysmorphic features. maternallyinheritedvariants,10incompoundheterozygous Methods: With the approval of our institutional ethics variants, 21 newly homozygous variants and 6 variants committee, the samples were analyzed using WES. inherited from parents. Patients with syndromic intellectual Results: Biallelic loss-of-function mutations of EZH1 disability(42%,78/187)andspeciﬁcneurologicaldisorders werefoundinthesisters.Theirparentsandunaffectedsister (40%, 19/48) showed higher molecular diagnostics rates was heterozygous for the mutation. thanpatientswithnon-neurologicdisorders(26%,8/31)and Conclusions: Probability of being LoF intolerant for non-syndromic intellectual disability (17%, 24/138). EZH1 is very low. Heterozygous deletion of EZH1 was Conclusions:Inourcohortexometrioanalysisprovidea non-candidate for developmental disorder. Haploinsufﬁ- diagnostic yield of 32% in patients whom traditional ciency of EZH1 may not cause abnormal methylation of molecular diagnostics strategies were uninformative. The H3K27. Our results show that biallelic loss-of-function implementation of exome trio analysis as a ﬁrst-tier mutationsofEZH1maycausedevelopmentaldisorderwith diagnostic approach will provide a higher diagnostic yield precocious puberty. and a cost-efﬁcient option particularly in rare syndromic N. Okamoto: None. H. Sakamoto: None. K. Yanagi: intellectual disabled patients. None. T. Kaname: None. I.Diez:None.M.Martinez-Garcia:None.R.Sanchez- Alcudia: None. C. Rodriguez: None. R. Perez-Carro: P08.24D None. I. Sanchez-Navarro: None. E. Mata: None. E. Clinical and molecular characterizationof three cases of Fernandez-Tabanera:None.M.Carcajona:None.L.De Floating-Harbor syndrome laVega:None.D.Rodriguez:None.G.Benito:None.N. Sánchez-Bolivar: None. P. Maietta: None. J. Botet: A.M.Travessa1,P.Dias1,L.Sampaio2,I.Cordeiro1,S.Martins3, None. S. Alvarez: None. A. Sousa3,A. B.Sousa1 P08.22B 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Biallelic loss-of-function mutations of EZH1 may cause Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, novel developmental disorder Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Unidade de Endocrinologia Pediátrica, Serviço de Pediatria N.Okamoto1,H.Sakamoto2,K. Yanagi2,T. Kaname2 Médica,DepartamentodePediatria,HospitaldeSantaMaria, Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico de 1Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Women's and Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Centro de Children's Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 2Department of Genome Neurodesenvolvimento, Serviço de Pediatria Médica, Medicine,NationalCenterforChildHealthandDevelopment, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Tokyo, Japan Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal Introduction: EZH1 is a component of a Polycomb repres- sive complex-2 (PRC2) that mediates methylation of Introduction: Floating-Harbor syndrome (FHS) (MIM# H3K27. It has important roles in the maintenance of 136140) is a very rare condition characterized by short embryonic stem cell pluripotency and plasticity. Mutations stature with delayed bone age, expressive language delay ofPRC2subunitsoftencauseovergrowthandneurological andtypicalfacialdysmorphism.FHSisduetoheterozygous diseases.Weaversyndromeischaracterizedbyovergrowth, pathogenic variants in the SRCAP gene. We present three intellectualdisability(ID),andcharacteristicfacialfeatures. cases of FHS. Our aim is to highlight the clinical and Mutations in EZH2 have been identiﬁed as a cause of molecular features of this syndrome. Weaver syndrome. We report sisters with biallelic loss-of- Cases description: We presentthree patients, aged5, 10 function mutations of EZH1. Clinical report: (Patient 1) and 11 years old, all with proportionate short stature with The 7-year-old female was the ﬁrst child of healthy and delayed bone age, relative macrocephaly, and mild toAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 223 moderate intellectual disability/ developmental delay with expected, targeting both the mGluR5 and the GABAergic language impairment. Other common features included pathways simultaneously did not result in a synergistic recurrent respiratory infections, hypotonia in the neonatal effect, but in a slight worsening of the social behavior period,brachydactyly,5thﬁngerclinodactyly, high-pitched phenotype. This does implicate that both pathways are voice and dental problems. One of the patients presented interconnected and important for social behavior. Our also deafness, constipation, Arnold-Chiari malformation, results underline the tremendous ﬁne-tuning that is needed and absence seizures. Two cases were medicated with to reach the excitatory-inhibitory balance in the synapse in growth hormone (GH). In all cases, the diagnosis was relation to social behavior. We believe that alternative suggested by the facial gestalt and conﬁrmed by the strategiesfocusedoncombinationtherapyshouldbefurther identiﬁcation of the c.7303C>T, p.(Arg2435*) or explored, including targeting pathways in different cellular c.7330C>T, p.(Arg2444*) pathogenic variants in the compartments or cell-types. SRCAP gene. S.Zeidler:None.H.DeBoer:None.R.Hukema:None. Conclusions: FHS should be considered in the differ- R. Willemsen: None. entialdiagnosisofshortstatureandlanguagedevelopmental delay, and can be recognized by the typical facial gestalt. P08.26B We report the second case of FHS with Arnold-Chiari diagnostic approach with genetic tests of global malformation and a case with toenails hypoplasia. The use developmental delay and/or intellectual disability: single of GH is controversial, and should be evaluated in these tertiary centre experience cases. Long term follow-up is needed to understand the evolution of the phenotype of patients with this very rare J.Han entity. A.M. Travessa: None. P. Dias: None. L. Sampaio: Daejeon St. Mary's hospital, Daejeon, Korea, Republic of None. I. Cordeiro: None. S. Martins: None. A. Sousa: None. A.B. Sousa: None. Diagnostic approach with genetic tests of global develop- mental delay and/or intellectual disability P08.25A Background: Global developmental delay (GDD) and Combination therapy in fragileX syndrome; possibilities intellectual disability (ID) are common cause for referral to andpitfallsillustratedbytargetingthemGluR5andGABA pediatric department. Recent advance in genetic tests have pathway simultaneously resulted that multiple diagnostic approach including brain imaging, metabolic tests, or genetic tests is possible for S. Zeidler,H.De Boer, R. Hukema,R. Willemsen children with GDD or ID. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the medical Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands records of children with GDD/ID attending the pediatric neurology department of Daejeon St. Mary’s Hospital Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common mono- during the period from January 2016 through March 2017. genetic cause of intellectual disability and autism. The Results: A total of 75 children were investigated for disorderischaracterizedbyalteredsynapticplasticityinthe GDD/ID in the pediatric neurology departments. Ten brain. Synaptic plasticity is tightly regulated by a complex patients (13%) were diagnosed with speciﬁc disease such balance of different synaptic pathways. In FXS, various as Rett syndrome, Prader Willi syndrome. Chromosomal synaptic pathways are disrupted, including the excitatory microarray was performed as 1st tier test and 25 patients metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) and the inhi- (33%) diagnosed. Brain structural abnormalities were bitory γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) pathways. Targeting showed 8 patients (11%) and two patients diagnosed each of these pathways individually, has demonstrated Fragile X syndrome. Thirty patients who did not revealed beneﬁcial effectsinanimal models, butnot inpatients with etiologyofGDD/IDreceivedgenepanelbynextgeneration FXS. This lack of translation might be due to over- sequencing. Eight patients were found out underlying simpliﬁcation of the disease mechanisms when targeting geneticetiology:CHD8,ZDHCC9,CACNA1H,SMARCB1, onlyoneaffectedpathway,inspiteofthecomplexityofthe FOXP1, and KCNK18. However, twenty two patients manypathwaysimplicatedinFXS.Inthisreportweoutline (29%) were remained uncertain cause of GDD/ID. the hypothesis that targeting more than one pathway Conclusion: This study provides information on pedia- simultaneously, a combination therapy, might improve tricians to diagnostic approach of children with GDD/ID. treatmenteffectsinFXS.Inaddition,wepresentaglanceof Early detection of detection of GDD/ID can help treatment the ﬁrst results of chronic combination therapy on social planningandassignmentoftherecurrenceriskforsiblings, behavior in Fmr1 KO mice. In contrast to what we and emotional relief for the family. Practicality, precision,224 J.delPicchia yield,andgenome-baseddiagnosisinmedicalcaremustbe W.Habhab1,R. Buchert1, L.Laugwitz1,M.Grimmel1, deﬁnedinfutureresearchesandwillneedprospectivestudy M.Sturm1,B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz2,A. Kuster3,T. Haack1 designs. J. Han: None. 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Gemeinschaftspraxis für P08.27C Humangenetik, Biomedizinisches Zentrum, 66424 Homburg Helsmoortel-Van der Aa Syndrome as emerging clinical Saar, Germany, 3Neurometabolism department, Nantes diagnosis in intellectually disabled children with autistic Hospital and University, Nantes, France traits and ocular involvement Abstract G.Pascolini1,E. Agolini2, S.Majore1, A.Novelli2, Background: HNRNPU (OMIM *6022869) encodes a P. Grammatico1, M.Digilio3 member of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) family which mediates different aspects of RNA 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, Department of Molecular transport and metabolism by forming ribonucleoprotein Medicine, Sapienza University, San Camillo-Forlanini complexesinthenucleus.HeterozygousHNRNPUvariants Hospital, Rome, Rome, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Laboratory, have been associated with global developmental delay, Bambino Gesù Paediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, seizures and autistic features; additional symptoms such as Rome,Italy,3MedicalGeneticsUnit,BambinoGesùPaediatric cardiac and renal abnormalities as well as dysmorphic Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy features have been reported. Case Presentation: Here we report the identiﬁcation of Introduction: A recent syndromic condition with cranio- previously unreported de novo variants in two index facial dysmorphisms, comprising congenital ocular defect patients presenting with intellectual disability, speech andneurodevelopmentaldelaynamedHelsmoortel-Vander impairment and epilepsy. Additional clinical features Aa Syndrome (HVDAS)(OMIM#615873), has been includedcardiacdefects,recurrentinfections,hypermobility described and molecularly deﬁned, identifying pathogenic of the joints, muscular hypotonia and brain atrophy. mutations in the ADNP gene (OMIM#611386) as Methods:Weperformedexomesequencingontheindex biological cause. patients. Variant conﬁrmation and carrier testing was done Materials and Methods: We report on two children, by Sanger sequencing. displaying intellectual disability (ID) and peculiar congeni- Results: Exome sequencing and downstream variant taleyesanomalies,referredtoaclinicalgeneticsevaluation prioritization led us to identify predictively truncating de to better deﬁne their condition. novo Variants in HNRNPU including a heterozygous Results: Both patients resulted to carry a de novo stop_variant (c.1801C>T, p.Arg601*) and a frameshift nonsense mutation in the ADNP gene, identiﬁed by Next variant (c.974del, p.Ala325Alafs*14). Generation Sequencing analysis (NGS). Conclusion: Here we report on the phenotypic features Conclusions:Thereviewofpresentandliteraturereports, associated with novel truncating de novo mutations in suggeststhatthediagnosisofHVDAS shouldbesuspected HNRNPU. Global developmental delay and epilepsy in patients with ID accompanied by behavioral features in presentascommonfeaturesobservedinallHNRNPUcases the Autism Spectrum Disorder and distinctive craniofacial reported to date. Apart from the central nervous system phenotype. Among dysmorphisms due to malformation of additionalorgansystemsappeartobevariableaffected.Our the periorbital region, ptosis appears to be particularly ﬁndingssupporttheroleandimplicationofHNRNPUinthe recurrent in HVDAS. Furthermore, the present patients development and functions of different body organs in could support the inclusion of the HVDAS associated with addition to the central nervous system. speciﬁcmutationsclusteringwithinasmallADNPgenomic W. Habhab: None. R. Buchert: None. L. Laugwitz: region among clinical conditions reminiscent of the None. M. Grimmel: None. M. Sturm: None. B. Oehl- blepharophimosis/mental retardation syndromes (BMRS). Jaschkowitz: None. A. Kuster: None. T. Haack: None. G.Pascolini:None.E.Agolini:None.S.Majore:None. A. Novelli: None. P. Grammatico: None. M. P08.29A Digilio: None. AnovelHS6ST2variantreducestheenzymeactivityintwo brothers with severe myopia and syndromic intellectual P08.28D disability IdentiﬁcationofnovelvariantsinHNRNPUassociatedwith global developmental delay, epilepsy and multiple organ system defectsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 225 L. Paganini1,2,L. Fontana1,2, E.Bonaparte1,2, D.Rovina3, P08.30B D.Milani4,S. Esposito4,L. Hadi5, M.Chetta6,L. Riboni5, HUWE1 gene variants as the cause of snydromic or S. Sirchia3, S.Tabano1,2, M.Miozzo1,2 nonsyndromic intellectual disability: spectrum of the HUWE1 associated phenotypes 1Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda OspedaleMaggiore Policlinico,Milano,Italy, 2Departmentof M.Vlckova1, K.Sterbova2,J. Neupauerova2,D.Stanek2, Pathophysiology & Transplantation, Università degli Studi di H.Zunova1,V. Moslerova1, L.Sedlackova2,J.Paderova1, Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, Department of M.Havlovicova1,P. Seeman2, Z.Sedlacek1, P.Lassuthova2 Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 4Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Italy, 5Department of Medical Biotechnology and Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Paediatric Translational Medicine, Università degli Studi di Milano, Neurology, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Milano, Italy, 6GenomiX4Life, Università degli Studi di University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic Salerno, Salerno, Italy Pathogenic variants in HUWE1 have been described as the Introduction:AnItalianfamilycomposedofhealthynon- cause of a broad spectrum of phenotypes ranging from consanguineous parents, two affected male children and isolated craniosynostosis to non-syndromic or syndromic one healthy son came to our attention. The affected sibs X-linked intellectual disability (ID). Some of the presented with febrile seizures, EEG irregular diffuse syndromic cases were clinically diagnosed as the Brooks, spike-wave anomalies, severe myopia, mild facial dys- Juberg-Marsidi or Kabuki-like syndromes. To our knowl- morphisms and developmental delay. Their phenotypic edge, 16 families with HUWE1 mutations have been features resembled those associated with Brooks Wis- reported, and all variants were missense. No genotype- niewski Brown (BWB) syndrome even though probands phenotypecorrelationhasbeenidentiﬁed yet. Wepresenta were wild type for HUWE1, described in literature as novel family with a missense HUWE1 variant causative of BWB. NM_031407.6:c.12195G>C p.(Trp4065Cys) in two male Materialand Methods: WES of all the family members cousins. Both boys suffered from ID, epilepsy and autism, was set up. To evaluate the effect of the identiﬁed variant, and showed similar facial phenotypes with epicanthus, site-directed mutagenesis was performed on a commercial strabism, short palpebral ﬁssures, low-set dysplastic ears, expression vector containing HS6ST2 cDNA. Transient prominentnoseandbroadcolumella.Oneoftheboyshada expression of both wild type and mutant transcripts was short stature and failure to thrive. Their facial phenotype carried out in HEK293 cells and HS6ST2 enzymatic wasalso verysimilartopatientswith aneighboring variant activity was assayed. (p.(R4063Q), Friez et al., 2016)), but not to the other Results and Conclusion: WES highlighted the novel previously published cases whose variants were more maternally-inherited mutation c.916 G>C (G306R) at distant. To our knowledge, autism has not been associated HS6ST2 gene, present in hemizygous state in the two withHUWE1yet,incontrasttocraniosynostosis,whichhas probandsandabsentintheirhealthybrother.HS6ST2maps beenreportedrepeatedlybutwasnotpresentinourpatients. at Xq26.2, a locus associated with X-linked mental Interestingly, craniosynostosis has been described only in retardation and recessive myopia, and encodes a member patients carrying different amino acid substitutions in of the heparan sulfate (HS) sulfotransferase (ST) family position 110. Our report contributes to the delineation of expressedinbrainandeyeduringdevelopment.c.916G>C theHUWE1phenotypicspectrumwhichisapparentlybroad variant affects HS6ST2 substrate binding site and its effect and seems not to be strongly inﬂuenced by the localization was considered “deleterious” by many in-silico tools. In- ofthevariant,withapossibleexceptionofcraniosynostosis. vitroenzymaticassayrevealedthatHS6ST2mutantisoform The phenotypic heterogeneity must be considered in maintained 36% of transferase activity, supporting our interpretation of exome sequencing data. Supported by hypothesisofitsinvolvementinthepathologicalphenotype MH CR AZV 15-33041A, 17-29423A and 00064203. establishment. M. Vlckova: None. K. Sterbova: None. J. Neupauer- L. Paganini: None. L. Fontana: None. E. Bonaparte: ova: None. D. Stanek: None. H. Zunova: None. V. None. D. Rovina: None. D. Milani: None. S. Esposito: Moslerova: None. L. Sedlackova: None. J. Paderova: None.L.Hadi:None.M.Chetta:None.L.Riboni:None. None. M. Havlovicova: None. P. Seeman: None. Z. S. Sirchia: None. S. Tabano: None. M. Miozzo: None. Sedlacek: None. P. Lassuthova: None.226 J.delPicchia P08.31C 2020program,Portugal2020,EuropeanUnion,throughthe X-linked intellectual disability: report on 6 families with European Regional Development Fund. HUWE1 missense mutations and literature review S.M. Ribeiro: None. J. Sá: None. A. Beleza: None. C. Reis: None. F. Ramos: None. P. Louro: None. S. Maia: S. M.Ribeiro1, J.Sá1,A. Beleza1, C.Reis1,F. Ramos1, None.H.Williams:None.M.Harakalova:None.G.Van P. Louro1,S. Maia1,H.Williams2,M.Harakalova3,G.Van Haaften: None. M. Simões: None. C. Barroso: None. H. Haaften3,M.Simões4,C. Barroso4,5,H. Froufe4,C. Egas4,5, Froufe: None. C. Egas: None. J.M. Saraiva: None. S.B. J.M. Saraiva1,6,S. B. Sousa1,6,M.Venâncio1,6 Sousa: None. M. Venâncio: None. 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediatrico, Centro P08.33A Hospitalar Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Impact and rates of exonic de novo mutations in patients 2GOSgene,GeneticsandGenomicMedicineProgramme,UCL with intellectual disability GOS Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Centre for Molecular L. Pranckeniene,A. Jakaitiene,L. Ambrozaityte, V.Kucinskas Medicine, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Biocant, Transfer Technology Association, Vilnius university, Vilnius, Lithuania Cantanhede, Portugal, 5Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Due to extensive locus heterogeneity the causes of intel- 6UniversityClinicofGenetics,FacultyofMedicine,University lectual disability are numerous and unknow in many cases. of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal For such spectrum of disorders the variation of de novo mutations (DNMs) are less frequent and potentially more Introduction: Most of the over 200 phenotypes associated deleterious,couldofferinsightsintorisk-determininggenes withX-linkedintellectualdisability(XLID;10%ofcasesof or integrated deleterious effect of DNMs. Accordingly, the IDinboys)arenotspeciﬁcandnext-generationsequencing maininterestofthisstudywastoevaluatetheobservedrate techniques are crucial for their accurate diagnosis. HUWE1 and consequence of de novo point and indels mutations in missense variants have been described as causative in a the exomes of ID subjects and their sibs. The data set limited number of XLID families with wide phenotypic consisted of the Lithuanian patients with ID and relevant variability. family members samples. Sequencing data of 9 parent- Methods: Clinical and molecular characterization of all offspring trios exomes generated by sequencer SOLiD cases with HUWE1 point mutations identiﬁed in our 5500™ and 33 more parent-offspring and 16 parent-sibs department through retrospective analysis of medical trios exomes were generated by Illumina™. Considering records and literature comparison. platform of sequencing primary analysis performed by Results: We report 9 affected males from 6 unrelated Lifescope™ and GATK™ respectively. DNMs called by families, each with a distinct HUWE1 missense variant VarScan. Called potentially DNMs were ﬁltered, manually identiﬁed. One variant had already been reported and was reviewed by the IGV and validated by Sanger sequencing. considered likely pathogenic. Five were novel: 1 was Functional annotation of all identiﬁed DNMs were per- considered as likely pathogenic, 3 as of uncertain formed using ANNOVAR. The ﬁndings indicate that the signiﬁcance and 1 as benign due to its presence on the number of DNMs varies between 1 and 12. Preliminary unaffectedbrother(caseexcluded).Onewasdenovoand5 resultsofsinglenucleotideDNMratebeforevalidationstep were inherited. The X-inactivation patterns were normal in is 3.1×10-6, 95% CI [2.2x10-6; 4.2x10-6], and de novo rate 3/5 heterozygous mothers. for indels - 1.1×10-6, 95% CI [5.4x10-8; 5.7x10-6]. Func- Conclusions:Ourclinicalﬁndingsareinaccordancewith tional analysis revealed rs398123009 (CM1211547), the literature. All patients had signiﬁcant global develop- rs121909121 (CM072075), rs28934906 (CM992178) ment delay / ID with limited speech and variable DNMs that determine Schuurs-Hoeijmakers (OMIM: dysmorphisms. One had pre- and postnatal severe short 615009), Pitt-Hopkin (OMIM: 602272) and Rett syndrome stature andpostnatalmicrocephaly.Featuresnotpreviously (OMIM:312750).FunctionalanalysisofremainingDNMs, reported include a multicentric ganglioneurocytoma and a their clusters and hot spots are ongoing. This study sup- linearhypopigmentednevus.Ourresultsreinforcethelikely ported by the Lithuanian-Swiss cooperation program under pathogenic role of HUWE1-missense variants in XLID and UNIGENE project agreement no. CH-3-ŠMM-01/04. the difﬁculty in interpreting novel variants in this gene. L. Pranckeniene: None. A. Jakaitiene: None. L. This work was partly funded by the In2Genome, ref Ambrozaityte: None. V. Kucinskas: None. CENTRO-01- 0247- FEDER-017800, of the CENTROAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 227 P08.35C P08.36D FAAH2 gene disruption in a female with intellectual Intellectual disability, hypotonia and episodes of disability and epilepsy bearing an X-autosome unexplained hyperthermia: think COG7 translocation M.Tessarech1,A. Guichet1, M.Barth1,2,S.Vuillaumier3,4, M.Moreno-Igoa1, B.Hernández-Charro1,M. Artigas-López1, J.Durigneux1,I. Pellier1, T.Dupré3,4,A. Bruneel3,P. Van A. Bengoa-Alonso1,M.M.Mehrjouy2,N.Tommerup2,M.A. Bogaert1,N.Seta3,5,D.Bonneau1,2,E.Colin1,2 Ramos-Arroyo1 1CHU ANGERS, ANGERS, France, 2UMR CNRS 6015, 1S.Genética, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, INSERM U1083, Angers, France, 3AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat- Spain, 2ICMM, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Claude Bernard, PARIS, France, 4INSERM U1149 CRB3, Denmark Université Denis Diderot, Paris 7, Paris, France, 5Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France Introduction:FAAH2encodesafattyacidamidehydrolase that plays a role in the complex neural endocannabinoid Congenital glycosylation deﬁcits (CDG syndromes) are a signaling system. FAAH2 gene maps to chromosome Xp11 group of pathologies caused by a defect of synthesis of andhasbeensuggestedasapossiblecandidategenefor X- glycoproteins.COG7isageneencodingoneofthesubunits linked intellectual disability (XLID). We present a female of the Golgi oligomeric complex (COG), involved in patientwithintellectualdisability(ID)andepilepsy,bearing intracellular trafﬁcking and modiﬁcation of glycoproteins. a de novo translocation spanning FAAH2 gene. The pathogenic variants of COG7 cause CDG type -IIe, PatientandMethods:34-yearsoldfemaleprobandwith resulting in abnormalities of the N- and 0-glycosylation mild-moderate ID and absence and generalized seizures, pathway. So far, only eight cases havebeen reported inthe since the age of 7 years. Conventional and molecular literature. We describe two sisters from a Moroccan con- karyotypes were performed. FISH experiments were sanguineous couple and review the literature. These two completed using BAC clones for breakpoint’s approach. sisters present a phenotype associating moderate to severe Rearrangement breakpoints were characterized by whole intellectualimpairmentwithabnormalitiesincerebralMRI, genomesequencingandvalidatedbySangersequencing.X- unexplained episodes of fever with macrophagic activation inactivation studies were also performed. syndrome-like, hepatomegaly and growth retardation. They Results: Cytogenetic analysis showed an apparent are also insensitive to pain in the extremities, which has balanced translocation [46,XX,t(X;10)(p11.2;q25)dn] and never been described before. Through the association of absence of cryptic genomic imbalances. Translocation homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing, we have breakpoints were narrowed by FISH between RP11- highlighted a homozygous intronic variant c. 170-7A>G in 466I19 and RP11-613D18 probes at 10q25, and RP11- the COG7 gene, previously reported in a consanguineous 141B06 and RP11-497J09 at Xp11.2. Sequencing analysis family evoking a founder effect of this variant. Biochemi- revealed two disrupted genes at translocation breakpoints: cally, the electrophoresis of transferrin on a Guthrie blood FAAH2 (Xp11.2) and NHLRC2 (10q25). The normal X- spot was normal and only the 2D isoform analysis of chromosome was > 90% inactive. transferrinandapoC3wereabletoconﬁrmthediagnosisof Conclusions: Our patient displayed a skewed pattern of CDG type- IIe. This observation of a consanguineous X-inactivation of the normal X-chromosome, silencing the family allows the identiﬁcation of two new cases of CDG normalFAAH2gene,while thedisrupted alleleispredicted type -IIe with the variant c. 170-7A>G in the COG7 gene. to render a non-functional protein. No mutations in the We extend the phenotype of CDG syndromes caused by NHLRC2geneorassociatedphenotypeshavebeenreported COG7 and show the importance of transferrin and ApoC3 in humans and animal models suggest embryonic lethality analysisin2Delectrophoresisforthediagnosticorientation in recessive inheritance. We, therefore, conclude that the of CDG syndromes. FAAH2 gene is likely to play an important role in M. Tessarech: None. A. Guichet: None. M. Barth: neurodevelopment, causing XLID and epilepsy. None. S. Vuillaumier: None. J. Durigneux: None. I. M. Moreno-Igoa: None. B. Hernández-Charro: None. Pellier:None.T.Dupré:None.A.Bruneel:None.P.Van M.Artigas-López:None.A.Bengoa-Alonso:None.M.M. Bogaert: None. N. Seta: None. D. Bonneau: None. E. Mehrjouy: None. N. Tommerup: None. M.A. Ramos- Colin: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis Arroyo: None. Pharma SAS.228 J.delPicchia P08.37A years, which makes a panel of genes rapidly obsolete Medical exome sequencing vs whole exome sequencing in whereas WES remains always up to date and sees its the diagnosis of intellectual disability diagnostic rate increase with scientiﬁc advances. C. Nava: None. B. Keren: None. C. Mignot: None. B. C. Nava1,2,3,B. Keren1,2,C. Mignot1,2,B. Julien1,C. Estrade1, Julien: None. C. Estrade: None. S. Karagic: None. A. S. Karagic1, A.Laﬁtte1, E.Lejeune1,C. Mach1,V. Olin1, Laﬁtte: None. E. Lejeune: None. C. Mach: None. V. T. Courtin1,A. Afenjar4,5,D.Doummar6,M.Moutard6, Olin: None. T. Courtin: None. A. Afenjar: None. D. T.Billette deVillemeur6,M.Nougues6,S.Valence6,B.Héron6, Doummar: None. M. Moutard: None. T. Billette de D.Rodriguez-Levi6,L. Burglen4,7,S. Whalen4,7,D.Haye1,5, Villemeur: None. M. Nougues: None. S. Valence: None. S. Heide1,2,5,P. Charles1,2,5,I.Marey1,2,5,C. Depienne1,3, B. Héron: None. D. Rodriguez-Levi: None. L. Burglen: D.Héron1,2,5 None.S. Whalen: None. D.Haye: None. S. Heide:None. P.Charles:None.I.Marey:None.C.Depienne:None.D. 1Département de génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Héron: None. Paris, France, 2Groupe de Recherche Clinique (GRC) "déﬁcience intellectuelle et autisme", UPMC, Paris, France, P08.39C 3INSERM U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, DenovoFBXO11mutationsareassociatedwithintellectual UPMCUnivParis06UMRS1127,InstitutduCerveauetdela disability, microcephaly and behavioural anomalies Moelle épinière, ICM, Paris, France, Paris, France, 4Département de génétique, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, A. Kuechler1, D.Fritzen2,J. Becker2,S. Peters2,M.Sturm3, APHP, Paris, France, 5Centre de Référence Déﬁciences H.Hundertmark2,A. Schmidt2, M.Kreiß2,T. Strom4, IntellectuellesdeCausesRares,HôpitaldelaPitié-Salpêtrière, D.Wieczorek5,T. Haack3,6,S. Beck-Wödl7,K. Cremer2, Paris, France, 6Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand- H.Engels2 Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 7Centre de Référence Malformations et maladies congénitales du cervelet, Hôpital 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France Universität Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine & More than 1000 genes are known in intellectual disability University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3IInstitute of (ID)andnewgenesarestilldiscoveredmonthly.Becauseof Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of this genetic heterogeneity, Next Generation Sequencing Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, (NGS) has allowed great progress. Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, Weincluded676probandswithIDandtheirparentsafter 5Heinrich-Heine-University, Medical Faculty, Institute of clinical evaluation and negative testing, i.e array CGH, Human Genetics, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Institute of Human FragileXand,forsomecases,targetedsequencingorsmall Genetics, Technische Universität München, München, NGS panels. We performed medical exome sequencing Germany, 7Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied (MES) with the Illumina TruSight One (including 4813 Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany genes known in pathology) for 262 patients. And then we performedwholeexomesequencing(WES)withtheRoche Intellectual disability (ID) has an estimated prevalence of Medexome for 464 patients, including 50 patients with 1.5-2% and in most affected persons its genetic basis negative MES. remains unclear. Whole exome sequencing (WES) has We made 55/262 (21%) diagnoses with MES and 202/ proven to be a valuable tool to identify causative gene 464 (44%) with WES. 38% of the diagnostic variants defectsandhasshownthatalargeproportionofsporadicID identiﬁed with WES were in genes absent from MES cases results from de novo mutations. because they were too recently discovered. Besides, we Here, we present two unrelated patients with common found17/50(34%)diagnoseswithWESinpatientswithno clinical features and deleterious de novo variants in diagnosiswithMES.Moreover,weidentiﬁed25additional FBXO11 detected by WES. Patient 1 has mild ID, mild likely pathogenic variants with WES in yet unpublished microcephaly, hyperkinetic disorder, corrected cleft lip and genes (ongoing international collaborations). All diagnoses alveolus, mild brain atrophy and mild dysmorphism. Trio were validated through strong collaboration between WES detected a heterozygous de novo 1bp insertion in the clinical and biological geneticists. splicedonorsiteofexon3whichispredictedunequivocally Thus nearly 40% of our WES diagnoses would not have to result in aberrant splicing. Patient 2 showed ID, growth beenfoundwithMES,althoughMEStheoreticallyincluded retardation, mild microcephaly, hyperkinetic and restless allknownIDgeneswhenitwasdesigned.Thisisexplained behaviour, as well as mild dysmorphism. WES detected a by the discovery of many new genes in ID over the past 3 heterozygous de novo nonsense mutation.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 229 FBXO11 (Homo sapiens F-box protein 11) encodes a were negative.The motherwas found tobe aheterozygous memberoftheF-boxproteinfamilywhichformpartofthe carrier. SCF ubiquitin ligases. Two ID patients with de novo Conclusion: Our research sheds light on the few variants in FBXO11 are mentioned without additional controversial reports describing the relationship between clinical data by Lelieveld et al. (Nat Neurosci. ZNF674genemutationsandintellectualdisability,support- 2016;19:1194-6).Onlyonepatientwithclinicalinformation ing this association. and a de novo FBXO11 mutation has been reported by L. Sagi-Dain: None. V. Adir: None. G. Larom-Khan: Martínez et al. (JMG 2017;54:87-92). Interestingly, this None. A. Harari-Shaham: None. O. Sadeh: None. S. patient carries the identical mutation as our patient 2 and Sagi: None. A. Peleg: None. J. Haddad-Halloun: None. also displays ID, growth retardation, microcephaly, beha- vioural anomalies, and dysmorphisms. Thus, we propose P08.44D deleterious de novo mutations in FBXO11 as a novel cause Cell cycle and neuronal differentiation defects in Kabuki- of ID and possibly microcephaly and behavioural KMT2D mutant hESC and iPSC lines anomalies. A.Kuechler:None.D.Fritzen:None.J.Becker:None. S. Cuvertino, HipSci Consortium,S. Kimber, S.Banka S. Peters: None. M. Sturm: None. H. Hundertmark: None. A. Schmidt: None. M. Kreiß: None. T. Strom: FacultyofBiology,Medicine,andHealth,Manchester,United None. D. Wieczorek: None. T. Haack: None. S. Beck- Kingdom Wödl: None. K. Cremer: None. H. Engels: None. Introduction: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a multi-systemic P08.41A intellectual disability (ID) disorder. Loss-of-function (LoF) Wholeexomesequencingrevealsanovelmissensemutation KMT2D mutations are responsible for a vast majority of in the ZNF674 gene, underpinning its association with X- cases of KS. KMT2D encodes a Histone3 Lysine4 methyl- linked mental retardation transferase but the underlying mechanism of ID in KS is unknown. L. Sagi-Dain1,V. Adir1,G.Larom-Khan1,A. Harari-Shaham1, Materials and Methods: We generated (1) induced O.Sadeh1,S. Sagi2, A.Peleg1, J.Haddad-Halloun1 pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines from ﬁbroblasts of patients with heterozygous LoF KMT2D mutations; and 1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Bnai Zion Medical (2) a LoF heterozygous KMT2D in a wildtype human Center, Haifa, Israel embryonic stem cell (hESC) line using the CRISPR-Cas9 approach.WedifferentiatedtheKSiPSCandhESClinesto Background: Numerous genes have been implicated in form cortical neurons. non-syndromic mental retardation. The association of Results: In KS iPSC and hESCs, we observed signiﬁ- ZNF674 gene mutations in isolated X-linked intellectual cantly fewer cells (~10%) in the S-phase of the cell cycle disabilityiscontroversial.Whilesomestudieshaveshowna whencomparedtocontrol cells. Accordingly, inthese cells clear relationship between mutations and deletions in wefoundadecreaseintheexpressionofCCDN1andE2F3, ZNF674 gene with mental retardation, other authors have two genes important for G1-S transition in the cell cycle. contradicted these ﬁndings. Our report presents a novel Additionally, we observed a delay in neuronal differentia- mutationinZNF674gene.Thecases:Wedescribetwo48- tion of KS iPSC and hESCs compared to control lines. In old and 39-old brothers with non-syndromic mental retar- particular, at day 20 of the differentiation protocol, we dation. Fragile X syndrome genetic testing and chromoso- observed a 4 fold decrease in formation of CD44-CD184- + malmicroarrayanalysiswerenormal.Maternalexamination CD24 neuronal cells in KS mutant cells compared to was positive for skewed X-inactivation. control cells. Results: Whole exome sequencing of the older brother Conclusions: Our results suggest that correct dosage of revealed a novel hemizygous 46360713 A>G (Leu-104- KMT2Dis essential for normal progression of cell cycle in Pro) mutation in ZNF674 gene. The variant was not found pluripotent stem cells and that altered cell cycle may inlargeexomedatabases,andin-silicopredictionprograms underlie delay in neuronal differentiation and ID in KS. classiﬁed the mutation as "pathogenic". According to S.Cuvertino:None.S.Kimber:None.S.Banka:None. sequence alignment of the ZNF674 protein from bacteria tohuman,Leu104isahighlyconservedresiduethroughout P08.45A evolution. Family segregation analysis demonstrated the New KIAA1033 mutations in 3 patients with syndromic mutation in the younger brother with mental retardation, intellectual disability while two healthy males (a brother and a maternal uncle)230 J.delPicchia J.Delanne1,2,3,M.Assoum2, M.L. Crenshaw4, I.M. P08.47C Wentzensen5, K.McWalter5,M.T. Cho5,P. Kuentz1,2,3, RNA sequencing and pathway analysis identify important J.Thevenon1,2,3,Y. Duffourd1,2,3,C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3, pathways involved in hypertrichosis and intellectual L. Faivre1,2,3 disability in patients with Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome 1Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du N.Lebrun1,L. Mietton1,I.Giurgea2,A.Goldenberg3, Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs de l’Interrégion B. Saintpierre1, J.Hamroune1,A. Afenjar4,P. Billuart1, Est, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, T. Bienvenu1 2Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, UMR1231, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3Fédération 1Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, CNRS Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et (UMR8103), Paris, France, 2U.F. de Génétique moléculaire, Anomalies du Développement (TRANSLAD), Centre HôpitalArmandTrousseau,AssistancePublique-Hôpitauxde Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Division of Paris; INSERM UMR S933, Faculté de médecine Sorbonne Genetics, Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital, Johns Universités, Paris, France, 3Service de génétique, CHU de Hopkins University School of Medicine, St Petersburg, FL, Rouen et Inserm U1079, Université de Rouen, Centre Nor- United States, 5GeneDx, 207 Perry Pkwy, Gaithersburg, MD, mand de Génomique Médicale et Médecine Personnalisée, United States Rouen, France, 4Service de génétique et embryologie médicales, Centre de référence Maladie du cervelet, CHU In 2011, KIAA1033/SWIP has been associated with auto- Paris Est - Hôpital d'Enfants Armand-Trousseau, Paris, somal recessive intellectual disability (AR-ID) in a large France consanguineous family comprising seven affected indivi- duals with moderate ID and short stature. Since that, no Growing number of histone modiﬁers are involved in other case of KIAA1033 mutation has been reported. Here, human neurodevelopmental disorders, suggesting that we report 3 patients from two unrelated couples with syn- proper regulation of chromatin state is essential for the dromic ID due to compound heterozygous KIAA1033 developmentofthe centralnervoussystem.Amongthem, mutations ascertained by whole exome sequencing (WES). heterozygous de novo variants in KMT2A, a gene coding Two sisters, aged 5.5 and 4 years, had a nonsense and a for histone methyltransferase, have been associated with missense mutation inherited from their parents (p.Gln442* Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome (WSS), a rare develop- and p.Asp1048Gly), and presented with learning dis- mental disorder mainly characterized by intellectual dis- abilities, macrocephaly, dysmorphic features, and skeletal ability (ID) and hypertrichosis. As KMT2A is known to features, associated with congenital absence of the right regulate the expression of multiple target genes through internal carotid with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in methylationoflysine4ofhistone3(H3K4me),wesought the youngest. Our third patient was aged 32 years, had 2 to investigate the transcriptomic consequences of KMT2A missense mutations inherited from each parent (p. variants involved in WSS. Using ﬁbroblasts from four Lys1079Arg and p.His503Arg), and presented with mild WSSpatientsharboringloss-of-functionKMT2Avariants, ID, short stature and microcephaly. KIAA1033 encodes a weperformedRNAsequencingandidentiﬁedanumberof large protein named WASH4/SWIP which is part of the genes for which transcription was altered in KMT2A- WASH complex. WASH complex is involved in the reg- mutated cells compared to control ones. Strikingly, ana- ulation of the ﬁssion of tubules that serve as transport lysis of the pathways and biological functions sig- intermediates during endosome sorting. Previous members niﬁcantly deregulated between patients with WSS and ofWASH complexKIAA0196/WASHC5havealreadybeen healthy individuals revealed a number of processes pre- implicated inAR-IDwith brain and cardiac malformations, dictedtobealteredthatarerelevantforhypertrichosisand under the designation of the Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome. intellectual disability, the cardinal signs of this disease. WES has proved its efﬁciency to ﬁnd replications of genes Network analysis of the present RNA-Seq data suggest withinsufﬁcientdataintheliteraturetobedeﬁnedasanew thateNOS,WNTandBMPsignalingpathwaysalterations OMIMgene.WeconcludethatKIAA1033isresponsibleof maybelinkedtocognitivedysfunctionandhypertrichosis a non-recognizable AR-ID phenotype, and additional in WSS. descriptionswillbeneededtoreﬁnetheclinicalphenotype. N.Lebrun:None.L.Mietton:None.I.Giurgea:None. J.Delanne:None.M.Assoum:None.M.L.Crenshaw: A. Goldenberg: None. B. Saintpierre: None. J. Ham- None. I.M. Wentzensen: None. K. McWalter: None. M. roune: None. A. Afenjar: None. P. Billuart: None. T. T. Cho: None. P. Kuentz: None. J. Thevenon: None. Y. Bienvenu: None. Duffourd: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 231 P08.48D Table (continued) GENIDA, an international participative cohort study on # GENIDA Registered Active Familyaccess Professionals geneticformsofintellectualdisabilityandautismspectrum cohorts-top11 families participants toanalyses ofreference disorders:analysesofKoolen-deVries,Kleefstra,KBGand 3. KBGsyndrome 55 42 Overview/ C.Ockeloen MECP2duplications syndromes MCQ 4. MECP2 47 30 Overview/ H.vanEsch F. P.Colin1,T. Mazzucotelli1, D.A.Koolen2, T.Kleefstra2, duplication MCQ syndrome H.vanEsch3,C.Ockeloen2,P. Parrend4,J.Mandel1 5. Valproate 46 31 Under F.Francis& Neurodev. preparation M.Nosten project 1Department of Neurogenetics and Translational Medicine, 6. RASopathies 34 23 Overviewonly A.Verloes& Institut de génétique et de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire B.Kerr (IGBMC)–INSERMU964–CNRSUMR7104–Universityof 7. Cockayne 30 24 Overviewonly N.Calmels syndrome Strasbourg, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, 2Department of 8. 22q11.2 19 13 Overviewonly noneyet Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, duplication Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, 9. MED13L 12 9 Overviewonly noneyet University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4iCube laboratory, 10. DYRK1A 9 6 Under A.Piton preparation CNRS UMR 7357, University of Strasbourg, ECAM 11. PCDH19 6 6 Overviewonly noneyet Strasbourg-Europe, Strasbourg, France ... ... ... ... ... ... Total 860 535 onGENIDA Many recurrent CNVs and more than 700 genes are impli- cated in genetic forms of intellectual disability (ID) or autism spectrum disorders (ASD), but often with limited informationontheclinicalspectrumandnaturalhistory.We F.P.Colin:None.T.Mazzucotelli:None.D.A.Koolen: initiatedcohortsstudyforgeneticcausesofID/ASD,called None. T. Kleefstra: None. H. van Esch: None. C. GENIDA (https://genida.unistra.fr), whereby clinical infor- Ockeloen: None. P. Parrend: None. J. Mandel: None. mation is entered by the family of the affected individual based on a clinical questionnaire (41 MCQ and 5 text P08.49A qualitativequestions,includingadverseeffectofdrugs)that A pseudogene increasing LRFN5 expression in a patient iscurrentlyavailablein5languages.Weareinternationally with 14q21.2 deletion and autism recruiting and have constituted a collection of cohorts (table1-top11). We have a questionnaire completion level G.Cappuccio1, M.Alagia1, R.Borzone2, S.Attanasio2, above 85% for our best 300 participants. We have used R.Genesio1,A.Mormile1,L.Litsch1,B.Granese1,G.Terrone1, Koolen-deVries syndrome to conﬁrm that in general the S. Banﬁ2,E. DelGiudice1, N.Brunetti-Pierri1 dataisinlinewiththeliterature.Importantly,wereportedin detailgrowthparametersovertimeandtheexpectedtiming 1Federico II Univeristy, Naples, Italy, 2Tigem, Pozzuoli, Italy ofdelayeddevelopmentalmilestones,including speechand language development, showed that social skills are rela- Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a dis- tively more preserved compared to other communication order with impaired social relationships, language and skills, and calculated - for the ﬁrst time - the mean age of communication, and is frequently associated with intellec- seizure onset (5.8 yo - n=56). We are now extending our tual disability. Underlying genetic defects can be identiﬁed efforttoothersyndromesandwillalsopresenttheseresults. in 30-40% of ASD patients by chromosomal microarray This project shows the willingness and effectiveness of analysis and whole exome sequencing. parents in participative studies. Direct comparison with Matherials and Methods: We report a 16 year-old boy published data allows us to search for novel and/or sig- with ASD bearing a microdeletion at chromosome 14q21.2 niﬁcantcomorbiditiesandshouldpromotebetterhealthcare. inherited from the father who has borderline cognitive impairment.Thedeletionaffectsa‘genedesert’andLRFN5 is the closest gene in the non-deleted interval. LRFN5 # GENIDA Registered Active Familyaccess Professionals cohorts-top11 families participants toanalyses ofreference encodes a protein involved in synaptic plasticity that has been implicated in neurodevelopmental phenotypes. 1. Koolen-deVries 223 188 All- D.Koolen syndrome excepttext Results: We found decreased mRNA expression of both 2. Kleefstra 124 74 Overview/ T.Kleefstra LRFN5 gene and chr14.232.a pseudogene included within sydrnome MCQ thedeletedintervalintheproband’sﬁbroblastscomparedto controls. We hypothesized the pseudogene chr14.232.a232 J.delPicchia regulates LRFN5 expression. In agreement with this and 5.5-year-old male). Two patients had frameshift hypothesis, LRFN5 expression was increased following mutations - c.4245_4246del p.(His1415Glnfs*2) and transfection of the chr14.232.a pseudogene in the patient’s c.5488_5495dup p.(Ser1833Ilefs*22). In the third case, ﬁbroblasts. CNV calling from WGS data revealed complex rearrange- Conclusion: The chr14.232.a pseudogene is predicted to ment with four breakpoints in MED13L gene. This patient bind miRNAs and based on the data generated so far, we has tandem duplication: chr12:116,661,676-116,668,880 speculate that the chr14.232.a pseudogene functions as a and a deletion: chr12:116,662,161-116,675,475. The dele- miRNA decoy to regulate LRFN5 expression through tion disrupts exon 2 of MED13L gene presumably causing sequestration of miRNAs targeting LRFN5. In conclusion, loss of gene function. All patients presented with mild to this study may unravel a novel mechanism of gene moderate ID, muscular hypotonia, ataxia or coordination regulation involved in neurodevelopmental disorders. problems and facial dysmorphism. Epilepsy, skeletal G. Cappuccio: None. M. Alagia: None. R. Borzone: anomaliesandstrabismuswerenoticedonce.Nocongenital None. S. Attanasio: None. R. Genesio: None. A. heart anomalies were detected. One patient with complex Mormile: None. L. Litsch: None. B. Granese: None. G. CNV had severe speech defect. Terrone:None.S.Banﬁ:None.E.DelGiudice:None.N. Conclusion: We identiﬁed a pathogenic variant in Brunetti-Pierri: None. MED13L gene in 0.2% of cases in our patient cohort. It makes MED13L one of the most common ID-associated P08.50B genes among our diagnostic cohort. Funding: Estonian Three new cases of MED13L defect caused by a de novo Research Council PUT355. novel frameshift mutations and a complex rearrangement K.Õunap:None. K.Reinson:None. E. Õiglane-Shlik: None.M.H.Wojcik:None.M.Lek:None.J.L.Marshall: K.Õunap1,2,K.Reinson3,2,E.Õiglane-Shlik4,5,M.H.Wojcik6,7, None. Ü. Murumets: None. T. Reimand: None. M.Lek7, J.L. Marshall7,Ü.Murumets1,T. Reimand1,2 P08.51C 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu KCNT2-related developmental and epileptic University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Clinical encephalopathy - a novel disease entity with potential for Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, targeted treatment Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, P. Ambrosino1,M.Soldovieri1,T. Bast2,P. Turnpenny3, 4Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, S. Uhrig4,S.Biskup4, M.Döcker4,T. Fleck5,I. Mosca1, 5Department of Paediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, L. Manocchio1,N.Iraci6, M.Taglialatela7, J.Lemke8 University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children’s 1University of Molise, Department of Medicine and Health Hospital,HarvardMedicalSchool,Boston,MA,UnitedStates, Sciences "Vincenzo Tiberio", Campobasso, Italy, 2Epilepsy 7BroadInstituteofMITandHarvard,Cambridge,MA,United CenterKork,Kehl,Germany,3ClinicalGenetics,RoyalDevon States & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4CeGaT GmbH and Praxis für Humangenetik Tübingen, Introduction: The MED13L gene was ﬁrst associated with Tübingen, Germany, 5University Heart Center Freiburg, Bad transposition of the great arteries and intellectual disability Krotzingen, Germany, 6University of Salerno, Department of (ID). Later, it was recognised as distinctive syndromic ID Pharmacy,Salerno,Italy,7UniversityofNaples“FedericoII”, phenotype presenting moderate to severe ID, facial Department of Neuroscience, Naples, Italy, 8University of anomalies, severe speech delay and muscular hypotonia in Leipzig, Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany majority cases. At least 26 cases have been previously described. Variants in several potassium channel genes have been Methods: We analysed retrospectively the results of found in developmental and epileptic encephalopathies 4813-gene panel and exome sequencing analyses (1495 (DEE). KCNT1 and KCNT2 belong to the SLO2 family of + + cases) performed during 2014-2017 at Tartu University Na -dependent (K ) channel genes, of which the latter has Hospital. In 25 unsolved exome sequencing trios, whole not been reliably associated with human disorders. We genome sequencing (WGS) was performed at Broad reporttwoindependentindividualswithdenovovariantsin Institute. Copy number variant (CNV) calling from WGS KCNT2 at position R190. One of the two had West syn- data was performed using Manta software. drome evolving to Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, the second Results: We identiﬁed a novel de novo variant in individual had DEE with malignant migrating partial sei- MED13L gene in three cases (6 and 6.5-year-old females zures of infancy. In vitro analysis suggested a gain-of-Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 233 function responsive to quinidine. A precision medicine TRAP1 genes in 176 unrelated ADS patients revealed no approach in one of the two patients with add-on therapy of relevant variants in RUVBL1, whereas in TRAP1 eight rare quinidine resulted in increase of alertness and vigilance, variants were identiﬁed, including the p.Gln639Ter. mild developmental progression, improved EEG and a Conclusions: Mutations in TRAP1, especially the p. temporary decrease of seizure frequency. We suggest that Gln639Ter, may be associated with ADS. DNA puriﬁed KCNT2-related disorders share similar phenotypic and from blood of disease discordant MZTsshould notbe used in vitro functional and pharmacological features with toperformmolecular testsduetopossiblebloodchimerism KCNT1-related disorders and thus may represent a further that may mask genetic differences. example for disorders potentially responsive to targeted Support: National Science Centre (NCN) Poland, Grant treatment opportunities. 2014/13/B/NZ5/00287 P. Ambrosino: None. M. Soldovieri: None. T. Bast: M.Rydzanicz:None.A.Walczak:None.I.Chojnicka: None. P. Turnpenny: None. S. Uhrig: None. S. Biskup: None. G. Kostrzewa: None. J. Kosińska: None. P. None.M.Döcker:None.T.Fleck:None.I.Mosca:None. Gasperowicz: None. N. Chojnacka: None. P. Stawiński: L. Manocchio: None. N. Iraci: None. M. Taglialatela: None. R. Płoski: None. None. J. Lemke: None. P08.53A P08.52D ConﬁrmationofarecurrentmutationinNACC1causinga Molecular study of autism spectrum disorder discordant severe neurodevelopmental disorder monozygotic twins indicates the role of TRAP1 defects in disease susceptibility K. Steindl1, A.Bahr1,A. Hackenberg2, M.Papik1,P. Joset1, A. Rauch1 M.Rydzanicz1, A.Walczak1,I.Chojnicka2,G.Kostrzewa3, J.Kosińska1,P. Gasperowicz1,N.Chojnacka1,P. Stawiński1, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, 8902 R. Płoski1 Schlieren, Switzerland, 2Division of Child Neurology, Children's Hospital Zurich, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,WarsawMedicalUniversity, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Health and Rehabilitation Only recently, the NACC1 gene was shown to harbor a Psychology, Faculty of Psychology, University of Warsaw, recurrent mutation leading to a complex congenital neuro- Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical developmental disorder in 7 affected children (Schauch University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland et al. 2017). All patients presented with a highly similar phenotype including severe intellectual disability (ID), Introduction: Monozygotic twins (MZTs) have been con- developmental delay, cataract, microcephaly, severe infan- sideredtobephysicallyandgeneticallyidentical.However, tile epilepsy, failure to thrive, irritability and stereotypic asigniﬁcantnumberofdisease-discordantMZTs,including hand movements. Whole exome sequencing (WES) pairs discordant for autism spectrum disorder (ASD), have revealed the same de novo missense mutation in the been observed. NACC1 gene in all 7 children: c.892C>T p.(Arg298Trp). Materials and Methods: Three male MZT pairs TheNACC1gene(nucleusaccumbensassociatedprotein1) discordant for ASD was recruited. DNA puriﬁed from hair encodes atranscriptional repressor andhas,until then,only follicleswasusedforwholeexomesequencing(WES).For been considered a candidate gene for ID due to its func- replication amplicon deep sequencing (ADS) was per- tionalroleandamissensemutationfoundbyGilissenetal., formed using DNA form MZTs’ blood and hair follicles. 2014inasinglepatientwithID.Here,wedescribea5-year Furthervalidationwasperformedusing176unrelatedADS old girl with ID, microcephaly, cataract and movement patients. abnormalities, leading to an initial diagnosis of a Rett-like Results: In one MZTs pair WES analysis revealed phenotype in 2016. Panel sequencing of genes associated discordant missense variant in RUVBL1 (p.Phe329Leu) withRettsyndromeandanArray-CGHhavebeennegative andanonsensevariantinTRAP1(p.Gln639Ter).Inautistic inourpatient.Subsequently,usingTrio-WESinthegirland twin’s hair follicles ADS conﬁrmed the presence of herparents,therecurrentmutationc.892C>TintheNACC1 RUVBL1 variant with the mutant allele frequency (MAF) was found as a de novo mosaic and was the most likely 42%andtheTRAP1variant(MAF8%);bothvariantswere disease-causing variant in this family. Comparison of the absent from hair follicles DNA of the healthy brother. girls’ clinical symptoms with those described by Schauch However, in blood DNA both variants had the same MAF et al. showed a highly congruent phenotype. Our ﬁndings (RUVBL1 22%, TRAP1 2%) in both twins. Subsequent support the hypothesis that this NACC1 mutation causes a analysis of the whole coding sequences of RUVBL1 and very speciﬁc phenotype.234 J.delPicchia K. Steindl: None. A. Bahr: None. A. Hackenberg: 1DepartmentofGeneticMedicineandDevelopment,University None. M. Papik: None. P. Joset: None. A. Rauch: None. of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan, P08.55C 3Department of Genetics, University of Karachi, Karachi, Identiﬁcation of a novel de novo deletion of Pakistan, 4Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, MAP3K8 suggestive of causing Noonan syndrome Medical Research Center, Liaquat University of Medical and Health Sciences, Jamshoro, Pakistan, 5Biomedical Research E.K.S.M.Leenders,C.Marcelis,A.P.A.Stegmann,T.Rinne, Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, I.vandeBurgt 6ServiceofGeneticMedicine,University HospitalsofGeneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo Radboud University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, Netherlands 8Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common genetic 9Department of Bio Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, disorder, characterized by distinctive facial features, short Muhammad Ali Jinnah University, Karachi, Pakistan stature, congenital heart defect and developmental delay of variable degree. Known causative genes account for 70- Consanguinity, practiced in a substantial fraction of human 80% of clinically diagnosed NS patients, but the genetic populations, reveals numerous rare recessive phenotypes basisfortheremainingcasesisnotknown.Themajorityof because of the extensive regions of homozygosity by the mutations identiﬁed in NS and other RASopathies are decent.Theaveragetotalsizeofhomozygosityis253Mbin gain-of-function which result in increased RAS/MAPK the offspring of consanguineous parents; this is 10fold signaling. However, previous studies have demonstrated higher than that of 25Mb in outbred individuals. Similarly, that copy number variations, containing critical genes the rare homozygous variants (<2% frequency) in the cod- related totheRAS/MAPKsignalingpathway, play aminor ingregionsare57intheoffspringofﬁrst-cousinscompared roleinRASopathies.Wedescribea7yearoldgirlthatwas to 18 in outbred individuals. In Pakistan, the frequency of clinically diagnosed with Noonan syndrome at the age of consanguineous marriages approaches 70%. We have 10months.Usingexomesequencing,werecentlyidentiﬁed initiated a Swiss-Pakistani project to identify novel reces- a novel de novo ~3,2 Mbp deletion of multiple genes on sive gene candidates for two phenotypes: intellectual dis- chromosome 10p12.1p11.22, including MAP3K8. ability (ID) and visual impairment (VI). We have collected MAP3K8 is an oncogene, encoding a MAP kinase kinase samples from 145 ID and 205 VI families of ﬁrst cousin kinase, that can phosphorylate and activate MAP2K1, marriages with at least2 affecteds.Exome sequenceof one which is associated with NS and CFC syndrome. We affected and genotyping of the whole family (parents, all hypothesize that the 10p12.1p11.22 deletion leads to a affectedandunaffectedsiblings)hasbeencompletedin114 dysregulation of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway and ID and 146 VI families to date. The likely causative gene/ therefore has an association with the phenotype of our variant in known genes was found in 67% of the VI and patient.Functional analysis will be thenext step toprovide 34% in the ID families. Thus, there are more unknown additional evidence that (micro)deletions containing recessive genes for ID. We have identiﬁed 21 novel can- MAP3K8 could result in NS. didate genes in VI and 14 in ID (to be presented in the E.K.S.M. Leenders: None. C. Marcelis: None. A.P.A. conference). International matchmaking identiﬁed addi- Stegmann:None.T.Rinne:None.I.vandeBurgt:None. tional families in 20% of the candidate genes. Careful evaluation of the phenotypes is mandatory to assess the P08.56D possibility of 2 or more causative genes, to eliminate false 35novelrecessivecandidategenesforintellectualdisability negative results. International databases from con- and visual impairment by using 260 consanguineous sanguineous individuals are needed to facilitate the families assignment of pathogenicity to homozygous variants. S.E. Antonarakis: None. S.A. Paracha: None. S. S.E.Antonarakis1,S.A.Paracha2,S.Imtiaz3,A.Nazir2,Y.M. Imtiaz: None. A. Nazir: None. Y.M. Waryah: None. P. Waryah4,P. Makrythanasis1,5,S.Qureshi2,S. Saeed3, Makrythanasis:None.S.Qureshi:None.S.Saeed:None. E. Falconnet1,M. Guipponi6,C. Borel1,M.A. Ansari3, E.Falconnet:None.M.Guipponi:None.C.Borel:None. E. Frengen7, E.Ranza6, F.A. Santoni1,8,I.Shah2, K.Gul9, M.A. Ansari: None. E. Frengen: None. E. Ranza: None. M.T. Sarwar2,1,J. Ahmed2,A. M.Waryah4,M.Ansar1 F.A. Santoni: None. I. Shah: None. K. Gul: None. M.T. Sarwar: None. J. Ahmed: None. A.M. Waryah: None. M. Ansar: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 235 P08.57A 1AllWalesMedicalGeneticsService,Cardiff,UnitedKingdom, Two novel splicing mutations in the OTUD6B gene 2Division ofCancer andGenetics,Cardiff University, Cardiff, associated with intellectual disability and seizures United Kingdom, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 4Division of L. Straniero1,V.Rimoldi1,M.Bellini2,S.Duga1,3,G.Soldà1,3, Genetics,Children’sHospitalofEasternOntario,Ottawa,ON, R. Asselta1,3 Canada,5DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,LiverpoolWomen's Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 6North West Thames 1HumanitasUniversity,PieveEmanuele(Milano),Italy,2Dept Regional Genetic Service, Kennedy Galton Centre, Northwick of Paediatrics and Neonatology, Guglielmo da Saliceto Park Hospital, Harrow, United Kingdom, 7Department of Hospital, Piacenza, Italy, 3Humanitas Clinical and Research Clinical Genetics, Northern General Hospital, Shefﬁeld, Center, Rozzano, Italy United Kingdom, 8Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom Introduction Biallelic mutations in the ovarian tumor domain-containing 6B (OTUD6B) gene, coding for a deu- Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome (BFLS, OMIM biquitinating enzyme, were recently described to cause an 301900) is a rare X-linked condition associated with intel- intellectual disability syndrome characterized by seizures lectual disability, dysmorphic features and endocrine and dysmorphic features in 6 families worldwide. abnormalities. In recent years, a distinct phenotype, similar Materials and Methods We report on a 5-year-old to Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome, has been described in females Italian girl, presenting mild intellectual disability, speech with de novo mutations in PHF6. We ascertained 13 and motor delay, and recurrent seizures. Whole-exome patients(8malesand5females)withPHF6mutationswho sequencing was performed on the proband DNA using the were identiﬁed through clinical or research testing. Two SureSelect Human All Exon V6 kit (Agilent) and the families with 5 affected males had the same novel inframe NextSeq500instrument(Illumina).Theidentiﬁedmutations deletion (p.E338del). Another male patient had a novel were conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing and their functional missense (p.D353H) which is the most distal pathogenic role was assessed by performing RT-PCR assays on the mutation yet described in PHF6. Female patients tend to RNA extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of have large de novo deletions, duplications or truncating the patient and her parents. mutations. Consistent features in the subjects included Results and Conclusions We identiﬁed two candidate intellectual disability and the typical facial gestalt: broad heterozygous splicing mutations in the OTUD6B gene. nasal bridge, deep-set eyes, prominent or arched eyebrows, These variants (c.324+1G>C and c.405+1G>A), both synophrys, brachydactyly, syndactyly, and large ears with reported in the ExAC database with a frequency lower ﬂeshy lobes. Obesity, hormonal deﬁciencies and delayed than the 1%, affect the donor splicing site of exon 2 and 3, puberty were common in male patients, whereas females respectively. Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed the segregation oftenhadlinearskinhyperpigmentation,abnormalteethand of the variants in the family, showing that both parents are autistic traits. Unusual features in our series included carriers of one mutation. RT-PCR experiments demon- umbilical hernias, keloid scarring, peri-ungal ﬁbromas, strated that both variants affect OTUD6B splicing and lead absent vaginal oriﬁce, lower limb motor neuropathy and to the production of aberrant transcripts, the major ones talipes. The majority of our patients had squints or refrac- being, in both cases, the skipping of the upstream exon. tiveerrors.Onehaddysplasticopticdiscswhileanotherhad Quantitative analysis performed by competitive-ﬂuorescent chorioretinal pigmentation and atrophy. One female patient RT-PCR on the patient RNA showed that the proband with a novel missense mutation (p.G248V) had cortical presents less than 1% of wild-type transcripts, further abnormalities and poorly-controlled nocturnal frontal epi- strengthening the causative role of these variants. lepsy. This is further evidence that females with BFLS are L. Straniero: None. V. Rimoldi: None. M. Bellini: at risk of malformations of cortical development. None. S. Duga: None. G. Soldà: None. R. Asselta: None. V. Jain: None. A. Clarke: None. S. Davies: None. S. Doyle:None.G.Graham:None.L.Greenhalgh:None.S. P08.58B Holder: None. D. Johnson: None. S.A. Lynch: None. E. A series of patients with PHF6-related disease: novel McCann:None.C.Pottinger:None.D.D.D.study:None. mutations and an expansion of the phenotype A.E. Fry: None. V. Jain1,A. Clarke1,2,S. Davies1,S. Doyle3,G.Graham4, P08.59C L. Greenhalgh5,S. Holder6,D.Johnson7, S.A. Lynch3, Asymmetrical and Chemical-modiﬁed Donor-DNA Leads E. McCann5,C. Pottinger1,D.D.D.study8, A.E. Fry1,2 toEfﬁcientKnock-insofPathogenicMutationsatCRISPR- Cas9-induced DNA Double Strand Breaks236 J.delPicchia M.Rodriguez delosSantos1,2,A. Knaus3,B. Fischer-Zirnsak1, G.Marangi1, S.Frangella1,S. Ricciardi1,P. Chiurazzi1, L. Wittler4,S.Mundlos1,2,U.Kornak1, P.Krawitz3 D.Orteschi1,S. Lattante1,R. Pettinato2, F.Martinez3, C.Magnani4,C.Pantaleoni5,C.Perria6,G.Scarano7,V.Saletti8, 1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité P. Bonanni3, G.Vasco9, C.Lo Rizzo10, A.Volzone3, E.Alfei5, Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck-Institute F. Faletra11,S.Romano12,A. Renieri10,M.Giannotta13, for Molecular Genetics, FG Development & Disease, Berlin, C. Minetti14,C. Bruno14,M.Piccione15,F. Stanzial16, M.Della Germany,3InstituteforGenomicStatisticsandBioinformatics, Monica17,A. Ardissone5,M.Di Giacomo18,A. Battaglia19, UniversityofBonn,Bonn,Germany,4Max-Planck-Institutefor C. Graziano20,L. Garavelli21, M.Zollino1 Molecular Genetics, Department Developmental Genetics, Berlin, Germany 1InstituteofGenomicMedicine,UniversitàCattolicadelSacro Cuore,Roma,Italy,2UnitofPediatricsandMedicalGenetics, Introduction: Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors I.R.C.C.S. Associazione Oasi Maria Santissima, Troina, Italy, attach a broad range of proteins to the cell membrane that 3Epilepsy and Clinical Neurophysiology Unit, Scientiﬁc have diverse roles in cell adhesion, signaling and comple- Institute IRCCS "Eugenio Medea", Conegliano, Italy, ment regulation. Patients with a biosynthesis deﬁciency of 4Maternal and Child Department, University of Parma, theGPIanchor reveal globaldevelopmental delay, seizures Parma, Italy, 5Department of Pediatric Neurosciences, Carlo and multiple malformations. Around 30 genes are involved BestaNeurologicalInstitute,IRCCSFoundation,,Milan,Italy, in the molecular pathway and most pathogenic mutations 6Department Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University have shown to be hypomorphic. However, the patho- of Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 7Department of Medical Genetics, mechanisms on a cellular, tissue or organ level remain Gaetano Rummo Hospital, Benevento, Italy, 8Department of unclear and suitable animal models are lacking. We there- Pediatric Neurosciences, Carlo Besta Neurological Institute, fore chose to establish a mouse line for one of the most IRCCS Foundation,, Roma, Italy, 9Department of prevalent pathogenic missense mutations observed in NeurosciencesandNeurorehabilitation,IRCCSBambinoGesù humans so far PIGV c.1022C>A, p.Ala341Glu. ChildrenHospital,Roma,Italy,10MedicalGenetics,University Methods: We co-transfected mouse embryonic stem of Siena, Siena, Italy, 11Department of Advanced Diagnostic (mES)cellswithPX459-pSpCas9(BB)-2A-Puro(Addgene) and Clinical Trials, Institute for Maternal and Child Health- vector and single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ssODN) IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy, 12Genetics and including the disease-causing mutation PIGV c.1022C>A. Molecular Medicine Unit, Anna Meyer Children’s University Positive clones were expanded and characterized by ﬂow Hospital,, Florence, Italy, 13Child Neurology Unit, Istituto di cytometry. Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientiﬁco, Institute of Results: We successfully integrated the pathogenic Neurological Sciences, Bologna, Italy, 14Center of Myology mutation PIGV c.1022C>A in mES cells using ssODNs and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, with asymmetrical homology arms which were modiﬁed at Genova,Italy,15DepartmentofSciencesforHealthPromotion the ends with phosphoro-thioat bonds. With this strategy, and Mother and Child Care "Giuseppe D'Alessandro", we were able to obtain up to 30% of knock-in (KI) clones. University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 16Department of Furthermore, we observed that sgRNAs located directly at Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy, the missense mutation generated only homozygous clones. 17MedicalGeneticsUnit,MeyerChildren'sHospital,Florence, In contrast, we obtained heterozygous clones using sgRNA Italy, 18U.O.C Anatomia Patologica, AOR Ospedale "San binding 13 bp upstream or downstream from the missense Carlo", Potenza, Italy, 19Stella Maris Clinical Research mutation. The generated PIGV-deﬁcient mES cells were InstituteforChildandAdolescentNeuropsychiatry,Pisa,Italy, analyzedbyﬂowcytometryandrevealedareduced surface 20Unit of Medical Genetics, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, expression of GPI-linked markers. Bologna, Italy, 21Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Conclusion: We here present a valid gene-editing Obstetrics and Pediatrics, AUSL-IRCCS of Reggio Emilia, strategy to generate efﬁciently KIs of missense mutations Reggio Emilia, Italy in mES cells via the CRISPR-Cas9 system. M.RodriguezdelosSantos:None.A.Knaus:None.B. Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS, OMIM #610954) is a rare Fischer-Zirnsak: None. L. Wittler: None. S. Mundlos: neurodevelopmental disorder caused by TCF4 hap- None. U. Kornak: None. P. Krawitz: None. loinsufﬁciency. Clinical features include severe intellectual disability, distinctive facial characteristics, breathing P08.60D anomalies,postnatalmicrocephaly,andrecurrentbehavioral Pitt-Hopkins syndrome: dissecting the clinical and genetic abnormalities. We studied 320 subjects referred to our heterogeneity of conditions in the phenotypic spectrum Institute with a clinical suspicion of PTHS, who, in most cases, had already undergone several genetic tests withAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 237 normal results. We performed clinical evaluation and resulted in identiﬁcation of a de novo p.Glu198Lys genetic analyses according to the following procedure: 1) mutation in the PPP2R5D-gene. This mutation has been detailed phenotype characterization by means of direct previouslydescribedandisassociatedwiththemostsevere observation or the use of a speciﬁc questionnaire; 2) direct phenotype. Interestingly, in our patient profound myopia, sequencingand MLPAoftheTCF4 gene; 3) NGS analysis strabismusconvergensﬁxusandretinalpunchedoutlesions of a panel of genes; 4) standard karyotype/ FISH analysis. wereidentiﬁed.Toourknowledge,noretinalabnormalities Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in 16 were associated with mutations in the PPP2R5D-gene patients.Byclinicalevaluation,asubsetof158/320subjects until now. was included in the PTHS spectrum. Among the 146 sub- Punched out lesions are associated with inﬂammation of jects analyzed by techniques 1) to 4), pathogenic variants the retina and choroidea, described in posterior uveitis as wereidentiﬁedin58(40%),involvingthefollowinggenes: well as after congenital infection. There was no history of TCF4 (tot:42), UBE3A (tot:4), MECP2 (tot:6), FOXG1 uveitis or congenital infection in our patient. Interestingly, (tot:3), ZEB2 (tot:2), ATRX (tot:1). Further causative var- such lesions have been described in Aicardi syndrome. iants were identiﬁed by WES in 4/12 analyzed patients, in Aicardi syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder char- EHMT1, SZT2, ASXL3 and GABRB2. Through an in-depth acterized by infantile spasms, agenesis of the corpus molecular characterization of a further TCF4 variant non callosum, and retinal abnormalities. The cause of the associated with a classical PTHS phenotype, and a critical disease remains unclear. review of other similar cases in scientiﬁc literature, we We see some overlap in the phenotype of PPP2R5D- suggestanintragenicphenotypicalmapofTCF4,reﬂecting mutations and Aicardi syndrome. Mutations in PPP2R5D- the selective disruption of different functional domains of gene have not been previously identiﬁed in Aicardi cohort. the protein. This case illustrates the clinical phenotype and natural G. Marangi: None. S. Frangella: None. S. Ricciardi: history of a PPP2R5D-mutation in an adult patient. We None. P. Chiurazzi: None. D. Orteschi: None. S. recommend to perform ophthalmological examination in Lattante: None. R. Pettinato: None. F. Martinez: None. patients with PPP2R5D-mutation to identify visual impair- C. Magnani: None. C. Pantaleoni: None. C. Perria: ment and to ﬁnd out whether the retinal abnormalities are None. G. Scarano: None. V. Saletti: None. P. Bonanni: part of the PPP2R5D-phenotype. None. G. Vasco: None. C. Lo Rizzo: None. A. Volzone: A. Kattentidt: None. J.T.H.N. de Faber: None. R. None. E. Alfei: None. F. Faletra: None. S. Romano: Pfundt: None. R. Kersseboom: None. None.A.Renieri:None.M.Giannotta:None.C.Minetti: None. C. Bruno: None. M. Piccione: None. F. Stanzial: P08.62B None. M. Della Monica: None. A. Ardissone: None. M. Dysmorphic phenotype in patients with RAB39B mutation Di Giacomo: None. A. Battaglia: None. C. Graziano: None. L. Garavelli: None. M. Zollino: None. D.Casas-Alba1,2,A. Martínez-Monseny1, L.Martorell1, C. Arjona1,F.Palau1,M.Serrano1,3 P08.61A IntellectualdisabilityduetoaPPP2R5D-mutation;whatdo 1Genetic Medine and Pediatric Institute for Rare Diseases, we know about natural history and adult phenotype? Hospital Sant Joan de Deu (University of Barcelona), Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 2Pediatrics Department, A.Kattentidt1,J.T.H.N.deFaber2,R.Pfundt3,R.Kersseboom1 Hospital Sant Joan de Deu (University of Barcelona), Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 3Pediatric Neurology 1Zuidwester, Spijkenisse, Netherlands, 2The Rotterdam Eye Department, Hospital Sant Joan de Deu (University of Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Barcelona),, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands Background: Mutations in the gene RAB39B (Xq28) have been associated with X-linked mental retardation-72 PPP2R5D is a gene associated with neurodevelopmental (#MIM300271, including intellectual disability (ID) and disordersandintellectualdisability.Thephenotypeincludes autismspectrumdisorders(ASD)),andWaismansyndrome large ventricles, macrocephaly, hydrocephalus and (partial) (#MIM311510), characterized by ID and early-onset Par- corpus callosum agenesis. Data on the natural history in kinsonism. RAB39B regulates GluA2 trafﬁcking to deter- adulthood is limited. mine synaptic AMPAR composition. In this report we Wedescribeafemale,42years,withasevereintellectual describe a family with two affected males with severe ID disability, macrocephaly, corpus callosum agenesis, open and characteristic dysmorphic features not previously vertebral bow and no seizures. Trio exome sequencing reported in patients with RAB39B mutation.238 J.delPicchia Methods:Clinicalphenotyping,MLPAandwholeexome Introduction: RAC1 is a highly conserved Rho GTPase sequencing(WES)combinedwithtargetedanalysisfocused under strict mutational constraint. on119genesrelatedtoX-linkedIDwasperformedonfour Methods and Results: We report seven individuals with members of this family. intellectual disability and distinct de novo missense RAC1 Results:Theprobandcase,a18-year-oldmale,presented mutations. These included four patients with microcephaly withID,ASD,epilepsyandbehavioralandsleepdisorders. (OFC between -2.5 to -5 SD; p.Cys18Tyr, p.Asn39Ser, p. Thematernal unclewasa57-year-old malewithsevere ID. Pro73Leuandp.Cys157Tyr),twowithmacrocephaly(OFC Both showed long and hypomimic face, bilateral ptosis, +4.16and+4.5SD;p.Val51Metandp.Val51Leu)andone lower lid ectropion, thick and everted lower lip, protruding individual with normal OFC (p.Tyr64Asp). ears and drooling and swallowing difﬁculties, unlike other In silico modeling, mouse ﬁbroblasts spreading assays family members. Two novel variants were identiﬁed in and in vivo overexpression assays using zebraﬁsh as a RAB39B and HCFC1 in the proband, the mother and the surrogate model demonstrated that (a) the p.Cys18Tyr and maternal uncle, but not in the brother. The ﬁrst one was a p.Asn39Ser variants are dominant-negative alleles and hemizygousmutationinRAB39B(NM_171998.3:c.137dup, result in reduced neuronal proliferation, microcephaly and p.Ser47Leufs*44) with a likely pathogenic signiﬁcance. cerebellar abnormalities; (b) the p.Tyr64Asp variant is The second one was a hemizygous nonsense mutation in constitutively active; and (c) the effect of other variants is HCFC1 (NM_005334.2:c.2984C>G, p.Thr995Ser), pre- likely context dependent. dicted tobe probablytolerated. These genes arenotknown RNAi-mediatedknockdownofCYFIPhomologue,sara1, to interact with each other (dSysMap). X-chromosome indrosophilaneuronswithconstitutivelyactivep.Tyr64Asp inactivation in the mother was not skewed. rac1 variant resulted increased the rate of embryonic Conclusions: In addition to ID and ASD, RAB39B lethality. mutations could be associated with a characteristic Conclusions: RAC1 missense mutations orchestrate dysmorphic phenotype. diverse human phenotypes with an extraordinary spread of D.Casas-Alba:None.A.Martínez-Monseny:None.L. ~10 SD of head circumferences. These ﬁndings highlight Martorell: None. C. Arjona: None. F. Palau: None. M. the importance of RAC1 in neuronal development and Serrano: None. demonstrate the complexity of deﬁning novel rare diseases with extreme phenotypic variability. P08.63C Mutations in several genes encoding components or RAC1 missense mutations cause diverse phenotypes and regulators of the Rho signaling pathway (e.g. CDC42, deﬁne Rhopathies as a new group of developmental ARHGAP31, TRIO, HACE1, ELMO2, DOCK6 and SMPX) disorders have been identiﬁed in human disorders recently. We propose that this emerging sub-category of rare develop- M.R.F.Reijnders1,N.M.Ansor2,3,M.Kousi4,W.W.Yue5,P.L. mentaldisorderstobedesignatedasRhopathieswithRAC1 Tan4,K. Clarkson6,J. Clayton-Smith2,7,K. Corning6,J.R. as its central player. Our and others’ work indicate that Jones6,W.W. K.Lam8,G.M.S. Mancini9,C. Marcelis1, some Rhopathies may be amenable to treatment. S. Mohammed10,R.Pfundt1,M.Roifman11,12,R. Cohn11, M.R.F.Reijnders:None.N.M.Ansor:None.M.Kousi: D.Chitayat11,12,Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study, None. W.W. Yue: None. P.L. Tan: None. K. Clarkson: N.Katsanis4,T. H.Millard2,H.G.Brunner1,13,S. Banka2,7 None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. K. Corning: None. J.R. Jones: None. W.W.K. Lam: None. G.M.S. Mancini: 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, None. C. Marcelis: None. S. Mohammed: None. R. 2University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, Pfundt: None. M. Roifman: None. R. Cohn: None. D. 3Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia, 4Duke Chitayat: None. N. Katsanis: None. T.H. Millard: None. University,Durham,NC,UnitedStates,5UniversityofOxford, H.G. Brunner: None. S. Banka: None. Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 7Manchester Centre for P08.64D Genomic Medicine, St. Mary's Hospital, Manchester, United Whole genome sequencing of consanguineous families Kingdom, 8Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United reveals novel pathogenic variants in intellectual disability Kingdom, 9Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, C. SoussiZander1,A. Thuresson1,J.Zhao1,J.Halvardson1, 11University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 12Mount Sinai E. Månsson2,E.Stenninger2,U.Holmlund3,Y. Öhrner3, Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 13Maastricht University L. Feuk1 Medical Center, Maastricht, NetherlandsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 239 1DepartmentofImmunology,GeneticsandPathology,Science Shefﬁeld,UnitedKingdom,4DepartmentofGenetics,Aberdeen for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of RoyalInﬁrmary,Aberdeen,UnitedKingdom,5WessexClinical pediatrics, Örebro university hospital, Örebro, Sweden, Genetics Service, G Level, Princess Anne Hospital, 3Department of pediatrics, Västmanlands hospital Västerås, Southampton, United Kingdom, 6Cheshire and Merseyside Västerås, Sweden ClinicalGeneticService,LiverpoolWomen'sNHSFoundation Trust, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 7Department of Clinical Intellectual disability (ID) is a common disorder affecting Genetics, City Hospital Campus, Nottingham, United morethan2%ofthepopulation,butthemajorityofpatients Kingdom, 8Institute of Cancer and Genetics, University receive no molecular diagnosis. The disorder is highly Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 9Temple Street genetically heterogeneous, with estimates of more than Children’sHospital,Dublin,Ireland,10DepartmentofClinical 2,500 autosomal ID genes. Autosomal recessive ID genes Genetics, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation have primarily been identiﬁed by studies of patients from Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 11Clinical Genetics Unit, consanguineous families. Here we used whole genome Birmingham Women's Hospital, Edgbaston, Birmingham, sequencing to study six consanguineous families that had United Kingdom, 12Shefﬁeld Clinical Genetics Service, previously been tested using whole exome sequencing Shefﬁeld Children's Hospital, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, withoutobtainingamoleculardiagnosis.Forfourofthesix 13Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals, families (66%) we identiﬁed pathogenic variants in genes Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 14Clinical Genetics, previously reported in patients with ID (PIGN, SMC1A, Royal Devon&Exeter NHS FoundationTrust, Exeter, United FRRS1L, and RTTN). Additionally, in one patient we Kingdom, 15Department of Clinical Genetics, University identiﬁed variants in both FRMD4A1 and COL27A1. The Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Leicester Royal Inﬁrmary, COL27A1variantexplainstheskeletalmalformationsinthe Leicester, United Kingdom, 16University of Exeter Medical patient, but also expands the phenotype of this gene to School, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, RILD, involve hearing impairment and ID. Our study highlights RoyalDevon&ExeterHospital,BarrackRoad,Exeter,United thebeneﬁtsofwholegenomesequencinginfamilieswhere Kingdom, 17MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC IGMM, diagnosticexomesequencingwasunsuccessful.Ourresults University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, provide new pathogenic variants in several autosomal Edinburgh, United Kingdom recessive ID genes and describe a second ﬁnding of pathogenic variation in COL27A1 in a patient with both Large scale sequencing is illuminating the genetic archi- skeletal malformations and ID. tecture of rare diseases. We analyzed 7,447 exome- C.SoussiZander:None.A.Thuresson:None.J.Zhao: sequenced families from the Deciphering Developmental None. J. Halvardson: None. E. Månsson: None. E. Disorders study, and estimated the genome-wide contribu- Stenninger:None.U.Holmlund:None.Y.Öhrner:None. tionofrecessivecodingvariationinbothknownandas-yet- L. Feuk: None. undiscovered genes. Our approach is the ﬁrst to allow a properly calibrated estimate of recessive burden. We found P08.65A that the proportion of cases attributable to recessive coding Quantifying the contribution of recessive coding variation variants was only 3.6% in patients of European ancestry, to developmental disorders comparedto50%explainedbydenovocodingmutations.It washigher(31%)inpatientswithPakistaniancestry,dueto H.C. Martin1,W. D.Jones1, J.Stephenson1,J.Handsaker1, elevated autozygosity. Half of this recessive burden is R. McIntyre1,M.Bruntraeger1, G.Gallone1,J.McRae1, attributabletoknowngenes.Threegenesweresigniﬁcantly E. Prigmore1, P.Short1,M. Niema1,J.Kaplanis1,E. Radford1, enriched for biallelic variants after stringent Bonferroni N.Akawi2,M.Balasubramanian3,J.Dean4,R. Horton5, correction.Oneisanewdiseasegene(EIF3F),andanother, A.Hulbert6,D.S.Johnson3,K.Johnson7,D.Kumar8,S.Lynch9, KDM5B, is already reported in association with dominant S. G.Mehta10, J.Morton11,M.Parker12,M.Splitt13, P.D. disease. The signal in EIF3F (p=1.2×10-10) is driven by a Turnpenny14,P.C.Vasudevan15,M.Wright13,A.Bassett1,C.F. single missense variant (frequency ~0.1%) that was homo- Wright16,D.R.FitzPatrick17,H.V.Firth10,M.E.Hurles1,J.C. zygousin9DDDprobands,andwearecurrentlytestingits Barrett1 effectincelllines.KDM5B(p=1.1×10-7)appearstofollow acomplexmodeofinheritance,inwhichheterozygousloss- 1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, of-function(LoF)variants showincompletepenetrance and 2DivisionofCardiovascularMedicine,RadcliffeDepartmentof homozygousLoFsarefullypenetrant.Throughsimulations, Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, we estimate the number of as-yet-undiscovered genes that 3Shefﬁeld Clinical Genetics Service, Shefﬁeld Children's NHS act by a recessive coding mechanism. Our results suggest Foundation Trust, OPD2, Northern General Hospital, that recessive coding variants only account for a small240 J.delPicchia fraction of currently undiagnosed individuals, and that therefore investigate the functional effects of six mutations future studies should focus on noncoding variants and to elucidate the different pathomechanisms leading to polygenic mechanisms. EE or ID. H.C.Martin:None.W.D.Jones:None.J.Stephenson: Methods: Six pathogenic SCN2A mutations underlying None. J. Handsaker: None. R. McIntyre: None. M. eitherEE,IDorBFNIEwereselectedforfunctionalstudies. Bruntraeger: None. G. Gallone: None. J. McRae: None. Biophysicalproperties ofrecombinantwildtypeandmutant E. Prigmore: None. P. Short: None. M. Niema: None. J. Na 1.2 channels were measured using voltage-clamp of v Kaplanis: None. E. Radford: None. N. Akawi: None. M. transiently transfected HEK293T cells co-expressing aux- Balasubramanian: None. J. Dean: None. R. Horton: iliary β-subunits and EGFP. In-silico protein modeling was None. A. Hulbert: None. D.S. Johnson: None. K. used to gain insight into the structural effects of the Johnson: None. D. Kumar: None. S. Lynch: None. S.G. mutations. Mehta: None. J. Morton: None. M. Parker: None. M. Results: Both SCN2A missense mutations causing EE Splitt: None. P.D. Turnpenny: None. P.C. Vasudevan: showed profound gating changes in patch-clamp experi- None. M. Wright: None. A. Bassett: None. C.F. Wright: ments, whereas all ID mutations, nonsense and missense, None. D.R. FitzPatrick: None. H.V. Firth: None. M.E. exhibitednorelevantcurrent.TheBFNIEmutationshowed Hurles: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent a small change of channel inactivation resulting in a small or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. gainoffunction.Theproteinmodelingsuggestedstructural F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. aberrations for all studied missense mutations consistent J.C. Barrett: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; with the electrophysiological ﬁndings. Genomics plc. Discussion: By examining the functional consequences ofSCN2Amutationscausingepilepticencephalopathy,self- P08.66B limited familial neonatal-infantile epilepsy and intellectual The functional consequences of SCN2A mutations disability this study contributes to the elucidation of determine the phenotype mechanisms leading to the broad phenotype variability reported for SCN2A mutations. Our ﬁndings support the A. Begemann1, M.Acuña2, M.Zweier1,H. Sticht3,K. Steindl1, hypothesis that complete loss-of-function mutations lead to M.Besnard1, A.Hackenberg4,L. Abela4, B.Plecko4, intellectual disability without seizures, small gain-of- K.Yamakawa5,Y.Inoue6,A.Baumer1,P.Joset1,R.Asadollahi1, function mutations cause BFNIE and epileptic encephalo- H.Zeilhofer2,7,8,A. Rauch1,7,8,9 pathymutationsexhibitvariablebutprofoundNa 1.2gating v changes. 1UniversityofZurich,InstituteofMedicalGenetics,Schlieren- A. Begemann: None. M. Acuña: None. M. Zweier: Zurich, Switzerland, 2University of Zurich, Institute of None. H. Sticht: None. K. Steindl: None. M. Besnard: Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zurich, Switzerland, None. A.Hackenberg: None. L. Abela: None. B. Plecko: 3Friedrich-Alexander-UniversitätErlangen-Nürnberg,Institute None.K.Yamakawa:None.Y.Inoue:None.A.Baumer: of Biochemistry, Erlangen, Germany, 4University Children's None.P.Joset:None.R.Asadollahi:None.H.Zeilhofer: Hospital, Division of Child Neurology, Zurich, Switzerland, None. A. Rauch: None. 5RIKENBrainScienceInstitute,LaboratoryforNeurogenetics, Wako-shi,Saitama,Japan,6ShizuokaInstituteofEpilepsyand P08.67C Neurological Disorders, National Epilepsy Center, Shizuoka, A recurrent de novo missense mutation in SMARCB1 Japan, 7radiz - Rare Disease Initiative Zürich, Clinical causes severe intellectual disability and choroid plexus Research Priority Program for Rare Diseases, Zurich, hyperplasia with resultant hydrocephalus Switzerland, 8University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Neuroscience Center Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 9University I.J.Diets1,T.Prescott2,N.L.Champaigne3,G.M.S.Mancini4, of Zurich, Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, B. Krossnes5,R. Frič6,K. Kocsis7,M.C. J.Jongmans1, Zurich, Switzerland T. Kleefstra1 Objective: Mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical type 2 (Na 1.2) lead to a broad spectrum of phenotypes Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Medical v ranging from self-limited familial neonatal-infantile epi- Genetics, Telemark Hospital, Ulefossveien, Skien, Norway, lepsy(BFNIE)toverysevereepilepticencephalopathy(EE) 3Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, to intellectual disability without seizures (ID), yet the 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus medical center, underlying mechanisms determining this phenotypic varia- Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Pathology, Oslo bility are incompletely understood. In this study, we University Hospital, the Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 241 Norway, 6Department of Neurosurgery, Oslo University Division, IRCCS Fondazione Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Hospital - Rikshospitalet, and Faculty of Medicine, Oslo, Milan, Italy Norway, 7Children's Hospital Colorado, University of Colorado, Department of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Smith-Magenis Syndrome (SMS) [MIM:182290] is a Denver-Aurora, CO, United States genomic disorder caused by RAI1 gene haploinsufﬁciency and characterized by intellectual disability, craniofacial Introduction: SMARCB1 encodes a subunit of the SWI/ dysmorphisms, behavioral and sleep disturbances, speech SNF-complexinvolvedinchromatinremodeling.Mutations andmotordelay.Herewedescribea17yearsoldgirlwitha inthis genecangive risetothreeconditions.Heterozygous clinical suspicion of SMS. Upon previous exclusion of loss of function germline mutations cause the rhabdoid 17p11.2 SMS locus deletion, RAI1 mutational screening tumor predisposition syndrome and schwannomatosis. identiﬁed the yet unreported heterozygous variant p. Presumed gain of function missense mutations in exon 8 A1091D predicted as likely benign and inherited from the and9resultinCofﬁnSirissyndrome,whichischaracterized healthy mother. Moreover, MLPA analysis revealed a de byintellectualdisability(ID),coarsefacialfeaturesandﬁfth novo heterozygous deletion encompassing RAI1 exon 5, digit anomalies. that encodes PHD functional domain, consistent with the Methods:Byagenematchingapproach,individualswith initial clinical suspicion.In order to verify that the de novo a similar SMARCB1 mutation were identiﬁed. Informed deletion results in RAI1 haploinsufﬁciency, RT-qPCR stu- consent was obtained and patient data were collected to dies were carried out but showed an unexpected signiﬁcant further establish genotype-phenotype relationship. increase in blood transcript levels of both patient and Results: A recurrent de novo missense mutation mother compared to those of 10 controls. Moreover, a (c.110G>A;p.Arg37His) in exon 2 of SMARCB1, encoding speciﬁc allelic dosage analysis revealed that the deleted theDNA-bindingdomain,wasidentiﬁedinfourindividuals allele is overexpressed in the patient and concerns the from different genetic centers. They shared a distinct inherited maternal allele. This result conﬁrms SMS diag- phenotype consisting of profound ID and hydrocephalus nosis,asanoverexpressionofanaberranttranscriptlacking due to choroid plexus hyperplasia. Other shared features thefunctionaldomainwasdetected.Ourﬁndingsupportsthe include severe neonatal feeding difﬁculties, congenital hypothesis that RAI1 overexpression, shared with the heart-, kidney-, and eye anomalies, obstructive sleep apnea mother, can be mediated by a cis element. Promoter and and anemia. regulatory regions are under study aiming at identifying Conclusion: The p.Arg37His mutation in the DNA variants that could be related with RAI1 overexpression binding domain of SMARCB1 causes a distinctive syn- ﬁnding. Despite RAI1 overexpression causes Potocki- drome, probably through a gain of function, which is Lupski Syndrome (PTLS) [MIM:610883], the mother characterized by severe ID and hydrocephalus resulting doesnotresembleaPTLSclinicalphenotype.Thismightbe from choroid plexus hyperplasia. This report broadens the explained by the PTLS high phenotype variability or by phenotypic spectrum associated with mutations in penetrance defect as previously reported in other SMARCB1. familiar cases. I.J.Diets:None.T.Prescott:None.N.L.Champaigne: A. Sironi: None. I. Bestetti: None. C. Boninsegna: None. G.M.S. Mancini: None. B. Krossnes: None. R. None. M. Masciadri: None. S. Russo: None. C. Panta- Frič:None.K.Kocsis:None.M.C.J.Jongmans:None.T. leoni: None. S. D'Arrigo: None. L. Larizza: None. P. Kleefstra: None. Finelli: None. P08.68D P08.69A RAI1 intragenic deletion and concomitant overexpression Maternal transmission of mild Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome in a syndromic patient: Smith-Magenis or Potocki-Lupski phenotype due to a SOX11 missense mutation syndrome? B. Hoffmann1,G.Gillessen-Kaesbach1,H.Lüdecke2, A. Sironi1,2,I. Bestetti1,2,C. Boninsegna1, M.Masciadri1, I.Hüning1,D.Wieczorek2 S.Russo1,C.Pantaleoni3,S.D'Arrigo3,L.Larizza1,P.Finelli1,2 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, 1Lab.ofMedicalCytogeneticsandMolecularGenetics,IRCCS Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, Milan, Italy, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany 2Dep. of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Developmental Neurology Since 2014, mutations in SOX11 are known to cause mild Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome (CSS) phenotype. SOX11 is a242 J.delPicchia transcription factor of the PAX6-BAF complex, which is The ST3GAL3 gene located on chr1p34.1 encodes for the proposed to play a role in brain development. β-galactosidase-α2,3 sialyltransferase-III (ST3Gal-III), a Here we report for the ﬁrst time of a maternal glycoprotein/ganglioside sialylytransferase present in Golgi transmission of Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome (CSS) due to a membrane and playing a role in interactions of brain cells SOX11 missense mutation. We present two daughters (14 with their environment thought glycocalyx. Pathogenic and 10 years of age) of non-consanguineous parents with variantsinST3GAL3werereportedinthreeconsanguineous intellectual disability and muscular hypotonia. Both sisters families only in patients with nonsydromic intellectual showed mild dysmorphic facial features such as short disability or with epileptic encephalopathy (West syn- philtrum,thicklips,low-setearsandstrabism.Coganocular drome) and severe developmental delay. We report three motor apraxia was present in both sisters. Mother and both unrelated patients (two brothers and a sporadic case) to daughters showed hypoplastic nails of the ﬁfth toes as sign further delineate the phenotype associated with ST3GAL3 of mild CSS. The mother also had a history of learning mutations and describe with more details the phenotype of difﬁculties. A coloboma of the iris was present. previously reportedpatients. All ofour three novelpatients Karyotyping and array-CGH gave normal results. NGS had early epilepsy and severe to profound intellectual dis- panel diagnostics for CSS revealed a missense variant in ability. The epilepsy was transient in one and pharmacore- SOX11 [c.139G>A; p.(Gly47Ser)] in both sisters and their sistant in the siblings with a more severe mother.Fourinsilico-tools(PROVEAN,SIFT,Polyphen-2 neurodevelopmental phenotype. We identifed by whole and MutationTaster) predicted the mutation as probably exome sequencing and with a sequencing gene panel two pathogenic. novel homozygous variants in ST3GAL3: the c.765-1G>A A review of the literature showed that until now only six intronic variant in one patient and the c.1015C>T (p. patients with de novo mutations in SOX11 have been Arg339*) nonsense mutation in the brothers. Our three described. All of them showed intellectual disability and patients and those of the literature share severe neurode- hypoplastic nails of the ﬁfth toes. Some of these patients velopmentaldelaywithoutlanguageacquisition.Epilepsyis had Cogan ocular motor apraxia. Facial dysmorphic constant and variable ranging from few seizures to phar- features seem not to be speciﬁc. We suggest that the macoresistant epileptic encephalopathy. The siblings had combinationofCoganocularmotorapraxia,developmental the most severe phenotype reported to date and micro- delay and hypoplastic nails of ﬁfth toes are important cephaly, a feature not previously reported in the condition. diagnostic criteria for recognizing patients for mutations in MRI, EEG and the patients’ morphology are non speciﬁc. SOX11. We report the ﬁrst truncating mutation and the ﬁrst splice B. Hoffmann: None. G. Gillessen-Kaesbach: None. H. site mutation predicted to product exon skipping, which Lüdecke: None. I. Hüning: None. D. Wieczorek: None. may explain that the patient has a less severe phenotype. L. Ruaud: None. D. Héron: None. H. Maurey: None. P08.70B C. Mehler-Jacob: None. D. Doummar: None. S. Heide: Novel ST3GAL3 mutations in three patients with None.C.Nava:None.B.Keren:None.C.Mignot:None. intellectual disability and epilepsy P08.71C L. Ruaud1,2,D.Héron2,3,4,H.Maurey5,C. Mehler-Jacob5, Alterations to synaptic vesicles pathways are likely to be D.Doummar6,7,S. Heide2,3,4,C. Nava2,3,4,B. Keren2,3,4, involved in non-syndromic intellectual disability C. Mignot2,3,4 M.A. Zelenova1,2, S.G.Vorsanova1,2, Y.B. Yurov1,2, S.A. 1Centre de Génétique Humaine, CHU Besançon, Besançon, Korostelev3,O.S. Kurinnaia1,2,I.Y. Iourov1,2,4 France, 2Département de Génétique, APHP, GH Pitié- Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Centre de Référence Déﬁciences 1FSBSI «Mental Health Research Center», Moscow, Russian Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France, 4Groupe de Federation,2AcademicianYu.E.VeltishchevResearchClinical RechercheClinique(GRC)'déﬁcienceintellectuelleetautisme' InstituteofPediatrics,N.I.PirogovRussianNationalResearch UPMC, Paris, France, 5Service de neurologie pédiatrique, Medical University, Ministry of Health of the Russian APHP, HU Paris Sud Site Kremlin Bicêtre, Le Kremlin- Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3The State Bicêtre, France, 6Service de Neuropédiatrie - Unité de Educational Institution of Professional Training under the neuropédiatrie et pathologie du développement, APHP, Federal Agency of Health Care and Social Development, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 7Centre de Moscow, Russian Federation., Moscow, Russian Federation, Référence Cervelet, Paris, France 4FSBEI FPE «Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education» of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian FederationAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 243 Introduction. Pathway prioritization is a challenging yet Badajoz, Spain., Badajoz, Spain, 33. Laboratorio de promising tool for uncovering mechanisms and therapy Citogenética, Complejo Hospital Universitario de Vigo, Vigo, targets for intellectual disability (ID). Using big genomic Spain., Vigo, Spain data and advanced in silico techniques, it is possible to unmaskpathwaysandprocesses,alterationstowhichcanbe Introduction: Syndromic patients could manifest intellec- causative to neurobehavioral diseases. tual disability associated to early-onset weight alteration Materials and Methods. To reveal candidate processes (underweight and/or obesity). The diverse heterogeneity in for neurobehavioral problems, we used high-resolution itsetiologyhasimprovedthedevelopmentoftechniquesfor genome-wide CNV scan in 191 children with congenital genetic diagnosis, allowing the molecular characterization abnormalitiesandidiopathicID(AffymetrixCytoScanHD) ofnewsyndromicphenotypes.Theuseofgeneticdatabases and in 11 children with Rett syndrome-like phenotype of patients with intellectual disability and other described without MECP2 mutations (Nimblegen 12×135K). All clinical traits is evidencing correlations with speciﬁc children were not exhibiting cytogenetically visible chro- molecular alterations or combination of them. mosomal abnormalities and detectable genomic rearrange- Patients and Methods: We present an exhaustive ments and epigenetic changes. A bioinformatic algorithm description of Copy Number Variants (CNVs) identiﬁed (Iourov et al., 2014) was applied for candidate pathway in chromosome 16p from 191 CytoScan HD Affymetrix prioritization using KEGG, Reactome, Gene Ontology, arrays performed in syndromic patients and their relation- NCBI biosystems databases. ship with severe alterations in corporal and body weight Results. Pathway prioritization yielded enrichment of 4 composition. pathway clusters in both cohorts: vesicles functioning, Results:Variantswerelocalizedinchromosome16pand Notch signaling pathway, actin functioning, transcription were classiﬁed as: (I) previously non-described 10 Mb regulation. Among these clusters, the SNAP receptor duplicationinthe16p13.2p12.3regionconsideredcausalof activity pathway (GO:0005484) was found to be the most the developed phenotype which consisted on intellectual signiﬁcantly prioritized. Synaptic vesicles are mostly disability and obesity, and (II) CNVs localized in the located at presynaptic terminal and carry neuromediators. 16p11.2 region characterized by their low prevalence but Alterations to vesicles docking and exocytosis can affect with recurrence in syndromic patients with severe altera- neurotransmitter release leading to neurobehavioral tionsinthecorporalweight.Proximal16p11.2CNVshada diseases. dose-dependent effect: underweight in case of duplication Conclusions. Since synaptic vesicles fusion with pre- and obesity in case of deletion. Our analysis has allowed synaptic plasma membrane is essential for nerve impulse suggesting KCTD13 gene as candidate to produce the transmission, these data do not only hallmark alterations to physiopathology of the 16p11.2 proximal syndromes and synaptic vesicles pathways involved in non-syndromic SH2B1 gene for the 16p11.2 distal phenotypes. intellectualdisability,butalsoindicatespossibletherapeutic Conclusion: CNVs of chromosome 16 postulate it as targets for molecular interventions. Finally, it seems that genomic hotspot of alterations in the body mass index in synapticvesiclespathwaysrepresentanintriguingtargetfor syndromic patients, allowing the primary prevention of further studies of ID pathogenesis. Supported by RSF (14- comorbidities with its detection. Studies in syndromic 35-00060). individuals could constitute a reliable model to evaluate M.A. Zelenova: None. S.G. Vorsanova: None. Y.B. hypothalamic satiety disorders. Yurov: None. S.A. Korostelev: None. O.S. Kurinnaia: F. Gimeno-Ferrer: None. D. Albuquerque: None. C. None. I.Y. Iourov: None. Guzmán Luján: None. G. Marcaida Benito: None. M. Aleu Pérez-Gramunt: None. V. Ballesteros Cogollos: P08.72D None. E. Galán Gómez: None. C. Torreira: None. R. EffectofmodiﬁergeneswithinCopyNumberVariationsin Rodríguez-López: None. chromosome 16p on the body weight of intellectual disability patients P08.73A Taurine administration recovers motor and learning F. Gimeno-Ferrer1,D.Albuquerque1,C.Guzmán Luján1, deﬁcits in an Angelman syndrome mouse model G.Marcaida Benito1,M.Aleu Pérez-Gramunt1,V. Ballesteros Cogollos1,E.GalánGómez2,C.Torreira3,R.Rodríguez-López1 S. Guzzetti1, L.Calzari1,L. Buccarello1,V. Cesari2,I.Toschi3, S. Cattaldo4,F. Pregnolato5,S. Mazzola6,S. Russo1 11. Genomics Group for the Study of Obesity, Research Foundation of the General University Hospital, Valencia, 1Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Istituto Spain, 22.Servicio de Pediatría del Hospital Materno Infantil, Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Department of244 J.delPicchia Agricultural and Environmental Sciences University of Milan, B.Liesfeld15,T.Polster17,D.Mitter1,K.Platzer1,J.Hentschel1, Milano, Italy, 3of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, J.Lemke1, R.Jamra1 Universityof Milano, Milano, Italy, 4HPLC laboratory, Neurobiology, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Piancavallo (NO), 1Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany, 2Praxis für Italy, 5Experimental Laboratory of Immunological and Humangenetik Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 3Hospital for Rheumatologic Researches, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Children and Adolescents, University Medical Center Leipzig, Milano,Italy,6DepartmentofVeterinaryMedicine,University Leipzig, Germany, 4Division of Neuropediatrics, Hospital for of Milano, Milano, Italy Children and Adolescents, University Medical Center Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics and Angelman syndrome (AS, MIM 105830) is a rare neuro- Anthropology, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, developmental disorder affecting 1:10-20000 children. Düsseldorf,Germany,6DepartmentofHumanGenetics,Ruhr- Patients show moderate to severe intellectual disability, University, Bochum, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, ataxia and absence of speech. Currently no treatment is University Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 8Institute of Human available. Studies on both post-mortem AS human brains Genetics, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, and mouse models revealed dysfunctions in the extra 9Division for Neuropaediatrics and Metabolic Medicine, synaptic GABA receptors implicated in the pathogenesis. Center for Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg Ourstudyfocusedontaurine,afreeintracellularaminoacid, University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 10EKO Children‘s abundant in brain and considered an inhibitor neuro- Hospital, Witten/Herdecke University, Oberhausen, Germany, transmitter with neuroprotective properties. As taurine acts 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn School of as agonist of GABA-A receptors, expressing various Medicine and University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, GABA-A subunits, we aimed to investigate if it might 12Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 13CeGaT GmbH, Center ameliorate AS symptoms. Since the mice weaning, we for Genomics and Transcriptomics, Tübingen, Germany, orally and chronically administered 1 g/kg taurine in water 14Institute of Clinical Genetics, Technische Universität toUbe3adeﬁcientmice.Inordertotesttheimprovementof Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 15Limbus Medical Technologies motor and cognitive skills, rotarod, NORT and Open Field GmbH, Rostock, Germany, 16Institute of Human Genetics, tests were assayed at 7, 14, 21 and 30 weeks, while bio- University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, chemical tests and aminoacid dosages were carried on 17Bethel Epilepsy Center, Hospital Mara GmbH, Bielefeld, respectively by western blot and HPLC on frozen brains. Germany An increased level of GFAP and an activation of ERK1/2 pathwaywereobservedinthetotalbrainoftransgenicmice. Introduction: We present our results of scientiﬁc evalua- Taurine treatment signiﬁcantly rescued motor and learning tion of clinical trio exome sequencing of neurodevelop- skillsandrestoredtheleveloftheglialmarkerGFAPandof mental disorders (NDD). pERK1-2/ERK1-2 ratio. Our study indicates oral taurine Materials and Methods: We performed trio exome administration as a potential therapy to ameliorate motor sequencing of203 undiagnosed NDD cases. Of these, 59% deﬁcits and learning difﬁculties in AS. were preceded by a large, but negative diagnostic panel. Funded by ORSA Angelman parents’ association grant Sequencing was performed by Centogene or CeGaT using 08A401 and Ministery of Health 08C002_2010 well-established enrichment kits and sequencing platforms. S. Guzzetti: None. L. Calzari: None. L. Buccarello: Bioinformatic analyses were performed by Limbus. If None. V. Cesari: None. I. Toschi: None. S. Cattaldo: exome sequencing did not reveal a clear causative variant None. F. Pregnolato: None. S. Mazzola: None. S. in an established NDD gene, we searched for candidate Russo: None. genes on scientiﬁc basis. To estimate the relevance of candidate genes, we established a scoring system using 13 P08.74B parameters, based on inheritance, gene and variant attri- Scientiﬁc yield of clinical exome sequencing of butes, and published literature. neurodevelopmental disorders Results:Areliableclinicalgeneticdiagnosiswasmadein 60 (29.5%) trios, corresponding to 20% in cases preceded B.Büttner1,S.Martin1,I.Krey1,D.LeDuc1,T.Bartolomaeus1, by panel diagnostics and 43% in cases without prescreen- H.Constanze1, D.Huhle2, W.Kiess3, A.Merkenschlager4, ing. In the remaining 143 (70.5%) trios, re-evaluation M.Bernhard3,R. Pfäfﬂe3,F. Hornemann3, D.Wieczorek5, revealed potentially causative variants in 146 candidate S. Hoffjan6,Y. Hellenbroich7,A. Kuechler8,M.Elgizouli8, genes. We applied our scoring system to prioritize the S. Syrbe9,J.U.Schlump10, J.Schumacher11,A. Rolfs12, relevanceofthesevariants.Thescoresvariedbetween2and S. Biskup13,N.DiDonato14,A. Tzschach14,Y. Schmitz15, 11.9. The top 10% of the scores (score > 9) are ASIC1, S.Leye15,R.Ewald15,I.Schanze16,M.Zenker16,P.Muschke16, TANC2,FBXL19,KMT2E,GLS,ACTL6B,GRIN3B,CUX1,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 245 UNC13A, GRIA4, PUM2, TOP1, WDFY3, NPTX1 and Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Laboratory SPEN. of embryology and genetics of congenital malformations, Conclusion: For the majority of the candidates with INSERM UMR 1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 5Institut highest scoring variants additional cases have been Imagine, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, identiﬁed through our network of collaborators. This Paris, France, 6Departement of Medical Genetics, Trondheim conﬁrms disease associations and enables spin-off studies. University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, 7Division of Ourresultsillustratetheenormousscientiﬁcvalueofthere- Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, evaluation of the substantial amount of negative exome PA,UnitedStates,8DepartmentofPediatrics,PerelmanSchool sequencing samples. of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, B. Büttner: None. S. Martin: None. I. Krey: None. D. United States, 9Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Le Duc: None. T. Bartolomaeus: None. H. Constanze: Branch,NationalHumanGenomeResearchInstitute,National None. D. Huhle: None. W. Kiess: None. A. Merkens- Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, chlager: None. M. Bernhard: None. R. Pfäfﬂe: None. F. 10Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Hornemann: None. D. Wieczorek: None. S. Hoffjan: Columbia,Vancouver,BC,Canada,11CHRUBrest,Génétique None. Y. Hellenbroich: None. A. Kuechler: None. M. médicale, Brest, France, 12Service de Génétique, CHU Elgizouli: None. S. Syrbe: None. J.U. Schlump: None. J. Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 13EA3808 CiMoTheMA Université Schumacher: None. A. Rolfs: E. Ownership Interest Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 14GeneDx, Gaithersburg, Nantes, (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); MD, United States, 15GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United Signiﬁcant; Centogene, Rostock, Germany. S. Biskup: E. States, 16Department of Clinical Genetics, Oxford University Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 17Department intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; CeGaT. N. Di Donato: of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of None. A. Tzschach: None. Y. Schmitz: A. Employment Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 18Human Genome (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Limbus. S. Leye: E. SequencingCenter,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX, Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other United States, 19Department of Molecular Physiology and intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Limbus. R. Ewald: E. Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other States, 20Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, United intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Limbus. I. Schanze: States, 21Norwegian National Unit for Newborn Screening, None. M. Zenker: None. P. Muschke: None. B. Liesfeld: OsloUniversityHospital,Oslo,Norway,22InstituteofClinical E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 23Center for intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Limbus. T. Polster: Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United None. D. Mitter: None. K. Platzer: None. J. Hentschel: States, 24Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, None. J. Lemke: None. R. Jamra: None. Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 25Division of Neurogenetics and Hugo W. Moser Research Institute, P08.75C Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States, Genotype-phenotype correlation associated with de novo 26Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington missense variants in TRRAP: from autism spectrum School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 27Department disorder to syndromic intellectual disability of Pharmacology, Creighton University Medical School, Omaha, NE, United States, 28Yorkshire Regional Genetics B. Cogne1,2,E. Beauregard-Lacroix3,J. Rousseau3, Service, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds Teaching Hospitals S. Ehresmann3,T. Garcia3,C. Gordon4,5, C.von derLippe6, NHSTrust,Leeds,UnitedKingdom,29DepartmentofGenetics, C. Skraban7,8,J.Johnston9, A.Lehman10,P. Parent11, UniversityofNorthCarolinaSchoolofMedicine,ChapelHill, B. Gilbert-Dussardier12,13,K. McWalter14,M. T. Cho15, NC, United States, 30Department of Genetics, University of U.Kini16,Z. CobanAkdemir17, J.Punetha17,S. Jhangiani18, Groningen,UniversityMedicalCenterGroningen,Groningen, X. Song17,D.A. Scott19,17,20,A. Stray-Pedersen21,22, Netherlands, 31Division of Medical Genetics, Department of P. Blackburn23,24,J.S. Cohen25,H.Stessman26,27, M.Blyth28, Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, J.Berg29,E.Gerkes30,V. Shashi31,J. Sullivan31,D.B. United States, 32Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia Goldstein32,33,R.Redon2,J.R. Lupski17,20,18,F. Bolduc34,35,36, University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, DecipheringDevelopmentalDisorderstudy,TRRAPconsortium, 33Department of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in S. Bezieau1,2,S.Kury1,2,P. M.Campeau3 Ireland, St Stephen's Green, Dublin, Ireland, 34Division of Pediatric Neurology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, 1CHUNantes,ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,Nantes,France, Canada, 35Neuroscience and Mental Health Institute, 2l’institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, Nantes, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 36Department France, 3Centre de Recherche du CHU Sainte-Justine et246 J.delPicchia of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Modest; Regeneron. F. Bolduc: None. S. Bezieau: None. Canada S. Kury: None. P.M. Campeau: None. Acetylationofhistonelysineresiduesisamajorcomponent P08.76D of transcriptional regulation. This tightly regulated reaction Analysis of whole exome sequencing data with a panel of is performed by histone acetyltransferases (HATs). The genes associated with intellectual disability and epilepsy in recruitment and activity of HATs depend on a multiprotein a diagnostic lab complex, that includes cofactors and a large scaffolding protein of 3859 amino acids called TRansformation/tRan- S. Vergult,E. D'haenens, M.Baetens, F. Coppieters, M.De scription domain-Associated Protein (TRRAP). Through an Smet,A. Dheedene,T. Rosseel, T. Sante, B.Menten international collaboration and by use of GeneMatcher, 15 de novo variants in TRRAP (NM_001244580.1) were Center for Medical Genetics Ghent (CMGG), Ghent, Belgium identiﬁed from research and clinical exome sequencing cohorts, in 21 patients from 20 families (1 germinal Introduction: The implementation of whole exome mosaicism). All variants were absent from gnomAD. sequencing (WES) in the clinic has rapidly increased the Remarkably, a strong genotype to phenotype correlation diagnostic yield in patients with (syndromic) intellectual was observed with two clinical spectra. The ﬁrst is a com- disability (ID) and/or epilepsy. Here we present an over- plex, multi-systemic syndrome characterized by severe view of the ﬁrst 109 patients that were analyzed with our intellectual disability (ID) in addition to various mal- accredited ID & Epilepsy panel, a WES based targeted formations of the brain, heart, kidneys and genitourinary panel analysis. system. Patients with this phenotype carried missense var- Material and Methods: gDNA was enriched for iants (I1031M, R1035Q, S1037R, E1104G, E1106K, (coding)exonswiththeSureselectAllExonv6kit(Agilent G1111W, G1159R) that clustered around a substitution Technologies)followedbypaired-end2x150bp sequencing identiﬁed in 5 individuals (A1043T). The second pre- on a HiSeq3000 platform (Illumina). Raw sequence reads sentation includes individuals with autism spectrum dis- were processed using an in-house developed pipeline order and/or ID and epilepsy, with another cluster of (Seqplorer) and data analysis was limited to a panel of variants including R1859C, W1866C, W1866R, G1883R 1109 selected Intellectual Disability & Epilepsy genes. and P1932L as well as non-clustering variants (L805F and Results: We’ve found a possible molecular explanation F860L). TRRAP is highly conserved evolutionarily and is for the aberrant phenotype of the patient in 23% of the among the top ﬁve genes intolerant to missense variations. cases.Themajorityofthe(likely)pathogenicvariantsarose RNAseq on patient cell lines identiﬁed several hundred denovo(71%),fewcasescouldbeexplainedbyvariantsin misregulated genes; with an enrichment in genes involved genes related to respectively X-linked recessive disorders in neuronal development and axonal guidance, develop- (17%) or autosomal recessive disorders (8%). Several mental processes, cell-cell adhesion and motility. qRT- interesting ﬁndings were observed, for example, we’ve PCR, ATACseq and Immuno-histochemistry experiments identiﬁed de novo SATB2 missense variants in two are ongoing to conﬁrm the results and gain further insight unrelated patients affecting the same codon but different into pathophysiology. nucleotide. B. Cogne: None. E. Beauregard-Lacroix: None. J. Conclusion:Toconclude,sincetheintroductionofwhole Rousseau: None. S. Ehresmann: None.T. Garcia:None. exome sequencing in the Center for Medical Genetics C. Gordon: None. C. von der Lippe: None. C. Skraban: Ghent, we were able to provide a possible molecular None. J. Johnston: None. A. Lehman: None. P. Parent: diagnosis(thatcouldexplaintheclinicalfeatures)forahigh None. B. Gilbert-Dussardier: None. K. McWalter: A. percentage (23%) of patients. This is in concordance with Employment (full orpart-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. M.T. previousreportsinliteraturewithadiagnosticyieldranging Cho: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; from 16-29.4% (de Ligt, 2012 and Monroe GR, 2016). GeneDx. U. Kini: None. Z. Coban Akdemir: None. J. S. Vergult: None. E. D'haenens: None. M. Baetens: Punetha:None.S.Jhangiani:None.X.Song:None.D.A. None. F. Coppieters: None. M. De Smet: None. A. Scott: None. A. Stray-Pedersen: None. P. Blackburn: Dheedene: None. T. Rosseel: None. T. Sante: None. B. None. J.S. Cohen: None. H. Stessman: None. M. Blyth: Menten: None. None. J. Berg: None. E. Gerkes: None. V. Shashi: None. J. Sullivan: None. D.B. Goldstein: None. R. Redon: P08.77A None. J.R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock The phenotypic spectrum of WWOX-related Epileptic options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Encephalopathy: 20 additional cases and review of the 23andMe, Lasergen. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; literatureAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 247 J.Piard1,L. Hawkes2,M.Milh3,L. Villard3,R. Borgatti4, syndrome). We report on 20 additional patients with M.Fradin5,Y. Capri6,D.Héron7,M.Nougues8,C. Nava9, WOREE syndrome. O.TartaArsene10,D.Shears11,Y. Sogawa12,D.Johnson13, SNVs and CNVs were identiﬁed by means of pange- H.Firth14,P. Vasudevan15,G.Jones15, M.Nguyen-Morel16, nomic approaches (WES and aCGH) and/or WWOX T. Busa17,A. Roubertie18, M.vandenBorn19,M.Koenig20, targeted molecular screening. All missenses identiﬁed E. Brischoux-Boucher21,C. Mignot7,U.Kini2,C. Philippe22 (includedeightnovelmutations)areclassiﬁedaspathogenic or likelypathogenic according to the ACMG recommenda- 1CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,UniversitédeFranche-Comté, tions. The phenotype of our patients was consistent with Besançon, France, 2Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, previously reported cases. All individuals had severe Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, developmental delay (inability to walk and no speech United Kingdom, 3UMR_S 910 - Equipe de Neurogénétique development) and early onset epilepsy. In contrast to Humaine, Marseille, France, 4Unità Operativa Complessa di previousreports,growthretardation(6%)andmicrocephaly Neuropsichiatria Età Evolutiva Neuroriabilitazione, Bosisio (20%) were not prominent signs in our series. The most Parini,Italy,5ServicedePédiatrie,StBrieuc,France,6Service striking dysmorphic features were a round hypotonic face de Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, with full cheeks and a short neck. Additional medical 7Departement de Genetique et Centre de Reference « problems were visual impairment (75%), spine deformity Deﬁciences intellectuelles de causes rares », APHP, Groupe (65%), feeding (70%) and respiratory (40%) problems. HospitalierPitie-Salpêtriere,Paris,France,8Neuropédiatrieet Brain MRI was abnormal in 80% of patients showing Unité d'électrophysiologie clinique, Centre de Référence des corpuscallosumhypoplasia(75%)andprogressivecerebral Maladies Neuromusculaires de l'EST parisien et DHU I2B, atrophy (55%). By aggregating our patients with all cases Hôpital d'Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, reported so far, there are currently 37 patients with a 9INSERM, U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, WOREE syndrome. No clear genotype-phenotype correla- UPMC Univ Paris, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle tion is emerging. It was initially claimed that homozygous épinière, Paris, France, 10Pediatric Neurology Clinic, or compound heterozygous missense(s) genotypes could "Alexandru Obregia" Clinical Psychiatric Hospital, "Carol lead to a SCAR12 phenotype. In our cohort, we describe 5 Davila" University of Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 112. patients with missense(s) genotypes and a WOREE Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University syndrome. The most severe clinical presentation seems to Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, be associated with genotypes corresponding to virtual 12Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital of WWOX full knock-down. Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 13Clinical Genetics, J. Piard: None. L. Hawkes: None. M. Milh: None. L. Shefﬁeld Children’s Hospital, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, Villard: None. R. Borgatti: None. M. Fradin: None. Y. 14Department of Clinical Genetics, Cambridge University Capri: None. D. Héron: None. M. Nougues: None. C. Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Nava:None.O.TartaArsene:None.D.Shears:None.Y. Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Sogawa: None. D. Johnson: None. H. Firth: None. P. Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 15Clinical Vasudevan: None. G. Jones: None. M. Nguyen-Morel: Genetics Department, University Hospitals Leicester NHS None. T. Busa: None. A. Roubertie: None. M. van den Trust, Leicester, United Kingdom, 16Pediatric department, Born: None. M. Koenig: None. E. Brischoux-Boucher: Grenoble -Alp university hospital, Grenoble, France, None. C. Mignot: None. U. Kini: None. C. 17Département de Génétique, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, Philippe: None. France, 18Service de Neuropédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, P08.78B 19Department for Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, 3000, Ubiquitin-proteasome system impairment and intellectual Rotterdam, Netherlands, 20Laboratoire de Génétique disability: the CUL4B example Moléculaire, EA7402 Institut Universitaire de Recherche Clinique, Montpellier, France, 21Centre de génétique T. Besnard1,2,F. Ebstein3,L. Fuqua4,M. Lefèbvre5,6, Humaine, Besançon, France, 2221. Laboratoire de génétique B.Cogné1,2,X.Latypova1,2,W.Deb1,D.Quinquis1,F.Bolduc7,8, moléculaire et de Cytogénétique, Plateau Technique de S.Nambot5,6,M.Hempel9,D.Li10,F.TranMau-Them5,6,K.W. Biologie, CHU de Dijon et Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, Gripp11,E. Infante12, M.McGuire12,13,T. Smol14,15, France J.Ghoumid14,16,T. Maarup17, E.Calonico17,L. L.Immken18, D.Martin-Coignard19,S. Yang20,M.Cho20, D.Lessel9, Germline bi-allelic mutations in WWOX have been asso- C. Thauvin-Robinet5,6,L. Faivre5,6,B. Isidor1,2,S. Küry1,2, ciated with spinocerebellar ataxia type 12 (SCAR12) and S. Bézieau1,2 WWOX-Related-Epileptic-Encephalopathy (WOREE248 J.delPicchia 1CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, degradation rate of the Suc-LLVY-AMC substrate in France, 2L'institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, whole-cell extracts. Nantes, France, 3Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Conclusions: Our initial results suggest a direct implica- Molecular Biology, University Medicine Greifswald, tion of CUL4B in the regulating function of proteasome Greifswald, Germany, 4Lineagen, Salt Lake City, UT, United 26S.CUL4Bcouldindirectlycontributetothemaintenance States,5InsermUMR1231GAD,GénétiquedesAnomaliesdu of cellular protein homeostasis. However, the mechanisms Développement, Dijon, France, 6Centre de référence through which these interactions are exercised and their «Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs», consequences, particularly in the pathological context of Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, intellectual impairment, still remain to be clariﬁed. Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 7Neuroscience and T. Besnard: None. F. Ebstein: None. L. Fuqua: None. Mental Health Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, M.Lefèbvre:None.B.Cogné:None.X.Latypova:None. Canada, 8Department of Medical Genetics, University of W. Deb: None. D. Quinquis: None. F. Bolduc: None. S. Alberta,Edmonton,AB,Canada,9InstituteofHumanGenetics, Nambot: None. M. Hempel: None. D. Li: None. F. Tran University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Mau-Them:None.K.W.Gripp:None.E.Infante:None. Germany, 10Center for Applied Genomics, The Children’s M. McGuire: None. T. Smol: None. J. Ghoumid: None. Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, T. Maarup: None. E. Calonico: None. L.L. Immken: 11Division of Medical Genetics, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. S. Yang: None. M. Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States, Cho: None. D. Lessel:None. C.Thauvin-Robinet: None. 12Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, University of L. Faivre: None. B. Isidor: None. S. Küry: None. S. Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 13Department of Bézieau: None. Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 14Université de Lille, EA7364 RADEME, Lille, France, 15Institut de génétique médicale, P09 Neurogenetic and psychiatric disorders CHULille,Lille,France,16Servicedegénétiqueclinique,CHU Lille, Lille, France, 17Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, CA, P09.001A United States, 18Specially For Children Genetics, Austin, TX, Dissecting tissue-speciﬁc functional networks associated UnitedStates,19UnitédeGénétique,CHULeMans,LeMans, with 16p11.2 reciprocal genomic disorder using CRISPR France, 20GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States engineered human iPS and mouse models Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the CUL4B gene are P. Razaz1,2,3, D.J.Tai1,2,3, S.Erdin1,2,3,T. Aneichyk1,2,3, responsiblefortheclinical phenotypeofCUL4B-relatedX- T. Arbogast4, A.Ragavendran1, A.Stortchevoi1,2,B.B. linked intellectual disability (ID) or Cabezas syndrome Currall1,2,3,C.E. F. Esch1,2,3,E. Morini1,2,W.Ma1,2,R.J. (MIM #300354). CUL4B encodes a scaffold protein, the Kelleher1,2,C. Golzio4,5,N.Katsanis4, J.F. Gusella1,2,3,6, cullin-4BwhichisenrolledintheCullin4B-RINGubiquitin M.Talkowski1,2,3,6 ligase(E3)complex.Thiscomplexplaysanessentialrolein the recognition and ubiquitination of proteins which occurs 1Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of Neurology, prior to their cellular degradation by the 26S proteasome. MassachusettsGeneralHospital,BOSTON,MA,UnitedStates, MaterialsandMethods:Throughaninternationalmulti- 2Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, centric investigation based on exome sequencing, we MA, United States, 3Program in Medical and Population identiﬁed 15 male individuals with unpublished CUL4B Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, pathogenicvariants. Inorder todetermineif theubiquitina- MA, United States, 4Center for Human Disease Modeling, tion/protein system (UPS) was affected by these CUL4B Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, alterations, we performed protein analysis by native SDS- 5InstitutdeGénétiqueetdeBiologieMoléculaireetCellulaire, PAGE and western-blot on peripheral blood mononuclear Illkirch, France, 6Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical cells (PBMCs) from subjects and healthy controls. School, Boston, MA, United States Results: We identiﬁed 9 frameshift indels, 1 in-frame indel; 4 nonsense and 1 missense variants. All affected Reciprocal genomic disorders (RGDs) represent a recurrent individuals presented with mild to severe ID with speech class of copy number variants (CNVs) that collectively and motor delay, along with more variable neurological, comprise a major contributor to neurodevelopmental dis- skeletalanddysmorphicfeatures.Interestingly,the20Sand orders (NDD) and altered anthropometric traits. Here, we 26S proteasome complexes of the tested individuals systematically dissected the functional networks associated exhibited a higher chymotrypsin-like activity than those of with16p11.2RGDfromtranscriptomeanalysesof70mice the controls. This ﬁnding was conﬁrmed by measuring the with reciprocal CNV of the syntenic 7qF3 region acrossAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 249 cortex,striatum,andcerebellum,aswellasliver,whiteand Sciences,FacultyofBiology,MedicineandHealth,University brown adipose tissues in a subset of 16 mice (n= of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, 250 samples). We integrated these data with brain tissues Manchester, United Kingdom, 8INSERM UMR-1163, from a Kctd13 mouse model (a putative driver of 16p11.2 Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroinﬂammation, Paris, neuroanatomical phenotypes, n=50), and CRISPR-engi- France, 9Paris Descartes University, Sorbonne-Paris-Cité, neered, isogenic 16p11.2 iPSC-derived NSCs (n=25) and Imagine Institute, Paris, France inducedneurons(n=27).Thestrongestmagnitudeofeffect sizes from 7qF3 were observed across brain regions by Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a genetically deter- comparison to non-brain tissues (cortex 7qF3 region aver- mined inﬂammatory encephalopathy characterized by a age p-value=8.80E-35; non-brain p=0.0013), reﬂecting resemblance to congenital infection. Early onset in child- the ~3x higher basal expression changes. Coexpression hood is often observed, but variability in presentation and network analyses isolated a consistent module of 16p11.2 course is recognized, encompassing peripheral spasticity to genes, as well as a module that was highly enriched for severe psychomotor disability. To date, mutations in seven constrained genes (ExAC pLI≥0.9), autism-associated geneshavebeendescribedtocauseAGS.RNASEH2Bgene genes, early fetal development coexpression networks (MIM# 610326), encoding the RibonucleaseH2 beta sub- derived from BrainSpan, and neurological phenotypes and unit, is most frequently mutated, seen in association with processes. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were ~40% of diagnosed patients. Here we report a new case of enriched in this ‘constrained’ module network; moreover, AGS in a 4 year old girl who, after an infectious gastro- DEGs from the Kctd13 mouse coalesced into this same enteritis, developed a left spastic hemiparesis with pre- module (cortex enrichment p=7.82E-41), suggesting dominant dystonia of the upper limb, in association with overlap in altered transcriptional networks between full white matter abnormalities on brain MRI. Biochemical lengthCNVanddeletionofKCTD13alone.Theseanalyses investigation revealed high neopterin and slightly elevated identify a tissue-speciﬁc impact of 16p11.2 RGD that interferon (IFN)-α levels in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid, with a converges on a module of co-expressed genes that are variable elevation of IFN-regulated-gene transcripts in the intoleranttogeneticperturbationandassociatedwithcritical peripheral blood. By targeted next generation sequencing processes in human neurodevelopment. performed on genomic DNA, we identiﬁed a hitherto P. Razaz: None. D.J. Tai: None. S. Erdin: None. T. unreportedRNASEH2Bintronicvariant,c.699-9C>G,inthe Aneichyk: None. T. Arbogast: None. A. Ragavendran: compound heterozygous state with the recurrent mutation None. A. Stortchevoi: None. B.B. Currall: None. C.E.F. c.529G>A (p.Ala177Thr). Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed Esch: None. E. Morini: None. W. Ma: None. R.J. biallelic segregation consistent with autosomal recessive Kelleher: None. C. Golzio: None. N. Katsanis: None. J. inheritance. The study of RNASEH2B transcript expression F. Gusella: None. M. Talkowski: None. in leucocytes by RT-PCR in the proband, and her healthy heterozygous carrier mother, demonstrated that the novel P09.003C variantcreatesanew3’acceptorsplicesiteupstreamofthe Molecular characterization of a novel RNASEH2B splice boundary of exon 9, inducing the retention of an intronic site mutation responsible for Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome fragment in the mature mRNA, with predicted loss of the STOP-codon. An investigationofthe impact ofthis variant S. Samaan1,2, S.Valence3,4,F. Renaldo5,C. Maalouf1, on RNASEH2B transcript stability and translated protein is I.Dorboz2,K. Boussaid5,M. Elmaleh6, G.Rice7, O.Boespﬂug- in progress. Tanguy2,5,Y. Crow8,9,D.Rodriguez3,4 S.Samaan:None.S.Valence:None.F.Renaldo:None. C. Maalouf: None. I. Dorboz: None. K. Boussaid: None. 1Department of Medical Genetics, UF Molecular Genetics, M.Elmaleh:None.G.Rice:None.O.Boespﬂug-Tanguy: Robert Debre University Hospital APHP, 75019, Paris, None. Y. Crow: None. D. Rodriguez: None. France, 2INSERM UMR-S1141, DHU PROTECT, Robert Debre University Hospital APHP, 75019, Paris, France, P09.004D 3Department of Neuropaediatrics, Armand Trousseau A whole exome study of Alzheimer’s Diseases which is University Hospital, APHP, 75012, Paris, France, 4GRC augmented by population data found the noble AD risk ConCer-LD,SorbonneUniversités,UPMC-Paris6University, genes Paris,France,5DepartmentofNeuropaediatricandmetabolic diseases, Robert Debre University Hospital, APHP, 75019, J.Kim Paris, France, 6Department of Radiology, Robert Debre UniversityHospital,APHP,75019,Paris,France,7Divisionof Ilsan Hospital, Goyang-shi, Korea, Republic of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological250 J.delPicchia Alzheimer disease (AD) has high heritability. The AD UniversityHospital,DepartmentofNeuropathology,F76000, Sequencing Project (ADSP) which includes 10,909 parti- Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, cipants, aimed to ﬁnd additional AD risk genes harboring Rouen, France, 6Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle low frequency and rare coding variants. However, ADSP University, Newcastle UponTyne,United Kingdom, 7National may be still underpowered for very rare alleles. In this CJD Research & Surveillance Unit, Centre for Clinical Brain study, we augmented statistical power by using the ExAC Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, databaseascomparisongroupfortheADSPcasesandtried Edinburgh,UnitedKingdom,8DepartmentofNeuropathology, the noble AD risk and protective genes. In order to avoid John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, the population bias, we included only Non-Finnish Eur- 9Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of opean population in ExAC. In ADSP, we used European Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College ancestry and excluded outliers by the plot of the ﬁrst two London, London, United Kingdom, 10Department of research, principal components. We selected variants with minor Rouvray Psychiatric Hospital, Sotteville-lès-Rouen, France, allele frequencies (MAF) between that of the ADSP cases 11Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for Life, and ADSP controls. The MAF differences were tested by NewcastleUniversity,NewcastleUponTyne,UnitedKingdom, Pearson’schi-squaretests.TheMAFofgene-basedanalysis 12Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for were obtained by collapsing MAFs of variants within gene Infectious Diseases (RCI), Radboud University Medical boundaries.Inthevariantlevel,thewell-knownADgenes- Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands TOMM40, TREM2, and MS4A6A-are replicated. The noble genes with genome wide signiﬁcant level (p=5x10- Introduction:InsporadicAlzheimerdisease(sAD),highly 8) were 38 genes including C10orf2, CHRD, and CROCC. penetrant pathogenic variants have been reported in the Inthegene-basedlevelusingburdentest,weselectedgenes autosomal-dominant genes APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 in a with p<1x10-6. The well-known AD genes-ABCA7, minority of early-onset cases (onset before 66 years), some SORL1, and TREM2-are replicated. The signiﬁcant noble of them occurring as de novo germline events. Given the genes were 69 genes including AGAP1, ALYREF, and recent knowledge on seeding and spreading of neuro- TYRO3. We not only replicate known AD risk genes- pathological lesions in AD, we hypothesized that somatic ABCA7, MS4A6A, SORL1, and TREM2, but also found variantsinthesegenesmaycontributetosADetiologyina the noble candidate AD risk genes. Our augmentation proportion of patients with no germline pathogenic variant. methods can be applied to the whole exome sequencing Methods: We applied an ultra-sensitive technique of studies on other diseases. single-moleculemolecularinversionprobes(smMIP)-based J. Kim: None. deep NGS to 100 brain and 355 blood samples from 445sADpatientsfromFrance,theNetherlandsandtheUK, P09.005A including83.5%early-onsetcases.ThepanelincludedAPP, Assessingandchallengingthesomaticvarianthypothesisin PSEN1,PSEN2,geneswithadenovogermlinemutationin sporadic Alzheimer disease a trio study (VPS35, MARK4), the risk factor gene SORL1 and 5 genes involved in APP processing. G.Nicolas1,2,R. Acuña-Hidalgo2,3,M.J. Keogh4,O.Quenez1, Results:Weidentiﬁed9somaticvariantsin2brainand7 M.Steehouwer2,S. Lelieveld2,S. Rousseau1, A.Richard1, blood samples, with variant allele fractions ranging from M.Oud2,F.Marguet5,A. Laquerriere5, C.M. Morris6, 0.2% to 10.8%; 6/9 had a ratio below 0.5% (0.22-0.48%). J.Attems6,C.Smith7,O.Ansorge8,S.AlSarraj9,T.Frebourg1, All nine were conﬁrmed by independent amplicon-based D.Campion1,10,D.Hannequin1,D.Wallon1,C.Gilissen2,P.F. deep sequencing with similar fractions. Two somatic Chinnery4,J.A. Veltman11,2,A. Hoischen2,12 variants mapped to APP, although they were interpreted aslikelybenign.Theothersomaticvariantswerelocatedin 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen SORL1 (n=5), NCSTN (n=1) and MARK4 (n=1). Two UniversityHospital,DepartmentofGeneticsandCNR-MAJ,F oftheSORL1variantsmighthavecontributedtothedisease 76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized while the other variants remain of unknown signiﬁcance. Medicine, Rouen, France, 2Department of Human Genetics, Conclusion:Somatic variants intheautosomal dominant Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, AD genes may not be a common cause of sAD, including 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG early-onset cases. Development & Disease, Berlin, Germany, 4Department of G. Nicolas: None. R. Acuña-Hidalgo: None. M.J. Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Keogh: None. O. Quenez: None. M. Steehouwer: None. Biomedical Campus & MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, S. Lelieveld: None. S. Rousseau: None. A. Richard: University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, None.M.Oud:None.F.Marguet:None.A.Laquerriere: 5Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen None. C.M. Morris: None. J. Attems: None. C. Smith:Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 251 None. O. Ansorge: None. S. Al Sarraj: None. T. C. Charbonnier1, C.Bellenguez2,3,4,G.Nicolas1,B. Grenier- Frebourg: None. D. Campion: None. D. Hannequin: Boley2,3,4,O.Quenez1,K.LeGennec1,G.Chauhan5,D.Wallon6, None. D. Wallon: None. C. Gilissen: None. P.F. S. Rousseau1,A. Richard1,A. Boland7,G.Bourque8,H.M. Chinnery: None. J.A. Veltman: None. A. Munter8,R.Olaso7,V.Meyer7,A.Rollin-Sillaire9,F.Pasquier9, Hoischen: None. L. Letenneur5,R. Redon10, J.Dartigues5,C. Tzourio5, T. Frebourg11, M.Lathrop8,J.Deleuze7,D.Hannequin6,12, P09.006B E. Genin13,P. Amouyel2,3,4,14,S. Debette5,J.Lambert2,3,4, Leukocyte telomere shortening is associated with D.Campion1,15 progressive cognitive decline in amnestic mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease 1Department of Genetics and CNR-MAJ, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, D.Scarabino1,M.Peconi2,E. Broggio3, S.Magliulo2, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, G.Gambina3,R. M.Corbo2 Rouen, France, 2Inserm, U1167, RID-AGE - Risk factors and molecular determinants of aging-related diseases, Lille, 1CNR Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, Rome, France, 3Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France, 4University Italy, 2Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Lille, U1167 - Excellence Laboratory LabEx DISTALZ, Lille, Neuroscience, University and Hospital of Verona, Verona, France, 5University of Bordeaux, Inserm, Bordeaux Italy Population Health Research Center, UMR1219, Bordeaux, France,6DepartmentofNeurologyandCNR-MAJ,Normandie Introduction: Numerous studies have reported an associa- Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University tion between shortened leukocyte telomere length (LTL) Hospital, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized and increased risk of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In this Medicine,Rouen,France,Rouen,France,7CentreNationalde studyweinvestigatedtherelationshipbetweenLTLandAD Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de development, including in the analysis patients with Biologie François Jacob, CEA, Evry, France, 8McGill amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), a clinical University and Geń ome Queb́ ec Innovation Centre, Montréal, entity considered prodromal of AD. QC, Canada, 9CNR-MAJ, and Department of Neurology, Materials and Methods: LTL (T/S ratio) was measured Universitéde Lille, CHU, Inserm UMR-S 1171, Lille, France, in patients with AD (n=61) or aMCI (n=46), and 10Inserm UMR-1087/CNRS UMR 6291, l’institut du thorax, compared with LTL of age-matched controls (n=56). Univ. Nantes, Nantes, France, 11Department of Genetics, Results: signiﬁcant LTL differences were observed Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen betweencontrols,aMCIandADpatients(p<0.0001),with University Hospital, Normandy Centre for Genomic and meanLTLvalues(±s.d)intheorder:ADpatients(0.70 ± Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 12Department of 0.15) < aMCI patients (0.80 ± 0.14) < controls (0.88 ± Genetics, Neurology and CNR-MAJ, Normandie Univ, 0.15). A positive relationship (linear regression p=0.004) UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, was observed between LTL and cognitive performance Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, (measured by Mini Mental State Examination score). LTL Rouen, France, 13Inserm UMR-1078, CHRU Brest, Univ. did not differ by apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype. Brest, Brest, France, 14Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Conclusions: The shortened LTL observed in AD Lille, Epidemiology and Public Health Department, Lille, patients appears to stem from progressive telomere erosion France, 15Department of Research, Centre hospitalier du possiblycorrelatedwiththecognitivedeclinecharacterizing Rouvray, Sotteville-les-Rouen, France conversion from aMCI to AD. LTL reduction, indicating active cell proliferation, may reﬂect immune system Introduction: Alzheimer disease (AD) is a complex dis- involvement in AD pathogenesis. order with high genetic component. Associations of rare Grant 2016 by La Sapienza University of Rome variantswithADriskhaverecentlybeenreported,however D. Scarabino: None. M. Peconi: None. E. Broggio: the limited panels of variants under scrutiny or the sample None. S. Magliulo: None. G. Gambina: None. R.M. sizes restricted the possibility to assess their effect fully. Corbo: None. Materials and Methods: We took advantage from the ADES-FR dataset to focus on TREM2, SORL1, ABCA7 P09.007C genes. We generated whole-genome (n-955) or whole- ContributiontoAlzheimer'sdiseaseriskofrarevariantsin exome (n=2,106) sequencing data and performed gene- TREM2, SORL1 and ABCA7 in 1,779 cases and 1,273 based burden association analyses on 927 late-onset AD controls (LOAD, onset > 65 years) cases, 852 early-onset (EOAD, onset ≤ 65 years) cases and 1,273 controls.252 J.delPicchia Results: When aggregating rare (MAF<1%) protein Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a transitional stage truncating (PT) and missense variants predicted damaging between normal aging and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Not by three bioinformatics tools (strictly damaging, SD), all MCIsubjects convert toADbutsome remainMCI, and association with EOAD risk reached exome-wide signiﬁ- the identiﬁcation of biomarkers that could give alarm for cance (p<2.5x10-6). Missense variants predicted damaging dementia development would be of great usefulness in the by less than three bioinformatics tools were not associated clinical practice. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non- with EOAD risk. No exome-wide signiﬁcant signal was codingRNAsthatplayapivotalroleingeneexpressionand detected in the LOAD sample. in many neuronal mechanisms going to synaptic plasticity, Conclusion: Beyond aconﬁrmation ofthe associationof neurogenesis, neurodegeneration and apoptosis. In this TREM2, SORL1 and ABCA7 rare variants with AD risk, study we investigated if baseline blood levels of a set of our study provides a clearer insight into the classes of rare candidate miRNAs (miR-22, miR-24-3p, miR-101, miR- variants involded, namely SD variants sharing a common 146a, miR-181a, miR-181b, miR-186, miR-339, and miR- loss of function mechanism with PT variants, and sheds 590)maybeassociatedtoADconversionafter2yearsina light on the genetic heterogeneity of AD. Despite different group of 45 MCI patients (of whom 19 were converted). effect sizes and varying cumulative MAF, TREM2, SORL1 ExpressionlevelofmiR-146a(p=0.0.036)andmiR-181a andABCA7rare PTandSDvariantscontributesimilarlyto (p=0. 0.026) showed a signiﬁcant upregulation in MCI theheritabilityofEOADandexplainbetween1.1and1.5% subjects that converted to AD. A signiﬁcant negative cor- of EOAD heritability each, compared with 9.12% for relationwasfoundbetweenlevelsofmiR-146a(p=0.006) APOEε4. and miR-181a (p=0.001) in blood and Aβ-42 concentra- C. Charbonnier: None. C. Bellenguez: None. G. tioninCSF,whilenoassociationwasevidencedforP-Tau, Nicolas: None. B. Grenier-Boley: None. O. Quenez: and T-Tau. Moreover the increase in miR-146a was asso- None. K. Le Gennec: None. G. Chauhan: None. D. ciated with volume reduction in hippocampus and its sub- Wallon:None.S.Rousseau: None.A.Richard:None.A. ﬁelds(CA1p=0.013,subiculump= 0.027)andincreased Boland: None. G. Bourque: None. H.M. Munter: None. levelsofmiR-146a(p= 0.031)andmiR-181a(p= 0.002) R. Olaso: None. V. Meyer: None. A. Rollin-Sillaire: werecorrelated withdiffusivityalterations inthecingulum, None.F.Pasquier:None.L.Letenneur:None.R.Redon: a white matter tract connecting temporal with frontal and None. J. Dartigues: None. C. Tzourio: None. T. parietal lobes. In conclusion, the data obtained support a Frebourg: None. M. Lathrop: None. J. Deleuze: None. possibleusefulnessofbloodmiR-146aandmiR-181alevels D. Hannequin: None. E. Genin: None. P. Amouyel: as biomarkers for illness progression in MCI patients. None. S. Debette: None. J. Lambert: None. D. A. Ansari: None. E. Mafﬁoletti: None. M. Marizzoni: Campion: None. None. O. Blin: None. G. Frisoni: None. J. Richardson: None. R. Bordet: None. M. Gennarelli: None. L.B. P09.008D Chiavetto: None. miR-146a and miR-181a are potential biomarkers for the progression of mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer’s P09.009A disease Genomic variants in the FTO gene are associated with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Greek patients A.Ansari1,E.Mafﬁoletti1,M.Marizzoni2,O.Blin3,G.Frisoni2,4, J.Richardson5,R. Bordet6, M.Gennarelli1,2,L. B. Chiavetto2,7 K. Mitropoulos1,E. Merkouri Papadima2,G.Xiromerisiou3, A. Balasopoulou2,K. Charalambidou2,V. Galani2,K. Zafeiri2, 1Università degli Studi di Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 2IRCCS E.Dardiotis4,S.Ralli4,G.Deretzi5,A.John6,K.Kydonopoulou7, CentroS.GiovannidiDioFatebenefratelli,Brescia,Italy,3Aix E. Papadopoulou7, A.di Pardo8,F. Akcimen9,A. Loizedda10, Marseille University, UMR-CNRS 7289, Service de V. Dobričić11,I.Novaković11, V.S. Kostić11,C.Mizzi12,B.A. PharmacologieClinique,AP-HM,Marseille,France,4Memory Peters13,A.N.Basak9,S.Orrù10,E.Kiskinis14,D.N.Cooper15, Clinic and LANVIE - Laboratory of Neuroimaging of Aging, S. Gerou7,R. Drmanac13,M.Bartsakoulia12,E. Tsermpini12, University Hospitals and University of Geneva, Geneva, G.M.Hadjigeorgiou4,B.R.Ali16,T.Katsila12,G.P.Patrinos12 Swaziland, 5Neurosciences Therapeutic Area, GlaxoSmithKline R&D, Stevenage, United Kingdom, 1University of Athens, School of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 6UniversityofLille,Inserm,CHULille,U1171-Degenerative 2UniversityofPatrasSchoolofHealthSciences,Departmentof and vascular cognitive disorders, F-59000, Lille, France, Pharmacy, Patras, Greece, 3University of Thessaly School of 73Faculty of Psychology, eCampus University, Novedrate Medicine, Larissa, Greece, 4University of Thessaly, School of (Como), Italy Medicine, Larissa, Greece, 5Papageorgiou hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece, 6United Arab Emirates UniversityAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 253 College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of None. A. John: None. K. Kydonopoulou: None. E. Pathology, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 7ANALYSI Papadopoulou: None. A. di Pardo: None. F. Akcimen: Diagnostic Laboratories SA, Thessaloniki, Greece, None. A. Loizedda: None. V. Dobričić: None. I. 8Northwestern University Departments of Neurology and Novaković: None. V.S. Kostić: None. C. Mizzi: None. Physiology, Chcago, IL, IL, United States, 9Bogazici B.A.Peters:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; University,SunaandInanKiracFoundation,Istanbul,Turkey, Complete Genomics Inc. A.N. Basak: None. S. Orrù: 10University of Cagliari, Department of Medical Sciences and None. E. Kiskinis: None. D.N. Cooper: None. S. Gerou: Public Health, Cagliari, Italy, 11Institute of Neurology CCS, A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ANALYSI School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, Biomedical Laboraotories. R. Drmanac: A. Employment 12Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras School of (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Complete Genomics. E. Health Sciences, Patras, Greece, 13Complete Genomics Inc, Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Mountain View, CA, United States, 14Departments of intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Complete Genomics Inc. Neurology and Physiology, Northwestern University Feinberg M. Bartsakoulia: None. E. Tsermpini: None. G.M. School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States, 15Cardiff Hadjigeorgiou: None. B.R. Ali: None. T. Katsila: None. University, Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United G.P. Patrinos: None. Kingdom, 16United Arab Emirates University, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of Pathology, Al- P09.010B Ain, United Arab Emirates Polymicrogyria in patient with Angelman Syndrome- coincidence or a new feature ? Amyotrophiclateralsclerosis(ALS)isadevastatingdisease whosecomplexpathologyhasbeenassociatedwithastrong D.Gieruszczak-Białek, A.Skorka genetic component in the context of both familial and sporadic disease. Herein, we adopted a stepwise approach, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland including whole genome and conventional Sanger sequen- cing,inordertoexplorefurtherthegeneticbasisofsporadic Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurogenetic imprinting ALS (sALS) in 3 patient cohorts of Greek (n=150), disorderattributabletothereducedexpressionofmaternally Turkish (n=148) and Sardinian (n=114) origin. Whole inherited UBE3A gene on chromosome 15. Angelman genomesequencingyieldedatotalof174variantsthatwere syndrome is characterized by a combination of severe found in 6 Greek sALS patients and in none of the 5 intelactual impairement with limited speech, epilepsy, ethnically-matched controls, mostly intergenic (n=144) ataxic gait, unique behavior and psychiatric comorbidities. and intronic (n=23) variants. Next, genes were clustered MRI usually reveals only a small sized central nervous by metabolic or disease network and the most prominent system or minor abnormalities, such as mild cortical atro- ones were further analyzed in the entire 3 patient cohorts. phy, dysmyelination and focal white matter signal Our analysis revealed a positive association between FTO abnormalities. To our knowledge there is no patient with gene variants and sALS in the Greek patient cohort, while polymicorgyria in previously reported patients with linkage disequilibrium analyses were suggestive of a spe- Angelman syndrome. Polymicrogyria is genetically het- ciﬁcdisease-associatedhaplotypeforFTOgenevariants.In erogeneous, and only in a small minority of patients, a addition, qRT-PCR analysis of ﬁbroblasts, undifferentiated deﬁnite genetic cause has been identiﬁed. Here we report embryonic stem cells (ESCs), astrocytes, neural PAX6+ the patient with Angelman syndrome and polymicrogyria. progenitors, as well as stem cell-derived spinal cord motor The patient was born at term, birth measurements were neurons (MNs) and cortical neurons (CNs) indicated that normal. At the neonatal period he was presented with FTO gene expression is relatively neuron-speciﬁc and hypotonia.BrainMRIreavealedpolymicrogyria.Attheage notably,ismosthighlyexpressedinmotorneurons.Toour ofeightmonths,becauseofdevelopmentaldelayandslight knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study to present a possible dysmorphic features he was referred to geneticist. Whole- association between FTO gene variants and the genetic genomeoligonucleotidemicroarrayanalysisrevealeda5.75 etiology of sALS, while the lack of association between Mb deletion of chromosome 15q11.2q13.1 (15:22765628- FTOvariantsandsALSinpatientsofSardinianandTurkish 28520313; GRCh37) encompassing the critical region for descent may suggest a founder effect in the Greek popula- AS/PWS. Further MS-MLPA test identiﬁed hypomethyla- tion. <!--EndFragment--> tion of SNRPN and MAGEL2 locus as well as conﬁrmed K. Mitropoulos: None. E. Merkouri Papadima: None. the maternal Class I deletion extending from BP1 to BP3. G. Xiromerisiou: None. A. Balasopoulou: None. K. FISH studies in both parents gave normal results, proving Charalambidou: None. V. Galani: None. K. Zafeiri: the de novo occurrence of this aberration in the child. None. E. Dardiotis: None. S. Ralli: None. G. Deretzi: Furtherstudies (NGS)areneeded todetermine thepossible254 J.delPicchia genetic causes of polymicrogyria in our patient.aCHG and Salmela: None. M. Hytönen: None. M.J. Sillanpää: MLPA studies were performed in Department of Medical None. H. Lohi: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Genetics, Chidren' s Memorial Health Institute. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as D. Gieruszczak-Białek: None. A. Skorka: None. grants already received); Signiﬁcant; ERCStG, Jane ja Aatos Erkko Foundation, ERANET-NEURON CBGC. F. P09.012D Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Signiﬁcant; Mars Petcare from Two canine anxiety phenotypes overlap human 1.1.2018. neuropsychiatric loci P09.013A R. Sarviaho1,2,O.Hakosalo1,2,K. Tiira1,2, S.Sulkama1,2, AnovelvariantinCACNA1Gisassociatedwithearlyonset E. Salmela1,2,M. Hytönen1,2,M.J.Sillanpää3,H.Lohi1,2 cerebellar ataxia 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2The Folkhälsan D.Bartholdi1,S.Meier1,F. Joncourt1,S.Gallati1,M.Steinlin2 Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland 1Division of Human Genetics, University Children’s Hospital, Bern,Switzerland,2DepartmentofNeuropediatrics,University Introduction: Anxiety disorders include a large spectrum Children’s Hospital, Bern, Switzerland of heterogeneous conditions and rank among the most common health concerns in human medicine. Anxiety dis- Hereditary cerebellar ataxias (CAs) are a genetically hetero- orders are known to be heritable, but genetically complex. geneousgroupofdisorderswithdifferentinheritancepatterns Dogs suffer fromvariousnaturallyoccurringbreed-speciﬁc and a variety of neurological symptoms. To date, more than compulsionsandphobiassuchasnoisesensitivityandfear, 40 loci have been identiﬁed for the autosomal dominant which respond to human anxiolytics and can be measured. forms.Here,wedescribea10year-oldgirlwho,attheageof This study aimed to ﬁnd new anxiety loci in dogs. 2 years, presented with mild motor delay, gait instability, Materials and Methods: A total of 330 German dysarthria and oculomotor symptoms. Brain MRI showed Shepherd dogs were phenotyped for two anxiety traits, mild cerebellar atrophy. The family history is negative. We noise sensitivity (NS) and fear towards novel humans and performed targeted exome analysis and identiﬁed a hetero- situations (fear) using a behavioral survey. Each dog was zygous de novo missense variant in the CACNA1G gene given a score describing the severity of the phenotype, which has not been described previously and is classiﬁed as rangingfrom0forcontrolsto1-60forNSand0.5-13.5for likely pathogenic, according to the actual ACMG-guidelines. fear. Thedogsweregenotypedusing Illumina’scanine HD CACNA1G encodes Cav3.1, a T-type calcium channel SNP arrays and analysed for phenotype-genotype associa- belonging to the family of voltage-gated calcium channels. tions using single-locus method (PLINK) and single-locus Cav3.1ishighlyexpressedincerebellarneuronsaswellasin mixed model approach (GenABEL). thalamic relay neurons. The variant described here Results: Genomic regions on chromosome 20 and (c.5152C>G;p.(Arg1718Gly))inducesanaminoacidchange chromosome 7 were signiﬁcantly associated with NS and in the voltage sensor S4 segment of Cav3.1. It is located in fear, respectively. The NS locus includes known anxiety close proximity to the recurrent CACNA1G missense variant and hearing related genes, such as the glutamate receptor 7 c.5144G>A, reported in French and Japanese families with gene. The fear locus was syntenic to a locus in human CA (Coutelier et al. and Morino et al., both 2015). The pre- 18p11 that has been linked to psychiatric illnesses. viouslyreportedpatientswiththerecurrentCACNA1Gvariant Conclusions: The ﬁndings revealed new anxiety loci in all presented with symptom onset in adolescence or adult- dogs overlapping several genes associated with human hood.ThepresentcasehighlightsthatCACNA1Ghasalsoto neuropsychiatric disorders. Further investigation of the be considered in children with CA with very early onset. In causative variants within the loci has a potential to shed analogytoepisodicataxiatype2,whichiscausedbyvariants lightonthebiologicalbasisofthedisordersinbothspecies. inCACNA1A,westartedatreatmentwithacetazolamideand R. Sarviaho: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, will report on the efﬁcacy thereof. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as D. Bartholdi: None. S. Meier: None. F. Joncourt: grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Doctoral Programme None. S. Gallati: None. M. Steinlin: None. in Integrative Life Science, University of Helsinki. O. Hakosalo: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, P09.014B collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as AnunstableATTTCrepeatmutationwithintheDisabled1 grants already received); Signiﬁcant; The Finnish Cultural genecausescerebellarPurkinjecellalterations,DAB1RNA Foundation. K. Tiira: None. S. Sulkama: None. E.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 255 switch, and Reelin-DAB1 signalling dysregulation in and provides evidence of cerebellar Reelin-DAB1 signal- Spinocerebellar ataxia type 37 ling dysregulation in the spinocerebellar ataxia type 37. This work was funded by the Spanish Health Institute M.Corral-Juan1,C.Serrano-Munuera2,A. Rábano3,D.Cota- Carlos III (CP14/00029; FIS PI14/00136; PI14/01159; FIS González1, A.SegarraRoca1, L.Ispierto4,A.T. Cano Orgaz5, PI17/00534). A. D.Adarmes6, C.Méndez-del-Barrio6,S.Jesús6,P. Mir6,7, M.Corral-Juan:None.C.Serrano-Munuera:None.A. V.Volpini8,R.Alvarez-Ramo4,I.Sánchez1,A.Matilla-Dueñas1 Rábano: None. D. Cota-González: None. A. Segarra Roca: None. L. Ispierto: None. A.T. Cano Orgaz: None. 1Functional and Translational Neurogenetics Unit, A.D. Adarmes: None. C. Méndez-del-Barrio: None. S. Department of Neuroscience, Health Sciences Research Jesús:None.P.Mir:None.V.Volpini:None.R.Alvarez- Institute Germans Trias i Pujol (IGTP), Can Ruti Campus, Ramo: None. I. Sánchez: None. A. Matilla- Badalona, Spain, 2Neurology Section, Hospital Sant Joan de Dueñas: None. Deu de Martorell, Martorell, Spain, 3Fundación CIEN, Madrid, Spain, 4Neurodegeneration Unit, Neurology Service, P09.015C Department of Neuroscience, University Hospital Germans AnovelintronicATMgenemutationaffectingsplicingina Trias i Pujol (HUGTiP), Can Ruti Campus, Badalona, Spain, patient with Ataxia-Telangiectasia 5Neurology Service, Hospital de Mataró, Mataró, Spain, 6Unidad de Trastornos del Movimiento, Servicio de E. ArslanAtes1,2, A.Turkyilmaz3,M. A.Soylemez3,B.B. Neurología. Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Geckinli3,P. Ata3,A. Arman3,A.I. Guney3 HospitalUniversitarioVirgendelRocío,CSIC,Universidadde Sevilla,Sevilla,Spain,7CIBERNED,Sevilla,Spain,8IDIBELL, 1MarmaraUniversityPendikTrainingandResearchHospital, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain Pendik, Turkey, 2Istanbul University Institute of Graduate Studies in Science and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, The spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are characterised by 3Marmara University School of Medicine, Pendik, Turkey progressive cerebellar ataxia variably associated with oph- thalmoplegia, pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs, demen- Introduction: Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a rare auto- tia, pigmentary retinopathy, seizures, lower motor neuron somal recessive disorder characterized by progressive signs, or peripheral neuropathy. We previously reported a ataxia, chorea, myoclonus beginning in early childhood. novel spinocerebellar ataxia subtype, SCA37, linked to an The other characteristic feature of the disease is tel- 11-Mb genomic region on 1p32 in a large Spanish ataxia angiectases in the eyes and also on the skin. ATM gene pedigree, characterised by a pure cerebellar syndrome dis- mutationswhichencodesaproteininvolvedincelldivision tinctively presenting with early-altered vertical eye move- and DNA repair, are resposible for AT. ments. Here we demonstrate the segregation of an unstable Method: After the clinical evalution of the case next intronicATTTCpentanucleotiderepeatmutationwithinthe generation sequencing was performed for ATM gene 5’-noncoding regulatory region of the gene encoding the analysis. Detected intronic mutation was investigated for reelin adaptor protein implicated in neuronal migration splicing affect. From peripheral blood lymphocytes mRNA DAB1,asthecausativegeneticdefectofthediseaseinfour was isolated and via revers transcription cDNA was Spanish SCA37 families. Neuropathology revealed severe obtained. ATM gene exon 48-50 was sequenced using loss of Purkinje cells (PCs) with abundant astrogliosis, spesiﬁc primers targeting related region. empty baskets, occasional axonal spheroids, and hyper- Result: A 6 year-old girl was referred us with the trophic ﬁbers by phosphorylated neuroﬁlament immunos- diagnosis of AT. She was born at term to consanguineous taining inthecerebellar cortex.TheremainingPCsshowed parents. She had gait disturbance and dysartria for 3 years. loss of calbindin immunoreactivity, aberrant dendrite Multiple cutaneous telangiectases were observed on her arborisation, nuclear pathology, and multiple ubiquitinated face, trunk and limbs. Next-generation sequencing analysis perisomatic granules immunostained for DAB1. A sub- of ATM gene revealed homozygous c.7308-15A>G varia- population of Purkinje cells was found ectopically mis- tion in IVS49. Parents were carrying the variation in positioned within the cerebellar cortex. Importantly, we heterozygoussite.HumanSplicingFinderpredictedthatthe demonstrate that the ATTTC repeat mutation dysregulated mutationcouldactivateanintroniccrypticacceptorsite.We DAB1 expression and induced a DAB1 RNA switch designed primers for ampliﬁcation of related exons (49-50) resulting in the up-regulation of Reelin-DAB1 and PI3K/ from cDNA for evaluating splicing pattern. A fourteen AKT signalling in the SCA37 cerebellum. This study nucleotide insertion from intron 49 were detected between reveals the unstable ATTTC pentanucleotide repeat muta- exon 49 and 50, resulting premature termination of tion within the DAB1 gene as the underlying genetic cause translation at codon 2439.256 J.delPicchia Conclusion:Inthisstudyweinvestigatedtheaffectofan beassociatedwithsigniﬁcantlygreaterdiagnosticyieldwith intronic mutation on splicing and revealed the molecular a larger sample size. diagnosis of the AT case. <!--EndFragment--> C. Lintas: None. A. Costa: None. L. Gorrieri: None. E. Arslan Ates: None. A. Turkyilmaz: None. M.A. M. Baccarin: None. C. Picinelli: None. P. Tomaiuolo: Soylemez: None. B.B. Geckinli: None. P. Ata: None. A. None.C. Cannizzaro:None. M.Canali: None. R.Sacco: Arman: None. A.I. Guney: None. None. A. Persico: None. P09.016D P09.017A Appropriateness of genetic testing in the ADHD clinics: a Determination of prospective genes for autism spectrum comparative study disorders using microarray C. Lintas1, A.Costa1,L. Gorrieri1,M.Baccarin2, C.Picinelli2, Z. Capkova1,P. Capkova1,J. Srovnal2,K. Staffova2, P. Tomaiuolo2,C. Cannizzaro1,M.Canali1,R. Sacco1, V. Becvarova3,M. Trkova3,V. Curtisova1,M.Hajduch2, A. Persico3 M.Prochazka1 1University Campus Bio-medico of Rome, Roma, Italy, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Mafalda Luce Center for Pervasive Neurodevelopmental 2Institute of Molecular and Translation Medicine, Olomouc, Disorders, Milan, Italy, 3Interdepartmental Program "Autism Czech Republic, 3Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic 0-90""G.Martino"UniversityHospital,UniversityofMessina, Messina, Italy Introduction: Copy number variants (CNVs) play an important role in susceptibility to autism. Clinical sig- Introduction and objective: Attention Deﬁcit Hyper- niﬁcance, however, is still unclear in many of them. Gene activity Disorder (ADHD) is a common and heritable neu- content of CNVs seems to be crucial for determination of rodevelopmental disorder characterized by persistent the signiﬁcance. inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity. ADHD is fre- Aimofthestudy:Identiﬁcationofprospectivecandidate quently comorbid with other neuropsychiatric disorders. genes that could play a role in the aetiology of autism by Array-CGH is the ﬁrst-tier genetic test for patients with microarray. idiopathic autism and intellectual disability with a reported Patients and Methods: CNV analysis (Cytoscan HD diagnosticyieldranging from4%to30%.Yet,its utility in Affymetrix, CytoSNP-12 Illumina) was performed in 93 the ADHD clinics is more controversial. The aim of this patientsofCaucasianethnicity -63 males and 30 females - studywastocomparethearray-CGHdiagnosticyieldin91 with autism, PDD-NOS and Asperger’s syndrome, pre- ADHD subjects divided into two groups according to the dominantly from simplex families. Systematic analysis of clinicaldiagnosis:(1)48subjectsdiagnosedwithADHDas thegenesinvolvedinCNVswasperformedusingdatabases primary diagnosis, co-morbid with learning disabilities, Decipher, OMIM, DGV and SFARI databases. conduct disorders, motor coordination disorders, opposi- Results: We detected 188 OMIM genes affected by tional deﬁant disorders and mood disorders (2) 43 subjects CNV. 28 of them are associated with neurodevelopment in which ADHD was co-morbid with autism and/or intel- disordersinOMIMdatabase.GenesARX(SFARIscoreS), lectual disability. EIF2S3, GAL, GNAS, GRN, KLHL15, MSX2, NRXN1 Materials and Methods: Array-CGH technology was (SFARI score 2), ORC6, PRODH, PTCHD1 (SFARI score performed using the Human Genome CGH SurePrint G3 2), POLA1, SOX3, TSPAN7 and ZIC1 are associated with Microarray 4x180K Kit (Agilent). autosomal dominant diseases with mental retardation, Results: We detected pathogenic and likely pathogenic intellectualdisability, schizophrenia,agenesisofthecorpus CNVs in 37% (16/43) subjects in which ADHD was co- callosum, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, craniosynos- morbidwithautismand/orintellectualdisabilityandin21% tosis, and lissencephaly, epilepsy and seizure. (10/48) subjects diagnosed with ADHD as primary Conclusions: In our cohort we identiﬁed several new diagnosis (exact P=0.105, n.s.). Detection of CNVs of possible candidate genes associated with autism (EIF2S3, unknownclinicalsigniﬁcancewassimilarinthetwogroups GAL, GRN, KLHL15, MSX2, ORC6, PRODH, POLA1, being 10% and 8% in group (2) and in group (1) SOX3, ZIC1), in addition to previously reported ones respectively. (ARX, GNAS, NRXN1, PTCHD1, TSPAN7). However, Conclusions:ArrayCGHisavaluablediagnostictoolto further study is essential for determination of their detect pathogenic and likely pathogenic CNVs in ADHD- signiﬁcance in aetiology of ASD. affected subjects, even in the absence of comorbidity with autismand/orintellectualdisability,althoughthelattermayAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 257 Supported by MH CZ – DRO (FNOL, 00098892), IGA 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2MEDGEN, UP LF_2018_005, TACR TE02000058, NCMG Warsaw, Poland LM201591 a NPU LO1304. Z. Capkova: None. P. Capkova: None. J. Srovnal: Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) are one of the most None. K. Staffova: None. V. Becvarova: None. M. prevalent groups of neurodevelopmental disorder that Trkova: None. V. Curtisova: None. M. Hajduch: None. affects around 1-2% of the population with the average M. Prochazka: None. male tofemaleratio4-5:1.Astronggeneticcontribution to the etiology of ASDs has been recognized in ~ 25-40% of P09.018B patients. In ~ 7-14% of individuals with ASDs, submicro- An unusual high frequency of natural fetal loss in a scopicchromosomalcopy-numbervariants(CNVs)areone Colombian cohort with Autism Spectrum Disorder such contributing factor. Because of the large genetic het- erogeneity of ASDs, high-resolution whole-genome ana- A. Lopez1,D.Nuñez2,C.Velasco2, R.Chaskel1, E.Ferro3, lyses such as aCGH are useful tools to study the C. Lattig2 etiopathogenesis of these disorders. We applied genome-wide oligonucleotide microarrays 1Fundacion Santa Fe de Bogota, Bogota, Colombia, (OGT)withaverageresolution30kpzforidentiﬁcationand 2Universidad de los Andes, Bogota, Colombia, 3Clinica characterization of CNVs in patients with ASDs. The Montserrat, Bogota, Colombia analyses of the patients’ genomes were performed using arrays contained approximately 180,000 oligonucleotide Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopmental probes that covered the entire human genome and allow to disorders that share difﬁculties in communication, social accurate detection of copy number variation at the exon interactions and stereotyped behaviors. ASD has a herit- level. For the study 95 patients were qualiﬁed. ability of 64 - 91% indicating a high genetic component. Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed 18 nonpoly- Clinically recognized pregnancy loss is relatively common morphicCNVs,ranginginsizefrom15kbto3.1Mb,in17 in the population with an estimate between 12-20%. How- (17.9%) patients. We identiﬁed pathogenic or potentially ever, this risk increases substantially, frequencies between pathogenic CNVs in 9 individuals with ASDs (9.5%), 58-65%, for genetic diseases such as Edwards and Patau whereas CNVs with unknown clinical signiﬁcance were syndromes. Here we describe an unusual high rate of pre- identiﬁedin9.5%ofcases.AlloftheidentiﬁedCNVswere vious natural fetal losses in a cohort clinically diagnosed submicroscopic in size and therefore could not have been with ASD. We have clinically ascertained 45 family trios detected by standard karyotype analysis. Our results composedofmother,fatherandchildwithautism,ofwhich conﬁrmed the importance of array CGH in detection of 44% (20 mothers) had previous natural fetal losses; 14 of CNVs in patients with ASDs. themhadonepreviousnaturalfetalloss,and6mothershad B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. M. Kędzior: None. two or more previous natural fetal losses. Age was not a E.Obersztyn:None.A.Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak:None. critical factor in our cohort suggesting that clinically N. Bezniakow: None. J. Castañeda: None. A. Barczyk: recognized pregnancy loss might be associated with None. A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska: None. K. Czerska: increases risk of autism. None. B. Nowakowska: None. ThisworkwassupportedbyColcienciasGrant744-2016 and Vicerrectoria de Investigaciones, Universidad de los P09.020D Andes, Bogota - Colombia Facial dysmorphisms as biomarkers for autism spectrum A.Lopez:None.D.Nuñez:None.C.Velasco:None.R. disorder Chaskel: None. E. Ferro: None. C. Lattig: None. I.Menashe1, M.Ragoler1,A. Algrabili2,O.Bar2,I.Dinstein1, P09.019C G.Meiri3 Signiﬁcance of submicroscopic chromosomal copy-number variants in etiopathogenesis of autism spectrum disorders 1Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2FDNA, Herzelia, Israel, 3Soroka University Medical Center, B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik1,M.Kędzior1,E. Obersztyn1, Beer Sheva, Israel A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1,N.Bezniakow1, J.Castañeda1, A. Barczyk1,A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska2,K. Czerska2, Introduction: Current diagnosis of autism spectrum dis- B. Nowakowska1 order ASD is based on behavioral assessment that compli- cates diagnosis. Many genetic syndrome that share comorbiditieswithASD,haveuniquefacialdysmorphisms.258 J.delPicchia Therefore, we hypothesized that children with ASD have Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a complex neurode- distinct facial characteristics that could facilitate diagnosis velopmental disorder with multifactorial etiology. Genetic of the disorder. factorsarestronglyimplicatedinASD,whileenvironmental Methods: Cases included children with ASD from the toxicant exposure early in development is a documented NegevHUBautismdatabase.Frontalfacialphotosofthese risk factor, suggesting a role for gene-environment inter- children were compared to those of normally developed actions. We thus examined whether CNVs and SNVs in children(matchedbyage,sexandethnicityata2:1ratio).A genes involved in regulation of toxicant exposure, namely deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) architecture in detoxiﬁcation processes and physiological permeability withbatchnormalizationwasusedtoevaluatethesephotos. barriers, occur more frequently in individuals with ASD Classiﬁcation accuracy between the groups was assessed thanincontrolsubjects.Forthispurpose,publiclyavailable using cross-validation approach with 90% of the photos genomic datasets (AGP, SSC, ARRA, DGV) and the using for training, and 10% for validation. Permutation Comparative Toxicogenomics Database were analyzed. analysis with 1000 replication was used to assess the CNVs in 8 genes (STS, CYP2D6, ARSF, GUSB, CLDN3, statistical signiﬁcance of group classiﬁcation. CYP2R1,SLC3A2andSULT2B1)werefoundexclusivelyin Results:Overall,82childrenwithASD(78%males,and ASD subjects, while CNVs in 7 genes (CSH1, MAGEA8, 28% Bedouin) with a mean age of 4.78±2.03 years CYP4X1, CHST5, CSH2, GH2 and ABCC1) were more participated in the study. The FDNA algorithm could frequent in ASD individuals than in controls, after correc- distinguish between ASD and controls with a 96.6% tion for multiple testing (6.04x10-13<P<1.37x10-5). All accuracy (AUC=0.966; 95%CI=0.964-0.968(. This was these genes also carried detrimental loss-of-function or remarkablybetterthantheclassiﬁcationaccuracyofgender missense variants. Rare de novo loss-of-function or mis- or ethnicity (AUC=0.706 and AUC=0.790 respectively). senseSNVswerefurtheridentiﬁedintheARandANKRD11 Analysis of upper face achieved better separation between ASD candidate genes, and also in the CBS, CES1, GUSB cases and controls than lower face (AUC=0.892 vs. and JUP genes. Most ofthese genes interact with toxicants AUC=0.728), with eyes and nose being the most distinct implicated in ASD, namely bisphenol A, heavy metals and facial characteristics (AUC=0.912 and AUC=0.919 benzo(α)pyrene, and are key players in detoxiﬁcation pro- respectively). cesses or regulation of blood-brain barrier and placenta Conclusions: Our ﬁndings suggest that children with permeability, which are crucial in controlling exposure ASDhaveuniquefacialcharacteristicsthatcouldbeusedas during development. Notably, the hormonal regulation biomarkers for the disorder. functions of molecules encoded by STS, AR, CSH1, CSH2 I. Menashe: None. M. Ragoler: None. A. Algrabili: A. may link toxicant-related endocrine disruptions with the Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA. O. high ASD male/female ratio. These ﬁndings thus reinforce Bar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; the hypothesis that gene-environment interactions con- FDNA. I. Dinstein: None. G. Meiri: None. tribute to ASD. J.X. Santos: None. A.R. Marques: None. C. Rasga: P09.021A None. M. Asif: None. J. Vilela: None. H. Martiniano: A role for gene-environment interactions in Autism None. G. Oliveira: None. A. Nunes: None. A.M. Spectrum Disorder is suggested by an excess of potentially Vicente: None. pathogenic variants in genes regulating exposure to toxicants P09.022B miRNA and lncRNA gene variants in Autism Spectrum J.X. Santos1,2,3,A. R.Marques1,2,3,C. Rasga1,2,M.Asif1,2,3, Disorder J.Vilela1,2,3,H.Martiniano1,2,3,G.Oliveira4,5,A.Nunes2,3,A.M. Vicente1,2,3,6 A.R.Marques1,2,H.Martiniano1,2,3,J.X.Santos1,2,J.Vilela1,2, M.Asif1,2,G.Oliveira4,5,L. Romão6,2, A.M.Vicente1,2,7 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Biosystems and Integrative Sciences Institute 1Health Promotion and non Communicable Disease (BioISI), Lisbon, Portugal, 3Faculdade de Ciências da Prevention,NationalInstituteofHealthDoutorRicardoJorge, Universidade de Lisboa (FCUL), Lisbon, Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal, 2BioISI - Biosystems & Integrative Sciences 4Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Institute, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Centro de Investigação e Formação Lisboa, Portugal, 3Department of Informatics, Faculdade de Clinica do HP-CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Instituto Ciências,UniversidadedeLisboa,Lisboa,Portugal,4Unidade Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal de Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo (UNDA), Serviço do Centro de Desenvolvimento da Criança, Centro deAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 259 InvestigaçãoeFormaçãoClínica,HospitalPediátrico,Centro Introduction: Although the proportion of heredity in aut- Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, ism spectrum disorders (ASD) isestimated tobe ashigh as 5InstituteforBiomedicalImagingandLifeSciences,Facultyof 90%, genetic factors can only be detected in 20-25% of Medicine, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, cases because of their heterogeneity and complexity. 6Human Genetics Departament, National Institute of Health Among these factors, CNVs come to the forefront with a DoutorRicardoJorge,Lisboa,Portugal,7InstitutoGulbenkian high level of 10% and being easily detectable. de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal Methods: Array-CGH analysis (Agilent ISCA 8x60K) was performed in 30 patients with non-syndromic ASD. Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a clinically hetero- Results: Pathogenic CNVs (P) were found in 4 (13%) geneous neurodevelopmental disorder. Genetic factors are patients, clinically uncertain CNVs (VUS) in 2 (6,7%) and estimatedtoaccountfor50to80%ofthefamilialASDrisk, VUS/likelypathogenicCNVs(VUS-LP)in3(10%;Table). butmostofthegeneticdeterminantsarestillnotknownand Conclusions: The presence of P/ VUS-LPs in 23% of a role for epigenetic factors is likely. patientsindicatedtheimportanceofCNVsinASDetiology In this study we explored the potential role of noncoding and that microarray should be used as the ﬁrst step in the RNAs in ASD by comparing the frequency of Copy diagnostic algorithm. Deletion of 22q13.3 detected in two NumberVariants(CNVs)targetingmicroRNA(miRNA)or patients(6.7%)arecommonpathogenicanomaliesinASD. long noncoding (lncRNA) genes in ASD patients (n=- The LRCC7, NRXN1 (intronic region) and MACROD2 3570) with control subjects (n=9649), using the Fisher’s genes identiﬁed in VUS-LP regions have previously been exact test corrected for multiple testing. showntoberelatedwithautism.So,wesupposethatVUS- We found 22 miRNA genes exclusively targeted by LPs detected in this study may be a direct cause or low CNVs in ASD subjects and 14 miRNA genes more penetrating risk factor for ASD. frequently disrupted by CNVs in ASD patients than in Table:CNVsIdentiﬁedWithArray-CGHinPatientswith controls. Two miRNA were previously associated with ASD ASD in serum miRNA proﬁling studies, while 5 novel miRNAs for ASD have been described in schizophrenia, a PatientNo CytobandStart- Size(kb)Genes Del/ InheritanceInterpretation disorder that phenotypically and genetically overlaps with Stop(bp) Dup ASD. Many putative targets of these 36 miRNAs are Pt2 22q13.33 50241153- 930 ALG12,MLC1 Del Denovo Pathogenic 51178264 SBF1,SCO2, reported ASD risk genes. Gene-target enrichment analysis ARSA, SHANK3,ACR... identiﬁed 6signiﬁcant pathways,2of which,thePI3K-Akt Pt5 1p31.1 70059561- 326 LRRC7,PIN1P1 Del Unknown VUS/Likely and MAPK signalling pathways, have been implicated in 70386514 pathogenic ASD. We further identiﬁed 102 novel lncRNA genes more Pt10 2q36.3 223300945719757718-472 FDBNXEOR3,6T,RIP12, Dup Paternal VUS SLC16A14 frequently targeted by CNVs in ASD, 3 of which are Pt13 9p24.3 204193- 3,017 DOCK8,KANK1, Del Maternal Pathogenic antisense to ASD candidate genes. p24.2 3221675 DMRT1,DMRT2, (mildly SMARCA2, affected) Theseresults supportourhypothesisthat genetic variants VLDLR… Pt19 22q13.33 51123491- 55 SHANK3,ACR Del Denovo Pathogenic targeting noncoding regulatory RNAs are involved in ASD 51178264 pathophysiology. This systems biology integrative strategy Pt22 4q25q26 113762831-455 ANK2,MIR1243 Del Unknown VUS 114217645 will provide a better understanding of the biological Pt23 2p16.3 50937444- 117 NRXN1(intronic) Del Maternal VUS/Likely processes underlying ASD, and contribute to biomarker 51054432 pathogenic Pt27 20p12.1 14567155- 133 MACROD2 Del Unknown VUS/Likely and drug target discovery. 14700099 pathogenic A.R. Marques: None. H. Martiniano: None. J.X. Pt28 1q21.1 146507518-2,038 FMO5,CHD1L, Del Denovo Pathogenic q21.2 148545520 BCL9,GJA5, Santos: None. J. Vilela: None. M. Asif: None. G. GJA8,GPR89B… Oliveira: None. L. Romão: None. A.M. Vicente: None. P09.023C Copy number variation analysis in autism spectrum G.Kayhan: None.E. Guney: None.E. Iseri: None.M. disorders A. Ergun: None. E.F. Percin: None. G.Kayhan1,E.Guney2, E.Iseri2, M.A.Ergun1,E. F.Percin1 P09.024D Accessing mRNA and miRNA expression in binge eating 1Medical Genetics Department, Gazi University Hospital, disorder Ankara, Turkey, 2Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Department, Gazi University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey P. N.Moretti1,A. Simabucuro2,V. K.Ota2,N.M. Estella2, M.Maranhao2, M.G.Cury2,A. Claudino2,S. I.Belangero2260 J.delPicchia 1Universidade de Brasilia, Brasilia, Brazil, 2Universidade Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, San Diego, Federal de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil CA, United States, 9Department of Psychiatry, Dalhousie University,Halifax,NS,Canada,10NationalInstituteofMental Binge Eating Disorder (BED) is a disorder commonly Health, Klecany, Czech Republic, 11Intramural Research associated with obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases Program, National Institute of Mental Health, National and psychiatric disorders such as depression and anxiety. Institutes of Health, US Dept of Health & Human Services, Although the disorder presents a genetic inﬂuence, genes Bethesda, MD, United States, 12Institute of Psychiatric involved in risk for BED remain unknown. The aim of the Phenomics and Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital, current project was to analyze mRNA expression of neu- Munich, Germany, 13Department of Psychiatry and roplasticity and neurotransmission genes (SLC6A4 and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center (UMG), Georg- BDNF) and miRNAs (miR16 and miR206) possibly related August University Goẗtingen, Göttingen, Germany, to their regulation in BED patients and healthy controls. 14Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Fifty ﬁve patients with BED and twenty eight control sub- Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, jects, matched for age and sex, were analyzed. Peripheral University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany blood of all individuals was collected and total RNA was extracted from white blood cells using commercial tools. Bipolar disorder (BD) is a common, highly heritable neu- The assessments of mRNA and miRNAs were performed ropsychiatric disease characterized by recurrent episodes of using qRT-PCR technique with TaqMan detection method. mania and depression. Lithium represents the best- We did not detect miR206 expression in the blood samples established long-term treatment for BD, even though indi- ofbothgroups.InthecomparisonbetweenBEDandcontrol vidual response is highly variable. The largest GWAS of group, BMI differences were detected, with increased lithium response to date conducted by the International values of BMI being observed in BED subjects. We Consortium on Lithium Genetics (ConLiGen) provides observed differences in BDNF gene expression between evidence for the genetic basis of this variability. The ﬁrst BED and healthy controls, however, these results did not genome-wide analysis of involvement of miRNAs in BD remain different after correction for BMI values. No dif- identiﬁed nine BD-associated miRNAs, however it is ferences in SLC6A4 and miR16 expression were observed unknown whether these miRNAs are also associated with between groups. Although these target genes were pointed lithium response in BD. We therefore tested whether com- ascandidatesinvolvedinBEDpatophysiology,theabsence mon variants at these nine candidate miRNAs contribute to of differences in gene expression between groups does not the variance in lithium response. Furthermore, we system- indicate the use of these genes as BED biomarkers. aticallyanalyzedwhetheranyothermiRNAisimplicatedin P.N. Moretti: None. A. Simabucuro: None. V.K. Ota: the response to lithium. We performed gene-based tests for None. N.M. Estella: None. M. Maranhao: None. M.G. all known miRNAs in the ConLiGen GWAS dataset (n= Cury: None. A. Claudino: None. S.I. Belangero: None. 2,563 patients) using a set-based testing approach adapted from VEGAS2. In the candidate approach, miR-499a P09.025A showed nominally signiﬁcant association with lithium Analysis of the inﬂuence of microRNAs in Lithium response, thus providing evidence for involvement in both Response in Bipolar Disorder development and treatment of BD. In the genome-wide miRNAanalysis,71miRNAsshowednominallysigniﬁcant C. S.Reinbold1,2,A. J.Forstner3,4,1,J. Hecker5, J.M. associations with the dichotomous and 106 with the con- Fullerton6,7,TheInternationalConsortiumonLithiumGenetics, tinuous trait for treatment response. 15 miRNAs revealed J.Kelsoe8,M. Alda9,10,F.J. McMahon11, T.G.Schulze11,12,13, nominal signiﬁcance in both phenotypes with miR-633 M.Rietschel14,M.M.Nöthen3,4,S. Cichon1,2,3 showing the strongest association with the continuous (p =9.80E-04) andmiR-607withthedichotomousphenotype 1Human Genomics Research Group, Department of (p=5.79E-04). No association between miRNAs and Biomedicine,UniversityofBasel,Basel,Switzerland,2Institute treatment response to lithium withstood multiple testing of Medical Genetics and Pathology, Basel, Switzerland, correction. Given the limited power of our study, the 3Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, investigation of miRNAs in larger samples of BD and Germany, 4Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, lithium response is warranted. University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Department of C.S. Reinbold: None. A.J. Forstner: None. J. Hecker: Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, None. J.M. Fullerton: None. J. Kelsoe: None. M. Alda: Boston,MA,UnitedStates,6NeuroscienceResearchAustralia, None. F.J. McMahon: None. T.G. Schulze: None. M. Sydney, Australia, 7School of Medical Sciences, University of Rietschel: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. S. Cichon: None. New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 8Department ofAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 261 P09.026B P09.027C Rare genetic variants in ion channels genes identiﬁed by Exome sequencing of multiplex bipolar disorder families NGScontributetobothschizophreniaandbipolardisorder and follow-up resequencing implicate rare variants in neuronal genes contributing to disease etiology R. Bozhilova1,I.Popov1, M.Penchev2,G.Dzhebir1, O.Beltcheva1, R.Elliot3, V.Stoyanova2,V.Mitev1,M.Owen3, A. Maaser1,2,J. Strohmaier3, K.U.Ludwig1,2,L. Henschel1,2, M.O’Donovan3,G.Kirov3,V. Milanova2,R. Kaneva1 F. Streit3,F. Degenhardt1,2,S.Sivalingam1,2,L. M.Schenk1,2, A. C.Koller1,2,S. B.Fischer4, H.Thiele5,P. Nürnberg5, 1MolecularMedicineCenter,MedicalUniversity-Soﬁa,Soﬁa, J.Guzman Parra6,G.Orozco Diaz7, G.Auburger8,M. Albus9, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Psychiatry, Alexandrovska University M.Borrmann-Hassenbach9,M.JoséGonzález6,S.GilFlores10, Hospital, Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3MRC F.J.CabaleiroFabeiro11,F.delRíoNoriega12,F.PerezPerez13, Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff J.Haro González14,F.Rivas6,F. Mayoral6,S.Herms1,2,4, University, Cardiff, United Kingdom P.Hoffmann1,2,4,S.Cichon1,2,4,M.Rietschel3,M.M.Nöthen1,2, A. J.Forstner1,2,4 Background: Genes associated with ion channels were shown to contribute to schizophrenia (SCZ) and bipolar 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of affective disorder (BAD). Targeted NGS of a panel of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, genes, including ion channel genes, was performed to 2Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University of investigate the genetic architecture of Bulgarian patients Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Genetic Epidemiology with BAD and SCZ. in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Methods:Atotalof300individualswithBAD,151with Faculty Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, SCZ, 15 SAD, diagnosed with DSMIV and ICD-10, 85 Germany, 4Human Genomics Research Group,Department of controlsand40healthyrelativeswererecruited.Sequencing Biomedicine,UniversityofBasel,Basel,Switzerland,5Cologne was done on Ion PROTON platform. The panel comprised Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, of 187 candidate genes, 39 of them coding ion channel Germany, 6Department of Mental Health, University General proteins. Only samples with coverage >95% of the target Hospital of Málaga, Biomedical Research Institute of Málaga region at 20x were included in the analyses. Case-control IBIMA, Málaga, Spain, 7Unidad de Gestión Clínica del associationtestingwasdoneusingPLINK.Predictiontools Dispositivo de Cuidados Críticos y Urgencias del Distrito (SIFT&PolyPhen2) were used. Sanitario Málaga, Málaga, Spain, 8Experimental Neurology, Results:Thecase-controlanalysisrevealednosigniﬁcant Department of Neurology, Goethe University Hospital, association with SCZ, SAD and BAD, that survived the Frankfurt,Germany,9kboIsarAmperKlinikumMünchenOst, correction for multiple testing. However, 681 rare variants Haar, Germany, 10Department of Mental Health, University present in affected only were found. 260 of them were HospitalReinaSofía,Córdoba,Spain,11DepartmentofMental recurrent and 421 were singletons. Of these, 4LoF, 218 Health,HospitalofJaén,Jaén,Spain,12DepartmentofMental missense,63ofwhichpotentiallydamaging,30spliceand7 Health,HospitalofJerezdelaFrontera,JerezdelaFrontera, regulatory variants were detected. The genes with most Spain, 13Department of Mental Health, Hospital of Puerto detected variants were CACNA1H,CACNA1B and Real, Puerto Real, Spain, 14Department of Mental Health, CACNA2D4. Hospital Punta de Europa, Algeciras, Spain Discussion: No signiﬁcant association of common variants with the diseases was found, probably due to Bipolar disorder (BD) is a highly heritable mood disorder limited power. However, recurrentand unique rare variants with a lifetime prevalence of around 1%. Models of illness with potential functional relevance were detected, that are most consistent with a polygenic contribution of com- deservefurtherinvestigation.Thisaddstotheaccumulating mon and rare variants to disease susceptibility. As the evidence that ion channelopathies may be involved in the cumulative impact of common alleles may only explain pathogenesisofSCZandBAD.Theworkwassupportedby around 25-38% of the phenotypic variance, rare variants of projects DUNK01-2/2009 and B02/6/2014 funded by high penetrance have been suggested to contribute to BD NSF, MYES susceptibility. R. Bozhilova: None. I. Popov: None. M. Penchev: In this study, we performed whole-exome sequencing in None. G. Dzhebir: None. O. Beltcheva: None. R. Elliot: 226 individuals of 68 large multiplex BD families of None. V. Stoyanova: None. V. Mitev: None. M. Owen: European origin. We ﬁltered for rare (minor allele None. M. O’Donovan: None. G. Kirov: None. V. frequency<0.1%), non-synonymous, potentially functional Milanova: None. R. Kaneva: None. and segregating variants.262 J.delPicchia We identiﬁed 1214 variants implicating 1122 different chemical. The potential cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of genes. Gene enrichment analysis of 294 genes that were BPA have been thoroughly studied on neuroblastoma cells among the 20% most “intolerant” genes showed a (SH-SY5Y). signiﬁcant enrichment for 18 pathways (p<0.001) includ- Materials And Methods: SH-SY5Y cells were treated ingneuronprojection,axondevelopmentandcell-adhesion. with 50 μM and 100 μM concentrations of Bisphenol for For follow up analyses, we prioritized genes that were 48 hours. After RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis, Real- foundinatleasttwounrelatedfamiliesinthepresentstudy, time PCR reactions were performed for GRP78, XBP1, previously reported in next generation sequencing or BECN1 and ATG5 genes. GWAS studies of BD, or predominantly driving the Results:Inthepresentstudy,weaimedtoinvestigatethe signiﬁcant pathways in our gene enrichment analysis. The potential effect of Bisphenol on unfolded protein response different approaches of prioritization yielded 42 promising inducedbyEndoplasmicReticulumStressandEndoplasmic candidate genes including SYNE1 which is a genome-wide Reticulum Stress-Mediated Autophagy in neuron like cell signiﬁcant BD risk gene. line (SH-SY5Y). In accordance with this purpose we The 42 prioritized candidate genes are currently being exposed to SH-SY5Y cell line with both different doses of followed up by resequencing in larger cohorts of 2000 bisphenol. After 48h exposure, we measured mRNA levels independent BD patients and 2000 controls of European of the genes that play a role unfolded protein response and ancestry using the single molecule molecular inversion autophagy. probes technology. Conclusion: We observed a signiﬁcant decrease in Our preliminary results suggest that rare and highly GRP78 (Glucose-Regulated Protein) mRNA level and a penetrant variants in neuronal and cell-adhesion genes signiﬁcant increase in XBP1(X-Box Binding Protein 1), contribute to BD etiology. BECN1(Beclin 1), ATG5 (Autophagy Related 5) mRNA Grant: BMBF IntegraMent. level at low dose (50μM) Bisphenol exposure. According A. Maaser: None. J. Strohmaier: None. K.U. Ludwig: with this result we can conclude that 50 μM dose of None. L. Henschel: None. F. Streit: None. F. Degen- Bisphenol induced the autophagy via ER stress in SH- hardt: None. S. Sivalingam: None. L.M. Schenk: None. SY5Ycell line. A.C. Koller: None. S.B. Fischer: None. H. Thiele: None. Ü.H.Lüleyap:None.A.YoldaŞ:None.G.Cömertpay: P. Nürnberg: None. J.Guzman Parra: None. G.Orozco None. G. Ay: None. G. Evyapan: None. A. Pazarbaşı: Diaz: None. G. Auburger: None. M. Albus: None. M. None. D. Alptekin: None. Borrmann-Hassenbach: None. M. José González: None. S.GilFlores:None.F.J.CabaleiroFabeiro:None.F.del P09.029A Río Noriega: None. F. Perez Perez: None. J. Haro Cerebral MR imaging based genetic assessment of brain González: None. F. Rivas: None. F. Mayoral: None. S. malformations Herms: None. P. Hoffmann: None. S. Cichon: None. M. Rietschel: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. A.J. S. Hinreiner1,T. Roedl1,T. Geis2,M.Melter2,G.Schuierer3, Forstner: None. U.Hehr1 P09.028D 1Center for Human Genetics, Regensburg, Germany, Bisphenol A Triggers ER stress Mediated Autophagy in 2Childrens Hospital University of Regensburg, Regensburg, SH-SY5Y cell line Germany, 3Center for Neuroradiology, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany Ü.H.Lüleyap1, A.YOLDAŞ2,G.Cömertpay1,G.AY1, G.Evyapan1, A.Pazarbaşı1,D.Alptekin1 Introduction: Structural brain malformations are an important cause of early psychomotor retardation, intellec- 1Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, ADANA, Turkey, tual disability and seizures. Identiﬁcation of the underlying 2Kahramanmaraş Sütçü imam University, Medical Faculty, mutations allows more precise genetic counseling of the KAHRAMANMARAŞ, Turkey affected families and may also provide additional informa- tion directly relevant for further diagnostic workup or Introduction: Bisphenol A (BPA) is a chemical produced therapeutic decisions. in large quantities for use primarily in the production of Methods:Initial evaluationofavailablecMRimages(56 polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins. While BPA is patients) or imaging data, clinical data and individual found in a number of consumer products such as hard genetic testing by either Sanger sequencing/MLPA (14 plasticdrinkingcontainersandtheliningsofinfantformula patients)ormulti-genepanelsequencing(204patients)after and food cans, human are regularly exposed to this Nextera Enrichment (Illumina) and bioinformaticAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 263 assessment of called variants with our in house pipeline CNRSUMR5310-INSERMU1217,Lyon,France,11Institute includingSeqNext(JSImedicalsystems)andevaluationfor of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg- CNV using an in house JAVA-based skript. Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany Results and Discussion: For 18 patients with typical cMRIpatternasinglegeneanalysiswasemployedallowing In2012,Puffenbergeretal.,reportedtheﬁrstdescriptionof to identify the causal L1CAM (6), LIS1/PAFAH1B1 (7), a lethal neonatal rigidity and multifocal seizures syndrome DCX (2) or TUBA1A (2) mutations. Overall causal (OMIM#614498)in5patientsfromtheAmishcommunity. mutations (ACMG class 5 or 4) were identiﬁed for 76 This syndrome is caused by bi-allelic mutations in BRAT1 patients (35%) including: hydrocephalus 10/37; Walker- and characterized by early-onset epilepsy, arrest of head Warburg syndrome 9/12; Periventricular nodular hetero- growth, severe muscular hypertonia, frequent apnea and topia 2/7; Lissencephaly/Double cortex 20/28; Polymicro- bradycardia, feeding difﬁculties and early death due to gyria 6/30; (Ponto)cerebellar hypoplasia 10/19; cardiopulmonary failure. Microcephaly is inconsistent at Holoprosencephaly spectrum 12/51 and Microcephaly 7/ birth but progresses quickly over time accompanied by 37. NGS panel sequencing substantially increased the progressivecerebralatrophy.EEGmayshowasuppression- number of identiﬁed variants of unknown signiﬁcance burstpattern.Besidethisseverepresentation,amilderform (ACMG class 3), which were observed in 27% of the has been described in 2016 by Srivastava et al., in 5 overall patient cohort. Three holoprosencephaly patients patients.Itischaracterizedbyataxiaandcerebellaratrophy, with heterozygous mutation in one of the core genes were prolongedsurvival,lessseveremicrocephalyandinconstant heterozygous for an additional variant, suggestive for epilepsy. Twenty-eight individuals have been reported so digenic inheritance. Our data emphasize the importance of far with bi-allelic mutations in BRAT1. We report here 8 the individual clinical and imaging data for the individual new patients: two Algerian brothers with a homozygous testing strategy and for the ﬁnal clinical classiﬁcation of c.2068G>T (p.Glu690*) variant; three German siblings identiﬁed sequence variants. compound heterozygous for c.228insA(p.Leu77Thrfs*114) S.Hinreiner:None.T.Roedl:None.T.Geis:None.M. and c.638insA (p.Val214Glyfs*189); and three unrelated Melter: None. G. Schuierer: None. U. Hehr: None. French female girls, compound heterozygous for the fol- lowing combination of variants c.458A>C (p.Gln153Pro) P09.030B and c.294dupA (p.Leu99fs), c.294dupA(p.Leu99fs) and Epileptic encephalopathy due to BRAT1 pathogenic c.2125_2128del(p.Phe709fs), and c.359C>A(p.Arg120His) variants: report of eight new patients and c.1313_1314delAG(p.Gln4348Argfs*51). All but one patientdiedduringtheﬁrst14monthsoflife.Thesurviving J.Piard1,D.J.Moris-Rosendahl2,A. Putoux3,G.Delplancq1, patient, aged 7 years, has a milder form. Five variants are C. Cabrol1, J.Belleville Goffeney4,L. Pasquier5,E. Brischoux- novel: 3 nonsense and 2 missense. Although, no clear Boucher1,B. Wollnik6,G.Yigit6, B.Albrecht7,G.Lesca3, genotype-phenotype correlation has emerged, the presence L. Villard8,P. Edery3,D.Sanlaville9,N.Streichenberger10, oftwononsensemutationsseemstoproduceamoresevere C.Altuzarra4,F.L.Harms11,K.Kutsche11,L.VanMaldergem1 phenotype than bi-allelic missense mutations. J. Piard: None. D.J. Moris-Rosendahl: None. A. 1Centredegénétiquehumaine,UniversityHospital,University Putoux: None. G. Delplancq: None. C. Cabrol: None. of Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, 2Clinical Genetics and J. Belleville Goffeney: None. L. Pasquier: None. E. Genomics, Royal Brompton and Hareﬁeld NHS Trust and Brischoux-Boucher: None. B. Wollnik: None. G. Yigit: Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, None. B. Albrecht: None. G. Lesca: None. L. Villard: 3Department of Pediatrics, Lyon University Hospitals, Lyon, None. P. Edery: None. D. Sanlaville: None. N. Strei- France, 4Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, chenberger: None. C. Altuzarra: None. F.L. Harms: University of Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, 5Service de None. K. Kutsche: None. L. Van Maldergem: None. Génétique Médicale – Centre Référence « Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes Rares », Hôpital Sud - CHU Rennes, P09.031C Rennes, France, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regressive autism spectrum disorder expands the Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, phenotype of BSCL2-associated neurodegeneration University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 8Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d'Enfants de La Timone, G.Lesca1,2,A. Poisson3,4,N.Chatron1,2,A. Labalme1,M.Till1, Marseille, France. Inserm, Aix Marseille Université, UMR-S E. Broussolle5,6, C.Demily3,4,D.Sanlaville1,2 1251, Marseille, France, 9Department of Genetics, Lyon UniversityHospitals,Lyon,France,10HospicesCivilsdeLyon, 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,UniversityHospitalofLyon, University of Claude Bernard Lyon1, Institut NeuroMyogène Lyon, France, 2GENDEV, Centre de Recherche en264 J.delPicchia Neurosciences de Lyon, INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR529, 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, UCBL1, Lyon, France, 3GenoPsy, Reference Center for DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Eskisehir,Turkey,2Acibadem DiagnosisandManagementofGenetic PsychiatricDisorders, Hospital Neurology Clinic, Eskisehir, Turkey, 3Istanbul CentreHospitalierle Vinatier,Lyon,France,4EDR-PsyTeam University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Behavioural (CNRSandLyon1ClaudeBernardUniversity),Lyon,France, Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of 5Service de Neurologie C, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Neurology,Istanbul,Turkey,4EskisehirOsmangaziUniversity, NeurologiquePierreWertheimer,UniversityHospitalofLyon, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Eskisehir, Lyon, France, 6Institut des Sciences Cognitives Marc Turkey Jeannerod, CNRS, UMR 5229, University of Lyon, Lyon, France FTLDdescribesagroupofprogressivebraindisorders.The expansionofanoncodingGGGGCChexanucleotiderepeat Loss-of-function variants of BSCL2, encoding seipin, were intheC9orf72geneisamajorcauseofbothfamilialFTLD reported in congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 2, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). whereas two closely localized gain-of-function variants are The study was aimed to determine the prevalence of linked to two distinct neurological phenotypes: distal her- C9orf72 GGGGCC repeat expansion in the Turkish editary motor neuropathy type V and hereditary spastic population with FTLD and to determine the effects on the paraplegia type 17. In 2013, six Spanish patients affected phenotype. The G4C2 expansion in C9orf72 gene were with progressive encephalopathy death during infancy, and analysed in 100 FTLD cases without mutations of MAPT, homozygous or compound heterozygous for a rare BSCL2 PGRN,CHMP2B,VCP,TARDBP,FUS genes and a hundred exon 7 skipping variant (c.985C>T), were reported. We age-matched healthy controls by repeat-primed (RP-PCR) report on a female patient with regressive autism spectrum and size-PCR techniques. disorder who developed atypical parkinsonism in adult- The pathogenic expansion (>30) was found in one of the hood. She walked at the age of 11 months and began to familial cases(1/33) but none of sporadic cases. The allele associate words at 18 months. Slight behavioral disorders length difference between the cases and controls was appearedby3yearsofage,evolvingtoinvasiverituals,loss statistically signiﬁcant (p<0.01). An intermediate (20-30) of communication and language skills, and sleep disorders. repeatswasdetectedin4%ofourcases.Thedominancyof At the age of 6, a clinical examination disclosed motor intermediate/pathogenic repeats was seen in the cases with stereotypies,trichotillomaniaandlowerlimbhypertonia.At psychotic symptoms. the age of 16, Bichat’s fat pads, strabismus, bilateral wor- This is the ﬁrst study in our knowledge to evaluate the sening of dystonic hypertonia, and extrapyramidal and C9orf72GGGGCCrepeatexpansionfortheTurkishFTLD pyramidal features were noted. At the age of 23, falls, spectrum.Asaresultofourstudy,itisthoughtthatC9orf72 dysphagia and a marked frontal lobe syndrome appeared. repeat expansion is not common in Turkish FTLD cases, Shediedofapulmonaryinfectionat28yearsofage.Brain but intermediate repeat may be an increased risk factor for MRI and CIT SPECT showed bilateral dopaminergic FTLD or may act as a modifying gene. In addition, we denervation of the caudate nucleus. Trio-based whole- believethatthecorrelationoftheseintermediate/pathogenic exome sequencing showed two BSCL2 transitions. In repeats with psychotic symptoms is prognostically impor- addition tothec.985C>Ttransition previouslyreportedshe tant. Our data should be supported by further studies in was compound heterozygous for the c.1004A>C transition different ethnic groups of FTLD patients from Turkey. that was also predicted to favor exon 7 skipping. The pre- This study was supported by The Scientiﬁc and sentobservationshowsthatBSCL2pathogenicvariantscan Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBI- cause severe autistic regression in infancy and lethal aty- TAK1001-114S346) pical parkinsonism in adulthood. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. O. Cilingir: None. B.D. G. Lesca: None. A. Poisson: None. N. Chatron: None. Ozbabalik Adapinar: None. B. Bilgic: None. S. Kocagil: A. Labalme: None. M. Till: None. E. Broussolle: None. None. B. Durak Aras: None. C. Yenilmez: None. S. C. Demily: None. D. Sanlaville: None. Artan: None. P09.032D P09.033A Comparison of phenotypic variability with C9orf72 gene Major intra-familial phenotypic heterogeneity GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion in encompassingepilepticencephalopathyduetoaCACNA1A frontotemporal lobar degeneration spectrum missense variant E. Erzurumluoglu1,O.Cilingir1,B.D.Ozbabalik Adapinar2, C.Angelini1,J.VanGils1,D.Lacombe1,S.Moutton2,F.Riant3, B.Bilgic3,S.Kocagil1,B.DurakAras1,C.Yenilmez4,S.Artan1 G.Sole4,E.Tournier-Lasserve5,A. Trimouille1, C.Goizet6Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 265 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Bordeaux and 1Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics,Guangzhou Women and Laboratoire MRGM, INSERM U1211, Univ. Bordeaux, Children'sMedicalCenter,Guangzhou,China,2Departmentof Bordeaux, France, 2Service de génétique médicale, Dijon, Neuropediatrics,Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical France, 3Service de génétique moléculaire, Hopital Center, Guangzhou, China Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Service de neurologie médicale, Bordeaux, France, 5Service de génétique moléculaire - Cerebralpalsy(CP)isanumbrellaconceptspanningarange Lariboisière, Paris, France, 6Service de génétique médicale, ofsymptomsalbeitwiththecommonfeature,i.e.,aninborn Centre de référence neurogénétique, Bordeaux, France disturbance of human movement and posture. CP is observed with consistent prevalence regardless of the The CACNA1A gene encodes a calcium-dependent voltage socioeconomic advancement, and familial CP cases were channel, localized in neuronal cells. Pathogenic variants in reported. Seminal studies have conﬁrmed the involvement this gene are known to lead to a broad clinical spectrum of genetic changes, in the forms of copy number variant including episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2), spinocerebellar (CNV),insertionanddeletion(Indel),andsingle-nucleotide ataxia type 6, familial hemiplegic migraine, and more variant (SNV). As a major children’s medical center in recentlyepileptic encephalopathy. We report a large family China, we recruited a CP cohort of >500 individuals with revealing wide variability of neurological manifestations multiple subtypes and severity. To elucidate the genetic associated with a missense mutation. The index case had causality, we initiated a pilot study of 120 idiopathic CP early-onset epileptic encephalopathy with progressive cer- patients with their parents and siblings, with a comprehen- ebellar atrophy, although his mother and his great- sive genomic assessment. We considered possible etiologic grandmother suffered from paroxystic episodic ataxia. His mechanismsfromchromosomestogenesviamultiplehigh- grandfatherandgreatgrand-auntreportednosymptoms,but throughputplatforms.Wefoundthatupto45%ofCPcases two of her sons displayed progressive late-onset spinocer- could be due to detrimental mutations. Causative de novo ebellarataxia.Twoofherlittledaughtersalsosufferedfrom mutations were more prevalent than inherited ones, and epilepsy.Alltheserelativeswerecarriersofaheterozygous post-zygoticmutations(PZM)tookanonnegligibleportion. missense variant in CACNA1A: c.835C>T, p.(Arg279Cys) Major factions of the causal mutations were SNVs and (NM_023035.2). This CACNA1A variant has already been indels in nuclear genome, while mitochondrial genome described associated with EA2 phenotype. Prediction soft- harbored several putative mutations, and large segmental wares suggested a damaging effect on the protein, and this alterations accounted for 8% of CP cases. Strikingly, variantwasabsentfromGnomAD.MutationsinCACNA1A besides the conventional nonsynonymous and splicing-site may lead to several different phenotypes, including severe mutations, we observed by whole-genome sequencing a epileptic encephalopathy which was only recently descri- host of mutations residing in the regulatory regions which bed. Loss-of-function mutations in CACNA1A associated might serve as culprit for disease. Our work is of critical with large phenotypic heterogeneity have rarely been signiﬁcance to reveal the underlying reasons of CP, which described. We report here the ﬁrst missense mutation seg- is among the major causes for children referred to the regating in a large family and leading to major clinical neuropediatric departments and rehabilitation institutions. variability with incomplete penetrance. Environmental fac- N. Li: None. L. He: None. H. Tang: None. K. Xu: tors and modiﬁer genes may have inﬂuences on the phe- None. H. Hu: None. notype. Our family highlights difﬁculties to provide accurate genetic counselling concerning prenatal diagnosis P09.037A inregardtohighlyvariableseverityoftheclinicalspectrum Replication stress-mediated chromosome instability in the and incomplete penetrance. Alzheimer’s disease brain C. Angelini: None. J. Van Gils: None. D. Lacombe: None. S. Moutton: None. F. Riant: None. G. Sole: None. Y. B.Yurov1,2,S.G.Vorsanova1,2,T. Liehr3,I.Y. Iourov1,2,4 E. Tournier-Lasserve: None. A. Trimouille: None. C. Goizet: None. 1FSBSI «Mental Health Research Center», Moscow, Russian Federation,2AcademicianYu.E.VeltishchevResearchClinical P09.035C InstituteofPediatrics,N.I.PirogovRussianNationalResearch Comprehensive genetic analyses implicate highly Medical University, Ministry of Health of the Russian heterogeneous etiology of idiopathic cerebral palsy Federation,Moscow,RussianFederation,3InstituteofHuman spectrum disorders Genetics, Jena, Germany, 4FSBEI FPE «Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education» of the Ministry of N.Li1,L.He2,H.Tang2,K.Xu2, H. Hu1 Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation266 J.delPicchia Introduction. Chromosome instability (CIN) was recently We retrospectively reviewed the results of diagnostic suggestedasamechanismforneurodegeneration.However, array-CGH test on 700 cases with isolated or syndromic origins and underlying causes of CIN in the brain remain forms of ID and ASDs. We assessed pathogenicity of obscure. To gain further insights into origins of brain- identiﬁed CNVs by combining mining of literature and speciﬁc CIN, we have addressed intercellular and inter- searching in databases reporting deleterious and benign individual genome variations in the Alzheimer’s disease variants, and ID/ASD-associated genes. VOUS variants (AD) brain. encompassingnogenesorgeneswithoutanyapparentbrain Materials and Methods. Using FISH-based techniques expression/function were further investigated for potential (multiprobe/quantitativeFISHandinterphasechromosome- long range position effects through involvement of speciﬁcmulticolorbanding),wehaveanalyzed14ADpost- TopologicallyAssociatingDomains(TADs),LaminaAsso- mortem brain samples. Additionally, we have evaluated ciated Domains (LADs), and other chromatin activation CNVbyarrayCGHandanoriginalbioinformatictechnique signaturesbyusingtheweb-based3DGenomeBrowserand (Iourov et al., 2014; Yurov et al., 2017) for identifying UCSC Genome Browser. possible CIN origins. We identiﬁed non-benign CNVs in 314 patients. Among Results. CIN affected 5.2-20.3% of brain cells in the the pathogenetic and the probably pathogenetic variants samples. CIN essentially manifested as aneuploidy, struc- (19%), we found CNVs spanning known ID/ASDs- turalchromosomerearrangementsaffectingmainlychromo- associated genes, including two different de novo deletions some 21, chromosomal breaks resulting in the presence of and one duplication affecting genes whose mutations, 1-4 acentric chromosomal fragments in a nucleus. Further recently identiﬁed by whole exome sequencing (WES) genomic analyses have shown that a CNV burden enriched studies, were thought to act in ASDs with loss or gain of for cell cycle and similar pathways is observed in the AD functionmechanisms,respectively.Wefurtheridentiﬁed15 brain.Moreover,thedistributionofgenesaffectedbyCNV cases with de novo VOUS variants involving novel has indicated that there is a signiﬁcant bias toward genes candidate genes and/or regions of regulatory expression of involved in the DNA replication pathway. ﬂanking ASD-associated genes as one deletion and one Conclusions. Previously, we proposed the DNA replica- duplication spanning potential TAD boundaries and LADs. tion stress hypothesis of AD (Yurov et al., 2011). Here, an Theupdatingofdiagnosticarray-CGH CNVsinthelight empirical support of this hypothesis seems to be provided. of new candidate genes and pathogenetic mechanisms Nonetheless, further studies are required to highlight allowed us to unravel complex cases, and revealing replication stress as a mechanism and a therapeutic target unexpected position effects. for neurodegeneration treatment. Supported by ERA.Net S.Bossi:None.M.T.Divizia:None.L.Pisciotta:None. RUS Plus Programme. E. Tassano: None. G. Rosti: None. I. Serio: None. M. Y.B. Yurov: None. S.G. Vorsanova: None. T. Liehr: Lerone: None. E. Veneselli: None. P. Ronchetto: None. None. I.Y. Iourov: None. A. Puliti: None. P09.039C P09.040D Evaluation of CNVs variants in a cohort of isolated and Possible position effect on COL4A3BP gene regulation in a syndromicintellectualdisability/autismspectrumdisorders family affected by neurological impairment reveals novel position effects and candidate disease genes G.Tolva1,M.Crippa2,D.Zimbalatti2,R.Silipigni3,I.Bestetti2,4, S. Bossi1,M. T.Divizia2,L. Pisciotta1, E.Tassano2, G.Rosti1, A. Sironi2,4,S. Guerneri3,D.Milani1,P. Finelli2,4 I.Serio1,3,M.Lerone2,E. Veneselli1,3,P. Ronchetto2, A. PULITI2,1 1Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation,University of Milan, 1DiNOGMI, University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 2Medical FondazioneIRCCSCa'Granda,Milan,Italy,2Lab.ofMedical GeneticsUnit,IstitutoGianninaGaslini,Genova,Italy,3Child Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto NeuropsychiatryUnit,IstitutoGianninaGaslini,Genova,Italy Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics,FondazioneIRCCSCa´Granda,OspedaleMaggiore Array-comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) is Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 4Dpt. of Medical Biotechnology and widely used to detect copy number variants (CNVs) asso- Translational Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, Italy ciated with intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). We describe a 46,XX child aged 3 years, who came to our However,someCNVshavenoclearcausativeeffectsand attention because of slight psychomotor delay (GQ=77), remain of uncertain signiﬁcance (VOUS). nystagmus, esotropia, and facial dysmorphisms, namelyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 267 brachycephaly, round face, and palpebral upslanting. Introduction: Hereditary congenital facialpalsy (HCFP) is Familyhistoryshowspsychomotorretardation,mildschool a rare congenital cranial dysinnervation disorder, recogni- difﬁculties (IQ =67), and nystagmus in her older brother, sablebynon-progressiveisolatedfacialnervepalsy(cranial partial cryptogenic epilepsy and esotropia in the mother, nerve VII). It is caused by developmental abnormalities of andRendu-Osler-WeberSyndromebothinthefatherandin thefacialnervenucleusanditsnerve.Sofar,4homozygous the brother. Array-CGH analysis (60K) identiﬁed a rare mutations have been identiﬁed in 5 unrelated families (12 microdeletionof70kbinthechild,inthemotherandinthe patients) with HCFP worldwide. brother, mapping in 5q13.3 region (chr5:74822073- MaterialsandMethods: alarge Iranian consanguineous 74892303). This deletion involves the POLK gene, not kindred with 5 members affected by HCFP underwent currently known as a disease gene. Interestingly, the dele- thorough clinical and genetic evaluation. The candidate tion proximal breakpoint maps about 20 kb from the 5’ gene HOXB1 was screened and analysed by Sanger UTR of COL4A3BP gene, which leads to mental retarda- sequencing. As in previous cases, the most remarkable tion, autosomal dominant 34 (MRD34) [MIM:616351]. ﬁndings in the affected members of the family were mask- There is evidence of few cases with de novo missense like faces, bilateral facial palsy with variable sensorineural mutations in COL4A3BP gene reported as pathognomonic hearing loss, and some dysmorphic features. for a phenotype characterized by psychomotor and global Results:DirectsequencingofthecandidategeneHOXB1 development delay, intellectual disability, epilepsy, cranio- identiﬁed a novel homozygous frameshift mutation facial dysmorphisms, and skeletal features. The subsequent (c.296_302del; p.Y99Wfs * 20) which cosegregated with high resolution 1M a-CGH analysis ﬁnely maps the prox- the disease phenotype within the extended family. imal deletion bkp upstream the COL4A3BP promoter, Conclusions: Our ﬁndings expand the mutational spec- located in a region with several predicted regulatory ele- trumofHOXB1involvedinHCFPandconsolidatetherole ments (promoter region, enhancer and transcriptional elon- of the gene in the development of autosomal recessive gation). In our hypothesis the lack of mentioned regulatory HCFP. Moreover, the truncating mutation identiﬁed in this elementsmaycompromiseCOL4A3BPgeneexpressionby family leads to a broadly similar resentation and severity altering the gene regulatory domain. To conﬁrm a position observed in previous patients with nonsense and missense effect event and assess the pathogenic role of the identiﬁed mutations. This study haracterises and deﬁnes the pheno- CNV quantitative COL4A3BP gene expression analysis is typic features of this rare syndrome in a larger family than ongoing. has previously been reported. G. Tolva: None. M. Crippa: None. D. Zimbalatti: M. Vahidi Mehrjardi: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. M. None. R. Silipigni: None. I. Bestetti: None. A. Sironi: Dehghan Tezerjani: None. E. ZareMehrjardi: None.H. None. S. Guerneri: None. D. Milani: None. P. Hozhabri: None. M. Jaafarinia: None. M. Finelli: None. Dehghani: None. P09.041A P09.042B A novel loss-of-function mutation in HOXB1 associated Congenital Variant of Rett Syndrome: Three siblings with with autosomal recessive hereditary congenital facial palsy FOXG1 mutation due to maternal gonodal mosaicism in a in a large iranian family Turkish family M.VahidiMehrjardi1,R. Marooﬁan2,M.Dehghan Tezerjani3, O.F. Karacorlu1,2,H.Bagis2,I.Guney3,2,M.Z. Kara4, E. ZareMehrjardi4,H.Hozhabri5, M.Jaafarinia6, S. Ceylaner5 M.Dehghani3 1Ministery of Health, University of Health Sciences, Haseki 1Medical Genetics Research Center, Yazd, Iran, Islamic TrainingandResearchHospital,DiagnosticCenterofGenetic Republic of, 2RILD Wellcome Wolfson Centre, Royal Devon Diseases, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Adiyaman University Medical and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, Faculty Medical Genetics Department, Adiyaman, Turkey, 3Medical Genetics Research Center, Shahid Sadoughi 3Adana Numune Training and Research Hospital Medical University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran, Islamic Republic Genetics Department, Adana, Turkey, 4Adiyaman University of, 4Medical Biotechnology Research Center, Ashkezar Training and Research Hospital Child and Adolescent Branch,IslamicAzadUniversity,Ashkezar,Yazd,Iran,Islamic Psychiatry Department, Adiyaman, Turkey, 5Intergen Genetic Republic of,5Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza Diagnosis Center, Ankara, Turkey University, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Genetic, Marvdasht branch,IslamicAzadUniversity,Marvdasht,Marvdasht,Iran, Background: Congenital variant of Rett syndrome is a Islamic Republic of severeneurodevelopmentaldisorderwithfeaturesofclassic268 J.delPicchia Rettsyndrome,butearlieronsetintheﬁrstmonthsoflife.It history was signiﬁcant for learning disability but diagnosis is the most severe form of atypical Rett syndrome, is gen- of ADHD was only achieved at age 30. His father is being erally caused by mutations in the FOXG1 gene which is treated fordepressionandanxietydisorderandhisyounger located on chromosome 14q12. sisterhashadapsychoticepisodeatage18andiscurrently Case Presentation: A 8-year-old girl with had severe on anti-depressant treatment. After NGS analysis for con- mental and motor retardation referred to our clinic because nective tissue diseases was normal in the proband, SNP of two siblings also had similar ﬁndings. Delayed array(AffymetrixCytoScan®HD)identiﬁedaheterozygous psychomotor development was noted at 6 months of age microduplication of 554 kb at 16p11.2. qPCR analysis and she sit, crawl or walk all late. She could spaek only a conﬁrmedsegregationalsoforthefatherandsister.Among few words. She also had bruxisim, tongue thrusting and the 28 genes duplicated KIF22 and TBX6 are associated sialorrhea. Brain MRI was normal except cavum septum with joint laxity, for other candidate genes behavioral pellucidumvergae.Karyotypewas46,XXandsubtelomeric aberrations have been reported in mouse models. From FISH was normal. Whole exome sequencing of patient those we selected KIF22, DOC2A and SEZ6 and are per- reported with a heterozygous c.799G>A(p.Gly267Ser) forming qPCR studies in ﬁbroblasts and iPSCs of the variant at FOXG1 gene. Variant classiﬁcation was class 3 affected sister and unaffected mother. Our case demon- uncertain signiﬁcance, according to in silico parameters strates the broad intrafamilial spectrum of neuropsychiatric variant was 4/4 damaging and prediction was disease disturbances and adds data to the expression pattern of causing. Due to clinical manifestations and heterozygous candidate genes contributing to the mental phenotypes of mutationconﬁrmedbysangersequenceanalysisatFOXG1, microduplication carriers. Interestingly, when comparing congenital variant of Rett syndrome (OMIM#613454) the phenotype to another family with a CNV associated diagnosed.Parents werenotconsangious and they hadalso withneuropsychiatricsymptoms(16p13.2deletion)affected a 5-year-old girl and a 3-year-old boy have the same clinic womenseemtobemorevulnerabletolateronsetpsychotic andmutation.WhilefatherhadnomutationatFOXG1gene manifestations and carrier men rather to early onset neuro- mother had 19% mutation at DNA obtained from blood developmental disturbances. sample. A. Arlt: None. S. Käseberg: None. M. Linke: None. J. Conclusion: Totally three Congenital variant of Rett Winter:None.O.Bartsch:None.S.Davydenko:None.S. syndromedescribedclinicallyandgeneticallyatthisfamily. Schweiger: None. O. Tüscher: None. K. Komlosi: None. Possible segregation analyses stated that all siblings have disease due to maternal gonadal mosaicism. P09.044D O.F. Karacorlu: None. H. Bagis: None. I. Guney: Dosage imbalance of the chromatin remodeler CHD1L is None. M.Z. Kara: None. S. Ceylaner: None. responsible for the neurodevelopmental and under/ overgrowth phenotypes of the 1q21.1 CNVs P09.043C Intrafamilial variability of neuropsychiatric symptoms M.Loviglio, C. Weber,C. Golzio associated with the microduplication of chromosome 16p11.2 Institut de Génétique et Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France A. Arlt1,S. Käseberg1,M.Linke1,J.Winter1,O.Bartsch1, S. Davydenko2,S.Schweiger1,O.Tüscher2,K. Komlosi1 Recurrentreciprocal1q21.1deletionsandduplicationshave been found in individuals with syndromic autism. Variable 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, phenotypes have been reported, including congenital heart Mainz, Germany, 2Department of Psychiatry and defects, autism, schizophrenia, head circumference and Psychotherapy,University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, heightdefects.Thedeletionisassociatedwithmicrocephaly Germany and short stature, whereas the reciprocal duplication is associatedwithincreased risk ofmacrocephaly andcarriers Recurrent microduplications on chromosome 16p11.2 tend to be in the upper height percentiles, suggesting a (OMIM #614671) have been implicated in childhood-onset possible undergrowth/overgrowth phenotype. We modeled developmental disorders including language delay, cogni- the 1q21.1 duplication by overexpressing each of the eight tive impairment, ADHD besides neuropsychiatric symp- 1q21.1 genes in zebraﬁsh. Strikingly, we found that the tomssuchasdepression,anxiety,schizophreniaandbipolar overexpressionofthechromatinremodelerCHD1Linduces disorder. We report a German family whose son had initi- an increased number of both brain proliferating cells and ally been investigated for connective tissue disease post-mitotic neurons in the anterior forebrain at 2dpf, (ascendingaorticaneurysmwith21andjointlaxity).Patient resulting in macrocephaly at later stages. Consistently,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 269 suppression of the zebraﬁsh ortholog of CHD1L by conservation among species they cannot be judged without CRISPR/Cas9 led to a signiﬁcantly decreased head size at additional clinical information and feedback from the 5dpf. We further evaluated whether CHD1L could be specialist. implicated in the growth abnormalities observed in 1q21.1 In conclusion, the WES approach for malformations of CNV carriers; its overexpression indeed led to a signiﬁcant the cerebal cortex is a powerful tool for DNA diagnostics. increase of the total body length and inter-somites distance In order to increase the diagnostic yield of cortical brain at 5dpf. We also showed that the combinatorial over- malformations, close collaboration between laboratory and expression of CHD1L and GJA8, another 1q21.1 gene, referring specialist is mandatory. exacerbates the neurodevelopmental alterations induced by M. Wilke: None. G.M. Bolman: None. M. van CHD1L overexpression alone, but does not impact further Tienhoven: None. W.G. de Valk: None. R. Schot: None. the body growth, suggesting a genetic interaction between R. van Minkelen: None. G.M.S. Mancini: None. M.A. CHD1L and GJA8 on some, but not all phenotypic com- van Slegtenhorst: None. ponents. Our results suggest that CHD1L is a major con- tributor of the 1q21.1 CNV-associated neurodevelopmental P09.046B phenotypesandindicatethatCHD1Lhasapotential rolein CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 gene variants and schizophrenia in the control of human growth via an epigenetic regulatory Armenian patients mechanism. M. Loviglio: None. C. Weber: None. C. Golzio: None. E. V.Butenko1,R. F.O.Mamedov1,H.K. Ghazaryan2,R.V. Zakharyan3 P09.045A Malformations of the cerebal cortex: from targeted next 1Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian generation sequencing to whole exome sequencing Federation, 2Institute of Molecular Biology NAS RA,Yerevan, Armenia, 3Institute of Molecular Biology NAS RA,Russian- M.Wilke,G.M. Bolman,M. vanTienhoven, W.G.deValk, Armenian University, Yerevan, Armenia R. Schot, R.vanMinkelen, G.M. S.Mancini, M.A. van Slegtenhorst Introduction: Genetic variations play an important role in antipsychotic drug treatment response in several mental Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands disorders, including schizophrenia. Clinical studies sug- gested that antipsychotic drug metabolizing enzymes of Corticalbrainmalformations(raredisordersofproliferation, cytochrome P450 family contribute to reduction of disease neuronal migration or cortical organization) have been symptomsandmanifestationofsideeffects.Inthisstudywe associated with mutations in a rapidly growing number of aimedtoinvestigatethepotentialofschizophreniawithtwo genes. This complicates molecular diagnostic by Sanger single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of genes, coding sequencing.Until2015,weusedatargetedNextGeneration CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 enzymes (CYP2C19 rs4244285 Sequencing (NGS) based work ﬂow with a panel of 103 and CYP3A4 rs2740574, respectively). genesforroutinediagnostic.Nowadaysourﬂowisbasedon Materials and Methods: Here patients with paranoid wholeexomesequencing(WES)usingaﬁlterforapanelof form of schizophrenia and healthy subjects of Armenian 175 relevant genes. This approach has the advantage that population were enrolled. DNA was isolated using salting novel genes can be easily included and expansion to full out method with a simple introduction of chloroform step. exome analysis is possible. GenotypingwasperformedusingPCR-SSP.Distributionof TheWESwork-ﬂowinvolvedtheDNAenrichmentusing genotypes corresponded to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. the Agilent SureSelect CRE Capture. The detected variants Statistical analysis was performed using Pearson’s Chi- are ﬁltered and annotated with the Cartagenia software and squared test. classiﬁed with Alamut Visual Results:Wefoundthatgenotypesandallelefrequencyof DNA samples of 108 individuals were tested with the the CYP2C19 gene rs4244285 polymorphism was equally WES based panel. Eight patients (7,4%) received a direct distributed among the study groups (CYP2C19 681A allele diagnosis and 12 (11.1%) patients were solved after frequency in cases vs. controls: 0.11 vs. 0.17, p=0.46). additional investigations. With the previous used targeted The same applies for the CYP3A4 rs2740574*G allele NGS approach in total 192 patients were tested with a frequency (0.017 vs. 0.019, p=0.96). Interestingly, the diagnostic yield of 12,5%. minor allele frequencies obtained signiﬁcantly differ from However,mostoftheidentiﬁedalterationsarevariantsof thosein1000Genomesthatmightreﬂectethnicdifferences unknown clinical relevance. Despite the use of in silico in the populations enrolled. predictionprograms,usageoffrequencies,evaluationofthe270 J.delPicchia Conclusion: Despite this pilot study identiﬁed no T. Miyagawa: None. M. Shimada: None. A. Hida: association between schizophrenia and genetic variants None. Y. Honda: None. K. Mishima: None. K. Toku- within the CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 genes, further studies in naga: None. M. Honda: None. large sample size and independent research centers are required to clarify these ﬁndings.Funding: the basic part of P09.048D the Ministry of education and science of the Russian AnovelroleforDNAJC12,agenerecentlyassociatedwith Federation, state task project No. 6.6762.2017/BT. hyperphenylalaninemia and early-onset dopa-responsive E.V. Butenko: None. R.F.O. Mamedov: None. H.K. parkinsonism, in brain development Ghazaryan: None. R.V. Zakharyan: None. D.Facchi1,A. Ghilardi2,L. Straniero1,V.Rimoldi1,E. Saba1, P09.047C G.Soldà1,3, R.Asselta1,3,S. Duga1,3,L. DelGiacco2 A missense variant in PER2 is associated with delayed sleep-wake phase disorder 1Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele (MI), Italy, 2University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Humanitas Clinical and T. Miyagawa1,2,M.Shimada1,2,A. Hida3,Y. Honda4, Research Center, Rozzano, Italy K. Mishima3,K. Tokunaga2, M.Honda1,4 Introduction: We recently described biallelic null- 1Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, mutations in the DNAJC12 gene in two probands of unre- Japan, 2The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3National lated families with early-onset, dopa-responsive, and non- Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, progressive parkinsonism. This gene encodes a member of 4Neuropsychiatric Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan DNAJ/Hsp40 family. It was suggested that DNAC12 interacts with the aromatic amino acid hydroxylases Delayedsleep-wakephasedisorder(DSWPD)isacircadian involved in the dopamine and serotonin metabolism. rhythmsleepdisorder,andischaracterizedbyaninabilityto Despite this hypothesis, its function is still unclear. fall asleep until very late at night and awaken at a socially Understanding DNAJC12 physiological role could shed acceptable morning time. The pathogenesis of DSWPD is light on new pathways potentially involved in Parkinson poorlyunderstood.Recently,severallargescaleGWASsof disease pathogenesis and progression. chronotype have reported genetic variants associated with Materials and Methods: Immunoﬂuorescence experi- variation in chronotype. Several associated variants were ments were performed in HepG2 and in differentiated SH- located in genes related to circadian rhythms. This study SY5Y cell lines to assess DNAJC12 cellular localization wasperformedtoidentifyvariantsassociatedwithDSWPD and co-localization with potential cellular partners. To fromknowncircadiangenes.Wefocusedonlow-frequency better characterize its function, the DNAJC12-zebraﬁsh missensevariants.Weutilizeddataobtainedfromdatabases orthologue (dnajc12) has been cloned and the expression ofgeneticvariations(wholeexome-/ genome-sequencing). analyzed during embryogenesis. Gene functional ablation Candidates were extracted by integrating the data and in assayswerecarriedoutinzebraﬁshembryosusingmRNA- silico assessment. DNA samples from 236 patients with speciﬁcantisensemorpholinooligonucleotides.Histological DSWPD and 1,436 controls were genotyped to examine analyseswereperformed to evaluate theeffects ofthe loss- whether the candidates are associated with DSWPD. A of-function approach. missense variant (p.Val1205Met) in PER2 showed a sig- Results: Our immunoﬂuorescence experiments showed niﬁcant association with DSWPD (minor allele frequency that DNAJC12 does not present a speciﬁc cellular (MAF) of 2.5% in cases and 1.1% in controls, P=0.026, localization but is present both in the cytoplasmic and the odds ratio=2.32). In addition, MAF of the variant in 222 nuclear compartments. Concerning the in-vivo experiments patients with idiopathic hypersomnia was signiﬁcantly inzebraﬁsh,thednajc12-morphantswerecharacterizedbya higher than that in 3,554 controls (MAF of 2.3% in cases severe brain developmental phenotype. In particular, the and1.1%incontrols,P=0.038,oddsratio=2.07).PER2is morpholino-injected embryos displayed a marked expan- notedforitsmajorroleincircadianrhythms.PER2formsa sion of the cerebral ventricles. heterodimer with CRY, and the heterodimer plays an Conclusion: Our results suggest the existence of other importantroleintheregulationofthecircadianrhythm.The unknown functions for DNAJC12 beyond dopamine and p.Val1205Met substitution was located in the PER2 CRY- serotonin metabolism. Further studies will help shedding binding domain. The substitution could be a potential light on the speciﬁc role of this gene during early brain geneticmarkerforcircadianrhythmsandsleepphenotypes. development. (Grants: KAKENHI and AMED)Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 271 D. Facchi: None. A. Ghilardi: None. L. Straniero: S.Jens1,L.Laan1,J.Klar1,Z.Jin1,M.Huss2,S.Korol1,F.H. None.V.Rimoldi:None.E.Saba:None.G.Soldà:None. Norradin1,B. Birnir1,N.Dahl1 R. Asselta: None. S. Duga: None. L. Del Giacco: None. 1UppsalaUniversity,Uppsala,Sweden,2StockholmUniversity, P09.049A Uppsala, Sweden Identiﬁcation of the genetic defect in patients with Dravet syndrome by a NGS gene panel for epilepsy Introduction:Geneticepilepsiesaredevastatingconditions forpatientsandtheirfamilies.Existinganticonvulsantdrugs E. Barroso,A. Rubio, A. delPozo,P. Lapunzina donotprovidesatisfactoryseizurecontrolinonethirdofall patients. One approach to advance the development of InstitutodeGenéticaMédicayMolecular(INGEMM),Madrid, novel antiepileptic drugs is to identify druggable molecular Spain mechanism underlying the disease. MaterialsandMethods:Weestablishedadiseasemodel Introduction: Dravet syndrome (DS, MIM 607208) is a of SCN1A associated early onset epilepsy, i.e. Dravet severe early-onset infantile epilepsy that is mainly due to Disease, using induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) from heterozygous mutations in SCN1A, and other genes. The three patients with distinct and heterozygous SCN1A applicationofacomprehensiveNGSpanelofgenesrelated variants, and from three independent control individuals. to epilepsy may allow identifying other genes and epi- The iPSCs were differentiated into cortical GABAergic leptogenic pathways involved in DS. interneuron-like cells over 65 days and subsequently MaterialsandMethods:125patientswithapresumptive analysed by whole-cell patch clamp recordings and RNA diagnosis of DS were studied. The NGS panel Epilep- sequencing. sy_v5.0,with425genesrelatedtoepilepsy,wasappliedby Results: Patch-clamp recordings showed decreased fast Roche Nimblegen SeqCap EZ capture and Illumina sodiumcurrentsinneuron-likecellsfromthethreepatients. NextSeq. The in-house bioinformatics analysis tool was Transcriptome proﬁling of neuron-like cells from Dravet applied to the alignment and annotation of variants. patients revealed persistent upregulation of genes involved Filtering of variants, variant interpretation by ACMG/ in chromatin remodeling. Additionally, several genes AMP and subsequent validation by Sanger sequencing or belonging to an epilepsy gene network were dysregulated MPLA were performed. supporting functional convergence for a group of genetic Results: Epilepsy_v5.0 applied over 125 DS patients epilepsies. allowed the molecular diagnosis of 47 patients carrying Conclusions: Our data suggest chromatin remodeling to SCN1A pathogenic (P, 25), likely pathogenic (LP, 15) or be perturbed in neurons with SCN1A variants from Dravet variantsofunknownsigniﬁcance(VOUS,7).Moreover,39 disease patients thus providing candidate pathways for the SD patients without mutations in SCN1A carry P variants development of antiepileptic drugs. (6), LP(2) orVOUS(31) in35 additional genes that could Grants: This work was supported by grants from the explain their molecular defect. Swedish Research Council (2015-02424) and AstraZeneca. Conclusions: 68.8% of the tested patients (86/125) S. Jens: None. L. Laan: None. J. Klar: None. Z. Jin: presented variants in SCN1A and additional genes that None. M. Huss: None. S. Korol: None. F.H. Norradin: could explain DS. The application of Epilepsy_v5.0 has None. B. Birnir: None. N. Dahl: None. improved the mutational rate of SCN1A by Sanger sequencing and MLPA in DS patients, established in our P09.051C laboratory in 44.3%. Genes identiﬁed in this study and not Expanding the clinical and molecular spectrum of previously related to DS may open a new way for the DYRK1A-related disorder: report on novel mutations in molecular diagnosis and treatment of DS patients. three patients with syndromic intellectual disability, Grants: Health Research Institute (FIS) PI14-01753 microcephaly, febrile seizures, distinctive facial (2014-2018). dysmorphisms and cerebellar vermis hypoplasia E.Barroso:None.A.Rubio:None.A.delPozo:None. P. Lapunzina: None. S.Barresi1,M.Dentici1,A.Ciolﬁ1,E.Agolini1,M.Macchiaiolo1, S. Pizzi1,C. Leoni2,M.Niceta1,F.Pantaleoni1,F. Radio1, P09.050B A. Capuano1,R. Onesimo2, M.Digilio1,A. Novelli1, Co-dysregulation of epilepsy genes and disrupted G.Zampino2,A. Bartuli1, B.Dallapiccola1,M. Tartaglia1 chromatinarchitectureinaniPSC-derivedmodelofDravet syndrome 1Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Bambino GesùChildren'sHospital,IRCSS,Rome,Italy,2RareDiseases272 J.delPicchia and Genetic Disorders, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario The association between the KIAA0319 gene and dyslexia Agostino Gemelli, Rome, Italy wasreportedalmost15yearsago.Whiletheassociationhas been consistently replicated, KIAA0319 function remains Background: Haploinsufﬁciency of DYRK1A underlies a poorly understood. Initial characterizations showed a spe- recognizable Intellectual Disability (ID) syndrome (MIM ciﬁcexpressioninthehumandevelopingcortexandinutero #614104). To date, about 50 patients have been reported shRNA experiments in rats suggested a role in neuronal with clinical features including microcephaly, intrauterine migration. Conversely, recent studies in mice reported growth restriction, global developmental delay, ID, feeding effectsintheauditorysystembutnotinneuronalmigration. difﬁculties, and distinctive facial dymorphisms. Other To further elucidate the function of KIAA0319 we used a common ﬁnding include febrile seizures, and behavioral range of approaches. Gene expression analysis in zebraﬁsh disturbances encompassing autism spectrum disorder, revealedaspeciﬁcpatternrestrictedtoparticulardeveloping attention deﬁcit disorder, and stereotypic movements. structures,conﬁrmingaroleinthebrainandintheauditory Aspeciﬁc brain malformations have been described, system as well as in the visual system and the notochord. including enlarged ventricles, cortical atrophy, thin brain- Thedyslexiaassociatedgeneticvariantsresideinregulatory stem and thin corpus callosum. sequences and might therefore affect this tightly regulated Results:We report onthree Italianpatients heterozygous spatial/temporal pattern. To investigate the function of for previously unreported de novo DYRK1A mutations KIAA0319, we generated and characterised stable cellular identiﬁed by exome sequencing. The three variants were knockouts with different assays. These included the newly predicted to elicit a disruptive effect, being frameshift/ developedElasticResonatorInterferenceStressMicroscopy nonsense changes. In one subject, the impact on transcript (ERISM) system which allows the study of mechanical processingwasconﬁrmedexperimentally.Thethreepatients forces, such as cell-substrate interactions, at single cell presented clinical features within the phenotypic spectrum level. This approach shows that KIAA0319 plays a role in associated with DYRK1A mutations, including intrauterine cell motility, migration and attachment, three processes growth restriction, microcephaly, severe speech impair- mediated by the cytoskeleton. Taken together, these data ment, ID, feeding difﬁculties, febrile seizures, behavioral support a role for KIAA0319 in cytoskeleton dynamics, issues and suggestive facies (prominent metopic appear- consistent with an involvement in neuronal migration. ance, deep set eyes, blepharophimosis, microretrognathia). However, such role is likely to extend beyond brain Of note, all patients presented brain abnormalities, includ- development and contribute also to the development of ingcerebellarvermishypoplasia,whichhavenotpreviously sensory organs and the notochord. Supported by the Royal been reported to occur in individuals with DYRK1A Society, Northwood Trust, EPSRC and the ERC. mutations. S. Paracchini: None. R. Diaz: None. M. Gostic: None. Conclusion: Our ﬁndings provide further information on A. Martinelli: None. N. Kronenberg: None. K. Sillar: the clinical phenotype spectrum associated with truncating None. J. Tello: None. M. Gather: None. mutationsinDYRK1A,addingcerebellarvermishypoplasia as a previously unappreciated feature of DYRK1A P09.053A haploinsufﬁciency. Dopaminergic dysfunction in a rat model for DYT6 S.Barresi:None.M.Dentici:None.A.Ciolﬁ:None.E. dystonia Agolini: None. M. Macchiaiolo: None. S. Pizzi: None. C. Leoni: None. M. Niceta: None. F. Pantaleoni: None. F. F. Cheng1,P. Bonsi2,N.Casadei1,L. Yu-Traeger1,T. Ott1, Radio:None.A.Capuano: None. R.Onesimo: None. M. O.Riess1, A.Pisani3,H. Nguyen1,K.Grundmann-Hauser1 Digilio: None. A. Novelli: None. G. Zampino: None. A. Bartuli: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. M. 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tartaglia: None. Tübingen, Germany, 2Fondazione Don Gnocchi, Milan, Italy, 3IstitutodiRicoveroeCuraaCarattereScientiﬁcoFondazione P09.052D Santa Lucia, Neurophysiology and Plasticity Lab, Rome, Italy The KIAA0319 dyslexia susceptibility gene presents a highly speciﬁc expression pattern during the development Mutations in THAP1 (thanatos-associated protein domain- ofdifferentorgans&playsaroleincytoskeletondynamics containingapoptosis-associatedprotein1)causeautosomal dominant primary dystonia 6 (DYT6 dystonia). To date, S.Paracchini,R.Diaz,M.Gostic,A.Martinelli,N.Kronenberg, more than eighty different mutations / variations have been K. Sillar, J.Tello, M.Gather identiﬁedintheTHAP1geneindifferentethnicpopulations with unknown pathogenic mechanism. Recent studies of University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United Kingdom Thap1 mouse models showed a delay in myelination orAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 273 dysfunction of pathways related to eIF2α Signaling and performed using in-house pipelines. In 2017 molecular mitochondrialdysfunction.However,theneuropathological genetic study for trio (proband with parents) performed at and neurophysiological changes in rats due to THAP1 Birmingham Women’s Hospital (England) conﬁrmed de dysfunction are unknown. Using the CRISPR/cas9 techni- novo mutation in STXBP1 for proband. que, we generated a novel model for THAP1 dystonia in a Conclusions:Presently,theboy3y/oisundersupervision different species. As observed in THAP1 mouse models and drug therapy; he has some temporal delay of homozygousThap1knock-outratsarenotviable.RNA-seq psychomotor and speech development. The authors are and protein analysis in heterozygous KO rats revealed grateful to MD Zhilina S. for clinical genetics consulting. expression changes of genes involved in doparminergic TheresearchwassupportedbytheDepartmentofHealthof functios. Electrophysiological studies in the striatum Moscow (project 2014-2015). revealed abnormal ﬁring frequency in Thap1 heterozygous M. Belenikin: None. E. Lukyanova: None. S. knock-out rats stimulated with amphetamine. Taken toge- Ayvazyan: None. ther,ournovelTHAP1dytoniaratmodelshowedadystonia related phenotype associated with dopaminergic P09.055C dysfunction. Multi-gene panel testing improves diagnosis in Brazilian F. Cheng: None. P. Bonsi: None. N. Casadei: None. L. patients with Early-Onset Epilepsy Yu-Traeger: None. T. Ott: None. O. Riess: None. A. Pisani: None. H. Nguyen: None. K. Grundmann- G.M.Novo Filho1,A.T. Dias1,A. M.Nascimento1, J.G. Hauser: None. Damasceno1,É.A.Zanardo1,S.N.Chehimi1,F.A.R.Madia1, O.S.Akl1,O.S.Akl1,M.M.Montenegro1,Y.G.Oliveira1,L.L. P09.054B Vieira1,M.L. G.Manreza2,L. D.Kulikowski1 A novel de novo nonsense mutation in STXBP1 found in child diagnosed with early infantile epileptic 1Laboratório de Citogenômica LIM 03 – Departamento de encephalopathy type 4 Patologia – Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo – São Paulo-SP, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, M.Belenikin1,2, E.Lukyanova2, S.Ayvazyan2 2Departamento de Neurologia - Faculdade de Medicina da UniversidadedeSãoPaulo–SãoPaulo-SP,Brazil,SãoPaulo, 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State Brazil University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation, 2Research Center for Children Medical Care, Moscow, Russian Introduction: Early-onset epilepsy (EOE) is characterized Federation by seizures of variable intensity, cognitive impairment and unusual behavior. Approximately twelve forms of epilepsy Background: Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy have genetic etiology, however, in more than a half of the Type 4 (MIM:612164) is autosomal dominant disease EOE patients, the basis remains unknown. Thus, an causedbyheterozygousmutationintheSTXBP1gene.Here unequivocal molecular diagnosis in these patients is we present the clinical case report. The boy (birth year essential to develop targeted-disease therapies. 2013): at the 3rd week of life a single focal seizure attack Material and Methods: We studied 147 patients with was appeared. In 4 months resumed seizures (complex seizures and/or myoclonus whose started between 2 and 4 partialandsecondarygeneralizedtonic-clonic).In5months years of age using a customized panel (Agilent SureSelect therewereseizuresonthetypeofinfantilespasms.At2014 technologies / MiSeq Illumina, CA). A total of 51 genes we have performed the molecular-genetic study. associated to epilepsy in previous publications were Methods and Results: NGS sequencing (454 GSJunior; selected for investigation. The analysis was performed NimbleGenSeqCaptargetenrichment;testingmutationsfor using VariantStudio (Illumina, CA) and SureCall genes, associated with epileptic encephalopathy): in (Agilent, CA). STXBP1 gene we have found heterozygous mutation Results: Our results revealed 72 patients with 113 c.1235_1236delCC (NM_003165.3) or, using uniprot relevant variants in 42 different genes, highlighting ATM, canonical transcript, c.1038_1039delCC (CCDS35146.1/ CLN6, MSFD8, MECP2 and TPP1 genomic variants. Of CCDS6874.1). This two-nucleotide deletion results to the 113 relevant variants detected by NGS panel, 20 were frame-shift joined with nonsense mutation, changing classiﬁed as pathogenic, 31 likely pathogenic, 41 were a protein sequence: "...THLHL..." => "...TPAPC*". Further variant of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS) and 21 likely clinical exome analysis (Illumina) did not revealed any benign. The most frequent variant was single nucleotide other candidate-mutations. Clinical picture of disease variants(SNVs)andInDels,being91inheterozygosise22 allowed to assume de novo mutation. Data analysis was in homozygosis.274 J.delPicchia Conclusions: A total of ~49% of patients obtained a Competitiveness (MINECO), with speciﬁc projects PTQ- potential genetic diagnosis evidencing the efﬁciency of our 12-05686forAmorosD,PTQ-12-05687forPenachoVand customizedpanel,whichallowsahighdetectionratewitha PTQ-13-06028 for González-Reig S. The MINECO lower cost than a whole exome. A customized multi-gene Industrial Ph.D. grant with speciﬁc project DI-14-06922 panel allows detect genetic variants and also could further for Castejón N. improve genetic diagnosis in patients with early-onset L.A. Alcaraz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Epilepsy. Signiﬁcant; Bioarray, SL. F. Galán: A. Employment (full Grant References: FAPESP 2016/09452-0; CAPES; or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bioarray, SL. V. Penacho: A. OMIKA Consultoria em Genética and BioMarin. Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Bioarray,SL.I. G.M. Novo Filho: None. A.T. Dias: None. A.M. Manchón: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Nascimento: None. J.G. Damasceno: None. É.A. Bioarray, SL. D. Amorós: A. Employment (full or part- Zanardo: None. S.N. Chehimi: None. F.A.R. Madia: time); Signiﬁcant; Bioarray, SL. S. González-Reig: A. None. O.S. Akl: None. O.S. Akl: None. M.M. Montene- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bioarray, SL. gro:None.Y.G.Oliveira:None.L.L.Vieira:None.M.L. N. Castejón: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- G. Manreza: None. L.D. Kulikowski: None. cant; Bioarray, SL. P09.057A P09.058B DiagnosticyieldofaCGHandNGSgenepanelsinepilepsy Gain-of-function variants in the CASR gene in genetic generalized epilepsy L. A.Alcaraz, F. Galán,V. Penacho,I. Manchón,D.Amorós, S. González-Reig,N.Castejón M.Kaur1,P.Satishchandra2,S.Sinha2,A.Kapoor1,A.Anand1 Bioarray, SL, Elche, Spain 1Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientiﬁc Research, Bangalore, India, 2National Institute of Mental Health and Introduction:genetictestingisaverypowerfultoolforthe Neurosciences, Bangalore, India diagnosis of epilepsy. Copy-number variations (CNVs) or point mutations cause epileptic disorders or predispose to Introduction: Genetic generalized epilepsies (GGE) are a such heterogeneous pathology. Detection of CNVs require common form of human epilepsies with substantial genetic one method such as microarray CGH (aCGH), while point basis to their etiology. The EIG8 (3q13.3-q21) locus for mutations within related genes could be detected by next GGEwasidentiﬁedinathree-generationfamilyfromsouth generation sequencing technologies (NGS). We performed India (Kapoor et al. Ann Neurol 2008). aretrospectivecohortstudy,comparingthediagnosticyield Methods: Sequence analysis of the 64 Mb haplotype at of aCGH and NGS gene panels in epilepsy. 3p14.2-q21, being shared by all affected members of the Material and Methods: we performed a retrospective family was conducted by whole-exome sequencing (WES). cohort study of a series of neuropediatric patients with CASR was sequence analyzed in unrelated 480 GGE/JME seizures as the main symptom of epilepsy. In 158 cases, patients and 504 control chromosomes. Further, the aCGH was performed, while 231 cases were studied by functional implications of rare non-synonymous mutations Illumina targeted-exome sequencing and speciﬁc NGS identiﬁed were evaluated on the CASR-regulated signaling panels. pathways. Results: From the 158 cases studied by aCGH we Results: In WES analysis, ﬁve disease co-segregating detected pathogenic or likely pathogenic CNVs in 26 rare variants in the EPHA6, ABI3BP, KIAA1407, IQCB1 (16.4%) patients. As for NGS panels, we identiﬁed and CASR genes were found. Of these, c.2693G>A (p. deleterious mutations in 27 (17.7%) cases with 46-gene Arg898Gln) in CASR fulﬁlled the criteria of being a panel and 22 cases (27.8%) with 543-gene panel. causativemutation.CASRsequenceanalysis,identiﬁedﬁve Conclusions: we achieved an effective diagnostic two- additionalrarenon-synonymousmutations,p.Glu354Ala,p. step method for neuropediatric patients with epilepsy. It Asp433His, p.Ser580Asn, p.Ile686Val and p.Ala988Val in consists of aCGH analysis followed by the analysis of 14 unrelated GGE/JME patients. In cell signaling assays, speciﬁcNGSpanels.Diagnosticrateincreasedby35%due the mutant CASR receptors exhibited leftward shifts in the to the application of NGS panels, in an efﬁcient, accurate dose-response curves showing an enhanced responsiveness and cost-effective strategy. to extracellular calcium concentrations as compared to the Study funding/competing interest(s): Funding by wild-type receptor, thereby suggesting, activating nature of national/international organization(s): The Torres Quevedo these variants. Program from the Spanish Ministry of Economy andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 275 Conclusion: Our ﬁndings indicate a role for CASR in P09.060D predisposition to GGE/JME based on evidence provided at TheuseofNextGenerationSequencingforthediagnosisof the gene- and variant-level. Based on observed enhanced early onset epilepsy and epileptic encephalopathies calcium responsiveness of CASR alleles in the cell signaling assays, we propose that gain-of-function effects E. Bettella1,R. Polli1, E.Leonardi1,F.Cesca1,M.C. of these mutations may alter CASR-regulated functions in Aspromonte1,M.Vecchi2,I.Toldo3,C. Boniver2,D.Baldo4, the brain and contribute to pathophysiology of epilepsy. S. Negrin5,S. Sartori3,A. Murgia1 The study was supported by funds from DAE, Mumbai. M. Kaur: None. P. Satishchandra: None. S. Sinha: 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment, None. A. Kapoor: None. A. Anand: None. Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of Padova, Italy, Padua, Italy, 2Pediatric Neurophysiology Unit, P09.059C Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of Detection of copy number variations in epilepsy using Padua, Italy, Padua, Italy, 3Pediatric Neurology Unit, exome data Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of Padua,Italy,Padua,Italy,4ClinicalGeneticsUnit,Hospitalof N.Matsumoto,N.Tsuchida Treviso, Treviso, Italy, Treviso, Italy, 5Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS E. Medea, Conegliano Research Center, 31015 Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Conegliano, Italy, Padua, Italy Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan Epilepsy comprises a wide range of etiologically very het- Epilepsies are neurological disorders and genetic factors erogeneous clinical conditions ranging from benign forms contribute to their pathogenesis. Copy number variations totreatment-refractoryprogressiveencephalopathies,which (CNVs) are increasingly recognized as an important etiol- clinical features, seizure type, age of onset, electro- ogy of many human diseases including epilepsy. Whole encephalographic features and response to anti-epileptic exome sequencing (WES) is becoming a standard tool for drugs are very diverse and may vary over time. At present, detecting pathogenic mutations and has recently been targeted sequencing of genes associated with genetically appliedtodetectingCNVs.Here,weanalyzed294families heterogeneousconditionsseemstobetheelectivechoicefor withepilepsyusingWES,andfocusedon168familieswith early and efﬁcient etiological diagnoses. 155 individuals no causative single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in known have been subjected to NGS investigation, using a custo- epilepsy-associated genes to further validate CNVs using mized panel of 31 genes, on the Ion PGM™ sequencing two different CNV detection tools using WES data. We platform. Sequence variants were interpreted according to conﬁrmed18pathogenicCNVs,andtwodeletionsandtwo the ACMG guidelines. The average sequencing depth of duplications at chr15q11.2 of clinically unknown sig- coverage was 331.6X, with 97.6% of the reads on-target niﬁcance.Ofnote,wewereabletoidentifysmallCNVsless and 93.2% of reads uniformity. On average, 114 variants than 10 kb in size, which might be difﬁcult to detect by perpatienthavebeendetected.Intheoverall,wewereable conventional microarray. We revealed two cases with to identify disease-causing variants in 27 individuals pathogenic CNVs that one of the two CNV detection tools (17.4%) although, since the panel mainly targeted EIEE/ failed to ﬁnd, suggesting that different CNV tools are early epilepsy genes, the diagnostic yield stratiﬁed accord- recommended to increase diagnostic yield. Considering a ingtoageofseizureonsetresulted27%incaseswithonset relatively high discovery rate of CNVs (18 out of 168 within 6 months of life, 22.7% within 12 months of life, families,10.7%)andsuccessfuldetectionofCNVwith<10 19.2% incases with seizureonsetbefore 24monthsoflife. kb in size, CNV detection by WES may be able to surro- Out of 27 pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants 19 were gate, or at least complement, conventional microarray ana- found to alter ﬁve voltage-gated ion channels: SCN1A (7), lysis.Acknowledgements:NakashimaM,KatoM,Heyman SCN2A (4), SCN8A (4), KCNQ2 (2) and HCN1 (2). Our E, Inui T, Haginoya K, Watanabe S, Chiyonobu T, Mor- work further strengthens the importance of a careful phe- imoto M, Ohta M, Kumakura A, Kubota M, Kumagai Y, notypecharacterizationcoupledwiththepoweroftheNGS Hamano S-I, Lourenco CM, Yahaya NA, Ch'ng G-S, Ngu technologyandindicatesinasubsetoffewgenesthemajor L-H, Fattal-Valevski A, Hubshman MW, Orenstein N, players for epilepsy with very early onset. MaromD,CohenL,Goldberg-SternH,NakajimaH,Saitsu E.Bettella:None.R.Polli:None.E.Leonardi:None.F. H, Miyatake S. Cesca:None.M.C.Aspromonte:None.M.Vecchi:None. N. Matsumoto: None. N. Tsuchida: None. I. Toldo: None. C. Boniver: None. D. Baldo: None. S. Negrin: None. S. Sartori: None. A. Murgia: None.276 J.delPicchia P09.061A P09.062B De novo variants in neurodevelopmental disorders with Functional characterisation of novel SCN1A mutations in epilepsy epileptic disorders H.O.Heyne1,T. Singh1,H. Stamberger2, EuroEPINOMICS D.Kluckova1, B.Tarabova2, M.Kolnikova3,A. Ficek1, RES Consortium & Epilepsy DNVstudygroup, A. Poduri3, L. Lacinova2, L.Kadasi1,4,A. Soltysova1,4 Y. Weber4, S.Weckhuysen2,S. M.Sisodiya5,M.J. Daly1, I.Helbig6, D.Lal1,J. R.Lemke7 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences,ComeniusUniversity,Bratislava,Slovakia,2Institute 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of 2University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Boston Children's Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Child Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4University of Tübingen, Neurology, Children´s Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, Tübingen, Germany, 5UCL, Institute of Neurology, London, 4Institute for ClinicalandTranslational Research,Biomedical United Kingdom, 6Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7University of Leipzig, Slovakia Leipzig, Germany Mutations in SCN1A, the gene encoding voltage-gated Epilepsy is a frequent feature of neurodevelopmental dis- sodium channel Na 1.1, cause a spectrum of epilepsy dis- V orders (NDD) but little is known about genetic differences ordersthatrangefromgeneticepilepsywithfebrileseizures between NDD with and without epilepsy. We analyzed de plus to severe disorders such as Dravet syndrome. To date, novo variants (DNV) in 6753 parent-offspring trios ascer- more than 1,250 mutations in SCN1A have been linked to tained for different NDD. In the subset of 1942 individuals epilepsy but only a small number of them has been func- with NDD with epilepsy including 529 individuals with tionally characterised. We identiﬁed several novel muta- epileptic encephalopathy, we identiﬁed 33 genes with a tions(p.E78D,p.D249E,p.W384X,p.E777K,p.T1923I)in signiﬁcantexcessofDNV.Ofthese,SNAP25andGABRB2 SCN1A gene in Slovak epilepsy patients, which were sub- had previously only limited evidence for disease associa- sequently subjected to functional characterisation in het- tion. Joint analysis of all individuals with NDD also erologous expression system. EGFP gene was inserted to implicated CACNA1E as a novel disease gene. Comparing pCDM8-hNa 1.1 to visualise the eukaryotic cells expres- V NDD with and without epilepsy, we found missense DNV, sing protein of interest. All identiﬁed mutations were DNV in speciﬁc genes, age of recruitment and severity of introduced to pCDM8-hNa 1.1-EGFP construct and were V intellectual disability to be associated with epilepsy. 24 propagatedinTOP10/P3E.Coligrownat28°Ctominimize routinely used diagnostic panels would only have detected the rearrangements. The entire coding sequence was on average 59% of DNV in the 33 genes with exome-wide sequenced after each propagation. The pathogenic effect of DNV burden. We further found low evidence for disease each mutation on protein function was tested in transiently associationforgenesfrequentlyusedondiagnosticepilepsy transfected HEK293T cells by whole-cell patch clamp panels. 5% of DNV in our study were in eight genes for conﬁguration. Cells were also transfected with each of which we could conﬁrm therapeutic consequences with accessoryβsubunitstotestwhethermutantchannelscanbe established evidence-based medicine criteria emphasizing rescued by molecular interactions with these modulatory the beneﬁt of accurate genetic diagnosis in NDD with proteins. Finally two antiepileptic drugs, phenytoin and epilepsy. carbamazepine, and an antiarrhythmic drug, mexiletine, This work has been supported by the Eurocores program which probably act by stabilizing the correct folding con- EuroEPINOMICS and grants from the German Research formationweretested,iftheycanpreventthedegradationof Foundation (DFG), German Federal Ministry of Education the mutant protein and reduce the loss of function effect. and Research (BMBF) and Institute for Science and These ﬁndings may contribute to the understanding of Technology (IWT)-Flanders. mechanisms of the epileptogenesis and to the effective H.O. Heyne: None. T. Singh: None. H. Stamberger: therapy. None. A. Poduri: None. Y. Weber: None. S. Weckhuy- D. Kluckova: None. B. Tarabova: None. M. Kolni- sen: None. S.M. Sisodiya: None. M.J. Daly: None. I. kova: None. A. Ficek: None. L. Lacinova: None. L. Helbig: None. D. Lal: None. J.R. Lemke: None. Kadasi: None. A. Soltysova: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 277 P09.063C P09.064D Monoallelic expression of TTR gene as a contributor to Assesment of candidate genes in patients with phenotypic variability of TTR-related amyloidosis frontotemporal lobar degeneration spectrum: preliminary ﬁndings A. Todorova1,2,3,T. Todorov1,S. Sarafov4,T. Chamova4, M.Gospodinova5,I.Tournev4,6 S. Artan1, E.Erzurumluoglu1,O.Cilingir1,B. D.Ozbabalik Adapinar2,F.Tepgec3,H.Bas1,H.A.Hanagası4,I.H.Gurvit4, 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Soﬁa, G.Toksoy3,Z. O.Uyguner3,B. DurakAras1,C. Yenilmez5 Bulgaria, 2IMDL Genome Centre Bulgaria, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3DepartmentofMedicalChemistryandBiochemistry,Medical 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, UniversitySoﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,4ClinicofNervousDiseases, DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Eskisehir,Turkey,2Acibadem UMBAL Aleksandrovska, Department of Neurology, Medical Hospital Neurology Clinic, Eskisehir, Turkey, 3Istanbul University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 5Clinic of Cardiology, MVR University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of hospital, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 6Department for cognitive science Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, and psychology, New Bulgarian University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Behavioural Neurology and MovementDisordersUnit,DepartmentofNeurology,Istanbul, Monoallelic gene expression is a phenomenon in which Turkey,5EskisehirOsmangaziUniversity,FacultyofMedicine, only one allele from a homologous pair is transcribed. Department of Psychiatry, Eskisehir, Turkey Transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis is an autosomal dominant systemic disorder caused by mutations in the TTR gene. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a hetero- Markedly different penetrance according to the gender of geneous disorder group associated with degeneration in the transmitting parent as well as a variable manifestation the frontal/temporal lobes of brain. This study is aimed between monozygotic twins was observed in Bulgarian to determine the frequencies of mutations in MAPT, families. The aim of the present study was to better PGRN,CHMP2B,VCP,TARDBP and FUS genes, which understand the difference in the disease penetrance by are considered as the main genetic causes of FTLD in evaluating the mutant versus wild type transcripts. The Turkish population and to investigate the genotype- RNAwasextractedfromplasmaandurineandtheTTRRT- phenotype correlations in cases with pathogenic/ likely- PCR products were sequenced by Sanger. Apart from the pathogenic variants. The exon/exon-intron junctions for expected traditional biallelic transcription a monoallelic relatedgenesingDNAsof100FTLDcasesand100age- expression signature of only mutant or only wild type matched controls were sequenced by using IonTor- alleles was observed. For some patients tissue-speciﬁc rentS5, then analyzed with bioinformatics pipeline. NGS transcription proﬁle was detected, which corresponds to resultswereconﬁrmedbytheSangerSequencingandare multiple tissues and organs involvement in the disease shown in table without variants considered as benign. manifestation. Based on our results we propose a model of It was identiﬁed 2 novel variants in MAPT and natural selection, which includes age-related allele sup- CHMP2B genes that are intronic and missense, respec- pression:predominantexpressionofawildtypeallele(atan tively. Additionally, 2 missense and 2 frameshift muta- early age) and mutant allele (at the process of ageing). tions were detected in GRN and 1 missense mutation in Differentregulatorymechanismsatmolecularlevel(histone TARDBP. Interestingly c.759_760delTG GRN and modiﬁcations, chromatin remodelling, transcription factors, c.389A>G CHMP2B variants were identiﬁed in the same andepigeneticalterations)mightbeinvolvedandcombined patient who has died a year after the diagnosis. in different manner in different individuals, which explains Segregation studies of family members are in progress. interfamilial differences and phenotypic differences in This study indicates that GRN mutations are more monozygotictwinswithidenticalgenotypes.Furtherstudies common causative genetic factors for FTLD (%4) and this on monoallelic expression of the TTR gene will facilitate a ratio is% 12 in cases with positive family history. To our better understanding of the TTR gene transcriptional reg- knowledge, this is ﬁrst report evaluating the genetic ulation. Acknowledgement: The study was supported by backround in Turkish FTLD. This study was supported by Pﬁzer: Grant №WI220557/15.11.2016. The Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Council of A. Todorova: None. T. Todorov: None. S. Sarafov: Turkey (TUBITAK1001-114S346) None. T. Chamova: None. M. Gospodinova: None. I. Tournev: None.278 J.delPicchia Table: NGS Results FXTAS. The aim of this study is to elucidate the role of Genes cDNA Protein Insiliko MAF%Subclass Age Family Classiﬁ- mtDNA variation in the pathogenesis of FXTAS. rsID prediction ofFTD oOfnset Hist cation MaterialsandMethods:TwoindependentsetsofFMR1 premutation carriers were recruited. In the ﬁrst set (13 GRN c.415T>C p. PD/Del/ 0.018 bvFTD 55 + Pathogenic** rs763841075 Cys139Arg DC FXTAS and 13 no-FXTAS) the entire mitogenome was GRN c.430G>A p. PD/Del/ 0.00081 SD 59 + VUS*** rs200591137 Asp144Asn DC sequenced using massively parallel sequencing technolo- GRN c.102delC p. DC NA bvFTD 58 + Pathogenic** gies. In the second set (39 FXTAS and 67 no-FXTAS), rs63751073 Gly35Glufs GRN* c.759_760delTGp. DC 0.00041 bvFTD 56 + Likely mitochondrial haplogroups were determined. rs63751035 Cys253Terfs Pathogenic*** CHMP2B*c.389A>G p. PD/Tol/ NA bvFTD 56 + VUS*** Results: We identiﬁed haplogroup T differentially Novel Lys130Arg DC enriched in FMR1 premutation carriers and signiﬁcantly TARDBP c.1213A>G p. PD/Tol/ NA bvFTD 72 − VUS*** rs762209110 Met405Val DC underrepresented in FXTAS patients. Analysis of mtDNA MAPT c.1828-3A>C p.? − NA bvFTD 42 + VUS*** Novel sequences revealed an association between disease and the burdenofheteroplasmicvariantsandtheirdistribution.The MAF: Minor allel frequency from gnomAD (The Genome Aggrega- tionDatabase), FXTAS group presented 3-fold more low-level heteroplas- Insilicoprediction:Polyphen,SIFT,MutationTesterrespectively mic variants in compromised regions of the mitochondrial PD:ProbablyDamaging,Del:Deleterious,DC:DiseaseCausing,Tol: genome. Tolareted Conclusions: Our results suggest that haplogroup T *Samepatient might be a potential protective factor for FXTAS. In **DeﬁnedinHGMD(HumanGeneMutationDatabase) addition, FXTAS individuals accumulate higher rates of ***AccordingtoACMG(AmericanCollegeofMedicalGeneticsand heteroplasmic variants in compromised regions of the Genomics)criteria mitochondrial genome. These results may explain, in part, the role of mtDNA in the development of FXTAS. This S. Artan: None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. O. Cilingir: work was supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III None.B.D.OzbabalikAdapinar:None.F.Tepgec:None. (PI12/00879; PI17/01067), co-ﬁnanced by Fondo Europeo H. Bas: None. H.A. Hanagası: None. I.H. Gurvit: None. de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) “una manera de hacer G. Toksoy: None. Z.O. Uyguner: None. B. Durak Aras: Europa” and AGAUR (2014SGR603; 2014SGR1420; None. C. Yenilmez: None. 2017SGR1134). M.Alvarez-Mora:None.C.Santos:None.L.Carreño- P09.065A Gago: None. I. Madrigal: None. M. Tejada: None. F. RoleofmitochondrialDNAvariantsinthedevelopmentof Martinez:None. S.Izquierdo-Alvarez: None. E. Garcia- FXTAS Arumi: None. M. Mila: None. L. Rodriguez- Revenga: None. M.Alvarez-Mora1,C. Santos2,L. Carreño-Gago3,I.Madrigal1, M.Tejada4, F.Martinez5,S.Izquierdo-Alvarez6,E.Garcia- P09.066B Arumi7,M.Mila1,L. Rodriguez-Revenga1 Decreased mitochondrial DNA copy number is associated with clinical manifestations of FXTAS 1Hospital Clinic/CIBERER/IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, L. Rodriguez-Revenga1, M.Alvarez-Mora1,P. Podlesniy2, Spain,3HospitalUniversitariValld'HebronInstitutdeRecerca E.Gelpi3,J.Pagonabarraga4,I.Madrigal1,R.Trullas2,M.Mila1 (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain, 4Cruces University Hospital/ Biocruces Health Research Institute/CIBERER, Barakaldo, 1ServeideBioquímicaiGeneticaMolecular,Barcelona,Spain, Spain, 5Hospital Universitario y Politecnico La Fe, Valencia, 2Neurobiology Unit, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas Spain, 6University Hospital Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, deBarcelona,ConsejoSuperiordeInvestigacionesCientiﬁcas, 7Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron/VHIR/CIBERER, CSIC, Barcelona, Spain, 3Neurological Tissue Bank of the Barcelona, Spain Biobanc-Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS,, Barcelona, Spain, 4Neurology Service, Hospital Sant Pau,, Barcelona, Spain Introduction:FragileX-associatedtremor/ataxiasyndrome (FXTAS) is a late-onset neurodegenerative disorder that Introduction:FragileX-associatedtremor/ataxiasyndrome appears in at least one-third of adult carriers of a premuta- (FXTAS) is a late-onset neurodegenerative disorder with tion (55-200 CGG repeats) in the FMR1 gene. Although reducedpenetrancethatappearsinadultFMR1premutation several studies have described the impairment of mito- carriers (55-200 CGGs). There are several studies support- chondrial function in FXTAS patients, to our knowledge ingaroleformitochondrialdysfunctioninthepathogenesis there are no data regarding the involvement of mtDNA inAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 279 of FXTAS. However, the mtDNA copy number has been Stress-Mediated Autophagy in neuron like cell line (SH- poorly studied. SY5Y). Material and Methods: mtDNA copy number was Materials And Methods: SH-SY5Y cells were treated studied in multiple tissues from FXTAS patients and with 100ng/ml dexamethasone at acute stress dose for matchedcontrolsubjects(post-mortemhumanbrains,blood 4 hours. After RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis, Real- samples and skin ﬁbroblasts cultures). The results were time PCR reactions were performed for GRP78, ATF4, comparedtoage-matchedcontrols.DigitaldropletPCRand XBP1 and ATG5 genes. Real Time quantitative PCR was performed was used to Results: We found that the expression level of Autop- determine the mtDNA copy number. hagy related 5 (ATG5), which has been previously Results: The analysis of mtDNA levels in human tissues characterized as a protein required for autophagy, was evidenced reduced mtDNA content in cerebellar vermis, signiﬁcantly decreased in SH-SY5Y cell lines that were dentatenucleus,parietalandtemporalcortexareas.Thefact exposed to Dexmethasone. However, we did not ﬁnd any thatnomtDNAcopynumberalterationwasdetectedinany differences between genes (GRP78,ATF4,XBP1s) which other brain regions or in any other tissues analyzed, are key players of unfolded protein response. suggests that its potential effect is restricted to clinically Conclusion: Relationship between decreased autophagy relevantregionsexplainingwhyFXTASclinicalmanifesta- and neurodegenerative diseases in neuronal cells has been tions are associated with gait ataxia and tremor. well studied. For this reason, our result may suggests that Conclusions: Our study indicates that reduced mtDNA low dose of GCs can contribute to the pathogenesis of the copy number is restricted to the affected brain tissue and neurodegenerative diseases through decreasing the expres- provides new insights into the role of mitochondrial sion of ATG5. Supported by CUBAP/TSA-2017-8116. dysfunction in the pathogenesis of FXTAS. Acknowl- D. Alptekin: None. H. Luleyap: None. A. Yoldas: edgements: This work was supported by the Instituto de None. G. Comertpay: None. P. Pazarci: None. G. Ay: Salud Carlos III (PI17/01067), co-ﬁnanced by Fondo None. G. Evyapan: None. A. Pazarbasi: None. Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) “una manera de hacer Europa” and AGAUR from the Autonomous P09.068D Catalan Government (2017 SGR1134). The CIBER de Genetic analysis in GLUT1 deﬁciency syndrome EnfermedadesRarasisaninitiativeoftheInstitutodeSalud Carlos III. C. Ornek1,O.Ozdemir1,Y. Kesim1,S.A. Ugur İseri1,B. Kara2 L. Rodriguez-Revenga: None. M. Alvarez-Mora: None. P. Podlesniy: None. E. Gelpi: None. J. Pagona- 1Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul, barraga: None.I. Madrigal: None. R.Trullas: None. M. Turkey, 2Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli, Mila: None. Turkey P09.067C Introduction: GLUT1 deﬁciency syndrome is deﬁned as a Low Dose Dexmethasone Decrease the Level of ATG5 in metabolic encephalopathy that usually caused by patho- SH SY5Y cell line genic variations in the SLC2A1 gene. The aim of the study is to determine the presence of single nucleotide and copy D.Alptekin1,H.Luleyap1,A.Yoldas2,G.Comertpay1, number changes in SLC2A1 gene. P. Pazarci1,G.Ay1,G.Evyapan1, A.Pazarbasi1 Method: In this study, all of the 10 exons in 13 patients with GLUT1 deﬁciency syndrome were sequenced by the 1Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, Adana, Turkey, Sanger method. Results were analyzed as in-silico with 2Kahraman Maras Sutci Imam University, Medical Faculty, various bioinformatics tools, phenotype-genotype correla- Kahramanmaras, Turkey tionswererevealed.AccordingtotheACMGStandardsand Guidelinespublishedin2015,necessarytodemonstratethat Introduction:Glucocorticoids(GCs)haveasigniﬁcantrole familymembershavebloodconnectionswiththepatientfor in the adaptive response of the brain to stress. Increasing the conﬁrmation of de novo variants. For this reason, SNP evidence has demonstrated that an increase of GC levels Arrayanalysiswasperformedfor2patientsandtheirfamily may induce neuronal cell death via apoptotic pathways. In members. In 7 patients who do not have any variation in the present study, we aimed to investigate whether the Sanger analysis, quantitative real-time PCR was applied to Dexmethasone, a synthetic glucocorticoid, at physiologic each of the 10 exons in the SLC2A1 gene to determine the dose plays a role in unfolded protein response induced by presence of copy number variations. EndoplasmicReticulumStressandEndoplasmicReticulum Result: Sanger sequencing method, 8 variants were identiﬁed. 2 of them are novel and de novo variants. When280 J.delPicchia examined via databases, one of the novel and de novo an activating GNAO1 mutation. A new inhibitory mechan- variants is a splice-side variant, the other is a frame shift ismbetweenfolateandGNAO1signalingwassuggestedby variant, and the phenotype effects were assessed as the clinical ﬁndings. pathogenic by in-silico tools. qRT-PCR calculations for C. Lam: None. C. Ko: None. W. Cheng: None. C. CNV detection are still ongoing. Law: None. Conclusion:%90ofindividualswithGlut1DScausedby de novo heterozygous variants in SLC2A1 gene. Screening P09.070B of this gene is important for understanding genetic basis of Association of Haptoglobin-1 allele with Autism the disease and providing genetic counselling for patients. C. Ornek: None. O. Ozdemir: None. Y. Kesim: None. A. Mezzelani1,F. A. Cupaioli1, E.Mosca1,C. Magri2, S.A. Ugur İseri: None. B. Kara: None. M.Gennarelli2,3,M.E. Raggi4, M.Landini1,N.Galluccio1, F. Chiappori1,M.Moscatelli1,M. Gnocchi1, C.Villa4, P09.069A M.Molteni4,A.Bonfanti4,F.Ciceri4,A.Marabotti5,L.Milanesi1 An activating GNAO1 mutation causing refractory chorea suppressed by folinic acid therapy 1National Research Council, Segrate, Italy, 2Dept. of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, C. LAM1,C.Ko2,W.Cheng2,C. Law1 Brescia,Italy,3GeneticUnit,IRCCSCentroS.GiovannidiDio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy, 4Scientiﬁc Institute, IRCCS 1The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini (LC), Italy, 5Dept. Chemistry 2Department of Paediatrics & Adolescent Medicine/ and Biology, “A. Zambelli”, University of Salerno, Fisciano Developmental Disabilities Unit, Caritas Medical Centre, (SA), Italy Hong Kong, China Gene-environment interaction, through abnormal intestinal Introduction: There is no effective treatment for GNAO1- adsorption, has been proposed as possible mechanism for related movement disorder (MD). Here, we describe the autism pathogenesis in those patients lacking of causative novel use of folinic acid to control MD in a patient who genetic variants. Haptoglobin (HP) is a haemoglobin bind- carried an activating GNAO1 pathogenic variant. ing and acute-phase plasma protein, encoded by two co- Materials and Methods: The patient is a 13-month-old dominant alleles, HP-1 and HP-2, producing pre-HP-1 and Chinese girlwho presentedwithglobal delayanddystonia. pre-HP-2 proteins that mature in HP-1 and HP-2, respec- She had unremarkable birth history with no family history tively.HP-2allelecontainsa1.7Kbtandemduplicationthat of consanguinity or neuromuscular disorders. She had poor includes two extra exons with respect to HP-1. truncal tone and persistent ﬁsting at 5 months. At age one Endogenouspre-HP-2proteinderegulatesintestinaltight- she could only vocalize. Physical examinations showed junctions through EGFR and PAR2 activation, increases axial hypotonia with extremity hypertonia and brisk jerks. intestinal permeability and has been associated with Biochemical and imaginings ﬁndings were unremarkable. autoimmune and inﬂammatory diseases as well as with Subsequent genetic analysis revealed a de novo hetero- psychiatric conditions. zygous activating pathogenic variant, NM_020988.2 Since the association between HP alleles and autism has (GNAO1):c.736G>A; p.Glu246Lys. never been investigated, we genotyped, by PCR analysis, Results: Patient’s MD remained intractable. It persisted HPinacohortofItalianpatientswithautism(n=406)and throughout the day, and only temporarily ceased during in controls (n=367). The aim was to evaluate the possible sleep. She was unresponsive to combined treatment, i.e. role of HP-2 in enhancing macromolecular intestinal risperidone,nitrazepam,tetrabenazineandclonazepam,and trafﬁcking in these patients. required deep sedation with midazolam infusion. Folinic Contrary to what we expected, HP-1 allele distribution acid was administered for suspected secondary cerebral was different between patients and controls (36.3% and folate deﬁciency. Surprisingly, there was a signiﬁcant 29.4%, respectively) and signiﬁcantly associated with reduction in MD within 2 days with improvement in autism (P=0.0041). awareness and motor functions (video). Pre-treatment CSF Since a subgroup of patients and controls have already 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (MTHF) level was normal, mea- been genotyped by Illumina Human Omni-15-8 v.1.0 and suring 75 nmol/L (reference interval: 40-128). Her MD Affy-6.0 chips, respectively, we are trying to impute HP remained well controlled with folinic acid (75 mg daily), alleles from ﬂanking SNP haplotypes. HP alleles will low dose nitrazepam, carbamazepine and risperidone. therefore be predicted in publicly available large cohortsof Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst reported case of successful patients with autism. pharmacologicalcontrolforintractableMDinapatientwithAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 281 Acknowledgements. Projects: IRCCS Eugenio Medea, in cognition and 32.2% in behaviour (n=59). A positive GR-2009-1570296, Interomics-PB05, family history could be conﬁrmed in 21% of patients. Telethon Network of Genetic Biobanks (project No. Conclusion: Non-HD symptomatic patients seem to be GTB12001), funded by Telethon-Italy, which provided us morelikelytocarryanIA.However,exceptforalateageof with part of specimens. onset of symptoms, they do not show a common A. Mezzelani: None. F.A. Cupaioli: None. E. Mosca: recognizable phenotype. Further follow-up studies of IAs None. C. Magri: None. M. Gennarelli: None. M.E. carriers may help understand the possible effect and Raggi: None. M. Landini: None. N. Galluccio: None. F. penetrance of these alleles. Chiappori: None. M. Moscatelli: None. M. Gnocchi: A.RuizdeSabando:None.A.MartínezDescals:None. None. C. Villa: None. M. Molteni: None. A. Bonfanti: V. Álvarez Martinez: None. I. Legarda Ramírez: None. None. F. Ciceri: None. A. Marabotti: None. L. K.BergazoCorrales:None.A.López-de-Munain:None. Milanesi: None. M. Milà: None. M.A. Ramos-Arroyo: None. P09.071C P09.072D Retrospective study of symptomatic carriers of an Leucocyte Telomere Length in Huntington's Disease. Intermediate Allele (IA) in Huntingtin (HTT) gene Preliminary data A. RuizdeSabando1,A. Martínez Descals2,V. Álvarez D.Scarabino1,L. Veneziano2,M.Peconi3, M.Frontali2, R.M. Martinez3,I.LegardaRamírez4,K.BergazoCorrales5,A.López- Corbo3,1,E. Mantuano2 de-Munain6, M.Milà7,M.A. Ramos-Arroyo1 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology. National 1Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, Research Council, Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Translational 2Hospital Universitario Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Pharmacology. National Research Council, Rome, Italy, Spain, 3Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, 3Department of Biology and Biotechnology, La Sapienza Spain, 4Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma, Spain, University, Rome, Italy 5Hospital Universitario Cruces, Baracaldo, Spain, 6Hospital UniversitarioDonostia,SanSebastián,Spain,7HospitalClinic Introduction: Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain dominant,fullypenetrant,neurodegenerativediseasecaused by an expanded CAG repeat in the ﬁrst exon of the HTT Introduction: Huntington’s Disease (HD) is an autosomal gene. The onset of symptoms most commonly occurs at dominant neurodegenerative disorder characterized by midlife and inversely correlates with the CAG repeat uncontrollable movements (chorea) and subtle changes in expansion.However,ageofclinicalonset,progressionrate, cognition and behaviour caused by an expansion of CAG and severity of symptoms can vary between individuals. repeats (n≥36) in Huntingtin (HTT) gene. In this study we Leukocyte telomere length (LTL) has been widely investi- focus on symptomatic patients, carriers of intermediate gated in neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s alleles(IAs;n=27-35),inanattempttodescribeapossible and Parkinson diseases, but very few data on LTL in HD phenotypic association. have been reported. In the present preliminary study, we Methodology: We reviewed the available data (pheno- investigated the relationship between LTL and HD devel- typeandgenotype)ofsymptomaticpatientsreferredforHD opment, including premanifest and symptomatic HD genetictesting.FrequenciesofIAswerecomparedwiththe patients. general population. Clinical symptoms of IAs carriers were Methods: LTL (T/S ratio) was measured in HD patients classiﬁedinthreegroups:motor,cognitiveandbehavioural. (n= 46) or pre-HD (n= 31), compared with LTL of age- Results: Frequency of IAs was signiﬁcantly higher matched controls (n= 60). (X2=6.77, p=0.01) among symptomatic patients (3.69%) Results:signiﬁcantLTLdifferencesamongcontrols,pre- when compared to individuals of the general population HD and HD subjects were observed (p<0.0001), with (2.12%). Family and clinical data were available in 73 IA- meanLTLvaluesinthefollowingorder:HDpatients<pre- symptomatic patients: 64.38% had 29-27 CAG repeats and HD<controls.AfteradjustingLTLforage,thedifferences 35.61%had30-35CAGrepeats.Meanageatdiagnosiswas in LTL across the three groups remained highly signiﬁcant 61.27 (n=71, SD=20.1), with signs starting 3.27 years (p<0.0001). earlier (n=22, SD=2.46). Symptoms included abnormal Conclusion:currentdataindicatethatshortenedLTLare movements, chorea, ataxia, dyskinesia, cognitive impair- observed in HD patients as found in other neurodegenera- mentandanxiety&depressivedisorder.Whenclassiﬁedin tive disorders. The analysis of LTL in pre-HD patients groups, 86.44% showed alterations in movement, 23.73% (never examined to date) suggests that a progressive282 J.delPicchia telomere erosion may occur in the pre-manifest stage. The ANGPTL6 are causally related to familial forms of IA. We possible use of LTL as biomarker of disease progression is have now generated the knock-in mouse model for the discussed. ANGPTL6 c.1378A>T variant: the pathophysiological This work was supported by Grant 2016 La Sapienza consequences of this truncating substitution are currently University of Rome to RMC under further investigations. D. Scarabino: None. L. Veneziano: None. M. Peconi: R. Bourcier: None. S. Le Scouarnec: None. S. None. M. Frontali: None. R.M. Corbo: None. E. Bonnaud:None.M.Karakachoff:None.E.Bourcereau: Mantuano: None. None. S. Heurtebise Chrétien: None. C. Menguy: None. C. Dina: None. F. Simonet: None. A. Moles: None. C. P09.073A Lenoble: None. P. Lindenbaum: None. S. Chatel: None. ANGPTL6 and Familial Susceptibility to Intracranial B.Isidor:None.E.Génin:None.J.F.Deleuze:None.J.J. Aneurysm Schott:None.H.LeMarec:None.G.Loirand:None.H. Desal: None. R. Redon: None. R.Bourcier1,2,S.LeScouarnec1,S.Bonnaud1,M.Karakachoff1, E.Bourcereau1,S.HeurtebiseChrétien1,C.Menguy1,C.Dina1, P09.074B F. Simonet1, A.Moles2,C.Lenoble2,P. Lindenbaum1, Joubert Syndrome:New genes described! A new allelic S. Chatel1, B.Isidor1, E.Génin3,J.F. Deleuze4,J.J.Schott1, phenotypes achieved! H.Le Marec1,ICAN StudyGroup,G.Loirand1,H. Desal1,2, R. Redon1 U.Abur,G.Ogur,E.Altundag,A.Yilmaz,O.S.Akar,A.Sanri, H.Mutlu Albayrak 1L'institut du thorax, Inserm, CNRS, Univ Nantes, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 2Department of Neurosurgery, CHU ONDOKUZ MAYIS UNIVERSITY MEDICAL FACULTY Nantes, Nantes, France, 3Université de Bretagne Occidentale, DEPARTMENT OF GENETICS, Samsun, Turkey Inserm UMR1078, CHRU Brest, Etablissement Français du Sang, Brest, France, 4Centre National de Recherche en Introduction: Joubert syndrome (JS) is characterized by Génomique Humaine, CEA, Evry, France hypotonia,ataxia,psychomotordelay,‘molartoothsign’.JS is clinically and genetically heterogeneous. Intracranial aneurysms (IA) are acquired cerebrovascular Methods: NGS and array-CGH were used.An attempt of abnormalities characterizedbyalocalized dilationandwall genotype-phenotype correlation has been created. All thinning in intracranial arteries. The main IA complication patientshaddysmorphism,developmentaldelayand‘molar is the rupture, resulting in subarachnoid haemorrhage and toothsign’inMRI.Case1:7year-oldpatienthadhypotonia, possiblyleadingtosevere outcome.IA pathogenesis isstill microphtalmia, pytosis,aganglionic colon.Homozygous largely unknown, with no reliable risk marker available so mutation (p.Arg563His) in INPP5E gene was detected. far. We have recently identiﬁed one rare nonsense variant Case2:16 month-old patient had lobule tongue,biﬁd uvula, (c.1378A>T) in the last exon of ANGPTL6 (Angiopoietin- short thorax,tetramelic postaxial polydactyly.Homozygous Like 6) shared by the 4 tested affected members of a large 2-bpdeletioninIFT80genewasdetected. Case3:8day-old pedigreewithmultipleIAcases.SinceANGPTL6encodesa baby had cleft palate, coloboma and pytosis.Array-CGH circulating pro-angiogenic factor mainly secreted from the showed microdeletion of 136 kb at 16q22.1(This region liver, we showed a 50% reduction of ANGPTL6 serum included a PDPR gene). Case4:12 year-old patient had concentration in individuals heterozygous for the sleep disturbance, nephronophthisis and coloboma.Genetic c.1378A>Tallelecomparedtorelativeshomozygousforthe analysisrevealedcompoundheterozygousmutationc.6012- normal allele, probably due to the non-secretion of the 2A>G in splice site and c.5668 G>A (p.Gly1890X) in truncated protein produced by the c.1378A>T transcripts. CEP290 gene. Case5:3 year-old patient had breathing By sequencing ANGPTL6 in additional index cases with abnormalities, polysyndactyly.Genetic analysis revealed familial IA, we detected a signiﬁcant enrichment in rare homozygote mutation (p.Arg154Ter) in KIF7 gene. codingvariantswithinthisgeneamong95affectedsubjects Case6:3 month-old patient had hypotonia,breathing comparedtoareferencepopulationof404individualswith abnormalities,broad hallux and bilateral syndactyly of toes. French ancestry. We observed a higher rate of individuals Case 7:15 year-old patient had broad hallux,partial withahistoryofhighbloodpressureamongaffectedversus syndactylyoftoes.Geneticanalysisofcase6and7revealed healthyindividualscarryingANGPTL6variants,suggesting homozygous mutation (p.Arg973Ter) in KIF7 gene. that ANGPTL6 could trigger cerebrovascular lesions when Results: There are more then 20 genes in JS. Here we combined with other risk factors such as hypertension. suggested two new genes for JS, PDPR, IFT80. PDPR has Altogether, our results indicate that rare coding variants in not been associated with any disease;It is ought to beAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 283 responsible for cleft palate and molar tooth sign and currently manifesting an autistic disorder in absence of possibly presents a new JS fenotype (Alazami et al.,2017). others neurological signs. The description of JHD is IFT80 has been previously described in ATD-2 and we sometimeincludingchildrenwithpsychiatricmanifestations describeits correlationwithJS ﬁrstly.KIF7 seemsto bethe associatedwithadultmotoronset.Weadvisetopaycareful third new gene of JS with a possible founder effect in attention to such rare conditions that might represent either Northern Turkey. psychiatric conditions erreounously classiﬁed as JHD or U.Abur:None.G.Ogur:None.E.Altundag:None.A. prodromic adult HD cases. <!--EndFragment--> Yilmaz: None. O.S. Akar: None. A. Sanri: None. H. F. Consoli: None. M. Marano: None. S. Migliore: Mutlu Albayrak: None. None. S. Mafﬁ: None. I. Mazzante: None. A. De Luca: None. F. Squitieri: None. P09.075C Children with CAG expansion in the mild repeat range of P09.076D Huntingtin gene showing psychiatric but not neurological Expanding the phenotypic spectrum in neurological presentation: is it one more shade of the disease? disorders associated with mutations in KARS gene (lysyl- tRNA synthetase) by the identiﬁcation of a novel mutation F. Consoli1, M.Marano2,S.Migliore2, S.Mafﬁ2,I.Mazzante3, A. DeLuca1,F.Squitieri2 S.Scheidecker1,S.Bär2,C.Stoetzel1,V.Geoffroy1,B.Lannes3, B.Rinaldi2,S.Kremer4,M.Mirande5,C.Tranchant6,J.Muller1, 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza S. Friant2,H. Dollfus1,7 Hospital,IRCCS,SanGiovanniRotondo,Italy,2CasaSollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, INSERM U1112, Institute of Italy, 3LIRH (Lega Italiana Ricerca Huntington) Foundation, Genetics and medicine of Alsace (IGMA), Université de Rome, Italy Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Department of Molecular and Cellular Genetics, UMR7156, Centre National de Normal 0 14 false false false IT JA X-NONE /* Style Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS), Université de Strasbourg, Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"- Strasbourg,France,3Serviced’Anatomo-pathologie,Hôpitaux Tabella normale"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle- Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-prior- Strasbourg, France, 4Service de Neuroradiologie/Imagerie 2, ity:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in CHU de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, 5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0in; mso-para-margin-bot- France, 5Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), tom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font- CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, size:12.0pt; font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii-font-family: Paris,France,6ServicedeNeurologieHôpitauxUniversitaires Cambria; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi- de Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, font-family:Cambria; mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;} 7Centre de Référence pour les affections rares en génétique Our objective is to characterize the rare occurrence of ophtalmologique, CARGO, Filière SENSGENE, Hôpitaux clinicalmanifestationsinchildrencarryingmutationsinthe Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France low-mild size, generally causing adult Huntington disease (HD). We are following up a subgroup of young subjects Mutations in genes encoding aaRSs (aminoacyl-tRNA with HD mutation who manifested with disabling psychia- synthetases), an essential enzyme family for protein synth- tric condition since infancy or adolescence. Among 60 esis,werereportedinseveralneurologicaldisorders. aaRSs juvenile Huntington disease (JHD) patients we currently can be divided into 3 groups according to the cellular follow-up, four of them with mild mutation size showed localization of the aminoacylation: cytoplasmic, mitochon- neurologicalsignsormovementdisorderssuggestiveofHD drial or both. KARS is one of the 3 aaRSs with a bifunc- in adulthood. All patients were genetically (e.g. CAG size tional role and its cytosolic fraction is a component of a analysis) and clinically (e.g. total motor score within the multiple aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (MARS) complex. Uniﬁed HD Rating Scale) characterized. All four subjects Biallelic mutations in the KARS gene, encoding the lysyl- presented a CAG expansion size <45 repeats. Two patients tRNA synthetase, were described in peripheral neuropathy, manifested a schizophrenia-like disturbance during the non syndromic hearing loss and more complex phenotypes adolescence, with the later appearance of motor signs after evocating a mitochondrial disorder. age20.Intheothertwocases,patientspresentedsymptoms We performed whole exome sequencing in a patient of autistic spectrum disorder, since infancy. One of them presenting with severe neurological and neurosensory showedalsoaschizophrenia-likedisturbanceand,later,HD disorder and her healthy parents and we identiﬁed onset with motor signs after 20. One 4-years old patient is compound heterozygous variants in KARS, with one novel284 J.delPicchia mutation. To demonstrate the pathogenic effect of the two S4 segment which functions as a voltage sensor. KCND3 mutations, we studied the expression of both KARS pathogenic variants have been associated with Spinocer- isoforms in patient’s skin ﬁbroblasts and used a double ebellar Ataxia (SCA19/22) with reported ataxia onset hybrid interaction study. ranging from the age of ten to adulthood. Smets et al. We showed a different expression of both KARS 2015 have reported on a patient with a de novo KCND3 isoforms with a decrease of cytoplasmic KARS and an variant affecting the S4 segment who showed develop- increaseofmitochondrialisoforminthepatient’sﬁbroblasts mental delay, epilepsy, oral apraxia and attention deﬁcit compared to a control. With the double hybrid interaction hyperactivity and ﬁrst presented with ataxia symptoms at study we showed a defect of interaction between the two the age of 3 years. mutant forms of KARS and the p38 protein, a core protein Conclusion: This case supports the ﬁndings of Smets responsible for assembly of the MARS complex, which et al. that de novo variants should be considered in SCA. directly interacts with KARS. Both reported cases suggest that KCND3-associated ataxia Inconclusion,wereportapatientcarryingtwomutations should be taken into consideration even in cases with early in KARS gene, with one novel mutation, and presenting in childhoodmanifestationandthatvariantsinthesegmentS4 additiontoneurosensorydeafnessandneurologicalfeatures of Kv4.3 might result in earlier clinical manifestation of previously described, cerebellar ataxia and optic ataxia. To our knowledge thisis theearliest reported ataxia neuropathy. onset in KCND3-associated ataxia. S.Scheidecker:None.S.Bär:None.C.Stoetzel:None. A.Gazou:None.R.Buchert:None.A.Riess:None.A. V. Geoffroy: None. B. Lannes: None. B. Rinaldi: None. Dufke: None. U. Grasshoff: None. D. Gauck: None. J. S. Kremer: None. M. Mirande: None. C. Tranchant: Magg: None. V. Horber: None. I. Kraegeloh- Mann: None. J. Muller: None. S. Friant: None. H. None. O. Riess: None. T. Haack: None. Dollfus: None. P09.078B P09.077A An NGS approach to the genetic diagnosis of hereditary Casereportonaboywithearly-onsetataxiaandanovelde leukodystrophies novoKCND3variantaffectingtheS4segmentoftheKv4.3 channel D.DiBella1,S.Magri1,E. Sarto1,D.Tonduti2, A.Simonati3, I.Moroni2,C. Gellera1,E.Salsano4, F.Taroni1 A. Gazou1,R. Buchert1, A.Riess1,A. Dufke1,U.Grasshoff1, D.Gauck1, J.Magg2, V.Horber2,I.Kraegeloh- Mann2, 1Unit of Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic O.Riess1, T. Haack1 Disease,FondazioneIRCCSIstitutoNeurologicoCarloBesta, Milano, Italy, 2Child Neurology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 3Department University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, of Neuroscience, Biomedicine, Movement Neurology (Child 2Department of Neuropediatrics, Developmental Neurolgy, Neurology and Psychiatry), University of Verona, Verona, Social Pediatrics, University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Italy, 4Neurology Unit 10, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Germany Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy Introduction: The boy presented at the age of two years Introduction: Hereditary white matter disorders (WMDs) with delayed motor, cognitive and language development, are a heterogeneous group of disorders affecting myelin in dysarthria and postural as well as gait ataxia. Metabolic the central nervous system, with abnormalities in myelin workup revealed no abnormalities. Today he is 7 ½ years formation (hypomyelinating leukodystrophies, HLD) or old, receives supportive therapy and attends a special myelin degeneration (demyelinating leukodystrophies, school. DLD). Although >100 conditions have been identiﬁed, Methods: Whole exome sequencing (SureSelectXT <50%ofpatientsreceiveageneticdiagnosisbecauseofthe Human All Exon v6) identiﬁed the following novel variant heterogeneity and complexity of these disorders. Aim of in the KCND3 gene: c.910T>C: p.Ser304Pro; segregation thisstudywastoemployacomprehensiveNGSgenepanel analysis showed a de novo status. No other pathogenic to study both childhood-onset (EO) and adult-onset (AO) variantswereidentiﬁed.Thevariantwasclassiﬁedaslikely WMD patients negative for the most common genes. pathogenic. Materials and Methods: A probe-based customized Discussion: KCND3 encodes Kv4.3, a voltage-gated panelcovering142WMDdisease-geneswasusedtoscreen potassium channel with six transmembrane segments, S1- 81indexcaseswithHLD(17AO;19EO)orDLD(21AO; S6,andtwointracellulartails.Theabovevariantaffectsthe 24 EO).Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 285 Results: Pathogenic mutations were identiﬁed in 24,7% Methods: Trio/Quad whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of probands (20/81) and likely pathogenic mutations in was performed on 27 patients from 22 families with other 8 probands (9,9%). Overall, the mutation score was leukodystrophy and a non-diagnostic MRI pattern or non- higherinthehypomyelinatingforms:47%(9/19)inEOand diagnostic WES. 24% (4/17) in AO subjects. Interestingly, in AO-HLD Results: A genetic diagnosis was achieved in 11/23 forms, we identiﬁed mutations in genes usually associated families (47%). Implicated genes included six typically with the more severe EO-HLD forms or spastic paraplegia. associated with leukodystrophy: DARS2, NDUFV1, Mutation scores in DLD were 21% (5/24) in EO and only BOLA3, COL4A1, TUBB4A, SLC17A5 and ﬁve genes not 10% (2/21) in AO. Copy number variation (CNV) analysis previously-associated with leukodystrophy: HMBS, FIG4, allowed the identiﬁcation of deletions/duplications in 6% STAG2, SCN2A, SCN8A. The latter group includes genes (5/81) of probands. associated with porphyria, epileptic encephalopathy, per- Conclusions: Our approach allowed to identify the ipheralneuropathyandcongenitalmalformation.TrioWGS geneticcausein~30%ofpatients,extendingthephenotypic was effective in identifying de novo variants as well as spectrum associated to different genes and establishing variants that had been missed by exome sequencing due to novel genotype/phenotype correlations. Notably, the high poor coverage. mutation score in AO-HLD patients reveal a genetic cause Conclusions:Resultsfromthiscohortadvocatetheuseof also for these neglected forms. (Italian MoH grant to CG) trio WGS for the diagnosis of CNS white matter disease as D. Di Bella: None. S. Magri: None. E. Sarto: None. D. thegeneticaetiologiesarediverseandmayincludedenovo Tonduti: None. A. Simonati: None. I. Moroni: None. C. dominant developmental genes as well as recessive house- Gellera: None. E. Salsano: None. F. Taroni: None. keeping, metabolic and mitochondrial genes. NHMRC project grant:1068278. P09.079C C.A.Stutterd:None.M.Delatycki:None.P.Lockhart: Trio whole-genome sequencing for patients with None.R.Taft:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest; unclassiﬁed leukodystrophies llluminaInc.A.Vanderver:None.C.Simons:None.R.J. Leventer: None. C. A.Stutterd1,2,3,4,M.Delatycki1,2,3,P. Lockhart1,3, R.Taft5, A. Vanderver6,7,C. Simons1,8,R. J.Leventer1,3,4 P09.080D A novel mutation in the coiled-coil interaction domain of 1Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, LAMB1 extends the molecular basis of laminin-related 2Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Parkville, Australia, cortical malformation phenotypes 3University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 4Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 5Illumina Inc, San E. Yılmaz1,E. Sönmezler1,A. Töpf2,S. Balaraju2, A.Yaramış3, Diego, CA, United States, 6Children's Hospital of S. Güngör4,S. Laurie5,R. Horvath2,H.Lochmüller2, Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7University of Y. Oktay1,6,S.Hız7,8 Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 8Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, 1Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center (IBG), Izmir, Turkey, Australia 2John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Background: Leukodystrophies are a genetically diverse Tyne,UK,NewcastleuponTyne,UnitedKingdom,3Diyarbakır group of disorders that have in common the selective Memorial Hospital, Diyarbakır, Turkey, 4İnönü University, involvement of the central nervous system (CNS) white Malatya, Turkey, 5CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic matter. They most commonly present in childhood and Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, usually follow a progressive course, with high morbidity Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain, 6Dokuz Eylul University, and mortality and limited life span. A genetic diagnosis is Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, key to providing accurate prognostic information and Izmir, Turkey, 7Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, reproductive counselling to families, and appropriate clin- Dept. of Pediatric Neurology, Izmir, Turkey, Izmir, Turkey, ical management of the patient. Magnetic resonance ima- 8Izmir Biomedicine and Genome Center (IBG), Dokuz Eylul ging (MRI) pattern recognition and exome sequencing University Health Campus, Izmir, Turkey, Izmir, Turkey currently achieve a diagnosis for 70% of patients. Aim: To identify the genetic causes underlying a cohort of patients Introduction: Lamininsare major components ofthebasal withunclassiﬁedleukodystrophyonMRIornegativewhole laminae. LAMB1 mutations have been reported in only 3 exome sequencing (WES). families with lissencephaly and largely overlapping but286 J.delPicchia distinct phenotypes. Here we present a case with a novel Introduction: Lissencephaly is a rare brain malformation mutation in LAMB1 gene. caused by abnormal neuronal migration. The main clinical Materials and Methods: The patient, 17 year-old girl symptoms of the condition are developmental delay, intel- from a consanguineous marriage, never developed the lectual disability and seizures. Several genes have been abilitytowalkorspeakandhaddrug-resistantseizures.Her implicatedinlissencephaly,themostfrequentlyaffectedare physical examination revealed dysmorphic facial features, LIS1 (PAFAH1B1), DCX and TUBA1A. The encoded pro- scoliosis, ocular abnormalities, increased deep tendon teins play an essential role in the formation or function of reﬂexes and generalized weakness. The EEG demonstrated microtubules. generalized epileptic discharges. Cranial MRI showed Materials and Methods: We studied Hungarian patients bilateral perisylvianpolymicrogyria. Whole-exomesequen- withisolated(n=13)andsyndromic(n=2)lissencephaly. cing (WES) was performed using Illumina exome capture Diagnosis was based on clinical evaluation and magnetic (38 Mb) at MIT BROAD Institute. Data analysis was resonance imaging. Genetic testing involved sequencing of carried outontheRD-Connect Genome-PhenomeAnalysis theLIS1,DCXandTUBA1Agenesintheisolatedcasesand Platform. Standard ﬁltering criteria with MAF<1% and ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for the detection high/moderate VEP were used. of 17p13.3 microdeletion in patients with Miller-Dieker Results: We identiﬁed a homozygous missense variant syndrome. (p.Gly1413Glu)inLAMB1,associatedwithlissencephaly5 Results: Genetic analysis revealed pathogenic alterations (OMIM# 615191). This variant is predicted to be highly in 8 patients. We identiﬁed three frameshift, one missense, pathogenic(CADD=34)andisextremelyrareinthecontrol one extension and one nonsense mutations. Three of the population (0.000824%). The affected residue is localized intragenic mutations were novel. The LIS1 gene was to the ‘Domain alpha’, which is between Domain-I and affected in 4 patients characterized by agyria/pachygyria. Domain-II that mediate the interaction of laminin chains to ADCXmutationwasfoundinsubcorticalbandheterotopia form the coiled-coil structure. and the identiﬁed single TUBA1A mutation was associated Conclusion:PreviouslyreportedmutationsofLAMB1are with cerebellar hypoplasia and agenesis of the corpus localized to the EGFLAM and Laminin-IV domains. Our callosum. FISH analysis detected 17p13.3 microdeletion in ﬁndings for the ﬁrst time show that a missense mutation in 2 patients which conﬁrmed Miller-Dieker syndrome. the ‘Domain alpha’ of LAMB1 can cause a similar Conclusions:Thesearetheﬁrstresultsofgenetictesting phenotype. Moreover, heterogeneity in the clinical pheno- for lissencephaly in Hungarian population. We conﬁrmed type of patients with LAMB1 mutations is an interesting theclinicaldiagnosisinmore,thanhalfofthepatients.The ﬁnding that will require functional studies. precisedescriptionofthepatternofgyralmalformationand E. Yılmaz: None. E. Sönmezler: None. A. Töpf: None. associated abnormalities may predict the most likely S. Balaraju: None. A. Yaramış:None. S. Güngör: None. causative gene in a patient with lissencephaly. S. Laurie: None. R. Horvath: None. H. Lochmüller: B. Bessenyei: None. A. Mokanszki: None. O. Nagy: None. Y. Oktay: None. S. Hız: None. None. K. Szakszon: None. A. Zimmermann: None. M. Zombor: None. E. Horvath: None. A. Ujfalusi: None. I. P09.081A Balogh: None. L. Sztriha: None. GeneticinvestigationoftheLIS1,DCXandTUBA1Agenes in patients with lissencephaly P09.082B Integratedanalysisofgeneticandepigeneticdataofhealthy B. Bessenyei1,A. Mokanszki2,O.Nagy1,K. Szakszon3, individualswithdifferentriskfactorsforaffectivedisorders A. Zimmermann4,M.Zombor4,E. Horvath5,A.Ujfalusi1, I.Balogh1,L. Sztriha4 S. Sivalingam1,2,A. Forstner1,2,S. Herms1,2,3,A. Maaser1,2, A.Koller1,2,C.Reinbold3,4,S.Fischer3,4,T.Andlauer5,F.Streit6, 1Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory J.Frank6, H.Dukal6,S. Witt6,S.Heilmann-Heimbach1,2, Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, K. Ludwig1,2,F. Degenhardt1,7,A. Krug8,U.Dannlowski9, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Department of Pathology, Faculty of T. Kircher8,S. Cichon1,2,3,M.Rietschel6, P.Hoffmann1,2,3, Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, M.Nöthen1,2 3Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,Debrecen,Hungary,4DepartmentofPediatricsand 1Institute of Humangenetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Pediatric Health Center, University of Szeged, Szeged, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Hungary, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Human Genomics Research Group, Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 4Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 287 UniversityHospitalofBasel,Basel,Switzerland,5MaxPlanck P09.083C Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Munich, Germany, Two patients with PNKP mutations presenting 6Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central microcephaly, seizure, and oculomotor apraxia Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 7Department M.Taniguchi-Ikeda1,N.Morisada2,H.Inagaki3,N.Okamoto4, of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Bonn, Switzerland, T. Toda5,I.Morioka1,H.Kurahashi3, K.Iijima1 8Department of Psychiatry, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany, 9Department of Psychiatry, University of Muenster, 1Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School Muenster, Germany of Medicine, Kobe Hyogo, Japan, 2Clinical Genetics, Hyogo prefectural Childrens Hospital, Kobe Hyogo, Japan, Affective disorders (major depressive disorder, bipolar 3Department of Molecular Genetics, Fujita Health University, disorder) are genetically complex and heterogeneous dis- Toyoake,Aichi, Japan, 4Department Medical Genetics, Osaka orders. Both genetic and environmental risk factors con- MedicalCenterandResearchInstituteforMaternalandChild tribute to the etiology of the diseases. However, the Health, Izumi, Osaka, Japan, 5Department of Neurology, The neurobiological correlates by which these risk factors University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan inﬂuence disease development are hardly understood. Increasing evidence suggests that epigenetic modiﬁcations Microcephaly with early-onset, intractable seizures and such as DNA methylation have important implications on developmental delay (MCSZ, OMIM #613402) is an auto- the development of psychiatric diseases including affective somal recessive group of heterogeneous disorders, which disorders. Several studiesrevealed that genetic variants can can also be associated with other severe neurological alter DNA methylation at speciﬁc loci (methylation quan- defects. Mutations in polynucleotide kinase 3’-phosphatase titative trait loci, meQTLs). To investigate this, we exam- (PNKP)havebeensuggestedtocauseMCSZ.Additionally, ined the association between genetic variants and PNKPmutationsalsocauseataxia-oculomotorapraxiatype methylation levels in whole blood of 44 individuals with 4 (AOA4) without symptoms of epilepsy or microcephaly. different risk factors for affective disorders (genetic/envir- The reported AOA4 cases carried mutations in the kinase onmental risk). Genotyping of the 44 individuals was con- domainofPNKP.Hereweidentiﬁedthreenewmutationsin ducted using the Illumina Inﬁnium PsychArray. Imputation two Japanese MCSZ patients who gradually exhibited ofthegenotypeswasperformedusing IMPUTE2and1000 AOA4 symptoms. All mutations resided within the kinase Genomes phase 3 reference haplotypes. DNA methylation domain and both patients showed severe epilepsy and was assessed using the Inﬁnium MethylationEPIC Bead- microcephaly with congenital anomalies. A 38-year old Chip spanning 850,000 CpG sites. FastQTL using a cis- MCSZ patient showed apparent AOA symptoms with spi- window size of ±500 MB and a linear regression model nocerebellar degeneration. Another patient with MCSZ was applied to identify associations between imputed gen- showed lissencephaly and frequent horizontal headshaking otypes and methylation levels. In total, we investigated from age 1, suggestive of oculomotor apraxia. Kinase 551,275SNP-CpGpairsandidentiﬁed1,460signiﬁcantcis- domain mutations in PNKP may manifest as a wide spec- meQTLs for an FDR of 5% (p-value<9.06x10-8). One of trum of overlapping phenotypes of MCSZ and AOA4. the top meQTLs rs4880352 (p-value<1.72x10-10) was Therefore,wesuggestthateachMCSZandAOAmaybea associatedwiththemethylationlevelatcg01458105located sequential phenotypes of PNKP mutations in kinase nearbySTK32C.Thisgenewasdifferentiallymethylatedin domain. a former study of depression in monozygotic discordant M. Taniguchi-Ikeda: None. N. Morisada: None. H. twins(Dempsteretal.,2014).ThemeQTLsidentiﬁedinthe Inagaki: None. N. Okamoto: None. T. Toda: None. I. present study might improve the interpretation of the Morioka: None. H. Kurahashi: None. K. Iijima: None. functional relevance of genetic variants associated with affective disorders. P09.084D S. Sivalingam: None. A. Forstner: None. S. Herms: Recessive mutations in VARS encoding cytoplasmic valyl None. A. Maaser: None. A. Koller: None. C. Reinbold: tRNAsynthetase cause microcephaly, seizures and None. S. Fischer: None. T. Andlauer: None. F. Streit: progressive cerebral atrophy None.J.Frank:None.H.Dukal:None.S.Witt:None.S. Heilmann-Heimbach: None. K. Ludwig: None. F. J.Stephen1,S. Nampoothiri2, A.Banerjee3,N.J.Tolman4, Degenhardt: None. A. Krug: None. U. Dannlowski: J.Penninger5,U.Elling5,C. A.Agu5,J.D.Burke1, None. T. Kircher: None. S. Cichon: None. M. Rietschel: K.Devadathan6,R.Kannan7,Y.Huang8,P.J.Steinbach9,W.A. None. P. Hoffmann: None. M. Nöthen: None. Gahl1,4,8,M. V.Malicdan1,4,8288 J.delPicchia 1MedicalGeneticsBranch,NationalHumanGenomeResearch Funding:This study was supproted by the Intramural Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United Research Program of NHGRI, NIH, USA States, 2Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of J.Stephen: None.S.Nampoothiri:None.A.Banerjee: Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, India, None.N.J.Tolman:None.J.Penninger:None.U.Elling: 3DepartmentofBiochemistry,UniversityofIllinoisatUrbana- None. C.A. Agu: None. J.D. Burke: None. K. Deva- Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States, 4Ofﬁce of the Clinical dathan: None. R. Kannan: None. Y. Huang: None. P.J. Director, NHGRI, and the NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Steinbach: None. W.A. Gahl: None. M.V. Program, NHGRI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Malicdan: None. MD, United States, 5Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Science (IMBA), Vienna Biocenter P09.085A (VBC), Dr. Bohr Gasse 3, Vienna, Austria, 6Department of Clinical and molecular study of Tunisian families with Pediatric Neurology, KIMS Hospital, Thiruvananthapuram, autosomal recessive primary microcephaly India, 7Department of Radiology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, India, 8NIH I.Rejeb1,H. Sassi1,H.Jilani1, S.Hizem1, Y.Elaribi1, Undiagnosed Diseases Program, NHGRI, National Institutes S.Bourgou2,A.Belhadj2,A.Meherzi3,I.Selmi3,N.Pouvreau4, ofHealth,Bethesda,MD,UnitedStates,9CenterforMolecular S. Drunat5,A. Verloes4,L. Benjemaa1 Modeling, Center for Information Technology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States 1DepartmentofGenetics,MongiSlimHospital,Tunis,Tunisia, 2DepartmentofChildPsychiatry,MongiSlimHospital,Tunis, Introduction: Mutations in genes involved in human Tunisia, 3Department of Pediatrics, Mongi Slim Hospital, transcriptional and translational machinery, including the Tunis, Tunisia, 4Departement of Genetics, Hôpital amino acyl-tRNA synthetases (aARSs) family of genes Universitaire Robert Debré, APHP, Paris, France, 5Genetic largely account for postnatal neurodegenerative diseases. department, Robert Debre, Paris, France Herein we investigated the genetic etiology of two siblings with severe early onset neurological manifestations. Introduction: Autosomal recessive microcephaly or Materials and Methods:Whole exome sequencing MicroCephaly Primary Hereditary (MCPH) is a genetic (WES), homology modeling, RT-PCR, Immunoblotting, heterogeneous disorder, characterized by a reduction in Vars-/- mouse cell generation and valyl tRNA synthetase brain volume, with an occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) (ValRS)enzymeassaywereemployedduringthecourseof atbirthequaltoorlessthan-2SDbelowthemeanforsex, this study. age, and ethnicity. An MCPH phenotype has been asso- Results: WES identiﬁed novel compound heterozygous ciated with mutations in at least 18 loci, MCPH1-18. mutations in VARS, encoding ValRS, one of the aARSs; a Amongthem,ASPM(MCPH5locus)isthemostfrequently missense (c.3192G>A;p.Met1064Ile) and splice site muta- mutated gene reported (60%). In Tunisia, there are no data tion (c.1577-2A>G), that segregated with the affected on genetic variations in this entity. status. cDNAanalysis revealed thatthesplice sitemutation Materials and Methods: We report the clinical and led to nonsense mediated decay, thus resulting in a null genetic study of 15 patients belonging to 12 unrelated allele. Three-dimensional modeling of ValRS predicts that familiespresenting congenital microcephaly(OFC between missense mutation lies in the highly-conserved region and -2and-6SD),anintellectualdisabilityofvariableseverity, couldaltersidechainpacking,thusaffectingtRNAbinding epileptic seizures in 9 patients, and abnormalities on or destabilizing the interface between the catalytic and cerebral MRI in 6 patients. We performed 2 multigene tRNA binding domains. Further quantitation of VARS panelanalysesusingnextgenerationsequencingofmultiple expression showed remarkably reduced level of mRNA MCPH-causing genes. and protein in patient cells. Aminoacylation experiments Results:Onlytwodifferentheterozygousmutationswere revealed markedly reduced enzyme activity of ValRS foundintwopatientsrespectivelyinLIG4andSTILgenes. suggesting the mutations to be loss of function. These variants are not the only causative mutations Conclusions:Bi-allelic mutations in aARSs are well explaining the observed clinical features. We suggest that known for their role in neurodegenerative disorders, yet other mutations would be present in the regulatory regions human disorders associated with VARS mutations haven’t oftheexploredgenes,inthenoncodingregions,orinother yet been clinically well characterized. Our study describes genes that were not present in the used panels. WES is the phenotype associated with recessive VARS mutations planned for these families. and further functional delineation of the novel mutations Conclusions: MCPH is a very heterogeneous disorder. that widens the clinical and genetic spectra of individuals Many MCPH familieshavenot yetbeen ascribed toany of with progressive microcephaly.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 289 the known genes, suggesting that additional MCPH genes P09.089A are still to be discovered. Hemochromatosis gene polymorphisms in multiple I. Rejeb: None. H. Sassi: None. H. Jilani: None. S. sclerosis: a meta-analysis Hizem: None. Y. Elaribi: None. S. Bourgou: None. A. Belhadj: None. A. Meherzi: None. I. Selmi: None. N. N.StarcevicCizmarevic1,B. Ćurko-Cofek1,V. Barac-Latas1, Pouvreau: None. S. Drunat: None. A. Verloes: None. L. B. Peterlin2,S.Ristić1 Benjemaa: None. 1Faculty of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia, 2Clinical Institute of P09.088D Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia Clinicalandmoleculargeneticanalysisofacaseoffamilial multiple sclerosis in the Republic of Bashkortostan Introduction: Increasing bodies of evidence support a potentialroleofironmetabolisminmultiplesclerosis(MS). Y.R.Timasheva1,O.V.Zaplakhova2,K.Z.Bakhtiyarova2,I.A. Previous studies examining the association of hemochro- Tuktarova1, O.E. Mustaﬁna1 matosis (HFE) gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to MS yield inconsistent results. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Science Centre Materials and Methods: We performed a meta-analysis Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, ofsix studies conducted inpopulationsofCaucasian origin 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation (1871patientsand2030controls)usingtheComprehensive Meta-analysis 3.0 software. The strength of association Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex disease, and genetic between the HFE C282Y and H63D polymorphisms and predisposition plays an important role in its development. MSriskwas estimatedbyoddsratios with 95%conﬁdence Familialcasescomprise2%to5%ofallMSpatients.Inthe intervals. Cochran’s Q-statistic and I-squared tests were RepublicofBashkortostan,locatedintheVolga-Uralregion applied to quantify heterogeneity among studies. Egger’s of Russian Federation (RF), 1145 patients with MS have test was used to estimate the publication bias. been documented in MS Register; familial cases accounted Results: The results demonstrated that the HFE C282Y for6.1%.OurstudyfocusedonararecaseoffamilialMS- and H63D polymorphisms had no statistically signiﬁcant a family of Russian ethnic origin from the Republic of association with an increased MS risk (all P > 0.05) under Bashkortostan(RF)thatincludedsixindividualswithMSin subsequent genetic comparison models: dominant model four generations. Pedigree analysis and genotyping of the (YY+CY vs. CC or DD+HD vs. HH) and allelic contrast MScandidate lociwereperformed. Clinical features ofMS (Y vs. C or D vs. H). No evident publication bias or in the studied family reﬂected the most common patterns - signiﬁcant heterogeneity among studies was detected. matrilineal transmission of the disease, earlier debut and Conclusions: The present study indicates that the HFE benign course of MS in the younger generations. We C282Y and H63D polymorphisms are not associated with observed obvious clinical polymorphism of the disease, in susceptibility to MS in populations of Caucasian origin. particular, various symptoms of MS debut in affected Further studies should be conducted to estimate the family members. The absence of clinical exacerbations and contribution of HFE polymorphisms to the progression of lack of active MS foci according to neuroimaging in pro- MS. National research grants: Genetic analysis of Multiple band was probably due to the timely administration of Sclerosis 13.06.1.1.10 and The role of iron in pathogenesis immunomodulatorytherapy.Wefoundtheaccumulationin of multiple sclerosis 13.06.2.2.61 the family of the alleles that were associated with auto- N. Starcevic Cizmarevic: None. B. Ćurko-Cofek: immune diseases according to the results of genome-wide None. V. Barac-Latas: None. B. Peterlin: None. S. association studies: ASAP2 rs1109670*C, GPC5 Ristić: None. rs9523762*G, IL7R rs10624573*D and rs1494558*I, STAT3 rs2293152*G, IL2RA rs1570538*Т and P09.090B rs12722580*I, IL2 rs2069772*А. Our results corroborate In vitro Investigation for the role of IGF-I and MGF in the hypothesis that several strong-effect genetic variants High Glucose Environment on Neural Stem Cell may be responsible for familial aggregation of MS cases. Proliferation The study was supported by the RFBR grant No. 17-44- 020735. S. Sozer,T. Gurbuz,S. B. Tunç,K. Ateş Y.R. Timasheva: None. O.V. Zaplakhova: None. K.Z. Bakhtiyarova: None. I.A. Tuktarova: None. O.E. Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine (AS-DETAE), Mustaﬁna: None. Istanbul, Turkey290 J.delPicchia Neural stem cells (NSC) generate neurons, astrocytes, and Pontocerebellar hypoplasia is a group of neurodegenera- oligodendrocytes of the nervous system. Mechano-Growth tive disorders. There are 10 known subtyped (PCH1-10) Factor (MGF) is a splice variant of Insulin-like Growth with common characteristics of pontine and cerebellar Factor–I(IGF-I),knownasatissuerepairfactorindifferent hypoplasia and atrophy, neocortical atrophy, ventriculome- tissues and expressed in brain and heart during ischemic galy and microcephaly. To date, recessive mutations have conditions. High glucose levels are harmful to cells. This been noted in PCH1 in the EXOSC3 gene, in the tRNA studyaimstodeterminetheintrinsicandextrinsiceffectsof splicing endonuclease homolog 54 (TSEN54), mitochon- IGF-I and MGF on NSCs and to observe their proliferative drial arginyl-transfer RNA synthetase (RARS2), and in the and neuroprotective ability with varying glucose vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) gene. concentrations. Wepresentthecasesof2siblingsfromaconsanguineous Rat NSC cell-line was applied. Cells were subjected to Moslem Arabic family with unique combination of differentglucoselevelsincluding17.5mM:normoglycemia, progressive cerebellar atrophy and SMA-like anterior horn 27.75mM:diabetesmellitus,41.75mM:diabeticketoacidosis cell degeneration due to homozygous mutation in the and 83.75mM:hyperglycemia-hyperosmolar-state with/ PLA2G6 gene in both siblings. without IGF-I±MGF. NSC proliferation was determined ThePLA2G6geneencodesphospholipaseA2beta,which by ﬂow cytometric analysis of Bromodeoxyuridine, and is involved in the remodelling of membrane phospholipids, expressions were detected by Real-Time-RT-PCR analysis. signaltransductionandcalciumsignalling,cellproliferation High glucose levels were inhibited NSC proliferation and apoptosis. (85,16%, 57,51% and 35,64%, respectively). IGF-I±MGF MutationsinthePLA2G6areknowntocausethreemain were enhanced cell proliferation and re-acquisition of NSC clinical syndromes: infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy proliferation (p≤0.0005). There was a negative correlation (INAD), atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy of childhood- between IGF-I ±MGF expression and glucose levels. The onset (atypical NAD) and adult-onset PLA2G6-related highest expression with normoglycemia and a dramatic dystonia- parkinsonism . decrease (100 fold) with hyperglycemia were detected. Our cases have some similarities with INAD. Both Even at the level of hyperglycemia, increased expressions syndromes are characterized by rapidly progressive psy- ofIGF-IandMGF(0.5and3fold)comparedtothecontrols chomotorregressionandcerebellaratrophy.INADdoesnot were determined. exhibit anterior horn cell degeneration. IGF-IandMGFinﬂuenceNSCproliferationandincrease Though our cases have some similarities with INAD, even at the high glucose concentrations. This study SMA-like phenotype has never been described in patients enlightens the IGF-I and MGF role in neuroprotective and with PLA2G6 mutations. neuroproliferativeabilityofNSCandalsofortheirpossible M. Michelson Kerman: None. L. Dorit: None. K. applications in treatment for the patients having diabetic Yosovich: None. M. Gurevitch: None. complications. Supported by grants from Istanbul University BAP; P09.092D Yüksek Lisans 3582 and BAP THZ-2016-21839. FunctionalanalysisofasplicingregionvariantinС19orf12 S.Sozer:None.T.Gurbuz:None.S.B.Tunç:None.K. in neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation 4 Ateş: None. (NBIA 4) P09.091C P. Sparber1,A. Marakhonov1,2,A. Filatova1, I.Sharkova1, NovelphenotypeassociatedwithmutationsinthePLA2G6 M.Skoblov1,2 gene 1Research center of medical genetics, Moscow, Russian M.Michelson Kerman, L.Dorit, K. Yosovich,M.Gurevitch Federation, 2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel Introduction: NBIA4 is an autosomal recessive disorder, Novel phenotype associated with mutations in the caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous patho- PLA2G6 gene. genic variants in C19orf12 gene and characterized by M. Michelson(1,2), D. Lev(1,2), K. Yosovich(1),M. impaired gait, Parkinsonism, behavior and psychiatric Gurevitch(1). symptoms,opticnerveatrophy.Wepresentacasereportof 1) Inst Med Genetics, Wolfson Medical Ctr, Holon, an 11-y.o. girl with signs of neurodegeneration with brain Israel; 2) Metabolic Neurogenetic clinic, Wolfson Medical MRI typical for iron accumulation. Ctr, Holon, Israel.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 291 Materials and methods: Whole exome sequencing pN77K) in CLN6 gene. The amino acid is perfectly con- (WES) was performed in “Genomed” laboratory, Moscow, served among species. In silico analysis, the mutation is Russia. Identiﬁed variants were conﬁrmed by Sanger predicted to be probably damaging. Moreover, gene ana- sequencing. DNA was isolated from whole blood using lysisforunrelatedsecondKufspatientwasperformed,who the phenol-chloroform extraction. HEK293T cells were had a same homozygous mutation. These data suggest that transfected with a minigene plasmid vector containing the the mutation must be pathogenic one. As they lived in the splicing region variant. Splicing change was validated by samedistrict,theyseemedtobedistantrelativeormightbe RT-PCR with further Sanger sequencing. inheritedfoundereffectmutation.Geneanalysisofthethird Results:WESidentiﬁedtwovariantsinthe19orf12gene, NCL patient (Ueda T et al. Intern Med, 2013) was per- acommonpathogenicdeletionc.204_214del11andanovel formed ofCLN6and13,howeverfailedtodetectanygene splicing region variant c.193+5G>A in the intron 2. mutation. Therefore, we performed whole exome sequen- Functional analysis in HEK293T cells using a minigene cing (WES). We identiﬁed a novel heterozygous CLN3 plasmid vector showed that c.193+5G>A variant leads to mutation(c313A>G,p. I105V) andautophagyrelatedgene skipping of the exon 2. c.193+5G>A variant disrupts the mutation. Since NCLs are very rare disease in Japan and splicing donor site of the intron 2. This leads to the awareness of the adult form of NCL is insufﬁcient, WES C19orf12exon2skippingandresultsinaframeshiftanda will be useful to ﬁnd causative genes for NCL. formation of the premature stop codon. Hence, a truncated T. Inazu: None. M. Onodera: None. S. Tsujimoto: protein is formed which length is less than 25% from the None. S. Katayama: None. T. Ueda: None. T. natural. Makifuchi: None. Conclusion:Therefore,weclassifyc.193+5G>Avariant in the 19orf12 gene as pathogenic and disease-causing in P09.096D our patient. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst reported Identiﬁcation of a Novel Silent Exonic Point Mutation in pathogenic splicing region variant in NBIA4. the NF1 Gene Causing Partial Exon 9 Skipping P.Sparber:None.A.Marakhonov:None.A.Filatova: None. I. Sharkova: None. M. Skoblov: None. A. T.Hoejland1,2,I.Lolas3,T. Diemer1,H.Okkels3, M.B. Petersen1,2 P09.095C Identiﬁcation of CLN6and CLN3 genes mutations in three 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University unrelated Japanese neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis patients Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark, 3Section of T.Inazu1,M.Onodera1,S.Tsujimoto1,S.Katayama1,T.Ueda2, Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, T. Makifuchi3,4 Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark 1College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ritsumeikan university, Introduction: Neuroﬁbromatosis 1 is a genetic disorder Shiga, Japan, 2Department of Emergency Medicine and caused by heterozygous mutations in the NF1 gene. The General Internal Medicine, Rakuwakai Marutamachi main features of neuroﬁbromatosis 1 are neuroﬁbromas, Hospital,, Kyoto, Japan, 3Department of Clinical Research, café-au-lait macules, axillary or inguinal freckling, lisch National Hospital Organization Saigata Medical Center, noduli, and optic gliomas. We report the identiﬁcation of a Niigata, Japan, 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Joetsu novel silent exonic mutation, which causes partial exon General Hosipital, Niigata, Japan skipping and co–segregate with the disease. Materials and Methods: We report a family with four The neuronal lipofuscinoses (NCL) are a family of inher- family members that fulﬁls the diagnostic criteria for ited,neurodegenerativedisordersthatareaccumulatedwith neuroﬁbromatosis 1. All exons and intron-exon boundaries ceroidlipofuscinsinneurons,leadingtotheprogressiveloss of the NF1, NF2, and SPRED1 genes were sequenced at of vision and neuronal impairment. The NCLs have been Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University categorizedintofourclassesbasedontheageofonset.Kufs Hospital by massive parallel sequencing on DNA from the diseaseisanadultonsetNCL,whichisautosomalrecessive indexpatient.Carriertestingwasperformedonthreefamily progressive lysosomal disorders and responsible genes are members by direct sequencing analysis of exon 9. Total CLN6 and CLN13. Here we present the mutational report RNA extraction was performed from total blood of the for adult NCL patients. We have reported a Kufs patient, index patient using PAXgene Blood RNA Kit 50 v2, and whose parents were consanguineous marriage (Sakajiri K reversetranscribedtocDNAusingrandomhexames.Direct et al. Intern Med, 1995). We performed gene analysis and cDNA sequencing was performed using a forward primer found a known but homozygous mutation (c231C>G,292 J.delPicchia spanningexon7and8oftheNF1geneandareverseprimer phenotype (HSPB3 mutation in Amyotrophic lateral spanning exon 10 and 11. sclerosis, and MYH14 mutation in patient mitochondrial Conclusion:Theheterozygousc.987A>Gmutationinthe myopathy). NF1 gene was detected in the index patient and two other Conclusion:TheseresultssignifytheimportanceofCES familymemberswithneuroﬁbromatosis1andnotidentiﬁed inbetterdiagnosisofobscurecaseswithneurodegenerative in a healthy family member. cDNA analysis of the index disorders and gave us better insight in complexity of patient showed, that the mutation causes a partial skipping genetics of these disorders. of exon 9, speciﬁcally the last 75bp. We speculate that this M. Brankovic: None. V. Dobricic: None. M. Svetel: silent mutation creates a cryptic donor splice site within None. S. Peric: None. E. Stefanova: None. A. Marja- exon9leadingtotheproductionoftruncateddysfunctional novic: None. I. Petrovic: None. I. Novakovic: None. V. protein. Kostic: None. A.T.Hoejland:None.I.Lolas:None.T.Diemer:None. H. Okkels: None. M.B. Petersen: None. P09.098B Biallelic mutations in the homeodomain of NKX6-2 P09.097A underlie a severe hypomyelinating leukodystrophy Use of clinical exome analysis in rare neurodegenerative disorders in Serbian population: Firs experience C. Aiello1,I. Dorboz2,C.Simons3,R. Stone4,M.Niceta1, M.Elmaleh4,M. Abuawad2,D.Doummar5, A.Bruselles6, M.Brankovic1,2,V.Dobricic2, M.Svetel1,2,S.Peric1,2, N.Wolf7,L. Travaglini1,O.Boespﬂug-Tanguy4, M.Tartaglia1, E. Stefanova1,2,A. Marjanovic1,2,I.Petrovic1,2,I.Novakovic1,2, A. Vanderver8,D.Rodriguez9, E.Bertini1 V. Kostic1,2 1Bambino Gesu' Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Paris 1Faculty of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Neurology Clinic, Diderot University, Paris, France, 3The University of Belgrade, Serbia Queensland, St Lucia, Australia, 4Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 5Hôpital Armand-Trousseau,, Paris, France, Introduction: Neurodegenerative diseases encompass a 6Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 7VU University heterogeneous group of disorders. The clinical diagnosis of Medical Center,, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Children's neurodegenerativedisordersbasedonphenotypeisdifﬁcult Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, in conditions with overlapping symptoms. Most of these 9Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France diseases have a genetic basis and thus are expected to be amenabletogeneticorgenomicanalysisbynext-generation Introduction: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are sequencing (NGS). genetically heterogeneous disorders with overlapping clin- Material and Methods: Study included 20 patients with ical and neuroimaging features reﬂecting variable abnorm- various neurodegenerative diseases, negative after standard alitiesinmyelinformation.ThehomeoboxproteinNKX6-2 molecular-genetic testing. Preference was given to family is a transcription factor regulating multiple developmental cases with early presentation or complex phenotype processes with a main role in oligodendrocyte differentia- suggesting genetic heterogeneity. Clinical exome sequen- tion and regulation of myelin-speciﬁc gene expression. cing (CES) was performed using TruSight One Panel on Materials and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing Illumina MiSeq NGS platform. Variantsin genes related to (WES) and homozygosity mapping of selected patients neurodegenerative diseases were analysed using Illumina from three unrelated families was undertaken. The variants Variant Studio v3; conﬁrmation by Sanger sequencing identiﬁed were validated by Sanger sequencing and was done. cosegregation analysis. Results: We revealed 10 pathogenic or likelypathogenic Results: Five affected subjects (three unrelated families) variants in 9 different genes related to rare neurodegenera- were documented to share biallelic inactivating mutations tive disorders in 9 patients. Mutations in PANK2, PDGFB, affecting the NKX6-2 homeobox domain. A trio-based DCTN1 and PSEN1 genes causing neurodegeneration with whole exome sequencing analysis in the ﬁrst family brain iron accumulation, Fahr's, Perry syndrome and detected a homozygous frameshift change [c.606delinsTA; Alzheimer's disease respectively, are compatible with the p.(Lys202Asnfs*?)]. In the second family, homozygosity phenotype of patients. In ﬁve cases DNA diagnosis remain mapping coupled to whole exome sequencing identiﬁed a unclear. Only one recessive mutation was found in SPG7 homozygous nucleotide substitution (c.565G>T) introdu- and AP5Z1 gene in cases of spastic paraplegia, and in cing a premature stop codon (p.Glu189*). In the third COL6A3 gene in case of dystonia. In another two cases family, whole exome sequencing established compound detected variants were not directly related to patient’s heterozygosity for a non-conservative missense changeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 293 affecting a key residue participating in DNA binding (Cys67Gly and Gly89Cys) were ﬁrst described in Serbian (c.599G>A; p.Arg200Gln) and a nonsense substitution CADASILpatientsandcharacterizedaspathogenicaccord- (c.589C>T; p.Gln197*), in both affected siblings. The ing to in silico prediction. Positive family history was clinical presentation was homogeneous, with four subjects reportedin10of19mutationcarriers.Interestingly,parents having severe motor delays, nystagmus and absent head of one mutation carrier were tested and found negative for control, and one individual showing gross motor delay at NOTCH3 mutation. the age of 6 months. All exhibited neuroimaging that was Conclusions:Twonovelmutationsandoneconﬁrmedde consistent with hypomyelination. novo mutation in our study are implicating that estimation Conclusion: The ﬁnding of individuals with a severe of NOTCH3 gene mutation frequency and type in different neurodevelopemental phenotype with hypomyelination populations, as well as consideration of possible de novo associated with biallelic mutations in NKX6-2 provides mutations, is important for efﬁcient genetic testing strategy direct evidence of the relevant role of NKX6-2 in CNS for CADASIL. development in humans. M.Z. Jankovic: None. V. Dobricic: None. A. Marja- C.Aiello:None.I.Dorboz:None.C.Simons:None.R. novic: None. M. Brankovic: None. A. Pavlovic: None. I. Stone: None. M. Niceta: None. M. Elmaleh: None. M. Dujmovic: None. M. Mijajlovic: None. I. Novakovic: Abuawad: None. D. Doummar: None. A. Bruselles: None. V. Kostic: None. None.N.Wolf:None.L.Travaglini:None.O.Boespﬂug- Tanguy:None.M.Tartaglia:None.A.Vanderver:None. P09.100D D. Rodriguez: None. E. Bertini: None. A novel case of severe neurodevelopmental delay in a patient with Pitt-Hopkins like 2 syndrome associated with P09.099C compound heterozygous deletion in NRXN1 NOTCH3 mutations in Serbian CADASIL patients P. Castronovo1,M.Baccarin1,A. Ricciardello2, C.Picinelli1, M.Z. Jankovic1,V. Dobricic1,A. Marjanovic1,M.Brankovic1, P. Tomaiuolo1,M.Lamberti2,F. Cucinotta2,M.Frittoli1, A. Pavlovic1,I.Dujmovic1, M.Mijajlovic1,I.Novakovic2, C. Lintas3, R.Sacco3, A.Persico2,1 V. Kostic1 1MafaldaLuceCenterforPervasiveDevelopmentalDisorders, 1Neurology Clinic, Clinical Center of Serbia, School of Milan, Italy, 2Interdepartmental Program“Autism 0-90”,“G. Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute Martino”UniversityHospital,UniversityofMessina,Messina, for Human Genetics, School of Medicine, University in Italy, 3Unit of Child and Adolescent NeuroPsychiatry & Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry and Neurogenetics, University “Campus Bio-Medico”, Rome, Rome, Italy Introduction: Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leucoencephalopathy Introduction:Neurexin1isakeyorganizerofthesynapse. (CADASIL) is one of the most common inherited small- Only nine cases with compound heterozygous NRXN1 vessel disease, presenting with recurrent subcortical stroke deletions/mutations have been reported so far, all of which episodes, migraine, mood disorders and dementia. CADA- share a Pitt-Hopkins like 2 syndrome phenotype, char- SILiscausedbyNOTCH3genemutations,andmajorityof acterized by a severe global developmental delay. We conﬁrmed pathogenic variants are alterating number of describe a 5 y.o. child with a compound heterozygous cysteineresiduesinEGFrdomainsoftheNOTCH3protein. deletion in NRXN1 gene and typical phenotype. CADASILpatientsusuallyhavepositivefamilyhistoryand Materials and Methods: The patient was evaluated by de novo mutations are not commonly reported. GMDS and VABS Scales. CGH-array (180 K, Agilent Materials and Methods: Total genomic DNA was Technologies) was performed on the patient and the extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes of 249 Serbian NRXN1 deletions and familial segregation were conﬁrmed patients with clinical diagnosis of CADASIL (with or by qPCR . withoutfamilymemberswithsimilarsymptoms)andfamily Results:thepatientshowsasevereglobaldevelopmental members of patients with conﬁrmed mutations. PCR delay with intellectual disability, poor speech, motor ampliﬁcation and direct sequencing of exons 2-6 of stereotypies, autistic features and cranio-facial dysmorph- NOTCH3 gene were performed. ism. In addition, the child suffers from celiac disease with Results: Nineteen heterozygous mutation carriers were chronic constipation and positive anti-gliadin IgG. Beha- identiﬁed in our cohort and mutation frequency was 7,6% vior, as assessed by GDMS, is equivalent to an age of (19/249). Eight previously described, cysteine-alterating <12 months. Array-CGH revealed a complex alteration of mutations were identiﬁed in 13 cases. Two changes the region 2p16.3 due to the presence of two inherited,294 J.delPicchia partly overlapping, 467 and 269 kb deletions, both diverse group of patients who ﬁt the deﬁnition of ORS. disrupting the NRXN1 gene. Based on this phenotypic characterization, we suggest Conclusions:Wefoundsigniﬁcantoverlapinphenotypic clinical criteria to assist in the recognition of ORS. severity between our case and the nine previously reported Improving the recognition and diagnosis of ORS will lead patients with biallelic defects in NRXN1. Our report tomoretargetedmanagement,reducepsychologicaldistress conﬁrms the evidence that NRXN1 nullisomy is associated and stigma, and save in health care costs. The unique withtheclinicaldiagnosisofPitt-Hopkinslike2syndrome. phenotypicfeaturesalsosuggestapossibleas-yetundeﬁned Carriers of an heterozygous NRXN1 deletion/mutation genetic basis for this syndrome, which future genomic showingaparticularlyseverephenotypeshouldbescreened studies could help to elucidate. for possible mutations or microdeletions of the second V.McNiven:None.S.Mamane:None.G.Zai:None.J. allele. So: None. Funding information: Italian Ministry of Health (NET- 2013-02355263); European Union Innovative Medicines P09.104D Initiative Joint Undertaking (EU-AIMS, n. 115300) Identiﬁcation of a new candidate gene of monogenic P. Castronovo: None. M. Baccarin: None. A. Ricciar- Parkinkison disease: MTIF3 dello: None. C. Picinelli: None. P. Tomaiuolo: None. M. Lamberti: None. F. Cucinotta: None. M. Frittoli: None. J.J.Telleria1,2,3,E.Bueno-Martínez1,R.González-Sarmiento1,4 C. Lintas: None. R. Sacco: None. A. Persico: None. 1Instituto de Investigación Biomedica de Salamanca (IBSAL), P09.101A Salamanca, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico Universitario de Phenotypic characterization of olfactory reference Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 3IBGM (UVa / CSIC), syndrome in patients presenting to genetics for query Valladolid, Spain, 4Unidad de Medicina Molecular. trimethylaminuria Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain V. McNiven1, S.Mamane2,G.Zai3,J.So2,3,4 Parkinson disease (PD) is a chronic, debilitating and pro- gressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by bra- 1DivisionofClinicalandMetabolicGenetics,TheHospitalfor dykinesia, resting tremor, rigidity and postural instability. Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2The Fred A. Litwin About5-10%ofpatientssufferfromamonogenicformof FamilyCentreinGeneticMedicine,UniversityHealthNetwork PDcausedbyhighlypenetrantmutations.Currently,sixteen and Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Centre for PARK loci have been identiﬁed with autosomal dominant Addiction and Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry, or autosomal recessive genes. University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department of We report here a 48 years old patient with PD. Resting Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada tremor was initially limited to the left upper limb. As it is commonly observed in early onset PD patients (Mehanna), Olfactory reference syndrome (ORS) is a psychiatric dis- symptoms other than tremor were more evident at the orderinwhichindividuals holdafalsebelief thattheyemit beginning of the disease with decreased arm swing an offensive body odour. ORS leads to signiﬁcant distress, movements, depression, bradykinesia and urinary and yet remains poorly characterized with limited recogni- incontinence. tion and characterization of its management. Patients with Once discarded the presence of pathogenic mutations ORSrarelyseekpsychiatricattentionasﬁrst-linetreatment, withintheknowngenescausingPD.Theanalysisofwhole and instead seek an organic diagnosis, such as trimethyla- exome data applying a prioritization scheme identiﬁed two minuria (TMAU). TMAU is an inherited disorder in which pathogenicvariantswhichencodeprematurestopcodonsin there is a failure to break down trimethylamine, creating a MTIF3 gene that interacts with PINK1, a known PD pungent ﬁshy odour. This study characterizes the clinical autosomal recessive causing gene. and demographic features of a cohort who meet the deﬁ- Mitochondrial damage plays a central role in PD nition of ORS, and yet who presented to a Canadian pathogenesis and several PD causing genes are known to genetics clinic for query TMAU. Data was obtained via a regulatemitochondrialfunctionandhomeostasisMoreover, retrospectivechartreviewovera7yearspan(N=54).Only aknownalleleofthemitochondrialfactor3(MTIF3)which two individuals who presented for query TMAU had this causesasigniﬁcantreductionofMTIF3mRNAexpression, diagnosis,while83%hadalikelydiagnosisofORS.Ofthis has been associated to PD in patient-control series. ORS group, 62% were female, 73% had a psychiatric his- IfpaucityofMTIF3increasestheriskofPD,Itscomplete tory,and77%wereseenbymultiplespecialties.Thisstudy absence should be related to signiﬁcantly higher risk. is the ﬁrst to systematically examine a large, ethnicallyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 295 Our data suggest that MTIF3 could be a new PD P09.106B causing gene. Further functional and population studies TargetedgeneticanalysisofParkinsondiseaseinBulgarian are needed to assess the exact role of MTIF3 in the patients pathogenesis of PD. J.J. Telleria: None. E. Bueno-Martínez: None. R. K. Mihova1, A.Verstraeten2,3, J.Theuns2,3,R. Pavlova4, González-Sarmiento: None. S.Mehrabian4,M.Petrova4,S.Skelina4,R.Kaneva1,V.Mitev1, A. Jordanova1,5,C. VanBroeckhoven2,3,L. Traykov4 P09.105A Identiﬁcationofnewgenesinvolvedinautosomaldominant 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, forms of Parkinson’s disease Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University, Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Center C. Tesson,C. Condroyer,L. Ruaud,V. Drouet,S.Lesage, forMolecularNeurology,VIB,Antwerp,Belgium,3Laboratory A. Brice ofNeurogenetics,InstituteBornBunge,UniversityofAntwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital -INSERMU1127,CNRSUMR7225,UPMCUniversitéParis "Alexandrovska", Department of Neurology, Medical 06 UMR S1127, Sorbonne Université Institut du C, Paris, University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 5Molecular Neurogenomics France Group, Center for Molecular Neurology, VIB, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most frequent neu- rodegenerative disorder, affecting 1% of the population Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common neu- above 65 years. To date, the identiﬁed genes associated rodegenerative disease resulting from the interplay of mul- with AD PDonly explain 10-15%, so many genesremain tiplegeneswithenvironmentalriskfactors.Inheritanceisin to be discovered. We selected 73 affected relatives from an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked 20 multiplex AD PD families for exome sequencing. We manner and monogenic forms are rarely found. The main looked for rare heterozygous variants, predicted to be goal of the current study is to evaluate the frequency and pathogenicusingCADDandM-CAPscores,sharedbyall type of mutations in genes associated with Parkinson dis- affected relatives within the family. Replication studies ease in Bulgarian patients. Altogether, 69 patients with PD weredoneusingtheavailableexomedatafrom~1,500PD and detailed clinical assessment and 108 healthy controls, cases and 560 controls from the IPDGC consortium. matched by age, gender and ethnicity (NC) were recruited. Pathway analyses were realized using the R package All individuals were analyzed with a custom panel includ- Clusterproﬁler and the web interface ConsensuspathDB. ing known and candidate PD genes on an Illumina NGS For each family, we obtain a list of candidate genes (2 to platform. All pathogenic variants were conﬁrmed with 30).Toprioritizethem,weappliedﬁlteringcriteriawhich Sanger sequencing. 14 patients were analyzed with MLPA in order were 1) expression in brain; 2) replication of P051-D1 Parkinson kit. In 52% (36/69) of the patients these possible candidate genes in additional families; 3) variants in LRRK2, PARK2, PINK1, PARK7, ATP13A2, sharing common physiopathological pathways. None of FBXO7, PSEN1, PSEN2, CHMP2B, GRN, MAPT, EIF4G1 the identiﬁed candidate genes was replicated, using home were identiﬁed.Altogether 14 new variants werefound (10 and IPDGC consortium exome databases. On the other missense, 2 splice site, 2 frameshift) and 14 VUS (13 hand, using Clusterproﬁler we found that some of these missense,1splicesite).Fourpathogenicvariants,including genes can be grouped in the same biological process, twonovelones,wereidentiﬁedinPARK2,PARK7,PSEN2. which is actin metabolism. Furthermore, using Con- No mutations were found with MLPA analysis. This is the sensuspathDB we highlighted that some of these candi- ﬁrst Bulgarian study including a cohort of 69 patients dates’ genes were able to interact with genes involved in showingthefrequencyanddistributionofnovelandknown PD. Conclusion Although we identiﬁed a substantial variants in genes associated with Parkinson disease. Our number of multiplex families with AD PD, none of these ﬁndings contribute to a better understanding of the mole- families was explained by possible shared candidate cular basis of Parkinson disease and have implications for genes, highlighting the genetic heterogeneity of PD. diagnostic testing and genetic counseling in Bulgarian However, these genes were enriched in a common population. Acknowledgements: D35/27.05.2016, D77/ regulating. 02.05.2017 of SF, MU-Soﬁa, DUNK01-2/2009, NSF. C. Tesson: None. C. Condroyer: None. L. Ruaud: K. Mihova: None. A. Verstraeten: None. J. Theuns: None.V.Drouet:None.S.Lesage:None.A.Brice:None. None. R. Pavlova: None. S. Mehrabian: None. M. Petrova: None. S. Skelina: None. R. Kaneva: None. V.296 J.delPicchia Mitev:None.A.Jordanova:None.C.VanBroeckhoven: P09.108D None. L. Traykov: None. MosSCIandCRISPRC.elegansmodelsofLRRK2related Parkinson’sdiseasefailtoproducetheexpectedphenotype P09.107C Bridging mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction in C. Pereira1,2,J.Sequeiros1,2,3,R. Gassmann4, I.Alonso1,2,3 Parkinson Disease: clues of oligogenic inheritance 1UnIGENe,InstitutodeBiologiaMoleculareCelular(IBMC), S. Smolders1,2,D.Crosiers1,2,3,P. Cras2,3,C. Van Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Broeckhoven1,2,BELNEU Consortium UniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal,2InstitutodeCiências biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, 1VIB Center for Molecular Neurology, University of Antwerp, Porto, Portugal, 3Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute Born-Bunge, University of (CGPP), Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Cell Division Mechanisms, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular Introduction: Mutations in PARK2, PINK1, DJ-1 and (IBMC), Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), VPS13CcauseautosomalrecessiveParkinsonDisease(PD) Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal and impair mitochondrial quality control pathways. More- over, substantial evidence highlights the importance of Parkinson disease (PD) results from the loss of dopami- lysosomal mechanisms in PD, including excessive burden nergic neurons and represents one of the most common of lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) gene variants in PD neurodegenerative diseases. Models for LRRK2-mediated patients. PD inC. eleganshave relied on multi-copy overexpression Materials and Methods: We analyzed WES data of 66 of human transgenes from extrachromosomal arrays or PD patients, including 34 patients with a single rare random genomic integrations. Although successful in heterozygous mutation in an autosomal recessive PD gene reproducing the neurotoxic effects of human LRRK2 and 2 related patients, to investigate a role for different mutants,thevariabilityofexpressionbetweenwormstrains genetic factors in disease etiology. Variants in autosomal in these models complicates the interpretation of LRRK2 recessive genes associated with PD, atypical parkinsonian mutant phenotypes. To produce a closer physiological syndromes and LSD were prioritized based on quality, model of PD in C. elegans we generated new strains in frequency in public databases and impact (splice site and which transgenes are integrated in a deﬁned genomic locus non-synonymous variants with Combined Annotation in single copy. This ensures that human wild-type LRRK2 Dependent Depletion score >20). and mutant transgenes are expressed at identical levels in Results:TheWESdataanalysisrevealedthepresenceof every animal. We also used CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gen- oligogenic inheritance through known pathogenic and rare ome editing to introduce the equivalent of the human novel heterozygous mutations in multiple genes. We LRRK2G2019Svariantintothewormorthologuelrk-1.We identiﬁed 1 patient carrier of compound mutations in show that expression of either human mutant LRRK2 (at PARK2/DJ-1 and 1 patient with compound mutations in similar levels of endogenous lrk-1) or the worm lrk-1 PARK2/VPS13C. Coexistence of mitochondrial and lyso- mutant does not lead to a dopaminergic neurodegenerative somal pathways is established by the observation in 16 phenotype or motility problems, both a major hallmark of patients of multiple mutations in PD and LSD genes, C. elegans PD models, even in severely aged animals. In including 7 known pathogenic LSD gene mutations. Of fact, mutant strains show a minor increase in the thrashing note, the compound mutations PARK2 p.P437L and HEXA rate along with the cat-2 mutant. Other lesser behavior p.R247W are both present in an affected mother and deﬁcits were also present, such as reduced life span and daughter. Additionally, we found 4 carriers of compound hyperactive egg laying. While the newly generated models mutations in different LSD genes. do address the issue of variable expression neither mutant Conclusions: Our results underpin the potential oligo- human LRRK2 nor mutant lrk-1 produce a robust easy to genic complexity of Mendelian genes in PD etiology and scorephenotype,andthereforecannotbeusedforgeneticor highlight the crosstalk between mitochondria and lyso- pharma screens. somes in the pathophysiology of PD. C. Pereira: None. J. Sequeiros: None. R. Gassmann: S. Smolders: None. D. Crosiers: None. P. Cras: None. None. I. Alonso: None. C. Van Broeckhoven: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 297 P09.109A Feliz Feliz: None. X. Castro-Martínez: None. M. Mata: Genomic analysis of coding and regulatory regions using None. F. Palau: None. J. Hoenicka: None. NGS in early-onset parkinsonism: a multicentric study P09.110B M.Osuna-López1,P.García-Ruiz2,G.Fernandez3,J.Martínez- Generation of prediction models based on rare and Castrillo4,L. Vela5,J.Maynou3,I.Martínez-Torres6,C. Feliz common genetic variants in PD Feliz2, X.Castro-Martínez1,M. Mata7,F. Palau1,3,8, J.Hoenicka1,9 D.R. BOBBILI,P. Banda,R. Krueger,P. May 1Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, LUXEMBOURG CENTRE FOR SYSTEMS BIOMEDICINE, 2Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg Madrid,Spain,3HospitalSantJoandeDéu,Barcelona,Spain, 4Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria, Madrid, Introduction: Polygenic risk scores (PRS) are widely used Spain, 5Hospital Universitario Fundación Alcorcón, Madrid, in the ﬁeld of genetics to associate a group of SNPs to a Spain, 6Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, Valencia, disease/trait. However, majority of the studies use only the Spain, 7Hospital Universitario Infanta Sofía, Madrid, Spain, commongeneticvariantstogeneratethePRS.Inourstudy, 8CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 9CIBERSAM, Madrid, Spain inadditiontothecommongeneticvariants,wealsousedthe number of private loss of function variants per sample Aims:Next-generationsequencing(NGS) hasproventobe (singleton_score). very useful for the diagnosis of heterogeneous disorders in Materials and Methods: The data was provided by both their etiology and clinical expression. The aim of this Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative consortium. We study is to evaluate whether genetic diagnosis of patients used the NeuroX array data to generate the PRS based on with early-onset parkinsonism (EOP) can beneﬁt from a common genetic variants and Whole exome sequencing panel that contains both coding and regulatory regions of data to generate singleton_score. Machine learning models genes related to these disorders. were built based on state of the art methods and we Materials and methods: we have recruited 96 EOP performed a comprehensive assessment of the contribution patients (<55 years of age) from the Movement Disorders of singleton_score in the prediction models. Units at tertiary centers. The custom genetic panel of Results: We conﬁrm that the addition of singleton_score Nextera® Rapid Capture Enrichment technology (Illumina) signiﬁcantly improved the performance of the model contains 63 genes related to the following: i) familiar (AUC=0.72) compared to the model built on common Parkinson disease, ii) atypical Parkinsonisms, iii) variantsalone(AUC=0.62).Additionally,weshowthatthe Parkinsonism-pyramidal syndrome and iv) risk factors for inclusion of singleton_score along with the clinical scores Parkinson disease. MiniSeq Sequencing System (Illumina) improved the overall predictive ability of the model. wasusedforNGSandbioinformaticsanalysesandﬁltering Conclusions:AlthoughPRSgeneratedbyusingcommon were performed. variantsisaveryusefulapproachinordertounderstandthe Results: Until date, we have sequenced 48 patients. We diseasemechanism.Itisinterestingtoseethatrare/ultra-rare found 91.2% coverage of targeted genomic regions at 50- variants also contributing to the association signal, provid- fold mean coverage. These results show 71 previously ing evidence that rare/ultra-rare might add to missing documented rare variants and 19 new variants in 35 out of heritability of PD. 63 genes of the panel. 13 rare variants where reported as D.R. Bobbili: None. P. Banda: None. R. Krueger: pathogenicand19novelvariantshadinsilicopredictionof None. P. May: None. being pathogenic. We also have detected Copy Number Variations (CNVs) in 28 samples. Currently, we are P09.111C analyzing regulatory regions variants. GBA-related Parkinson disease: mutational frequency and Conclusions: Our preliminary ﬁndings show that NGS clinical- biochemical correlates in the Italian population panels can be useful to identify gene variations in EOP patients and it shows novel genotype/phenotype S. Petrucci1,2,3,M.Ginevrino1,4,A. DiFonzo5,6,M.T. relationships. Pellecchia7, M.C. Altavista8,F. Bove9,A. Cozzolino7, Funding: Institutode SaludCarlos III/FEDER, grant no. C. Criscuolo10,A. DeRosa10, G.Fabbrini2,G.Fabbrini2,11, PI15/01013. M.Moccia10,M. Petracca9,M.Squillante12, I.Trezzi5,6, M. Osuna-López: None. P. García-Ruiz: None. G. G.Volpe12,A. R. Bentivoglio9, A.Berardelli2,11,P. Barone7, Fernandez: None. J. Martínez-Castrillo: None. L. Vela: F. Morgante13,14,E. M.Valente1,4 None. J. Maynou: None. I. Martínez-Torres: None. C.298 J.delPicchia 1CERC Neurogenetic Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, for counselling, appropriate management of non-motor Rome, Italy, 2Department of Human Neurosciences, Sapienza complications, and selection of patients amenable to enter University, Rome, Italy, 3IRCCS Casa Sollievo della ongoing clinical trials. Sofferenza, Medical Genetics Unit, San Giovanni Rotondo, S. Petrucci: None. M. Ginevrino: None. A. Di Fonzo: Foggia, Italy, 4Department of Molecular Medicine, University None. M.T. Pellecchia: None. M.C. Altavista: None. F. of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5IRCCS Foundation Ca' Grande Bove: None.A. Cozzolino: None. C.Criscuolo: None.A. Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Dino Ferrari Center, Milan, De Rosa: None. G. Fabbrini: None. G. Fabbrini: None. Italy, 6Neuroscience Section, Department of Pathophysiology M. Moccia: None. M. Petracca: None. M. Squillante: andTransplantation,UniversityofMilan,Milan,Italy,7Center None.I.Trezzi:None.G.Volpe:None.A.R.Bentivoglio: for Neurodegenerative Diseases (CEMAND), Department of None. A. Berardelli: None. P. Barone: None. F. Medicine and Surgery, Neuroscience Section, University of Morgante: None. E.M. Valente: None. Salerno,Salerno,Italy,8SanFilippoNeriHospital,ASLRoma 1,Rome,Italy,9DepartmentofNeurology,CatholicUniversity, P09.112D Rome,Italy,10DepartmentofNeurosciences,Reproductiveand Parkinson’s disease: a disruption of nuclear/mitochondrial Odontostomatological Sciences, Federico II University, DNA communication Naples,Italy,11IRCCSNeuromed,Pozzilli,Italy,12Department of Neuroscience, AOU San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi H.Lowes1,A.Hudson1, M.Santibanez-Koref2,G.Hudson1 d'Aragona, Salerno, Italy, 13Department of Clinical and ExperimentalMedicine,University ofMessina,Messina,Italy, 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, 14Institute of Molecular and Clinical Sciences, St George's Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Genetic University of London, London, United Kingdom Medicince, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom Introduction: Heterozygous variants in the GBA gene, Background: The role of mitochondrial function in Par- encoding β-glucocerebrosidase (GCase), are major genetic kinson’s disease (PD) is established, however the precise risk factors for Parkinson Disease (PD). Their frequency roleofmtDNA(mtDNA)variationinPDremainedunclear. andphenotypiccorrelateshavebeenassessedinmanylarge Work in our laboratory has focused in the role that inher- cohorts of different ethnicities, being identiﬁed in ~10% ited mtDNA variants play in developing PD, identifying PD.However,inthetwopublishedItalianstudies,onlytwo bothlow-andhigh-riskmtDNAallelesassociatedwithPD. commonalleles(N370SandL444P)wereinvestigated,with Basedonthis,andsupportedbyourworkinotherdiseases, an overall frequency of 4,4%. we hypothesised that inherited mtDNA variation disturbs Patients and Methods: The whole GBA coding region thetranscriptomicbalancewithinvulnerablebrainregions, (11 exons) was Sanger-sequenced in 850 Italian PD causing either a direct mitochondrial phenotype or a dis- probands, who underwent deep phenotyping for motor ruption of the delicate mitochondrial/nuclear synergy con- and non-motor signs. Clinical features and, in a subset, tributing to cellular vulnerability and ultimately leading to GCase activity were compared between GBA-PD and not PD. mutated-PD (NM-PD), and among carriers of complex, Methodology: To address this hypothesis, we interro- severe, mild and risk variant alleles. gated the transcriptome of vulnerable regions of the brain Results: In this large cohort, the frequency of GBA in post-mortem PD tissue using RNAseq, stratifying our heterozygous variants was 14,5%, much higher than results using background mtDNA sequence data and previously reported in Italy. 32 distinct variants were comparing transcript abundances to matched controls. identiﬁed, of whom N370S and L444P accounted only for Results: Our results indicate the background mtDNA 48% GBA-PD. sequence modulates the expression of key protein coding GBA-PD signiﬁcantly differed from NM-PD for earlier, transcripts. PD cases carrying high-risk alleles showed prevalent bradykinetic onset and higher occurrence of non- differential expression of components of the lipid metabo- motor features, including cognitive, psychiatric and auto- lism or vesicular trafﬁcking pathways; supporting our own nomicdysfunctions.Amoreaggressivecourseandahigher recent metabolomic observations in PD. Conversely, PD predisposition to dementia correlated with complex/severe cases carrying low-risk alleles showed differential expres- alleles and with risk variants, respectively. GCase activity sionofcomponentsofthecalciumhomeostasisorapoptosis was signiﬁcantly reduced in PD-GBA, without signiﬁcant pathways, supporting recent expression and proteomic differences among sub-classes. observations in PD. Comments: GBA heterozygous variants are a common Conclusion: Our experiments, for the ﬁrst time, reveal a riskfactorforPDinItaly,andacompletegenescreeningis link between inherited mtDNA variation and the nuclear warrantedtoproperlyidentifygenecarriers.Thisisrelevant transcriptome - suggesting that inherited mtDNA variationAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 299 can impact cellular vitality in neuronal tissue; making a health, may partially explain the modiﬁed penetrance in signiﬁcant contribution to the observed mitochondrial (heterozygous) Parkin/PINK1 mutation carriers. dysfunction and neuronal cell death seen in PD. J. Trinh: None. A. Grunewald: None. K. Wasner: H. Lowes: None. A. Hudson: None. M. Santibanez- None. A.A. Hicks: None. P. Bauer: None. S. Imhoff: Koref: None. G. Hudson: None. None. K.K. Kandaswamy: None. N. Ouzren: None. M. Werber:None.M.E.R.Weiss:None.A.Rolfs:None.P.P. P09.113A Pramstaller:None.P.Seibler:None.K.Lohmann:None. Deep mitochondrial sequencing in Parkinson’s disease C. Klein: None. reveals possible genetic modiﬁers of penetrance in Parkin/ PINK1 mutation carriers P09.114B Genotype-phenotype correlations in an Italian sample of J.Trinh1,A.Grunewald2,K.Wasner2,A.A.Hicks3,P.Bauer4, patients with Phelan-McDermid syndrome S.Imhoff1,K.K.Kandaswamy4,N.Ouzren2,M.Werber4,M.E. R. Weiss4,A. Rolfs4, P.P. Pramstaller3, P.Seibler1, A. Ricciardello1, F.Cucinotta1, L.Turriziani1,M. Lamberti1, K. Lohmann1, C.Klein1 M.Briguglio1,P. Tomaiuolo2,M.Baccarin2,C.Picinelli2, P. Castronovo2,M.Boncoddo1,F. Bellomo1, G.Turturo1, 1Institute of Neurogenetics, Luebeck, Germany, 2Luxembourg M.Canali3,R. Sacco3,C. Lintas3,A. M.Persico1,2 Centre for Systems Biomedicine, Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 3Institute for Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy, 1University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 2Mafalda Luce Center 4Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany for Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Milan, Italy, 3University Campus Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy Background: Biallelic mutations in Parkin and PINK1 are fully penetrant and cause recessively inherited Parkinson’s Introduction: Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS), is a disease(PD).Ontheotherhand,heterozygousmutationsin neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by intellectual these genes may be considered as a risk factor for PD or disability (ID), hypotonia, delayed or absent speech, and even act in a dominant manner with highly reduced pene- autism spectrum disorder (ASD). PMS is due to de novo trance. Since both Parkin and PINK1 function in the chr. 22q13 terminal deletions or point mutations involving removalofdysfunctionalmitochondria,wehypothesizethat theSHANK3gene,crucialtotheformationandplasticityof mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations are both a con- excitatory synapses. Disruption of SHANK3 causes sequence of dysfunction in these genes, and also able to approximately 0.5% of ASD cases, with higher rates inﬂuence age-dependent penetrance and thus the onset of reported in ASD co-morbid with ID. This study aims to diseasesymptomsifnotclearedsufﬁcientlyovertime(i.e.a assess genotype-phenotype correlations in 42 Italian PMS ‘second hit’). patients. Method: Weperformed deep mtDNA sequencingin124 Materials and Methods: For each patient, we collected individualswithIlluminaNextSeqinblood-derivedDNAto medical history and performed neurological examination, assess mitochondria mutational load including somatic behavioral observation, medical work-up and psychodiag- mosaicism and individual mtDNA variants. Patients were nostic testing (Leiter or Raven, ADOS, ADI-R, VABS, recruitedfromGermanyandItalyandcomprisedcarriersof VAS, CGI, CBCL, SCQ, SSP, WHOQOL, QOL-A, ABC PINK1 (n=29) and Parkin mutations (n=52), idiopathic and RBS-R). Array-CGH using the Human Genome CGH PD patients (n=23) and controls (n=20). Microarray 4 x 180K or 400K Kit (Agilent) or targeted Results: A mean coverage of >10,000X was achieved Sanger sequencing were performed. with high sensitivity of detecting low level heteroplasmic Results:TheclinicalphenotypeofPMSpatientsdisplays (<15%) variants. Parkin mutation carriers have more great interidividual variability. Larger deletions are asso- variants including both single nucleotide variants (SNV) ciated with more severe clinical phenotypes and develop- and copy number variations (CNV) compared to controls mentaldelays.However,similardeletions resultat times in andidiopathicPD(p=0.005).Lastly,comparingearlyand phenotypes differing signiﬁcantly in severity. Some pheno- lateonsetParkinmutationcarriers,weidentiﬁedapotential typic features are highly correlated with a positive family protective variant in ATP6 (p.A177T). history. Conclusion:Parkin/PINK1mutationsmaypredisposeto Conclusions: Interindividual differences in the PMS anincreasedmitochondrialmutationalload.Replicationand phenotype are sizable and may stem from at least three random segregation of heteroplasmic mitochondrial DNA, different sources: (a) deletion size involving other func- alongside cellular mechanisms to correct mitochondrial tional genes in addition to SHANK3, (b) additional mutations, microdeletions, or epigenetic inﬂuences in the300 J.delPicchia non-deleted 22q13 allele, (c) greater penetrance of familial she has not achieved any developmental milestones. Brain genetic loading for neuro-behavioral disturbances in the imaging showed diffuse brain atrophy. She was born from presence of a SHANK3 synaptopathy. healthy parents. This variant is reported in dbSNP 150 as Funding: Italian Ministry of Health (NET-2013- rs770671752 and has a minor allele frequency (MAF) of 02355263); EU-IMI (EU-AIMS, n. 115300) 1.422e-5 (3/211,000) in gnomAD. No homozygotes have A. Ricciardello: None. F. Cucinotta: None. L. Turri- been reported on public databases. PIGC pathogenic ziani: None. M. Lamberti: None. M. Briguglio: None. P. mutations were recently identiﬁed in probands of two Tomaiuolo:None.M.Baccarin:None.C.Picinelli:None. unrelated families with epilepsy and intellectual disability. P. Castronovo: None. M. Boncoddo: None. F. Bellomo: Moreover,ouranalysesofpatient’sleukocytesshowedthat None. G. Turturo: None. M. Canali: None. R. Sacco: theexpressionofCD16(GPI-anchoredmembranereceptor) None. C. Lintas: None. A.M. Persico: None. and FLAER (marker for all GPI-APs) was signiﬁcantly decreased providing further proof that PIGC variants affect P09.115C membrane expression of GPI-APs. In conclusion, our Further delineation of the genotype-phenotype correlation familyisthethirdreportedwithPIGCmutations,helpingto associated with PIGC mutations better delineate the genotype-phenotype correlation and further corroborating the role of this protein in E. Riberi1,D.Carli1,T. T.M. Nguyen2,A. Bruselles3, F.C. neurodevelopment. Radio4,E. F.Belligni1,E. Grosso5,L. Tornetta1,E. Biamino1, E. Riberi: None. D. Carli: None. T.T.M. Nguyen: E. Giorgio6, E.DiGregorio5,6, S.Cavalieri6,E. Chierto6, None. A. Bruselles: None. F.C. Radio: None. E.F. M.Ferrero6,C.Mancini6,E.Pozzi6,B.Pasini5,6,S.DeRubeis7,8, Belligni: None. E. Grosso: None. L. Tornetta: None. E. M.Tartaglia9,P. M.Campeau2, A.Brusco5,6, G.B. Ferrero1 Biamino:None.E.Giorgio:None.E.DiGregorio:None. S.Cavalieri:None.E.Chierto:None.M.Ferrero:None. 1Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, University of C.Mancini:None.E.Pozzi:None.B.Pasini:None.S.De Torino,Torino, Italy, 2Centre HospitalierUniversitaire Sainte Rubeis: None. M. Tartaglia: None. P.M. Campeau: Justine Research Center, University of Montreal, Montreal, None. A. Brusco: None. G.B. Ferrero: None. QC, Canada, 3Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 4Medical P09.116D Genetics, Molecular Medicine Department, Sapienza SLP-2rescuesPINK1deﬁciencyinacellularmodelandin University of Rome, San Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, Roma, Drosophila Italy,5MedicalGeneticsUnit,CittàdellaSaluteedellaScienza University Hospital, Torino, Italy, 6Department of Medical A. Zanon1,S. Meschini1,S. Kalvakuri2,A. A.Lavdas1, Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 7Seaver Autism R. Bodmer2,P. P.Pramstaller1,A. A.Hicks1, I.Pichler1 CenterforResearchandTreatment,IcahnSchoolofMedicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 8Department of 1Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy, 2Development, Aging and Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New Regeneration Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical York, NY, United States, 9Genetics and Rare Diseases Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States ResearchDivision,OspedalePediatricoBambinoGesù,Roma, Italy Introduction:Deﬁciencies ofcomplexIactivityhavebeen observedinthesubstantianigraofParkinson'sdisease(PD) Phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis class C patients, and loss of Parkin and PINK1 results in the (PIGC) encodes for an endoplasmic reticulum protein reduction of complex I activity shown in cell and animal essential for the ﬁrst step of the biosynthesis of the glyco- models. The two key PD genes related to mitochondrial sylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) that anchors more than 150 function are Parkin (PARK2) and PINK1 (PARK6). proteins to the cell surface (GPI-anchored proteins, GPI- Recently, we have shown that Parkin interacts with mito- APs). These proteins are important for development, neu- chondrial Stomatin-like protein 2 (SLP-2), which functions rogenesis,andimmunity.InheritedGPIdeﬁciencies(IGDs) in the assembly of respiratory chain proteins. Induced causeintellectualdisability,epilepsy,coarsefacialfeatures, overexpression of SLP-2 was able to correct for mito- and multiple organ anomalies and are inherited as auto- chondrial alterations caused by Parkin deﬁciency. The aim somalrecessivetraits.Wholeexomesequencingidentiﬁeda ofthepresentstudywastoextendthisworktotestwhether homozygous variant in PIGC gene (NM_153747.1: c. SLP-2 is also able to rescue mitochondrial dysfunction 859G>T, p. E287*) in a 3-year-old female patient with induced by PINK1 knockdown in multiple systems. macrostomia, tented upper lip, low-set ears, drug-resistant MaterialsandMethods:PINK1 deﬁciencywasinduced epilepsyandsevereglobaldevelopmentaldelay.Atpresent by siRNA-mediated knockdown in SH-SY5YAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 301 neuroblastomacellsandpink1RNAiinDrosophila.Several considering p-value and R2 of linear regression analyses. mitochondrial phenotypes were assessed. We identiﬁed a signiﬁcant positive association of schizo- Results: The PINK1 siRNA cells exhibited signiﬁcantly phrenia PRS with the inﬂammatory marker C-C Motif increased mitochondrial superoxide levels and decreased ChemokineLigand4(CCL4,R2=0.10,adjustedp=7.86e- mitochondrial membrane potential and complex I activity. 3) and a signiﬁcant negative association with the hormone Induced overexpression of SLP-2 signiﬁcantly rescued the ghrelin (R2=0.11, adjusted p=6.84e-3). Noteworthy, in identiﬁed mitochondrial dysfunction. In-vivo Drosophila our sample CCL4 levels were increased in patients com- studies showed a genetic interaction of PINK1 and SLP-2, pared to controls, while ghrelin levels were decreased. and further, overexpression of SLP-2 transgenes rescued Interestingly, pathway speciﬁc PRS analysis showed that pink1mutantphenotypes,inparticularlossofdopaminergic genes involved in different pivotal metabolic pathways neurons. (e.g., related to amino acids and nucleotides synthesis/ Conclusions: These results highlight a protective effect degradation) are the ones leading the associations for both of SLP-2 not only in Parkin-deﬁcient cells but also in CCL4 and ghrelin. These results suggest the presence of a PINK1 deﬁciency, pointing to SLP-2 as a novel molecular potential correlation between the genetic component for target able to boost mitochondrial function and neuronal schizophrenia and immune/metabolic serum markers levels survival in multiple PD genes that disrupt mitochondria. at the onset of FEP, indicating an involvement of these A. Zanon: None. S. Meschini: None. S. Kalvakuri: processes in the psychosis vulnerability. None. A.A. Lavdas: None. R. Bodmer: None. P.P. C.Maj:None.S.Tosato:None.M.Ruggeri:None.M. Pramstaller: None. A.A. Hicks: None. I. Pichler: None. Gennarelli: None. L. Bocchio-Chiavetto: None. P09.118B P09.119C Association betweenInﬂammatory andMetabolicmarkers MutationsofKIF14,encodingakinesin-3familymemberof and the Polygenic Risk Score of Schizophrenia in First microtubule motors, cause primary microcephaly Episode Psychosis M.S. Hussain1,2,3,S. M.Baig4,A. Moawia1,4,R.Shaheen5, C. Maj1,2,S. Tosato3,4, M.Ruggeri3,4,M.Gennarelli2,5, N.Ewida5,M.Al-Owain6, S.Rasool1,7,B. Budde1,A. Hahn8, L. Bocchio-Chiavetto2,6 A. A.Noegel2,3,F.S. Alkuraya5,9,P. Nürnberg1,3 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics (IGSB), 1ColognecenterforGenomics,Cologne,Germany,2Instituteof Bonn,Germany,2GeneticsUnit,IRCCSCentroS.Giovannidi Biochemistry I, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy, 3Unit of Psychiatry, Cologne, Germany, 3Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata Verona, Verona, UniversityofCologne,Cologne,Germany,4HumanMolecular Italy, 4Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and GeneticsLaboratory,HealthBiotechnologyDivision,National Movement Sciences, Section of Psychiatry, University of InstituteforBiotechnologyandGeneticEngineering(NIBGE), Verona, Verona, Italy, 5Department of Molecular and PIEAS, Faisalabad, Pakistan, 5Department of Genetics, King Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, FaisalSpecialistHospitalandResearchCenter,Riyadh,Saudi 6Faculty of Psychology, eCampus University, Novedrate, Arabia, 6Department of Medical Genetics, King Faisal Como, Como, Italy Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 7Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Quaid-e-Azam Campus, There is an increasing interest in the clariﬁcation of the University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, 8Department of different components that characterize the genetic vulner- Child Neurology, University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany, ability risk for psychotic disorders. In this work, we ana- 9Saudi Human Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City for lyzed the association between Polygenic Risk Score (PRS) Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia for schizophrenia and the serum levels of 19 different inﬂammatory/metabolicmarkersin33controlsand83First- Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a Episode psychosis (FEP) patients. The diagnosis of FEP rare condition characterized by a reduced cerebral cortex was schizophrenia (n=46), bipolar disorder (n=35) and accompanied with mild to severe intellectual disability. delusional disorder (n=2). The PRS was calculated Mutations in 17 different genes have been shown to cause according to the summary association results for schizo- this phenotype. Recently, mutations in CIT encoding a phreniaavailablefromthePsychiatricGenomicConsortium component of the central spindle matrix were described in (PGC). Genome-wide and pathway speciﬁc PRS regarding MCPH families as well as in syndromic cases of micro- 186 KEGG pathways were computed. The associations cephaly. Here, we report on two MCPH families, one from between markers serum levels and PRS were evaluated Pakistan and the other from Saudi Arabia, with three302 J.delPicchia affected individuals each, in which we identiﬁed homo- rapidlyprogressivedementiawithmotorcharacteristicsand zygous mutations in KIF14 (NM_014875.2;c.263T>A; ashortsurvivaltimefromthebeginning(usually1year).In pLeu88* and c.4071G>A;p.Gln1357=, respectively) as the the present work the genealogical, clinical and molecular likelycause.Further,inaGermanpatientpresentingwitha study of four cases of familial Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease is severe form of primary microcephaly and short stature, we analyzed. Objective: To molecularly describe for unrelated identiﬁed compound heterozygous missense mutations in familial cases with Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease. KIF14 (NM_014875.2;c.2545C>G;p.His849Asp and Materials and Methods: From peripheral blood, the c.3662G>T;p.Gly1221Val). Interestingly, all but one (p. genomic DNA of four patients was obtained by conven- His849Asp) of the identiﬁed mutations impaired splicing tional techniques. The coding region of PRNP was and resulted in a truncated protein. Intriguingly, Kif14 ampliﬁedandsequencedthroughPCRandDNAautomated knockout mice also showed primary microcephaly. Human sequencing. Results were compared with 100 healthy KIF14, localizes at the midbody to ﬁnalize cytokinesis by controls and world databases. interacting with CRIK (Citron Rho-interacting kinase). We Results: Four heterozygous mutations were identiﬁed in foundimpairedlocalizationofbothKIF14andCRIKatthe the PRNP gene: c.598G>A, c.586G>A, 3 c.586G>A and midbody in patient-derived ﬁbroblasts. Further, we c.598G>A. observed a large number of binucleated and apoptotic cells Conclusions: Through the sequencing study, four muta- — signs of failed cytokinesis that we also observed in tions inthe PRNP gene were identiﬁed inthe four patients. experimentallyKIF14-depletedcells.Thus,inkeepingwith With the corresponding ethical considerations, the con- previous ﬁndings on CIT mutations, our data underline the ﬁrmation of the mutations is useful to analyze later the role of an impaired cytokinesis for the etiology of primary descendants or siblings of the affected patients, in order to and syndromic microcephaly. provide an adequate genetic counseling. M.S. Hussain: None. S.M. Baig: None. A. Moawia: M.G. Tovar-Ayala: None. L.M. Gonzalez-Huerta: None.R.Shaheen:None.N.Ewida:None.M.Al-Owain: None. R. Vega-Gama: None. N. Xilotl-DeJesus: None. None.S.Rasool:None.B.Budde:None.A.Hahn:None. V. Martínez-Montoya: None. M.R. Rivera-Vega: None. A.A. Noegel: None. F.S. Alkuraya: None. P. S.A. Cuevas-Covarrubias: None. Nürnberg: None. P09.121A P09.120D Whole exome sequencing identiﬁes novel etiologies in a Identiﬁcation of novel mutations in the PRNP gene in cohort of patients with progressive myoclonus epilepsy patients with Creutzfeldt Jacob disease C. Courage1,2,M.Muona1, K.Oliver3,J. Cameron3, M.G.Tovar-Ayala1,L. M.Gonzalez-Huerta2,R. Vega-Gama2, S. Berkovic3,A. Lehesjoki1 N.Xilotl-DeJesus2, V.Martínez-Montoya2,M. R.Rivera-Vega2, S. A.Cuevas-Covarrubias3 1FolkhälsanInstituteofGenetics,Helsinki,Finland,2Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, 1Genetica,5HospitalGeneraldeMexico,MexicoDF,Mexico, Helsinki, Finland, 3Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of 2Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, Medicine,UniversityofMelbourne,AustinHealth,Heidelberg, 3Genetica,HospitalGeneraldeMexico,FacultaddeMedicina, Melbourne, Australia Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico Progressivemyoclonusepilepsies(PMEs)compriseagroup of clinically and genetically heterogeneous rare disorders Introduction: Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies manifesting with action myoclonus, tonic-clonic seizures, (TSEs), also known as prion diseases, are a group of neu- ataxia and progressive decline with typical onset in child- rodegenerative disorders that affect 1-2 per million habi- hood. We carried out WES in a cohort of PME patients tants. TSEs are classiﬁed into three diseases based on their negative for the minisatellite expansion mutation in CSTB clinical and neuropathological characteristics: familial andtherecurrentdenovomutationinKCNC1aswellasfor Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Gerstmann-Straßussler-Schein- various PME associated genes. ker disease, and familial fatal insomnia. According to their We studied 41 independent cases including 31 with no presentation they are classiﬁed into three groups: a) spora- family history. To enhance identiﬁcation of de novo dic of unknown etiology (85%), b) genetics, caused by mutationsatrioapproachwasusedin24cases.Theoverall mutations in the PRNP gene (10-15%), and c) acquired bioinformatic analysis included 44 additional cases in (<1%). The abnormal accumulation in the neurons of the whom an earlier singleton WES study was unrevealing. prionprotein,leadstoapoptosisandcelldeath,presentinga Four patients had pathogenic variants in known but rareAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 303 PME-associated genes, ASAH1 and CERS1, both involved Results:Incategoricalcomparison,wefound619DMPs/ inthesphingolipidpathway,aswellasinNEU1,codingfor 66 DMRs. Among TOP10 DMRs, we identiﬁed a region a lysosomal sialidase. Furthermore, identiﬁcation of novel mapping to DHX30 associated with neurodevelopmental pathogenic variants in two neurodevelopmental genes disorders. No enrichment was identiﬁed. In continuous previously not associated with PME, CHD2 and NAXE, comparison, we found 38 DMPs/4 DMRs. We identiﬁed a were conﬁrmed. region mapping CERS3 that was found to be differentially In addition, through identiﬁcation of pathogenic variants methylated in brains of schizophrenia patients. We found in NUS1 and DHDDS, this study extends the pathomecha- the following GO pathways: glycoprotein metabolic nistic etiology of PMEs to protein glycosylation, with process, glycosylation, presynapse and dendrite. We also NUS1 directly interacting with DHDDS. Functional assays identiﬁed the neuronal system REACTOME pathway. in ﬁbroblasts of a patient with a de novo frameshift However, only the ﬁrst two GO pathways remained alteration in NUS1 conﬁrmed the underlying protein signiﬁcant after BH correction. glycosylation defect. Likely pathogenic variants identiﬁed Conclusions: Our study suggests an association of DNA in further genes provide novel insights into the molecular methylation and PS using two different comparisons basis of PMEs and imply that the as yet unsolved cases of (categorical and continuous). We found an enrichment of PME are a highly heterogeneous group of ultra-rare several pathways related with brain, that supports previous disorders. studiesthatsuggestedpsychiatricdisorderstohaveanearly C.Courage:None.M.Muona:None.K.Oliver:None. neurodevelopmental component. J. Cameron: None. S. Berkovic: None. A. L.M.Spindola:None.M.Santoro:None.P.Pan:None. Lehesjoki: None. F. Talarico: None. G. Xavier: None. C.M. Carvalho: None. A. Gadelha: None. G.A. Salum: None. L.A. P09.122B Rohde: None. E.C. Miguel: None. R. Pellegrino: None. Differential DNA methylation associated with the onset of R.A. Bressan: None. V.K. Ota: None. H. Hakonarson: psychiatric symptoms None. S.I. Belangero: None. L.M.Spindola1,M.Santoro1,P.Pan1,F.Talarico1,G.Xavier1, P09.123C C.M.Carvalho1,A.Gadelha1,G.A.Salum2,L.A.Rohde2,E.C. A compound heterozygous mutations in ALDH7A1 at Miguel3, R.Pellegrino4, R.A. Bressan1,V.K.Ota1, pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy (PDE): a case report H.Hakonarson4,S. I.Belangero1 M.Belenikin1,2, E.Lukyanova2, S.Ayvazyan2 1Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Neurosciences (LiNC), São Paulo, Brazil, 2Hospital de Clínicas de Porto 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 35. Department & Institute of University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation, 2Research Psychiatry - Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Center for Children Medical Care, Moscow, Russian Paulo (FMUSP), São Paulo, Brazil, 4Center for Applied Federation Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States PDE(MIM:266100) is autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in the gene ALDH7A1. The main criteria of Background: The study of psychiatric symptoms (PS) PDE is the response to admission of pyridoxine, resistance instead of diagnosis could help to better understand the to treatment by anti-epileptic drugs. Here we report the basis of psychiatric disorders. We aimed to identify differ- clinicalcase.Newborn,onﬁrstdayoflifedevelopedtonic- entially methylated positions (DMPs) and regions (DMRs) clonic convulsions. Negative response to initial pyridoxine associated with PS. For that, we compared: 1) children and admission.Laterwaspolymorphismofconvulsiveseizures: adolescentswithlowPSatbaselineandwithhighPSafter3 focal clonic, epileptic spasms, myoclonic seizures. Correc- years of follow-up (categorical comparison); 2) PS as a tion of anticonvulsant therapy was no effect. In dynamics, score (continuous comparison). the frequency and severity of seizures increased to appear- Methods: PS were assessed using Child Behavior ance of epileptic status. CMA&Karyotyping did not reveal Checklist (CBCL). For the present study, we selected from abnormalities. Molecular genetic study for proband and his alargeBrazilianstudy24subjectswithCBCLscore<30at mother revealed heterozygous variants: (1)NM_199037.4: baselinethatincreasedCBCLmorethan16after3yearsof c.769G>A(SCN1B)(p.Gly257Arg); (2)NM_001182.4: follow-up. We generated methylation data using EPIC c.1279G>C(ALDH7A1)(p.Glu399Gln); (3)NM_001182.4: BeadChip.Incontinuouscomparison,weusedDeltaCBCL c.328C>T(ALDH7A1)(p.Arg82Ter). An unaffected mother as independent variable. has only 1&2 variants. Presently, girl 3y/o delays in304 J.delPicchia psychomotor development: she ﬁxes the sight for a short these episodes occurred in mutated individuals. In sum- time,turnsonitsside,doesnotsit,notcrawl,notwalk,not mary, this condition thought to be determined by an babbling. Individual attacks persist despite daily intake of uncontrolled inﬂammatory process remains apparently B6 and P-5-P. We suppose the increased resistance to pri- triggered by environmental or epigenetic factors at large mary pyridoxine administration could be partly owing to making it a singular condition among mendelian disorders. variants in both, ALDH7A1 and SCN1B. Compound het- Further studies are required to elucidate the underpinning erozygous in ALDH7A1 gene causes PDE, while SCN1B mechanisms. Interestingly, autosomal dominant transmis- variant could contribute to severity of the proband condi- sion mode has been demonstrated in three large pedigrees tion, complicating the PDE recognition by routine manner with a high percentage of non-penetrance. after birth (in literature the same compound heterozygous C.Engel:None.C.Cabrol:None.L.Burglen:None.A. mutations were described for Dutch boy 6y/o only). It Munnich: None. D. Amsallem: None. L. Van should be noted the clinical picture of proband's seizures Maldergem: None. was uncharacteristic for SCN1B mutations. However, the quantitativeassessmentofindividualgenecontributionstill P09.125A remainsunclear.TheauthorsaregratefultoMDZhylinaS. Identity-by-descent mapping and whole-exome sequencing for help. implicates neuronal development pathways in M. Belenikin: None. E. Lukyanova: None. S. schizophrenia and bipolar disorder Ayvazyan: None. C. Salvoro1, S.Bortoluzzi2,A. Coppe2,G.Valle1, E.Feltrin1, P09.124D M.Mostacciuolo1,G.Vazza1 Low penetrance in RANBP2-related autosomal dominant acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ADANE) 1Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare, Università di C.Engel1,C.Cabrol1,L.Burglen2,A.Munnich3,D.Amsallem4, Padova, Padova, Italy L. VanMaldergem1 Background: Hundreds of common alleles have been 1CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,UniversitédeFranche-Comté, implicated in schizophrenia (SCZ) and bipolar disorder Besançon, France, 2Service de Génétique, GHU Armand (BPD), but recently a role for rare, high-penetrant variants Trousseau, Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique, Hôpital has been also suggested in both disorders. Necker - Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Service de Methods: This study investigated a familial cohort of Pédiatrie, CHU, Université de Franche Comté, Besançon, SCZandBPDpatientsfromaclosedpopulation,wherethe France high recurrence of the disorders indicated a possible enrichment inrare risk alleles. Atotalof230 subjects were Autosomal Dominant Acute Necrotizing Encephalopathy genetically investigated through a strategy that integrated (ADANE) is a recently described condition determining identity-by-descent (IBD) mapping and whole-exome frequent severe sequelae after an acute encephalitis most sequencing (WES). commonly occurring after a symptom-free interval of sev- Results: IBD analysis allowed to track high risk eral years. Described in 2009 by Neilson, only less than haplotypes shared exclusively by patients from different sixtypatientshavebeendescribeduntilnow,eithersporadic familiesandpossiblycarryingthemostpenetrantalleles.A cases or small families with two or three affected patients. total of 444 non-synonymous sequence variants, of which Only two large pedigrees are reported in literature, with an 137disruptive,wereidentiﬁedinthesehaplotypesbyWES. intriguing lack of penetrance in most relatives with large Interestingly, gene sets previously implicated in SCZ (i.e. sibships of unaffected individuals and occasional index post-synapticdensity(PSD)proteins,voltage-gatedcalcium patients. We described another large pedigree with two channels (VGCCs) and fragileX mental retardation protein severly affected children aged 6 and 9 years at the time of (FMRP) targets) were signiﬁcantly enriched in genes presentation and important post-critic encephalopathy with carrying these rare variants. Further, IBD variants were a frontal syndrome in both. Interestingly, some relatives preferentially affecting genes involved in the extracellular were heterozygous for the c.1754C>T (p.Thr585Met) matrix (ECM) biology and axon guidance processes. RANBP2familialmutationwithoutmanifestinganyclinical Conclusions: Results conﬁrmed rare risk variants as key symptom, except seizures in two, developmental delay or factors in SCZ and BPD pathogenesis and highlighted an learning disability in one and an acute pseudo-Quincke involvementofECMbiologyanddevelopmentofneuronal facialandlaryngealedemainone.Inaddition4historiesof projections in the etiology of both disorders. meningitis in infancy were noted, without any proof thatAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 305 C. Salvoro: None. S. Bortoluzzi: None. A. Coppe: P09.127C None. G. Valle: None. E. Feltrin: None. M. Mostac- Rett syndrome: Correlation between clinical, molecular ciuolo: None. G. Vazza: None. and QTc evaluation in 21 patients P09.126B M.Kossmann Ferraz1,A. SalgueiroNascimentoMonteiro1, Allele-speciﬁcXchromosomeinactivationinRettsyndrome W.NoratSiqueira1,C.M.MottaStofelldeSiqueira1,O.Ferreira patients deSiqueira1,G.SousaDomingos1, A.P. Casseta dos Santos Nucera1,L. SchuindtMonnerat2, F.Regla Vargas1,2 C. XiolViñas1,2, S.Vidal Falcó1,2,N.BrandiTarrau3, P. PachecoFernández4,M.Pineda Marfa1, J.Armstrong 1UNIRIO, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Morón4,2,5 Brazil 1Sant Joan de Déu Research Foundation, Barcelona, Spain, Introduction: Rett syndrome is a neurodevelopmental 2Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, disorder that affects mostly females and is related, in the Barcelona, Spain, 3Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de majority of cases, to MECP2 mutations. It is reported that Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Molecular and Genetics affected patients have a higher probability of sudden death Medicine Section, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, mostly due to a prolonged corrected QT interval (QTc). Spain, 5CIBER-ER (Biomedical Network Research Center for Materials and Methods: We included 21 patients Rare Diseases), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain diagnosed with Rett syndrome, 19 of those tested for MECP2 mutations. The patients' medical notes were Introduction: Rett syndrome (RTT; MIM#312750) is a analysed and used for the classiﬁcation of their clinical severe neurological disorder which mainly affects young forms and their clinical ﬁndings described. The patients females and is the second most common cause of severe werealsosubmittedtoelectrocardiogram(ECG)evaluation intellectualdisabilityinwomenworldwide.Inmostcases,it for QTc measurement, which were considered prolonged iscausedbymutationsinMECP2(MIM*300005),thegene when >450ms, and their risk for Long QT Syndrome encodingMeCP2(methylCpGbindingprotein2),whichis (LQTS) was calculated. located on the X chromosome. Many studies have been Results: The classic clinical form was more prevalent in carried out to assess whether X chromosome inactivation ourcohort(85%).Intheclinicalﬁndings,themeanagewas (XCI)playsaroleinthewiderangeofphenotypicvariation 18 years old. Stereotypical hand movements, epilepsy, and of these patients. However, classical methylation-based bruxismwerethemostprevalentsymptoms(80%,76%,and protocols to evaluate XCI were only able to determine 76% respectively). The average QTc was 401ms and whether the XCI pattern was biased or random, but not if prolonged QTc was found in 1 patient. However, none the preferentially inactivated X chromosome was the one were taking medications known to prolong QTc and none carrying the mutant or the wildtype allele. had a higher risk for LQTS. Materials and Methods: We have developed an allele- Conclusions:TheclassicformofRettsyndromeprevails speciﬁcmethylation-basedassaytoevaluatemethylationon in our cohort and in most of the cases, the management of the loci of several recurrent MECP2 mutations in blood theirseizuresrequiredmedication.Wefoundnocorrelation samples of RTT patients. between prolonged QTc and MECP2 mutations in our Results: The aim of this study is to provide data to study. None of the patients investigated exhibited a high effectively correlate XCI patterns to the phenotypic risk for LQTS. Nevertheless, a follow-up with ECG is presentation of RTT. highly recommended. Conclusions:Ifthiscorrelationisstrongenough,itcould M. Kossmann Ferraz: None. A. Salgueiro Nascimento be used in the future as a molecular tool to predict the Monteiro: None. W. Norat Siqueira: None. C.M. Motta severityoftheclinicalpresentationofgeneticallydiagnosed StofelldeSiqueira:None.O.FerreiradeSiqueira:None. RTT patients. G. Sousa Domingos: None. A.P. Casseta dos Santos Grant: The work was supported by grants from the Nucera: None. L. Schuindt Monnerat: None. F. Regla Spanish Ministry of Health (Instituto de Salud Carlos III/ Vargas: None. FEDER, PI15/01159); Crowdfunding program of Catalan Association for Rett Syndrome; Fondobiorett and Mi P09.128D Princesa Rett. Characterization of large deletions of the MECP2gene in C. Xiol Viñas: None. S. Vidal Falcó: None. N. Brandi Rett syndrome patients by gene dosage analysis Tarrau: None. P. Pacheco Fernández: None. M. Pineda Marfa: None. J. Armstrong Morón: None.306 J.delPicchia S. Vidal1,2,A. Pascual-Alonso1,2,M.Rabaza1,2,E. Gerotina1,2, 1Fundació Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, N.Brandi3,P. Pacheco4,M.Pineda1, J.Armstrong4,2,5 2Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Molecular and Genetics Medicine Section, Hospital 1Sant Joan de Déu Research foundation, Barcelona, Spain, SantJoandeDéu,EspluguesdeLlobregat,Spain,4Neurology 2Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Service, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Esplugues de Barcelona, Spain, 3Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Llobregat, Spain, 5Institut de Recerca Pediàtrica, Hospital Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Molecular and Genetics SantJoandeDéu, Barcelona,Spain,6CIBER-ER (Biomedical Medicine Section, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Network Research Center for Rare Diseases), Instituto de Spain, 5CIBER-ER (Biomedical Network Research Center for Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain Rare Diseases) Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain Introduction: Rett syndrome (RTT) is an early-onset neu- Introduction:Rett syndrome(RTT)isaneuromaintenance rodevelopmental disorder that is caused by mutations in disease that affects 1:12000 newborn girls becoming the MECP2, but defects in a handful of other genes (CDKL5 second cause of mental retardation in women after Down and FOXG1) can lead to presentations that resemble clas- syndrome. In more than 96% of the cases of classic RTT a sical RTT, but do not completely identical. Here, we mutation affecting the Methil-CpG-binding protein 2 attempted to identify other monogenic disorders that share (MECP2) has been found and in ~15% of the cases, the features with RTT. alteration is a big deletion within it. We carried out the Material and Methods: It has been studied 396 patients characterizationofthebreakpointsofthedeletionsfoundin withRett-likeclinicaldiagnosis.Ithasbeenperformed:242 17 classical RTT patients. patients by custom panel with 17 gens related to Rett-like MaterialsandMethods:MLPAwasperformedinallof clinicthroughHaloPlexTargetEnrichmentSystemand154 themtodetectthealteration.Then,theallelecontainingthe patients by commercial panel, TruSightOne Sequencing deletion was narrowed down via DNA-qPCRs and long- Panel. PCRs until Sanger sequencing of it could be done. Results: 35 patients had Rett-like clinical features and Results: Following this methodology we could conﬁrm pathogenic variants have been found in six different genes: thepresenceofthedeletionineverycaseanddeterminethe eleven in STXBP1 (Epileptic encephalopathy, early infan- area, sometimes even the exact nucleotide, where the large tile,4. OMIM#612164), nine in TCF4 (Pitt-Hopkins syn- rearrangement has occurred. Further analysis of the drome. OMIM#610954), six in SCN2A (Epileptic sequences surrounding the break points showed that most encephalopathy,early infantile,11. OMIM#613721), four ofthemhappenedinregionsfullofrepetitiveelementssuch in MEF2C (Mental retardation. OMIM#613443), three in as Alus. SYNGAP1(Mentalretardation.OMIM#612621)andtwoin Conclusions: We therefore provide more evidence to KCNQ2 (Epileptic encephalopathy,early infantile,7. support this former theory regarding the possible cause of OMIM#613720). theserearrangements.Besides,theXchromosomeinactiva- Conclusions: The genetic study by NGS allows to study tion pattern was determined and along with clinical data a a larger number of genes associated with Rett-like clinic possible correlation between genotype and phenotype has simultaneously, providing a genetic study to a wider group been searched. of patients. These variants identiﬁed by NGS may modify Grants: The work was supported by grants from the the initial clinical diagnosis to other neurodevelopmental Spanish Ministry of Health (Instituto de Salud Carlos III/ syndromes, or determine new candidate genes related to FEDER, PI15/01159); Crowdfunding program of Catalan RTT-like symptoms, providing the clinician with more Association for Rett Syndrome; Fondobiorett and Mi information and clues that could help in the prevention of Princesa Rett. future symptoms or in the pharmacologic therapy. S. Vidal: None. A. Pascual-Alonso: None. M. Rabaza: Grant: from the Spanish Ministry ofHealth (Instituto de None. E. Gerotina: None. N. Brandi: None. P. Pacheco: Salud Carlos III/FEDER, PI15/01159); Crowdfunding None. M. Pineda: None. J. Armstrong: None. program of Catalan Association for RTT; Fondobiorett and Mi Princesa Rett. P09.129A S.Vidal:None.N.M.Brandi:None.P.Pacheco:None. Themostrecurrentmonogenicdisordersthatoverlapwith E. Gerotina: None. A. Garcia-Cazorla: None. M. the phenotype of Rett syndrome O’Callaghan: None. M. Pineda: None. J. Armstrong: None. S.Vidal1,N.M.Brandi2,P.Pacheco3,E.Gerotina1,A.Garcia- Cazorla4,5,6,M.O’Callaghan4,5,6,M.Pineda1,J.Armstrong3,5,6 P09.130B Mutation screening and global gene expression analyses ofAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 307 Saudi Rett patients implicate mitochondrial dysfunction in None. O. AlHarazi: None. A. Al-Odaib: None. N. the pathogenesis of Rett syndrome Kaya: None. D.Colak1,M.Aldosary1,A. AlBakheet1, O.M. Mustafa1, P09.131C R. Almass1,M. Alsagob1, L.AlQuait1, H.Al-Dhalaan1, Implications of an admixed Brazilian population in M.Alfadhel2,Z.Rahbeeni1,A.Chedrawi1,M.Al-Dosari1,Z.Al- Schizophrenia polygenic risk score Hassnan1,M.Bulbul1,M.Salih3,M.Al-Owain2,H.Al-Zaidan1, M.Al-Muheiza1, M.AlSayed1, O.AlHarazi1,A. Al-Odaib1, F. Talarico1,2, M.LSantoro3,4,V. KOta1,2,R. Pellegrino5, N.Kaya1 A. Gadelha3,2,R. ABressan3,4,H.Hakonarson5, S.I Belangero1,3,2 1KingFaisalSpecialistHospitalandResearchCenter,Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Fahad National 1GeneticsDivisionofDepartmentofMorphologyandGenetics GuardHospital, Riyadh, SaudiArabia,Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, ofUniversidadeFederaldeSãoPaulo(UNIFESP),SãoPaulo, 3King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, Saudi Brazil, 2LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of Clinical Arabia NeurosciencesofUNIFESP,SãoPaulo,Brazil,3Departmentof PsychiatryofUniversidadeFederaldeSãoPaulo(UNIFESP), Rett syndrome (RS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder São Paulo, Brazil, 4 LiNC - Interdisciplinary Laboratory of that is found in a variety of racial and ethnic groups with a Clinical Neurosciences of UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil, 5The notable female predilection. MECP2 mutations are parti- Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United cularly known to cause RS phenotype, however, involve- States ment of other genes has also been reported. We herein present a detailed molecular characterization of a cohort of The Polygenic Risk Score (PRS) tool compiles data from 32 patients with RS Mutation screening revealed that 13 hundreds to millions of common variants into a single patientshad MECP2 mutations, three of which were novel. measure, making it a valuable tool to investigate genetic One patient had a novel FOXG1 mutation and another one risk of complex diseases, like Schizophrenia (SCZ). To had a novel CDKL5 mutation. All patients were females calculatethePRS-SCZ,areferencesamplemustbedeﬁned, except one male who carries FOXG1 mutation. Patients but most subjects from such samples are Caucasian and screened for cytogenetic abnormalities did not carry any doubtsremainaboutthereliabilityofPRS-SCZinadmixed gross chromosomal abnormality except for singleton who samples. We veriﬁed if PRS-SCZ could differentiate had a gain on chromosome X harboring two genes includ- patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls in a Bra- ing MECP2. Whole-transcriptome analysis of RS patients zilian sample and if miscegenation could inﬂuence the with MECP2 mutation and sex- and age-matching controls results. We used the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium- revealed alterations in a number of mitochondria related SCZ summary statistics GWAS as reference. As target pathways, including oxidative phosphorylation and mito- sample, we genotyped 177 patients with schizophrenia and chondrial dysfunction. We sequenced mtDNA on the 242 healthy controls. The Sanger Imputation Service plat- patients who did not have any tested genetic defect which form was used to impute genomic regions. To perform the revealed two novel mtDNA alterations in two patients. qualitycontrolandtogeneratethePRSweusedPRSiceand Furthermore, we identiﬁed common genes and pathways PLINK software. We could explain up to 5.2% of the var- possibly leading to autistic phenotype by performing net- iance between cases and controls when including all indi- work analysis of RS signiﬁcant genes with the multi- viduals. A similar result was found when selecting only disorderautismgenesetthatisassociatedwithautismandat individuals with large African component mixed with least one of 13 other autism sibling disorders. The gene Caucasian and Native Amerindian components (named as signatures and novel alterations that were found in this Latin 1). Considering only Caucasians, the variance studyalongwiththeobserveddisturbanceoftheexpression explained raised to 11%, with the PRS-SCZ signiﬁcantly ofmitochondrialpathwaysmayindicatetheinvolvementof higher in patients with SCZ than controls. The same was mitochondria in the Rett disease pathogenesis. observed in a sample with large Native Amerindian com- D. Colak: None. M. Aldosary: None. A. AlBakheet: ponent mixed with Caucasian component (named as Latin None. O.M. Mustafa: None. R. Almass: None. M. 2). We found more robust results after restraining the Alsagob:None.L.AlQuait:None.H.Al-Dhalaan:None. sample to Caucasian subjects, but PRS-SCZ was still cap- M. Alfadhel: None. Z. Rahbeeni: None. A. Chedrawi: able to differentiate cases from controls even in a highly None. M. Al-Dosari: None. Z. Al-Hassnan: None. M. mixed population. Bulbul: None. M. Salih: None. M. Al-Owain: None. H. Grants: FAPESP, CAPES Al-Zaidan: None. M. Al-Muheiza: None. M. AlSayed:308 J.delPicchia F. Talarico: None. M. L Santoro: None. V. K Ota: P09.133A None. R. Pellegrino: None. A. Gadelha: None. R. A Polygenic risk score analyses of symptoms and treatment Bressan: None. H. Hakonarson: None. S. I responseinanantipsychotic-naïveﬁrstepisodeofpsychosis Belangero: None. cohort P09.132D V. K.Ota1,M. L.Santoro1, S.deJong2,C. Noto1,L.M.N. Genome wide DNA methylation analysis in a longitudinal Spindola1,F. Talarico1,P. Moretti1, C.M. Carvalho1, cohort of antipsychotic naive ﬁrst episode of psychosis A. Gadelha1,Q.Cordeiro3,R. A. Bressan1,S.I. Belangero1, patients G.Breen2 M.L.Santoro1,V.K.Ota2,F.Talarico2,S.deJong3,C.Noto1, 1UNIFESP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2King’s College London, L.Spindola2,A.Gadelha1,Q.Cordeiro4,R.Bressan1,G.Breen3, London, United Kingdom, 3Irmandade da Santa Casa de S. Belangero2 Misericórdia de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil 1Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo, Brazil, 2UNIFESP, In this study, we aimed to test if the schizophrenia (SCZ) São Paulo, Brazil, 3King's College London, London, United polygenic risk score (PRS) was associated with clinical Kingdom, 4Santa Casa de Misericordia de São Paulo, São symptomsat:a)theﬁrstepisodeofpsychosispre-treatment Paulo, Brazil (FEP),b)nineweeksafterinitiationofrisperidonetreatment (FEP-9W) and c) with the response to risperidone. We Identifying the genetic and molecular changes of drug performedadetailedclinicalassessmentof60antipsychotic response is the ﬁrst step through personalized medicine. In naïve patients in their FEP and, again, after nine weeks of this study we aimed to identify DNA methylation markers standardized treatment with Risperidone. Blood derived in blood of an antipsychotic-naive First Episode of Psy- DNA was genotyped using the Illumina PsychArrayChip, chosis (anFEP) cohort before and after two months of ris- along with 59 controls, and then imputed. We used the peridonetreatment(FEP-2M),furthermore,weinvestigated latest available GWAS summary statistics from the Psy- overlaps between these markers and post-mortem schizo- chiatric Genomics Consortium wave-2 SCZ group as a phrenia brain datasets. Sixty anFEP were recruited for this training set to calculate their PRS for schizophrenia. We study.Weused theHuman_Illumina-450Kmicroarray.We used Poisson Regression to test association between the covariated the data for sex, age, smoking and cell propor- PRS and clinical measures adjusting for four ancestry tions, considering as statistically signiﬁcant differentially principal components. We considered as signiﬁcant a p- methylated positions (DMPs) with a p-value < 0.05 after a value<0.001(Bonferronicorrection).First,weveriﬁedthat FDRandasdifferentiallymethylatedregions(DMRs)those the schizophrenia PRS was also able to distinguish cases with at least two DMPs. E-GEOD-61107, E-GEOD-61380 from control in this south-eastern Brazilian sample, with a andE-GEOD-61431braindatasetswereusedtoinvestigate similar variance explained (~0.19, observed scale) to that for DMP overlaps between brain and blood. We searched seeninNorthernEuropeanpopulations.Inaddition,within- for enriched pathways using the WebGestalt software. We cases, we found that PRS is signiﬁcantly positively corre- found14DMRsbetweenanFEPandFEP-2M,mostrelated lated with baseline (pre-treatment) symptoms as measured to treatment response (ANKRD33) or side effects such as by the PANSS-excitement factor. After standardized treat- male fertility (BRDT, TEX14, ASZ1, STARD6) and meta- ment for 9 weeks, this correlation disappeared and the bolism (CPN1, ERLIN1, ASB3). Comparing results with depressivesymptoms(CDSS)becamenegativelyassociated braindatasets,wefound27DMPsoverlapinRNF39 gene, with PRS. These results highlight the importance of which lies within the MHC region. No biological pathway studying schizophrenia, and other disorders, pre-treatment wereenrichedforbloodorbrainstudies.Toourknowledge, to understand the relationship between polygenic risk and this is the ﬁrst study to ﬁnd DMPs and DMRs in a long- phenotypic features. itudinalcohortofanFEP.Collectively,weidentiﬁedDMRs Grants: FAPESP, MRC ref NEWTON001 that seem to be related to the adverse effects of risperidone V.K. Ota: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, andalargeoverlapbetweenbloodandbrainstudiescloseto collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as the most associated genomic region in schizophrenia, the grantsalreadyreceived);Modest; FAPESP.M.L.Santoro: MHC region. None. S. de Jong: None. C. Noto: None. L.M.N. M.L. Santoro: None. V.K. Ota: None. F. Talarico: Spindola: None. F. Talarico: None. P. Moretti: None. None. S. de Jong: None. C. Noto: None. L. Spindola: C.M. Carvalho: None. A. Gadelha: None. Q. Cordeiro: None.A.Gadelha:None.Q.Cordeiro:None.R.Bressan: None. R.A. Bressan: None. S.I. Belangero: None. G. None. G. Breen: None. S. Belangero: None. Breen: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 309 collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as N.Sánchez-Bolivar, L. Dela Vega,J.Botet, P.Maietta, grants already received); Modest; MRC ref NEWTON001. S. Alvarez P09.134B Unidad de secuenciación, NIMGenetics S.L., Madrid, Spain, A molecular analysis of SDCCAG8, a schizophrenia risk Madrid, Spain gene that functions in the centrosome Background: Epilepsy is a common clinical and genetic M.Flynn, L.Whitton, G.Donohoe,C. Morrison,D.Morris heterogeneousneurologicaldisorder,withalargenumberof cases caused by genetic factors. To understand the mole- National University Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland cular basis of epilepsy, 234 epileptic patients were studied using a targeted sequencing of 223 epilepsy- Schizophrenia affects 1% of adults and is a major global associated genes. healthproblem.Thefocusofmyprojectisthepotentialrole Material and Methods: We performed exome sequen- of the centrosome in schizophrenia. The centrosome, an cing using the Ion AmpliSeqTM Exome RDY, combined organelle within cells, plays a crucial role in brain devel- with an AmpliSeq panel design and SureSelectXT technol- opment where it directs cell shape, polarity and motility. ogy. Sequencing reads were analyzed using Torrent Suite The centrosome also seeds the growth of antenna-like sig- software and an in-house pipeline, respectively. Annotated nalling structures called primary cilia. Rare mutations in variants using ION Reporter were prioritized with an in- centrosome genes cause disorders that present with severe house analytical pipeline. cognitivedeﬁcitsandvariableneuropsychiatricphenotypes. Results:Amongthe234cases,152patientswerereferred GWASdatahasimplicatedmanygenesinschizophrenia. asEarlyInfantileEpilepticEncephalopathy(EEIE).Onthis Wehaveshownthatsevenschizophreniariskgenesencode group a diagnostic yield of 35% was obtained. SCN1A, proteins with centrosomal functions. Of these, SDCCAG8 CDKL5 KCNT1, KCNQ2, and SPTAN1 were the most isalsoassociatedwitheducationalattainmentinGWASand frequently mutated genes. On the 82 remaining patients, the genome-wide signiﬁcant SNPs for the two phenotypes 33% of them with an associated neurodevelopmental are in high linkage disequilibrium indicating a pleiotropic disorder, potential diagnostic variants were detected in effect. We have found that a schizophrenia risk SNP in 25% of the cases, being IQSEC2, identiﬁed in 3 cases, the SDCCAG8 is signiﬁcantly associated with poorer perfor- only recurrent mutated gene on this group. Out of the 281 mance in a social cognition task, in a large Irish dataset of identiﬁed variants, 171 (61%) were associated to schizophrenia patients and controls (p=0.001). autosomal-dominant inheritance pattern diseases. Variants ToanalysethemolecularfunctionofSDCCAG8wehave of uncertain signiﬁcant category were identiﬁed in RYR3, usedgenomeediting toknockitoutinneuronalandretinal ARHGEF15,FASNandRELNgenes.Recurrentupdatingof cells. Loss of SDCCAG8 impairs cells’ ability to make targeted genes and the familial segregation studies has primary cilia and their capacity to repair genome damage. shown to be essential to identify causal variants. Nuclear lobulationhasalso beenobserved.Current workis Conclusions: Targeted sequencing based on whole addressing whether SDCCAG8 affectscell signalling using exome sequencing in epilepsy patients provide a cost RNA-Seq analysis. This could identify molecular mechan- effective and comprehensive strategy that accelerates the isms by which SDCCAG8 mutations contribute to schizo- identiﬁcation of a deﬁnitive clinical diagnosis on EEIE and phrenia risk and cognition and help uncover the processes on patients with seizures associated to other neurological that implicate centrosome genes in neurodevelopmental disorders. phenotypes. M. Martinez-Garcia: None. I. Diez: None. C. Rodri- Funded by Irish Research Council. guez: None. R. Perez-Carro: None. I. Sanchez-Navarro: M.Flynn:None.L.Whitton:None.G.Donohoe:None. None. R. Sanchez-Alcudia: None. E. Mata: None. M. C. Morrison: None. D. Morris: None. Carcajona: None. E. Fernandez-Tabanera: None. D. Rodriguez: None. G. Benito: None. N. Sánchez-Bolivar: P09.135C None. L. De la Vega: None. J. Botet: None. P. Maietta: Targeted WES study, an effective tool for the genetic None. S. Alvarez: None. diagnosis of epilepsy P09.137A M.Martinez-Garcia, I. Diez,C. Rodriguez, R. Perez-Carro, High incidence of SHANK3 loss of function mutations in I.Sanchez-Navarro, R.Sanchez-Alcudia, E.Mata, individuals with intellectual disability and autistic traits M.Carcajona,E.Fernandez-Tabanera,D.Rodriguez,G.Benito,310 J.delPicchia M.C. Aspromonte1,A. Gasparini2,R. Polli1,E. Bettella1, M.C.Aspromonte:None.A.Gasparini:None.R.Polli: F. Cesca1,F. Benedicenti3,S. Boni4,O.Carlet5,F.Rivieri6, None.E. Bettella: None. F. Cesca:None. F. Benedicenti: F. Vittorini7,M.Carraro2,S. Sartori8,S. C. E.Tosatto2,9, None. S. Boni: None. O. Carlet: None. F. Rivieri: None. A. Murgia1,E. Leonardi1 F. Vittorini: None. M. Carraro: None. S. Sartori: None. S.C.E. Tosatto: None. A. Murgia: None. E. 1Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment, Dept. of Women's Leonardi: None. and Children's Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Dept. of Biomedical Sciences and CRIBI Biotechnology P09.138B Center, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 3Genetic Serotonin transporter polymorphism, cortisol and CounselingService–Dept.ofPediatrics-RegionalHospitalof hippocampal volume in post-stroke patients Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy, 4Medical Genetic Service, S. Martino Hospital of Belluno, Belluno, Italy, 5Child Psychiatry Unit – E. BenAssayag1,2,D.Amar1,2,E. Kliper1, S.Usher1, Scientiﬁc Institute E. Medea of Conegliano, Treviso, Italy, H.Hallevi1,2,L. Shopin1, J.Molad1,A. Korczyn2, N. M. 6Medical Genetic Service, Department of Laboratory, Bornstein1,2,S. Shenhar-Tsarfaty1,2 S. Chiara Hospital, Trento, Italy, 7S.C. Neuropsichiatria InfantileDipartimentodiPediatriaeSpecialitàPediatriche,A. 1TelAvivSouraskyMedicalCenter,TelAviv,Israel,2TelAviv O.U.CittàdellaSaluteedellaScienzaTorino,PresidioOIRM, University, Tel Aviv, Israel Torino, Italy, 8Pediatric Neurology Unit, Dept. of Woman's and Child's Health, University Hospital of Padova, Padova, Background: The s allele variant of the serotonin trans- Italy, 9CNR Institute of Neuroscience, Padova, Padova, Italy porter gene (5-HTT) has been related to hypothalamic- pituitary-adrenal (HPA)-axis reactivity to stress, depressio- SHANK3 deletions or loss of function mutations cause nand negatively impact on memory. Acute strokeis asso- Phelan-McDermidsyndromeandhavebeenfoundin2%of ciated with elevated cortisol levels as part of the body's individuals with intellectual disability (ID) and 0.5% of reaction to a stress provoking event. We investigated individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We whether5-HTTgenotypeinteractswithphysiologicalstress analyzed SHANK3 coding sequence (NM_033517; hg19) to impact on cognitive function and hippocampal structural with amplicon-based next-generation sequencing in 163 measures in stroke patients. individuals,negativetoaCGHandFragileXtest,withnon- MethodsDatafrom182cognitivelyintactstrokepatients speciﬁc ID with or without autistic traits. Due to high GC from the TABASCO study were available. Patients under- content, 7% of the gene was not covered by the analysis. went 3T MRI scans, saliva cortisol measure and compre- WeidentiﬁedsixnovelSHANK3variants,ofwhichfourde hensivecognitiveanddepressionassessmentsatadmission, novoframeshiftornonsensemutations.Individualscarrying 6, 12 and 24 months thereafter. truncating mutations had global developmental delay with Results Carriers of the 5-HTT s allele had signiﬁcantly moderate to severe ID, severely delayed or absent speech, higher admission bedtime salivary cortisol and reduced and abnormal behavior. Although some features were pre- hippocampal volume than non-carriers. Patients with sent, ASD was speciﬁcally referred only for one of them. smaller hippocampi had lower cognitive scores at all The other two variants were missense with discordant pre- timepoints post-stroke, and higher depression scores. diction of pathogenicity; one inherited from an unaffected Carriers of the 5-HTT s allele displayed strong negative parent was found in a girl with Rett-like phenotype. The association ofadmission cortisol with hippocampal volume othermissense,apparentlyhomozygous,wasfoundinaboy and cognitive scores at all timepoints, while non-carriers with ID, ASD, epilepsy, speech delay and macrocephaly, displayed no such association. who carried other four apparently homozygous SHANK3 Conclusions Carriers of the 5-HTT s allele had lower variants. We are currently investigating the possible pre- hippocampalvolumeandhigheradmissionsalivarycortisol senceofapreviouslymissedintragenicdeletion.Thehigher .Theircortisollevelsnegativelycorrelatedwithpost-stroke incidence of SHANK3 mutations (2,5%) we report in indi- cognitive function. . The interactive effects of the s allele viduals with ID and autistic traits indicates SHANK3 hap- and cortisol levels on reduced hippocampal volume,lower loinsufﬁciency as one of the most prevalent monogenic cognitive scores and higher depression imply that the causes of ID and ASD. We suggest routine screening of negative effect of 5-HTT-s on cognition involves the HPA SHANK3forthediagnosisofnon-speciﬁcIDinindividuals axis.Sincegeneticfactorsmayinﬂuencevulnerabilitytothe with or without reported autistic traits. Funding: Italian adverse effects of stress, serotonin receptors may provide a Ministry of health Young Investigator Grant GR-2011- novel target for therapeutics to prevent dementia in stroke 02347754 to E.L. patients.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 311 E. Ben Assayag: None. D. Amar: None. E. Kliper: Inconclusion,ourstudiesrepresentstheﬁrststeptowards None. S. Usher: None. H. Hallevi: None. L. Shopin: the development of new types of RNA-based therapy, with None. J. Molad: None. A. Korczyn: None. N.M. implications for a large repertory of presently incurable Bornstein: None. S. Shenhar-Tsarfaty: None. genetic diseases. F.Di Leva:None.M.Arnoldi: None.G.Alvari:None. P09.139C A. Messina: None. S. Casarosa: None. G.L. Carvill: SINEUP, a synthetic antisense non-coding RNA-based None. S. Zucchelli: None. S. Gustincich: None. M. technology, as possible new therapeutic tool for Biagioli: None. haploinsufﬁciency: Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) and Epilepsy as Proof-of-Principle P09.141A Delineation of SPATA5 related epilepsy, hearing loss, and F.DiLeva1,M.Arnoldi1,G.Alvari1,A.Messina2,S.Casarosa2,3, mental retardation syndrome (EHLMRS) G.L. Carvill4,S. Zucchelli5,6,S. Gustincich5,7,M.Biagioli1 D.J.Josifova1,K. Bradbury1,R. L. Jones1, V.Govender2 1NeuroEpigeneticslaboratory,CentreforIntegrativeBiology, Trento, Italy, 2Laboratory of Neural Development and 1Guy'sHospital,London,UnitedKingdom,2EvelinaChildrens Regeneration, Centre for Integrative Biology, Trento, Italy, Hospital, London, United Kingdom 3CNRNeuroscienceInstitute,Pisa,Italy,4KenandRuthDavee Department of Neurology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Bi-allelic variants in SPATA5 (spermatogenesis-associated Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States, 5Area of protein 5, MIM: 613940) are associated with severe global Neuroscience, Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi developmental delay,congenitalsensorineuralhearingloss, Avanzati (SISSA), Trieste, Italy, 6Department of Health seizures, cortical visual impairment and microcephaly. Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy, SPATA5 is vital for mitochondrial function and morphol- 7DepartmentofNeuroscienceandBrainTechnologies,Istituto ogy in the cortical neurons. The absence of functional Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genova, Italy protein prevents the normal neuronal development and interferes with axonal growth. Congenital sensorineural Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and epilepsies are het- hearing impairment is often the ﬁrst presenting symptom, erogeneous conditions that frequently coexist with other followedbyseizuresandmotordelayonthebackgroundof developmentaldisabilities.Geneticbasesareprominentrisk abnormalneurologicalphenotypeincludingcorehypotonia, factors for both disorders. Among others, loss of function increased peripheral tone. A slowly progressive hyperki- mutations in CHD8 gene represents a recurrent risk factor netic movement disorder evolves from early childhood. for ASD, while CHD2 is more frequently mutated in epi- Mostpatientshavemicrocephaly,althoughbrainimagingis lepsy. Thus, the sole reduction in CHD8 or CHD2 expres- non-speciﬁc, demonstrating brain atrophy and/or delayed sionisabletocausecellularandmolecularphenotypesthat myelination. In partnership with the patient support group, are key hallmarks to follow and rescue in assessing new we have had access to an international cohort of patients therapeutic approaches. with conﬁrmed SPATA5 mutations. We provide a detail Particularly, we aim to test SINEUPs, a novel class of clinical description of the breadth and variability of the syntheticantisenselongnon-codingRNAs-abletoincrease clinical phenotype, alongside the already reported cases in the translation of target proteins to physiological level the literature. SPATA5 should be considered in cases sug- without affecting transcription - to rescue the phenotypes gestive of mitochondrial disorders especially in young caused by CHD8 or CHD2 haploinsufﬁciency. infants whose clinical picture is often less recognisable. Since the activity of SINEUP depends on two domains, D.J. Josifova: None. K. Bradbury: None. R.L. Jones: an effector domain required for translation enhancement None. V. Govender: None. and a binding domain conferring target speciﬁcity, we designed SINEUP molecules able to recognize the initial P09.142B andinternalmethioninesofCHD8andCHD2proteins.We Biallelic SQSTM1 mutations in early-onset, variably thenproceededtotesttheefﬁcacyofdifferentSINEUPson progressive neurodegeneration neural progenitors. From our preliminary observations, SINEUPs targeting internal methionines are more efﬁcient V. MUTO1,E. Flex2, Z.Kupchinsky3, G.Primiano4, in stimulating CHD8 and CHD2 protein production, thus H.Galehdari5, M.Dehghani6,S. Cecchetti2,G.Carpentieri1, representing a valid target to be further tested in patients’ T. Rizza1, N.Mazaheri5,A. Sedaghat7,M. Mehrjardi6, derived cell lines and in zebraﬁsh, an in vivo model of the A.Traversa8,M.DiNottia1,M.Kousi3,Y.Jamshidi9,A.Ciolﬁ1, disorders. V. Caputo10,R. Malamiri11,F. Pantaleoni1,S. Martinelli2,312 J.delPicchia A. Jeffries12,J.Zeighami7,A. Sherafat13,D.Di Giuda14, phenotype characterized by cerebellum anomalies ranging G.Shariati7, R.Carrozzo1,N.Katsanis3,R. Marooﬁan9, from depletion of axonal connections to complete atrophy. S. Servidei15,M.Tartaglia1 Italian Ministry of Health (R. C. 2017) V. Muto: None. E. Flex: None. Z. Kupchinsky: None. 1Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, ROMA, Italy, 2Istituto G. Primiano: None. H. Galehdari: None. M. Dehghani: Superiore di Sanità, ROMA, Italy, 3Duke University School of None. S. Cecchetti: None. G. Carpentieri: None. T. Medicine, Durham, NC, United States, 4Policlinico Rizza:None.N.Mazaheri:None.A.Sedaghat:None.M. Universitario A. Gemelli, ROMA, Italy, 5Shahid Chamran Mehrjardi: None. A. Traversa: None. M. Di Nottia: UniversityofAhvaz,Ahvaz,Iran,IslamicRepublicof,6Shahid None. M. Kousi: None. Y. Jamshidi: None. A. Ciolﬁ: Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran, Islamic None. V. Caputo: None. R. Malamiri: None. F. Republicof,7NargesMedicalGeneticsandPrenatalDiagnosis Pantaleoni:None.S.Martinelli:None.A.Jeffries:None. Laboratory, Ahvaz, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 8Università J. Zeighami: None. A. Sherafat: None. D. Di Giuda: “Sapienza",ROMA,Italy,9StGeorge’s,UniversityofLondon, None. G. Shariati: None. R. Carrozzo: None. N. London, United Kingdom, 10Università “Sapienza”, ROMA, Katsanis: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. S. Servidei: None. Italy, 11Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, M. Tartaglia: None. Iran, Islamic Republic of, 12University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 13Kerman University of P09.143C Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Compound heterozygosity for a frameshift and a missense 14Fondazione Policlinico A. Gemelli, ROMA, Italy, mutation in the SURF1 gene in a patient without Leigh 15Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, ROMA, syndrome Italy E. Nibbeling1,D.Kamphuis2,j.knijnenburg1,s.bollen1, Intracellular clearance of damaged cellular constituents, M.Laurense-Bik1, I.Fokkema1,M.Kriek1,C. Ruivenkamp1 including protein aggregates and dysfunctional organelles, is necessary for proper neuronal function and long-term 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Reinier de Graaf Gasthuis, survival of neuronal cells. Autophagy contributes sig- Delft, Netherlands niﬁcantlytothisprocess,anditsdefectivefunctionhasbeen implicated in a number of neurodegenerative disorders. The SURF1 gene encodes an assembly factor of the mito- Here, we describe clinically and molecularly a recently chondrial respiratory complex IV. Recessive mutations in recognized early-onset, variably progressive, neurodegen- theSURF1geneareassociatedwithLeighsyndrome(MIM erative disorder caused by loss of function of SQSTM1, a 256000) and a few patients with Charcot-Marie-Tooth dis- multidomain protein serving as a selective autophagy ease type 4K (MIM 616684). The majority of the reported receptor. Eleven affected individuals from three con- mutations lead to premature termination codons. Missense sanguineous families shared a homogeneous phenotype mutations are reported to cause a milder phenotype and characterized by ataxia, hypotonia, dysmetria, dysarthria, longer survival. Here we report an adult patient showing ophthalmoplegia, dyskenesia, and cognitive decline as episodes of balance and coordination problems, tremor, major features. Whole exome sequencing (WES) in two short stature and stuttering who was referred to our clinic families, and a combined approach based on homozygosity for whole exome sequencing. We identiﬁed compound mapping analysis in six affected individuals of the third heterozygosity for a missense and a frameshift mutation in family coupled to WES performed in a single affected the SURF1 gene. Both mutations have previously been member allowed to identify three homozygous inactivating reported in patients with Leigh syndrome, however, the variants, including a splice site substitution (c.301+2T>A) clinicalphenotypeofthepatientdidnotﬁtLeighsyndrome. causing aberrant transcript processing and accelerated The clinical phenotype of our patient and those reported degradation of a resulting protein lacking exon 2, and two withthesamemutationsiscomparedandwillbepresented. truncating changes (c.875_876insT and Overall, mutations in the SURF1 gene comprise a broad c.934_936delinsTGA). In vitro studies directed to char- clinical phenotype and should also be considered in adult acterize the consequences of loss of SQSTM1 function on patients with movement disorders. autophagy provided evidence of a decelerated autophagic E. Nibbeling: None. D. Kamphuis: None. J. knijnen- ﬂux and impaired production of ubiquitin-positive protein burg: None. S. bollen: None. M. Laurense-Bik: None. I. aggregates in response to misfolded protein stress. The Fokkema: None. M. Kriek: None. C. impact of sqstm1 down-modulation on the structural Ruivenkamp: None. integrity of the cerebellum was analyzed in vivo, using zebraﬁshasmodel,documentingavariablebutreproducibleAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 313 P09.144D P09.145A Natural history of a 34 year old male with an apparently Systematic analysis of the involvement of DNA tandem balanced translocation t(1,17)(q24,q24.2) disrupting the repeats in Amyotrophic lateral sclerosisfrom Whole BPTF gene Genome Sequencing data A. T.Midro1,B. Panasiuk1,L. Cooper2,S. E.Scherer3, L. Corrado1,L. M.Genovese2,E. Mangano3,A. DiPierro1, P. Stankiewicz2,4 N.Barizzone1,R.Bordoni3,F.Geraci4,R.D'Aurizio2,R.Croce1, F. DeMArchi5,L. Mazzini5, R.Cantello5,G.De Bellis3, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Bialystok, Poland, 2Baylor G.Manzini6,7, M.Severgnini3, M.Pellegrini2,S.D'Alfonso1 Genetics, Houston, TX, United States, 3Human Genome SequencingCenter,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX, 1Lab. of Human Genetics, Dep. of Healty Sciences, UPO, United States, 4Dept of Molecular & HumanGenetics, Baylor NOvara, Italy, 2Institute for Informatics and Telematics (IIT), College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States National Research Council (CNR), Pisa, Italy, 3Institute for Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council (CNR- Introduction:Wepresenta24-yearfollow-upofa34-year- ITB), Segrate (MI), Italy, 4Institute for Informatics and old male with a de novo apparently balanced chromosomal Telematics(IIT),NationalResearchCouncil(CNR),,Pisa(PI), translocation t(1;17)(q31;q25) reported in 1993 with the Italy, 5ALS Center AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, features of Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS, PMID: NOvara,Italy,6UniversityofEasternPiedmontUPO,Vercelli, 8403458). The chromosomal region 17q25 was also Italy, 7Institute for Informatics and Telematics (IIT), National involved in another apparently balanced translocation t Research Council (CNR), Pisa (PI), Pisa, Italy (17;20)(q25;q13) associated with RSS (PMID: 1633648). Molecular studies indicated a disruption of KPNA2. How- The C9ORF72 gene repeat expansion is the most frequent ever, subsequent screenings for mutations in KPNA2 in 31 cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Long repeats unrelated individuals with RSS revealed no disease-related alleles in ATXN-1, ATXN-2, and NIPA1 genes are asso- variants (PMID: 11735022). ciated to ALS susceptibility. Thus, Tandem Repeat Poly- Material and Methods: Phenotypic analyses were morphisms (TRPs) are good candidates for missing performed according to the Munich Dysmorphology hereditability in ALS, although they were never system- Database(MDDB)methodology.Chromosomalmicroarray atically analyzed because challenging to NGS. The general analysis and FISH with BAC and fosmid clones were used aim of this study is to perform a systematic analysis of to narrow the 17q breakpoint. TRPs inALSbycombiningNGSandnovel bioinformatics Results:Wefoundthatthetranslocationbreakpointmaps tools. TRPs from whole genome sequencing data (WGS, to 17q24.2 and disrupts BPTF encoding the largest subunit Illumina HiSeq X Ten, avg. coverage 30X, 2x 150 bp of a nucleosome remodeling factor (NURF), a member of length)ofacohortof70ALScasesenrichedinFALScases ISWIchromatinremodelingcomplex.Nonon-polymorphic wereevaluatedbymeansoftwosoftwaredevelopedwithin CNVs were identiﬁed. Phenotypic analyses showed short our consortium and by a literature software (lobSTR) to stature, hemihypotrophy, microcephaly, triangular shape of detect either expansions with a repeat size within the NGS face, prominent forehead, hypertelorism, protruding eye- reads sizes (short TRPs), and repeat expansions larger than balls, broad palpebral ﬁssures, long eye lashes, long nasal the NGS reads sizes. The analysis of short tandem repeat bridge, short philtrum, thin lips microretrogenia, and expansion for about 600K loci in 70 ALS cases and 300 bilateral 5th ﬁnger clinodactyly. Muscle hypotonia, intel- controls led to the selection of 20 TRPs showing a sig- lectual disability, vision problems, speech delay, and the niﬁcant distribution among patients and controls. The defectofphonemicauditionhaveimprovedduring24years validation of these loci by traditional methods revealed a of treatment. high technical consistency (70%). However, we failed to Conclusion: Observed phenotypic changes are similar to replicate this data in an independent sample (208 Italian those seen in the recently described patients with Neuro- ALS patients and 229 matched controls). For large repeat developmental disorder with dysmorphic facies and distal expansions detection, the analysis of 700K TRPs identiﬁed limb anomalies (NEDDFL, OMIM 617755) due to 16 loci withpotential very large repeat expansion observed haploinsufﬁciency of BPTF, further demonstrating its in 1 or 2 of the 70 patients, and whose validation and pathogenicity. Our data expand the clinical spectrum of replication is ongoing. human disorders caused by ablation of chromatin remodel- L. Corrado: None. L.M. Genovese: None. E. Man- ing complexes. gano: None. A. Di Pierro: None. N. Barizzone: None. R. A.T. Midro: None. B. Panasiuk: None. L. Cooper: Bordoni:None.F. Geraci: None.R.D'Aurizio: None.R. None. S.E. Scherer: None. P. Stankiewicz: None. Croce:None.F.DeMArchi:None.L.Mazzini:None.R.314 J.delPicchia Cantello: None. G. De Bellis: None. G. Manzini: None. P09.147C M. Severgnini: None. M. Pellegrini: None. S. TOR1A variants cause a severe arthrogryposis with D'Alfonso: None. developmental delay, strabismus and tremor P09.146B A. Kariminejad1, M.Dahl-Halvarsson2,G.Ravenscroft3, Generation and in-depth characterization of 20 induced F.Afroozan1,E.Keshavarz4,M.FarajiZonooz1,H.Najmabadi1, pluripotentstemcell(iPSC)linesfrom10dystoniapatients H.Goullée3, M.Davis5,N.Laing3,H.Tajsharghi6 and healthy carriers of THAP1 mutations 1Kariminejad Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, H.Baumann1,M.Trilck1,M.Jahn1,A.Muenchau1,V.Kostic2, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of Pathology, C. Klein1, P. Seibler1,K. Lohmann1 University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Sweden, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Centre for Medical Research, 1Institute of Neurogenetics, Luebeck, Germany, 2Clinic of The University of Western Australia and the Harry Perkins Neurology, Belgrade, Serbia Institute for Medical Research, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia, Nedlands, Australia, 4Department of Radiology, Introduction: Mutations in THAP1 have been linked to Mahdieh Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical dystonia (DYT-THAP1, DYT6) with reduced penetrance. Science, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, THAP1encodesatranscriptionfactorthatregulatesitsown 5DepartmentofDiagnosticGenomics,Pathwest,QEIIMedical expression and the expression of TOR1A, another dystonia Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia, Nedlands, gene. To date, little data is available on the expression of Australia, 6School of Health and Education, Division THAP1 and TOR1A in mutant THAP1 induced pluripotent Biomedicine and Public Health, University of Skovde, SE-541 stem cells (iPSCs). 28, Skovde, Sweden, Skovde, Sweden Material and Methods: Cultured skin ﬁbroblasts were reprogrammed into iPSCs using Sendai virus. Two clones Abstract per patient were comprehensively characterized by testing Background: Autosomal dominant torsion dystonia-1 is for the mutation using Sanger sequencing, by expression a disease with incomplete penetrance most often caused by analysis of four pluripotency markers using quantitative an in-frame GAG deletion (p.Glu303del) in the endoplas- PCR and immunocytochemistry, and by their ability to mic reticulum luminal protein torsinA encoded by TOR1A. differentiate into all three germ layers. Genomic rearrange- Methods: We report an association of the homozygous ments were excluded by single nucleotide polymorphism dominant disease-causing TOR1A p.Glu303del mutation, (SNP) array analysis. Expression of THAP1 and TOR1A and a novel homozygous missense variant (p.Gly318Ser) was tested by quantitative PCR compared to 10 iPSC withaseverearthrogryposisphenotypewithdevelopmental controls while ß-Actin served as a reference gene. delay, strabismus and tremor in three unrelated families. Results: We generated 20 iPSC lines of 10 affected and Results: All parents who were carriers of the TOR1A unaffected members of three families carrying pathogenic variant showed no evidence of neurological symptoms or THAP1 variants (p.Arg13His [4 lines], p.Ser21Cys [10 signs, indicating decreased penetrance similar to families lines], p.Leu159fs180X [6 lines]). THAP1 expression was with autosomal dominant torsion dystonia-1. The results reduced for Ser21Cys and TOR1A expression in Arg13His fromcellassaysdemonstratethatthep.Gly318Sersubstitu- and Ser21Cys mutant cell lines compared to controls. tioncausesaredistributionoftorsinAfromtheendoplasmic Conclusion: We report the generation and characteriza- reticulumtothenuclearenvelope,similartothehallmarkof tion of 20 lines from 10 human THAP1 iPSC lines as well the p.Glu303del mutation. as alterations in THAP1 and TOR1A expression in these Conclusion: Our study highlights that TOR1A mutations cells.Thesestemcellscanfurtherserveasanidealmodelto should be considered in patients with severe arthrogryposis investigate the mechanism of reduced penetrance by and further expands the phenotypic spectrum associated transcriptomic analysis in affected and unaffected THAP1 with TOR1A. mutation carriers on the stem cell and differentiated Keywords: TOR1A; Endoplasmic reticulum luminal neuron level. protein torsinA; DYT1 dystonia; TOR1A p.Glu303del; H. Baumann: None. M. Trilck: None. M. Jahn: None. Severe arthrogryposis A.Muenchau:None.V.Kostic:None.C.Klein:None.P. A.Kariminejad:None.M.Dahl-Halvarsson:None.G. Seibler: None. K. Lohmann: None. Ravenscroft: None. F. Afroozan: None. E. Keshavarz: None.M.FarajiZonooz:None.H.Najmabadi:None.H. Goullée: None. M. Davis: None. N. Laing: None. H. Tajsharghi: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 315 P09.148D 1UnIGENe, IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Identiﬁcation of a third family further conﬁrms i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, TRAPPC6B as a disease gene associated with signiﬁcant Portugal, 2CGPP, IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell neurological dysfunction Biology, i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, Portugal, 3ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas X. Yang1,M.A. Thomas1,2,A. M.Innes1,2 Abel Salazar, Porto, Portugal 1Department of Medical Genetics, Cumming School of SCA11 is a rare autosomal dominant form of cerebellar Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, ataxia, characterized by early-onset cerebellar ataxia and 2Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, University of nystagmus. SCA11 is caused by variants in TTBK2; the Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada ones reported are heterozygous truncating variants. Never- theless, the disease mechanism linking TTBK2 and SCA11 Increasingly whole exome sequencing (WES) is used as an remains unclear. TTBK2 encodes tau tubulin kinase 2 pro- early diagnostic tool in patients with undiagnosed rare tein, a protein kinase involved in different cellular pro- diseases. Particularly in the setting of consanguinity, hun- cesses,namely,ciliogenesis,microtubuledynamics,andtau dreds of emerging disease genes, usually with private and TDP-43 phosphorylation. mutations, have been identiﬁed. Typically, these require Ourgrouphaspreviouslyidentiﬁedanovelheterozygous replicationtovalidateasbonaﬁdediseasegenestofacilitate missense variant in TTBK2 in twoPortuguese siblings with managementofsuchfamilies.Thetransportproteinparticle a diagnosis of ataxia. Therefore, we aim to characterize the (TRAPP) family of protein complexes regulates intracel- potential pathogenic effect of this variant in SCA11. For lular trafﬁcking between the endoplasmic reticulum and that, we generated TTBK2 clones (wild-type and different Golgi apparatus. Variants in several TRAPP subunits have mutants) in fusion with EGFP-tag that were transfected in been implicated in diverse human diseases. Harripaul cultured cells. Thesubcellular localizationwas accessed by (2017)reportedahomozygousnonsensevariantinonesuch immunoﬂuorescence and subcellular fractioning; however, subunit, TRAPPC6B, in two consanguineous individuals TTBK2 clones did not display signiﬁcant changes. TTBK2 with non-syndromic intellectual disability. A homozygous kinase activity was evaluated by measuring the phosphor- foundersplicevariantinTRAPPC6Bwasrecentlydescribed ylation state of TTBK2 substrates and potential new by Marin-Valencia (2018) in 3 Egyptian sibships with interactors of TTBK2 were analyzed by co- microcephaly, global developmental delay, autism, and immunoprecipitation. Our results showed that the TTBK2 epilepsy (OMIM 617862). We report two consanguineous missense variant impairs phosphorylation activity against Pakistani sisters with microcephaly (-8 SDs) and severe TDP-43andmayleadtoalteredprotein-proteininteractions, global developmental delay. Additionally, the younger sis- namely with ataxin-2. In addition, we created a cellular ter had a movement disorder while the older sister had modelexpressingtheendogenousTTBK2missensevariant, epilepsy. Trio WES of the parents and younger sister by CRISPR/Cas9 technology. revealed a homozygous novel variant in TRAPPC6B at a In conclusion, we showed that the newly identiﬁed splice donor site (c.149+2T>A), carried by both parents. TTBK2 missense variant confers different biochemical This variant is predicted to cause skipping of exon 2, and properties,whichmayresultinabnormalproteinphosphor- hasbeenreportedonce,inheterozygousform,ingnomAD. ylation in SCA11. The study of the novel CRISPR/Cas9 Therefore, we report the third “family” with homozygous cellularmodelshouldcontributetoabetterunderstandingof TRAPPC6B variants. These ﬁndings support the role of the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying SCA11. recessive mutations in TRAPPC6B in severe disease. We M.Santos: None. J.Sequeiros: None. I.Alonso: None. will review the phenotype associated with recessive muta- tions in TRAPPC6B as well as those associated with other P09.150B members of the TRAPP family. Severe speech delay in Cohen Syndrome: three novel X. Yang: None. M.A. Thomas: None. A.M. mutations and the long-term follow-up of nine patients Innes: None. B. Akdeniz1,N.Gunes1,D.Uludağ1,G.Ercan-Şençiçek2, P09.149A O.Çağlayan2,K. Bilguvar2,B. Tüysüz1 Functional characterization of a new TTBK2 missense variant: uncovering the molecular basis of SCA11 1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United M.Santos1,J. Sequeiros1,2,3,I.Alonso1,2 States316 J.delPicchia Introduction: Cohen Syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal cognitive dysfunction and ongoing epileptiform activity. A recessive disorder caused by VSP13B mutations. Char- genetic aetiology can be identiﬁed in a signiﬁcant propor- acteristic features are hypotonia, mild dysmorphic facies at tion of patients. Whole exome sequencing (WES) analysis infantile period, microcephaly, retinitis pigmentosa, devel- by tools like Denovogear and Exomiser has proven to be opmental delay with positive social behavior and inter- very effective. mittent neutropenia in childhood. Here, we investigate the Materialsandmethods:WeperformedWESinacohort genetic defects and follow-up ﬁndings of CS patients. of 18 unrelated individuals (9 males and 9 females) with Materials and methods: Clinical ﬁndings of nine epilepticencephalopathies.Allthepatientswerethoroughly patients from ﬁve families were evaluated during the assessedbymedicalspecialists andcounselledbyaclinical follow-up period of 1-14 years. Mutations were identiﬁed geneticist,inordertoprovidedetailedandcompleteclinical by using Sanger sequencing of VSP13B gene. information. These patients were previously tested by gene Results: While 4 patients were diagnosed at age 3-38 panelandthecauseofepilepsywasnotidentiﬁed.Tentrios months, 5 patients at 4.5-9.5 years of age. Hypotonia, were analysed by Denovogear and eight single samples microcephaly, joint laxity, almond shaped eyes, and wereanalysedwithExomiseralsowithhelpofproperHPO micrognathia were present in 4 patients admitted during terms, OMIM database and HGMD professional database) the infantile period. Patients admitted in childhood had Manual ﬁltering for all samples was also performed. typicalfacialappearanceandmicrocephaly(5/5),hypotonia Results:Afterrunninganalyses,wewereabletoidentify (5/5)andalsopigmentaryretinopathy(2/5),neutropenia(2/ pathogenic variants in28% of patients. Pathogenic variants 5),truncalobesity(2/5)attheﬁrstexamination.Threenovel were found in: HUWE1, UBTF, NARS2, PPP2R5D, mutations (1 splice site, 1 nonsense and 1 frameshift) were SETBP1. All these variants were highly prioritised by found.Duringthefollow-up,retinopathyandneutropeniain algorithms and conﬁrmed by segregation analysis in the 2, growth hormone deﬁciency in 1, hypothyroidism in 2, family. The analysis time per sample was approx. 15 min - hyperinsulinemia in 1 patient were detected. Interestingly, instead of hours/days by previous algorithms based on severe speech delay has developed in eight patients over 5 manualﬁltering.Withmanualﬁltering,noothervariantsof years of age. interest were found. Conclusions: We aim to contribute to the literature three Conclusions: New approaches in WES analysis helps to novel VSP13B mutations without any distinct genotype- reduceamountoftimespentpersample.Withthisapproach phenotyperelationship.Ininfantilepatientswithhypotonia, we were able to identify a causal variant in 28% samples. jointlaxity,andtypicalfacialfeatures,CSshouldbekeptin Supported by: AZV 15-33041 mind. The observation of severe speech delay in our D.Stanek:None.P.Lassuthova:None.L.Sedlackova: patients over the age of 5 suggests that this ﬁnding should None. J. Neupauerova: None. K. Sterbova: None. M. be added to diagnostic criteria. Vlckova: None. P. Seeman: None. B. Akdeniz: None. N. Gunes: None. D. Uludağ: None. G. Ercan-Şençiçek: None. O. Çağlayan: None. K. P09.152D Bilguvar: None. B. Tüysüz: None. NGS gene panels for the challenging diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders with high genetic P09.151C heterogeneity Analysis of WES data in 15 minutes - new methods override manual ﬁltering S. Magri1,D.DiBella1,E. Sarto1,F. Balistreri1,S. Baratta1, D.Tonduti2,L. Nanetti1,E. Salsano3,I.Moroni2,C. Pisciotta3, D.Stanek1,P. Lassuthova1, L.Sedlackova1,J.Neupauerova1, D.Pareyson3, C.Mariotti1,C. Gellera1,F. Taroni1 K. Sterbova2,M.Vlckova3,P. Seeman1 1Unit of Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic 1DNAlab,DepartmentofPaediatricNeurology,2ndFacultyof Disease,FondazioneIRCCSIstitutoNeurologicoCarloBesta, Medicine, Charles University in Prague a, Prague 5, Czech Milan, Italy, 2Child Neurology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Republic, 2Department of Paediatric Neurology, 2nd Faculty IstitutoNeurologicoCarloBesta,Milan,Italy,3NeurologyUnit ofMedicine,CharlesUniversityinPraguea,Prague5,Czech 10, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Republic, 3Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Milan, Italy Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague a, Prague 5, Czech Republic Introduction: Hereditary ataxias, spastic paraplegias (HSP), white matter disorders (WMD) and peripheral neu- Introduction: Epileptic encephalopathies are severe, early ropathies (Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease) are onsetdisordersassociatedwithglobaldevelopmentaldelay, genetically highly heterogeneous and exhibit phenotypicAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 317 overlap. Since >100 genes are known for each group, Introduction: Familial dyskinesia with facial myokymia molecular deﬁnition represents a challenging task, with (FDFM) or ADCY5-related dyskinesia is an autosomal >50% of patients undiagnosed. NGS technology allows a dominant movement disorder characterized by early-onset comprehensiveandsystematicapproachforgenetictesting. of involuntary choreiform or dystonic movements. ADCY5 Methods: We developed and validated different disease- belongs to the adenylate cyclase family of enzymes speciﬁc gene panels covering >98% of target region at responsible for the synthesis of cAMP. Heterozygous mis- >20X: 1) 205 HSP and ataxia genes; 2) 177 CMT and sense mutations in this gene are primarily known to cause related neuropathies genes; 3) 143 WMD genes. We the disease. Around 400 cases have been reported in the analyzed 710 probands (142 HSP, 155 ATAXIA, 332 literature, but the disorder is thought to be underdiagnosed CMT and 81 WMD) negative for the most frequent forms. because its features can resemble those of other conditions Results: Pathogenic mutations were identiﬁed in 25% such as cerebral palsy or epilepsy. In this study, we inves- (178/710)ofpatients(22%HSP,21%ATAXIA,28%CMT tigated the cause of neuromotor development delay and and 25% WMD). In particular, we identiﬁed mutations in dystonia in a 3,5 years old female patient. challenging genes difﬁcult to be studied by conventional Materials and methods: We performed whole exome sequencing because of their length (eg, SYNE1, SACS, sequencing in the patient with central hypotonia and facial SETX,CACNA1A).Mutationsinextremelyraregeneswere myokymia.Allbiochemicalandmetabolicscreeningresults identiﬁed in 10% of cases. Panel design allowed CNV were normal. Chromosome analysis did not show any analysis that detected pathogenic CNVs in 13/283 patients abnormalities. and CNV of unknown signiﬁcance in 9/283 patients. In 10 Results: Whole exome sequencing analysis identiﬁed a patients,weidentiﬁedmutationsingenesunexpectedbased novel heterozygous missense mutation (c.2090G>T; p. on the clinical diagnosis, thus expanding the phenotypic Gly697Val) inADCY5.p.Gly697Val occurs inaconserved spectrum. Moreover, pathogenic mutations in more than domain whose function is unknown. In silico tools a one gene were identiﬁed in 3 patients, thus challenging deleterious effect on the protein. The family study diagnosis and genetic counseling. conﬁrmed that it is a de novo mutation. Conclusions: The use of high-coverage panels for the Conclusion:Givenitsgeneticheterogeneityandvariable genetic deﬁnition of highly heterogeneous neurodegenera- phenotype, molecular diagnosis of dystonia and dyskinesia tive diseases is a reliable (high detection rate, no incidental is difﬁcult. Whole exome sequencing is a powerful ﬁndings) and cost-efﬁcient approach (Italian MoH-RF- diagnostic tool for patients with these phenotypes. Muta- 2011-02351165 grant to FT). tionsinADCY5shouldbeconsideredincaseswithcomplex S. Magri: None. D. Di Bella: None. E. Sarto: None. F. movement disorders and with or without a family history. Balistreri:None.S.Baratta:None.D.Tonduti:None.L. B.Cavdarli:None.N.Esen:None.V.Topcu:None.A. Nanetti: None. E. Salsano: None. I. Moroni: None. C. Aksoy: None. A. Danis: None. B. Anlar: None. Pisciotta: None. D. Pareyson: None. C. Mariotti: None. C. Gellera: None. F. Taroni: None. P09.154B Whole exome sequencing in a cohort of 48 trios with P09.153A neurodevelopmental disorders Whole exome sequencing identiﬁes a novel mutation in ADCY5inapatientwithdevelopmentaldelayanddystonia C. Bianchini1,A. Vetro1,D.Mei1,E. Cellini1, D.Pucatti1, D.Rutigliano1,S.Virdò1,D.De Vita1,V. Cetica1, B. Cavdarli1, N.Esen1,V.Topcu1,A. Aksoy2,A. Danis3, C. Mandorlini1,C. Barba1,T. Pisano1,F. Mari1,S. Chiari1, B. Anlar4 M.Montomoli1,V.Doccini1,M.Donati2,C.Marini1,E.Parrini1, R. Guerrini1 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara Numune Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of 1Pediatric Neurology Unit, Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Pediatric Neurology, Dr. Sami Ulus Research and Training Laboratories, Neuroscience Department, A. Meyer Pediatric Hospital of Women's and Children's Health and Diseases, Hospital, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 2Pediatric Ankara,Turkey,3DepartmentofPediatricNeurology,Dr.Sami NeurologyUnit,NeuroscienceDepartment,A.MeyerPediatric Ulus Research and Training Hospital of Women's and Hospital, University of Florence, Firenze, Italy Children'sHealthandDiseases,,Ankara,Turkey,4Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hacettepe University Faculty of Introduction:Neurodevelopmentaldisorders(NDDs)area Medicine, Ankara, Turkey heterogeneousgroup ofneurologicalphenotypesdiagnosed during early in life and including epilepsy, brain mal- formations, autism spectrum disorder, and intellectual318 J.delPicchia disability. Next generation sequencing increased to over Materials and methods: Genomic DNA has been 450 the number of genes associated with NDDs, underling extracted from 45 Italian WS1 patients (20 males and 25 their high genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity. Such a females) aged 25-45 years. WFS1 exons have been high number of genes as well as genetic and phenotypic ampliﬁed by PCR and, then, subjected to automatic heterogeneity make panel based diagnostics unsuitable. In sequencing. The mutations have been subdivided in 3 patients with NDDs, analyzed with whole exome sequen- groups according to their predicted functional conse- cing (WES), the molecular yield ranges from 25 to 57%. quences: Group 1 (complete depletion of wolframin); Materialsandmethods:WeperformedWESin48trios Group 2 (milder degradation of WFS1 protein than group withNDDswhoweremutation-negativetopreviousgenetic 1); Group 3 (compound heterozygous mutations not found investigations. in 1 and 2 groups). Results: We identiﬁed pathogenic variants in known Results: DM and OA have been found in all patients disease-genesin22patients(22outof48:46%).Inthreeof (100%), DI in 26 (57.7%), D in 27 (60%), renal tract these patients, we expanded the phenotypic spectrum abnormalitiesin10(22.2%),neuro-psychiatricsymptomsin previously associated with the causative gene. In 9 patients 20 (44.4%), and endocrinopathies in 3 (6.6%). Six patients (9outof48:19%),weidentiﬁedvariantsincandidategenes (13.3%)havediedofwhom5forrespiratoryfailureandone (not yet reported as disease-causing genes), possibly for chronic renal failure. We have found 34 different explaining clinical symptoms. Finally, in 17 patients (17 mutations in WFS1 which were all known except for 2 out of 48: 35%), we detected variants of unknown missense substitutions, c.1523 A>G and c.1514 G>A, both signiﬁcancethatwerecouldnotbecorrelatedtotheclinical locatedinexon8.In2/45patients(4.5%),wehavedetected condition. In about one-third of all patients the analysis a mutation of WFS1 in only one chromosome. We have revealed a recessive condition. This was an unexpected found 23 patients (54%) in group 1 mutations, 10 (23%) in resultconsideringthereportedexcessofdenovovariantsin group 2 and 10 (23%) in group 3. patients with NDDs. Conclusions: Although a clear genotype-phenotype Conclusions: Our results, although obtained in a small correlation is difﬁcult to establish in WS1, we have found series, indicate WES as a ﬁrst-line diagnostic option to severalcorrelationsbetweenseverephenotypesandthetype provide genetic counseling and facilitate personal medical of WFS1 mutations. care in NDDs without a clear syndromic picture and L.Rigoli:None.P.Bramanti:None.C.DiBella:None. characterized by high genetic heterogeneity. C. Aloi: None. A. Salina: None. F. Lombardo: None. G. C. Bianchini: None. A. Vetro: None. D. Mei: None. E. Salzano:None.F.DeLuca:None.G.D'Annunzio:None. Cellini: None. D. Pucatti: None. D. Rutigliano: None. S. Virdò: None. D. De Vita: None. V. Cetica: None. C. P09.156D Mandorlini: None. C. Barba: None. T. Pisano: None. F. Is microduplication Xp22.31 a possible synergic factor in Mari: None. S. Chiari: None. M. Montomoli: None. V. MECP2 defect for Rett Syndrome? Doccini: None. M. Donati: None. C. Marini: None. E. Parrini: None. R. Guerrini: None. E. Candelo,D.Ramirez,H.Pachajoa P09.155C Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia Fenotype genotype correlations in Italian patients with Wolfram Syndrome 1 Introduction:Rettsyndrome(RS)isaneurodevelopmental infant disease characterized by early normal psychomotor L. Rigoli1,P. Bramanti2,C. DiBella1, C.Aloi3,A. Salina3, development followed by a regression in the acquisition of F. Lombardo1,G.Salzano1,F. DeLuca1, G.D'Annunzio3 developmental stages. In the majority of cases, it leads to a sporadic mutation in the MECP2 gene, which is located on 1Department of Human Pathology, University of Messina, the X chromosome. However, this syndrome has also been Messina, Italy, 2IRCCS Centro Neurolesi "Bonino-Pulejo", associated with microdeletion, gene translocations, and Messina, Messina, Italy, 3Pediatric Clinic, IRCCS, Istituto G. other gene mutations. Here we described a classic Rett Gaslini, Genova, Italy syndrome associated with Xp22.31 microduplication. Materials and Method: A Colombian patient who is 12 Introduction: Wolfram syndrome 1 (WS1) is a rare, auto- years old and is a product of quarter gestation, non- somalrecessive,neurodegenerative,andprogressivedisease consanguinity parents. Initially, her neurological develop- characterized by diabetes mellitus (DM), bilateral optic ment was normal until 11 months, when she started a atrophy (OA), diabetes insipidus (DI), deafness (D), renal seizure syndrome with difﬁcult treatment and regression in tract or neuropsychiatric abnormalities. the acquisition of developmental stages (especiallyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 319 language with motor and verbal stereotypes, hyperactivity, Results: Exome sequencing revealed a novel non- and autistic spectrum disorder). Comparative genomic synonymous variant (T338I) in NEFH gene that encodes hybridization array-CGH (750K) and MECP2 genes neuroﬁlament heavy polypeptide; a previously described sequence were performed. nonsense mutation (G1177X) in the alsin (ALS2) gene that Results: Array-CGH detected Xp22.31 duplication leads to premature stop codon and may affect endosomal (6866889-8115153)withasizeof1.248Mb.Duetoclinical and vesicle transport; and ﬁnally a recurrent variant criteria of RS a MECP2 gene sequence was performed, (R261H) in the NEK1 gene, encoding NIMA related which showed de novo pathogenic variant C.338C>G (p. kinase-1, that has recently been associated with ALS in Pro113Arg) associated with this disease. the Caucasian population. Conclusion:RSmakesapartoftheintellectualdisability, Conclusion:Diseasecausingvariantshavebeendetected developmental delay, and autism. These characteristics are in approximately 28% (3/21) of this sporadic cohort. Our associated with copy number variations (CNVs) in the X study contributed to the better understanding of the genetic chromosomesuchasXp22.31microduplication.Thisisthe background of the disorder and indicated that complex ﬁrst case report in the literature that shows a CNV and approaches are needed to understand the genetic hetero- MECP2 pathogenic mutation simultaneously in the context geneity of this disease. of RS. We propose that both DNA alteration might have a Funding:HungarianBrainResearchProgram(GrantNo. synergy effect and could lead to variable expressivity of KTIA_13_NAP-A-II/15) phenotype. K.Tripolszki:None.D.Nagy:None.Z.F.Nagy:None. E. Candelo: None. D. Ramirez: None. H. J.I.Engelhardt:None.P.Klivényi:None.M.Széll:None. Pachajoa: None. P10.02B The role of 3’ UTR variants in Amyotrophic Lateral P10 Neuromuscular disorders Sclerosis (ALS) etiology P10.01A C. Eitan1, T.Olender1,E. Barkan1,R. vander Spek2,S. Pulit2, Whole exome sequencing of patients with amyotrophic E. Chapnik1,K. R. vanEijk2,L. Kool2,J.van Vugt2, lateral sclerosis W.Sproviero3,D.Rotschild1,O.Weissbrod1, E.Segal1,C.E. Shaw3, L.H. vandenBerg2,A. Al-Chalabi3,J. E.Landers4, K. Tripolszki1,D.Nagy1, Z.F. Nagy1, J.I.Engelhardt2, R. H.Brown Jr4,J.H. Veldink2,E.Hornstein1 P. Klivényi2,M.Széll1 1TheWeizmannInstiuteofScience,Rehovot,Israel,2University 1University of Szeged, Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3King's Szeged, Hungary, 2University of Szeged, Department of College, London, United Kingdom, 4University of Neurology, Szeged, Hungary Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States Introduction:Amyotrophiclateralsclerosis(ALS)isafatal Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegen- neurodegenerative disease. Genetic factors play a key role erative disease of the human motor neuron system. inALSanduncoveringitsgeneticbackgroundmaybringus Although the disease etiology remains unclear, ~25 genes closertofullyunderstanditspathomechanism,thereforethe with ALS underlying protein-coding mutations have been aim was to identify rare damaging variants in major and discovered. The mutations explain mostly familial cases, minor genes involved in pathways annotated to ALS. andimply genetics asanimportantdriverofsporadiccases Patients and methods: The investigated sporadic too. Recent studies demonstrated dysregulation of micro- patients fulﬁlled the revised El Escorial criteria for ALS. RNAs (miRNAs) in ALS patients, suggesting a role of Wholeexomesequencingof21Hungarianpatientsaffected miRNAsinALSpathogenesis.However,systematicsearch by ALS was carried out. The patients were prescreened for for disease-causing variants in miRNA genes was yet not C9ORF72 repeat expansion, SOD1, ANG, FUS, SETX, performed. Here, we screened whole-genome sequencing TARDBP and UBQLN2 genes. Exome sequencing was data from 4281 ALS sporadic patients and 1838 controls, performed using Illumina NextSeq sequencer and data andexploredgenomicregionsof1,872miRNAsgenesand analysis was performed according to the best practices to 3′ untranslated regions (3′UTRs) of 295 ALS and miRNA- identify single nucleotide variants and small insertions/ related genes. The data was generated by Project MinE deletions. The detected variants were conﬁrmed by Sanger consortium and analyzed under collaboration. First, we sequencing. developed a pipeline for functional annotation of 3’UTR and miRNA variants and called qualiﬁed variants. The320 J.delPicchia pipeline predicts loss and gain of 3´UTR miRNA binding period. Through the exploration of these two objectives, sites and assigns miRNA variants with decreased patho- necessary steps were taken to further the application of genicityscorebasedonlocationintheseed,maturemiRNA C9orf72 yeast models in ALS research. or precursor, respectively. Region-based rare variant asso- S. Kim: None. ciation uncovered a signiﬁcant association with a relevant inﬂammatory gene, suggesting that its tight regulation is P10.04D critical.Theassociationsignalwasreplicatedusing>60,000 Biallelic mutation in CHP1 causes human autosomal controls from a different cohort. This is the ﬁrst report of a recessive ataxia by impairing NHE1 membrane targeting rare protective mutations in ALS and the ﬁrst association study that implies noncoding regulation by miRNAs. The N.MendozaFerreira1,M. Coutelier2,3, E.Janzen1, work emphasizes the ability to interrogate whole-genome S. Hosseinibarkooie1,H.Löhr4,S.Schneider1,J.Milbradt1, sequencing for discovery of new non-coding genetic M.Karakaya1, M.Riessland5,1,C. Pichlo6,L. Torres-Benito1, mechanisms and suggests neuroprotective immunomodula- A. Singleton7,S.Zuchner8, A.Brice2,9,A. Durr2,9, tory targets for therapy development. M.Hammerschmidt4, G.Stevanin2,3,9,B. Wirth1 C. Eitan: None. T. Olender: None. E. Barkan: None. R. van der Spek: None. S. Pulit: None. E. Chapnik: 1InstituteforHumanGenetics,CentreforMolecularMedicine, None.K.R.van Eijk: None.L. Kool: None.J.van Vugt: Center for Rare Diseases. University of Cologne, Cologne, None. W. Sproviero: None. D. Rotschild: None. O. Germany, 2Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière Weissbrod: None. E. Segal: None. C.E. Shaw: None. L. INSERM, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France, 3Ecole H. van den Berg: None. A. Al-Chalabi: None. J.E. Pratique des Hautes Etudes, PSL Research University, Paris, Landers: None. R.H. Brown Jr: None. J.H. Veldink: France, 4Institute for Zoology, Developmental Biology, None. E. Hornstein: None. University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, The Rockefeller P10.03C University, New York, NY, United States, 6Institute of Investigating mechanism of C9orf72 mutations in Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 7Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, S. Kim 8JohnP.HussmanInstituteforHumanGenomics,Universityof Miami,Miami,FL,UnitedStates,9APHP,HôpitaldelaPitié- Not Applicable, Concord, NH, United States Salpêtrière, Centre de réference de neurogénétique, Paris, France The GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion located in the ﬁrst intron of the C9orf72 gene is the most common Autosomalrecessivecerebellarataxias(ARCAs)comprisea genetic cause for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) as heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders that well as frontotemporal dementia (FTD). The repeat expan- affect the cerebellum, brain stem and spinal cord. sion is hypothesized to cause repeat-associated translation Approximately 40% of the ARCA-affected patients remain (RAN-translation), which results in toxicity by aggregation genetically unresolved. of dipeptide repeat proteins (DRPs). Though there have Following a combination of WES and linkage analysis, been many studies focusing on the toxicity of RAN- we identiﬁed a biallelic 3-bp deletion (p.K19del) in CHP1 translatedDPRs,thespeciﬁcfactorsthatcontributetoRAN (Calcineurin-like EF-hand protein-1) that co-segregates translationhavenotyetbeenidentiﬁed.Thisstudyemploys with motor neuropathy, cerebellar atrophy and spastic yeast models, which share high gene conservation with paraparesis in two siblings of a consanguineous family. humans, to examine the mechanisms of the C9orf72 Focused screening for CHP1 variants in two cohorts mutation in ALS. In particular, this study focused on the (ARCA: N=319 and NeurOmics: N=657) and Gene- cloningof149repeatexpansionsofC9orf72(C9149R).149 Matcherinterrogationdidnotyieldadditionalvariants,thus repeat expansions ligated into yeast-expression vectors, revealing the scarcity of CHP1 mutations. CHP1 plays a p416GAL1andGPD,weretransformedinStbl3E.coliand crucial role in pH regulation and ion homeostasis, by subsequently tested for stability of the 149R size. Further- controlling the function of the Sodium/Hydrogen more,thisstudyalsoobservedstabilityofrepeatexpansions Exchanger-1 (NHE1, encoded by SLC19A1). Reduced in yeast over various time periods. The sizes of 2 repeat CHP1expressionaswellasNHE1depletioncausePurkinje expansions (C92R) and 40 repeat expansions (C940R) of cell degeneration and ataxia in mouse. Moreover, loss-of- C9orf72 in yeast were examined to observe how much function mutation in NHE1 causes ataxia in human. shrinkage the expansions had undergone over each timeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 321 Here we demonstrate that mutant CHP1 fails to integrate Rome, Italy, 3Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Tor into functional protein complexes and is prone to aggrega- Vergata University, Rome, Italy tion, thereby leading to diminished levels of soluble CHP1 and reduced membrane targeting of NHE1. Moreover, we Introduction: ATP1A3 gene encodes for the alpha-3 cat- show that morpholino-mediated chp1 knockdown in alytic subunit of the Na+/K+ ATPase transmembrane ion zebraﬁsh resembles the phenotype of ARCA-affected pump. Gene mutations are associated with alternating humans, leading to spastic movements, cerebellar hypopla- hemiplegia of childhood, rapid-onset dystonia with par- sia and motor axon abnormalities. These defects were kinsonism or dystonia 12, cerebellar ataxia, areﬂexia, pes ameliorated by co-injection with WT, but not mutant, cavus, optic atrophy and sensorineural hearing loss syn- human CHP1 mRNA. Collectively, our results identiﬁed drome and catastrophic early life epilepsy. CHP1 as an ataxia-causative gene in humans, further Methods: medical charts and videos of patients were expanding the spectrum of ARCA-associated loci, and retrospectively evaluated. All patients were genetically corroborate NHE1 mistargeting as a key event underlying proven for ATP1A3 gene mutations. neuronal degeneration in the context of inherited cerebellar Results: Five patients with “atypical” phenotype were ataxias. selected. Three patients were sporadic, while two were N. Mendoza Ferreira: E. Ownership Interest (stock, directly related. Patient one had an early-onset epileptic stock options, patent or other intellectual property); encephalopathyandlaterdevelopedparoxysmalepisodesof Signiﬁcant; N. Mendoza-Ferreira co-holds patent non-epileptic origin, monocular nystagmus and episodes of 17172826.4-1401 (European patent ofﬁce) for Calcineurin apnoea. He had a multi drug resistance epilepsy associated Bhomologousprotein1inhibitorsandtherapeuticandnon- todevelopmentaldelay.Patients2and3representafamilial therapeutic uses thereof.. M. Coutelier: None. E. Janzen: case. The proband developed at 18 months dysmetria, E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other hypotoniaandupperlimbstremorandlostthestandingand intellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;E.Janzenco-holdspatent sitting position. Her mother had an episode of hypotonia 17172826.4-1401 (European patent ofﬁce) for Calcineurin and seizures at the same age and after 5 years developed Bhomologousprotein1inhibitorsandtherapeuticandnon- generalized dystonia. Patient four initially presented therapeutic uses thereof. S. Hosseinibarkooie: E. Owner- episodes of intermittent ﬂaccidity and bulbar symptoms ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other and then developed sudden onset of severe generalized intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; SM. Hosseinibarkooie dystonia, hypothonia, bradykinesia, and ataxic gait. Patient co-holds patent 17172826.4-1401 (European patent ofﬁce) ﬁveexhibitedanearlyonsetinfantileepilepsywithepisodes for Calcineurin B homologous protein 1 inhibitors and of non-epileptic origin of hemiparesis. After several years, therapeutic and non-therapeutic uses thereof.Seyyedmoh- she abruptly developed a RDP phenotype and recently sen. H. Löhr: None. S. Schneider: None. J. Milbradt: psychotic symptoms and anorexic behaviour associated. None. M. Karakaya: None. M. Riessland: None. C. Discussion: here we present ﬁve different cases of Pichlo: None. L. Torres-Benito: None. A. Singleton: ATP1A3 mutations showing intermediate and overlapping None.S.Zuchner:None.A.Brice:None.A.Durr:None. phenotypescomparedtotheclassicones.Thisseriesexpand M. Hammerschmidt: None. G. Stevanin: None. B. the continuum phenotype spectrum of ATP1A3. Wirth: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent L. Travaglini: None. F. Graziola: None. E. Bertini: or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; B. Wirth co- None. M. Valeriani: None. P. Curatolo: None. F. holds patent 17172826.4-1401 (European patent ofﬁce) for Vigevano: None. A. Capuano: None. Calcineurin B homologous protein 1 inhibitors and therapeutic and non-therapeutic uses thereof.. P10.07C ExpandingthehistopathologicalspectrumofCFL2-related P10.06B myopathies ATP1A3 related disease: a series of new mutations expanding clinical phenotype F. Fattori1,C. Fiorillo2,C. Rodolico3,G.Tasca4,M.Verardo1, E. Bellacchio5,S. Pizzi5,A. Ciolﬁ5,G.Fagiolari6,A. Lupica3, L. Travaglini1,F. Graziola2,3,E. Bertini1,M.Valeriani2, P. Broda2,M.Pedemonte2,M.Moggio6, C.Bruno2, P. Curatolo2,F.Vigevano2,A. Capuano2 M.Tartaglia5,E. Bertini1, A.D'Amico1 1Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegnerative Disorders, 1Neuromuscular Diseases, Genetics and Rare Diseases Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital - IRCCS, Rome, Italy, ResearchDivision,BambinoGesùChildren’sHospital,Rome, 2NeurologyUnit,BambinoGesùChildren’sHospital-IRCCS, Italy, 2Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health,322 J.delPicchia University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 3Department of Clinical P10.09A and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, Messina, A report of a family of intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth Italy, 4Istituto di Neurologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro disease with concomitant mutations in the GNB4 and Cuore, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario "A. Gemelli", DNM2 genes Rome, Italy, 5Molecular Genetics and Functional Genomics, GeneticsandRareDiseasesResearchDivision,BambinoGesù B. Burnyte1,2,A. Morkuniene1,2, L.Ambrozaityte1,2, Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 6Neuromuscular and Rare V. Regelskyte3,A. Vaitkevicius4,5,V.Kucinskas1,A. Utkus1,2 DiseaseUnit,DepartmentofNeuroscience,IRCCSFoundation Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of 1InstituteofBiomedicalSciences,FacultyofMedicine,Vilnius Milan,, Milan, Italy University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Introduction: Congenital myopathy (CM) caused by Lithuania, 3Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, mutation in coﬁlin-2 gene (CFL2) is a rare neuromuscular Lithuania,4InstituteofClinicalMedicine,FacultyofMedicine, disorder. The few reported cases show phenotypic hetero- Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5Center of Neurology, geneity ranging from early onset and rapid progressive Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, forms to milder myopathy characterized by slow pro- Lithuania, Vilnius, Lithuania gressive limb girdle and axial muscles weakness. Muscle histology shows features of nemaline or myoﬁbrillar myo- Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common pathy or the coexistence of both histopathological changes. inherited neuromuscular disorder with an estimated pre- We describe three new cases, from two unrelated families, valence of 1 in 2500 people. Hallmarks include symmetric ofsevereCMrelatedtonovelloss-of-functionmutationsin foot deformities, slowly progressive weakness and wasting CFL2. in the distal parts of upper and lower limbs, and length- Materials and methods: Whole Exome Sequencing and dependent sensory loss. Positive symptoms such as para- targeted resequencing using a custom gene panel for esthesias and pain may occur. Hereditary neuropathies are muscular diseases were performed respectively in Patient- ideal candidates for diagnosis by Next-generation sequen- 1andPatient-2.Studiesofmusclebiopsieswereperformed cing(NGS)approachesbecausesimilarphenotypeiscaused in all patients using standard technique on quadriceps by variants of different genes. We report the unusual muscles. occurrence of CMT, caused by mutations c.847C>T (p. Results: Next Generation Sequencing analysis revealed Arg283Cys) in GNB4 and c.1609G>A (p.Gly537Ser) in novel mutations in CFL2: p.(Asp86His), homozygous in DNM2, in a dominant geneaology. The phenotype of all Pt1, and p.(Asp79Tyr) and p.(Ser94LeufsTer6) in com- affected family members was rather uniform with symp- pound heterozygosity in Pt2 and in her older brother (Pt3). toms starting in the lower limbs. Initial signs were foot All babies presented severe neonatal muscle weakness deformity and gait abnormalities in early childhood. needingcontinuousrespiratoryandnutritionalsupportsince Nevertheless severity of progressive distal weakness of birth. Muscle biopsies showed features consistent of upper limbs, postural tremor and hand deformities were nemaline myopathy with thin ﬁlament accumulations different in some of the affected family members. The together to myoﬁbrillar changes. digenic effect of two pathogenic variants in different genes Conclusions: Muscle biopsies in our patients showed may modulate the phenotype, since both gene products are features evocative of the histopathological ﬁndings involved in endosomal sorting and cell signalling, possibly observed in Cﬂ2-/- knockout mouse model. Structural interacting in similar pathways. This study and previously modeling analysis supports the pathogenicity of the three reported cases of CMT caused by concomitant gene CFL2 mutationsandindicatesthat themutated residues are alterationsisanoticetolookforseveralcausativemutations involved in correct folding of coﬁlin-2 conﬁrming that the in families having phenotypic variability or unusual activity of the protein might be important for the postnatal expression. maintenance of sarcomeric structures. Our report expands B. Burnyte: None. A. Morkuniene: None. L. Ambro- theclinicalandhistopathologicalspectrumofCFL2-related zaityte: None. V. Regelskyte: None. A. Vaitkevicius: myopathies. None. V. Kucinskas: None. A. Utkus: None. F.Fattori:None.C.Fiorillo:None.C.Rodolico:None. G.Tasca:None.M.Verardo:None.E.Bellacchio:None. P10.11C S. Pizzi: None. A. Ciolﬁ: None. G. Fagiolari: None. A. Comprehensive copy number variant proﬁling in 234 Lupica:None.P.Broda:None.M.Pedemonte:None.M. diagnosis-resistant myopathic patients Moggio: None. C. Bruno: None. M. Tartaglia: None. E. Bertini: None. A. D'Amico: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 323 T. Giugliano1,M.Savarese2,A. Garofalo1,A.Torella1,3, 1HealthSciencesUnivesity,KanuniSultanSuleymanResearch L. Politano4,G.Piluso1, V.Nigro1,3 and Training Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical 1LaboratoriodiGeneticaMedica,DipartimentodiMedicinadi Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey Precisione, Università degli Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Napoli, Italy, 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Introduction: Sohar-Crisponi Syndrome with the other Helsinki,Finland,3TIGEM(TelethonInstituteofGeneticsand namecoldinducedsweatingsyndromewasﬁrstrecognized Medicine), Pozzuoli, Italy, 4Cardiomiologia e Genetica by Sohar in 1978 and then renamed in 1996 by Crisponi. Medica, Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale, Università Today it is deﬁned as an autosomal recessive disorder degli Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Napoli, Italy characterizedbymuscularspasmsoffacialmuscles,tetany, difﬁculty in swallowing and excess salivation, attacks of Nextgenerationsequencing(NGS)hasledtoanincreasein feverduringﬁrsttwoyearsoflife.Duringchildhoodtetany thediagnosisofnon-speciﬁcskeletalmuscledisorderswith and fever attacks ceases but cold induced sweating and a detection rate of single nucleotide variants or small ins/ thermodysregulationfollows.Inmostpatientstypicalfacial dels of 40%-60%. Mutations in unknown genes, multi- features, camptodactyly with tapering ﬁngers and kyphos- factorialorpolygenicconditions,orelusivevariantssuchas coliosis are also present. Most of the patients have muta- deep intronic mutations, variants in regulatory elements, tions in CRLF1 gene, in recent years two additional genes trinucleotide repeat expansions or copy number variants are deﬁned: CLCF1 and KLHL7. (CNVs) may occur in the patients remaining undiagnosed. Materials and Methods: We collected the datae of 6 An extensive NGS study of 504 genetically undetermined families with 7 affected members. All were evaluated for patients with clinical diagnosis of muscular dystrophies, neurological, metabolic and ophthalmologic pathologies. congenitalmyopathiesorotherconditionsaffectingmuscles CRLF1 gene analysis was done in all families. was performed, identifying putative causative mutations in Results: Four of the patients were diagnosed during ﬁrst 218/504 cases. We recruited 234/286 unsolved patients to monthsoflife,twowereonemonthold,theoldestonewas study the impact of CNVs in skeletal muscle disorders and 10 years old during diagnosis. All have typical face, potentiallytoimprovethediagnosticrate.Allpatientswere camptodactyly, abnormal ﬁnger and hand morphology and analyzed by Motor Chip, a custom CGH-array to identify difﬁculty in swallowing. Fever attacks were present in deletions and duplications in neuromuscular disorders. We infants. Thermodysregulation, and hyperhydrosis was pre- found non-polymorphic CNVs in 22 patients (9.4%). In 12 sent in older patients. All the patients had CRLF1 patients (5.1%), the identiﬁed CNVs were considered mutations. Two of the mutations were novel. responsible for the observed phenotype. Other 10 patients Conclusion: As new cases as our series with novel and (4.3%) had CNVs of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS). known mutations are described, more information will be AlthoughtheseVUSmaynotactasprimarydiseasedrivers, available about this syndrome and this will help clinicians wecannot excludethatsomeofthemmayactasmodiﬁers, to diagnose and follow the patients more efﬁciently. contributing to the observed phenotype. Our study has E. Yilmaz Gulec: None. A. Gezdirici: None. A. Ayaz: allowed the genetic diagnosis in unsolved patients and None. U. Altunoglu: None. Z.O. Uyguner: None. identiﬁcation of previously undescribed rearrangements in muscle genes. It conﬁrms that deletions and duplications P10.13A account for 5-10% ofpatientsaffectedbyaskeletal muscle Deletion & duplication mutations in Duchenne muscular disorder without a molecular diagnosis, explaining a not dystrophy in southern Iranian children exiguous number of unsolved cases. T. Giugliano: None. M. Savarese: None. A. Garofalo: A. Saberi1,2, G.Shariati1,2,M.Mohammadi anaei2, None. A. Torella: None. L. Politano: None. G. Piluso: N.Abdorasouli2,F. Nanvazed2 None. V. Nigro: None. 1Ahvaz Jundishpour university of medical sciences, Ahvaz, P10.12D Iran,IslamicRepublicof,2NargesGenetic&PNDLab,Ahvaz, Crisponi / Cold-induced sweating syndrome: Seven new Iran, Islamic Republic of cases and two novel mutations Duchennemusculardystrophy(DMD)andBeckermuscular E. YilmazGulec1,A. Gezdirici1,A.Ayaz1, U.Altunoglu2,Z.O. dystrophy (BMD) are X-linked disorders caused by muta- Uyguner2 tionwithinthedystrophingene.Ourstudyhasidentiﬁed28 Iranian families collected from Narges Genetic Lab, southwest of Iran, Ahvaz. All cases were subjected to324 J.delPicchia complete clinical evaluation pedigree analysis, electro- The breakpoint is in intron2 in case2. The insertion is an myography studies, estimation of serum creatin phospho- inverted duplication of exon5-7 followed by a duplication kinase (CPK) level and DNA analysis. Sample's DNA was ofexon1-2startedfurtherupstreamoftheDMDgene.Thus, analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁca- their DMD reading-frame would be disrupted. Both CGRs tion (MLPA). In this study deletion rate was 75% (21/28) involved microhomology and small insertions at the and was more frequent in the distal end exons whereas breakpoints. In Case1, SNP sequencing results indicated duplicationratewas25%(7/28)anditwasmorefrequentat thatthedenovoduplicationmutationaroseintheallelethat proximalexons.Majorityofthedeletion(11/21,52%)were originated from the grandfather. locatedonthedistalhotspotregionthatencompassesexons Conclusions: This study has report a method to uncover 45-55 and 33% of the deletion (7/21) were located at the CGRs in nucleotide level and revealed a novel type of proximal hot spot region (exon 1-16). Majority of exon DMD CGR. Knowing the genetic alteration help to predict duplication 71.5% (5/7) located at the proximal hot spot the consequence of the CGRs and provides insight into the region(exon1-16)and28.5%(2/7)locatedatthedistalhot molecular basis of this genomic rearrangement. spot region (exon 50-62). Single exon deletions were pre- Y.Xu:None.H.Wang:None.B.Xiao:None.W.Wei: sent in 8/28 families (28.5%) with the most common in None. Y. Liu: None. H. Ye: None. X. Ying: None. Y. exon45(2/21,9.5%).Onefamilyhadadenovosingleexon Chen: None. X. Liu: None. X. Ji: None. Y. Sun: None. deletion (exon 51) and whole dystrophin gene was deleted in only one family. This ﬁnding indicate that as with P10.15C deletions, duplications occur nonrandomly but with a dra- Duchenne muscular dystrophy: gene therapies in low- matically different distribution. Duplication frequency is income counties highest near the 5' end of the gene. A. Saberi: None. G. Shariati: None. M. Mohammadi K. Hovhannesyan, T.Sargsyan anaei: None. N. Abdorasouli: None. F. Nanvazed: None. Center of medical genetics and primary health care, Yerevan, P10.14B Armenia DMD noncontiguous duplications in duplication-normal- inversed duplication (Dup-Nml-Dup/inv) manner revealed Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD; OMIM ref. 310200) by targeted sequencing isanX-linkeddiseasethataffects1in3600-6000livemale births. DMD occurs as a result of mutations in the dystro- Y. Xu,H.Wang, B.Xiao, W.Wei,Y. Liu, H.Ye,X. Ying, phin gene (Xp21.2). Mutations cause a dysfunction in, or Y. Chen,X. Liu, X.Ji, Y.Sun lack of, protein dystrophin that is essential for muscle cell stability.Milderallelicformsofthediseaseareintermediate Xin Hua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of musculardystrophyandBeckermusculardystrophy.Thisis Medicine, Shanghai, China a descriptive study of 87 patients diagnosed with DMD at the CMG of Armenia from 2011 to 2017. Patients were Introduction: Complex Genomic Rearrangements(CGRs) reviewed by neurologist and a clinical geneticist; the clin- have been demonstrated in DMD. However, few CGRs in ical diagnosis was established and followed by other sup- DMD have been described at the nucleotide level thus portive investigations. A diagnosis of DMD was conﬁrmed difﬁcult to predict the consequence of the CGRs. bymoleculartestingusingmultiplexPCR(inArmenia)and Materials and methods: Case1, a DMD patient, harbors dmd gene sequencing (in France). From 2012 the manage- duplications of exon53-55 and exon57-79 in DMD gene. ment of DMD patients in Armenia is done according to Case2 is a female with growth retardation and craniosy- DMD Care Considerations Working Group’s recommen- nostosis. SNP array identiﬁed a duplication fragment dations.HerewepresentedthespectrumofDMDmutations included DMD gene. MLPA revealed the patient had which were observed among 87 patients with muscular duplications of Dp427c, exon1-2 and exon5-7. They were dystrophies in Armenia. 48% of these cases are with con- sequenced by whole DMD target sequencing. Breakpoints ﬁrmed DMD mutations, mainly deletion(s), as well as of the CGRs were detected by split-read method to duplication(s) and point mutations. Our available data reconstruct the structural changes of the gene and to suggest that up to 40% of DMD patients have genotypes investigate the mechanism of the CGRs. amenable to exon skipping or Ataluren therapies. Many Results: Both cases shared the same duplication event promisingtherapeuticstrategieshavesincebeendeveloped, (Dup-Nml-Dup/inv). In case1, a fragment comprised of howeveravailabilityofthosetherapiesisrestrictedforlow- exon57-79 and two upstream genes(FTHL17, TAB3) in an income counties such as Armenia. Having no access to inverted orientation and exon53-55 is inserted in intron55. advanced therapies has fatal consequences for the patients,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 325 as well as for the society, forcing affected families to seek A.Ferlini:None. E.O'Rourke:A.Employment (full or help outside of their country. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc. M. K. Hovhannesyan: None. T. Sargsyan: None. Pastore: None. A. Martin: None. P10.16D P10.17A Identifying and counseling patients amenable to mutation- Exome sequencing identiﬁes 2 novel disease-causing speciﬁc therapies in Duchenne muscular dystrophy: DYNC1H1 mutations in patients with spinal muscular knowledgeofresourceswillfuelgeneticcounselors’impact atrophy or mental retardation A. Ferlini1, E.O'Rourke2,M.Pastore3,A. Martin4 V. Ilinsky1,2,A. Krasnenko2, E.Okuneva2, K.Tsukanov2, P. Shatalov3,2,I.Fedonyuk4,E. Ilina4,S. Artemyeva3 1University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Sarepta Therapeutics, Inc., Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Nationwide Children's 1Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russian Hospital, Columbus, OH, United States, 4Parent Project Federation,2GenotekLtd.,Moscow,RussianFederation,3The Muscular Dystrophy, Hackensack, NJ, United States Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named after Academician Yuri Veltischev of the Pirogov Russian National Introduction: Mutation-speciﬁc therapies for Duchenne ResearchMedicalUniversityoftheRussianMinistryofHealth, musculardystrophy(DMD)areinclinicaltrialsworldwide. Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Department of More than 60% of DMD patients have DMD gene muta- Psychoneurology No.2, Russian Children's Clinical Hospital, tionsamenabletotwocurrentapproaches:stopcodonread- Ministry of Health Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian through and single exon skipping. Federation Methods: We identiﬁed gaps in DMD genotyping and examined potential solutions for genetic counselors to help Mutations in DYNC1H1 gene cause several autosomal overcome barriers in determining patient eligibility for dominant diseases including type 20 Charcot-Marie-Tooth, mutation-speciﬁc therapies. type 13 mental retardation and lower extremity- Results:Accesstogenetictestingisonebarrier.Asurvey predominant spinal muscular atrophy 1. These diseases of 27 physicians who managed >2,000 DMD patients have several common clinical symptoms. DYNC1H1 gene showedsubstantialvariabilityingenotypedpatients(≈25%- encodes a large (over 530 kD) crucial subunit of cyto- 100%). In Europe, multiplex ligation-dependent probe plasmic dynein complex, a cytoskeleton motor. ampliﬁcation is widely adopted, while availability of We did exome sequencing of 4 blood samples using sequencing procedures is nonhomogenous, especially in Agilent FocusedExome enrichment system and Illumina Eastern countries. Awareness of ﬁnancially viable genetic HiSeq2500. For variant calling and pathogenicity scoring testing options is essential (eg, International DMD, wefollowedACMGguidelines.Wealsoconﬁrmeddisease- University of Ferrara [Europe]; Decode Duchenne [USA, causing mutations by Sanger sequencing. Canada]. Accurate, unequivocal mutation interpretation Of 4 studied patients one had symptoms of spinal presents a second barrier. While nonsense mutations are muscular atrophy and 3 others had mental retardation with amenable to stop codon read-through, other DMD deletion seizures and polymicrogyria. mutations vary in amenability to exon skipping, depending We identiﬁed heterozygous mutations in DYNC1H1 on the exons involved. To direct patients to appropriate gene. Two variants (c.9749_9751delAAG and therapy,cliniciansmustdiscernif amutationisappropriate c.2029G>A) were previously described as uncertain for exon skipping and amenable to a particular exon- signiﬁcance alleles. Two others (c.751C>T and skipping therapeutic. This pinpoints the importance of c.5882A>T) were not listed in dbNSFP, Clinvar, OMIM, correct genotyping and genetic counselor involvement in HGMD, 1000Genomes and ExAC databases. mutation interpretation. This work was funded by Fundamental Scientiﬁc Conclusions:Accesstointerpretationtoolsandguidance Research Program of the Russian Academy of Sciences is paramount for genetic counselors to advise both patients for 2013-2020. and providers. We will review the DMD gene exon map, V. Ilinsky: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Leiden DMD database, and Decode Duchenne mutation- collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as speciﬁc resource as tools to help genetic counselors grants already received); Modest; Russian Academy of determine DMD patients’ eligibility for exon skipping Sciences. A. Krasnenko: None. E. Okuneva: None. K. trials, with the goal of increasing genotyped patients. Tsukanov:None.P.Shatalov:None.I.Fedonyuk:None. E. Ilina: None. S. Artemyeva: None.326 J.delPicchia P10.19C region of dystrophin. Besides expanding the DMD muta- Whole-genome sequencing detects a large genomic tional spectrum, this report reinforces the importance of inversion disrupting the DMD gene in a Becker muscular WGS in clinical genetics, having the potential to detect a dystrophy patient wide variety of mutation types. CHP grant reference 336-13(196-DEFI/285-CES). J.Oliveira1,2,A.Gonçalves1,2,Y.Ariyurek3,J.T.denDunnen4,3, J. Oliveira: None. A. Gonçalves: None. Y. Ariyurek: M.Sousa5,2,6,R. Santos1,2,7 None. J.T. den Dunnen: None. M. Sousa: None. R. Santos: None. 1Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigação Biomédica (UMIB), Instituto P10.20D de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade Anon-pathogenicduplicationofDMDexon45-51,inserted do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Leiden Genome Technology in chromosome 17, in three Danish patients Center, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Departments of Human Genetics and Clinical M.Faurholdt Lauridsen1,K. MagaardKoldby1,L. Nylansted Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Krogh1,J.Graakjaer2,T.DyrsoeJensen2,C.Fagerberg1,J.M. Netherlands, 5Departamento de Microscopia, Laboratório de Hertz1 Biologia Celular, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 1DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,OdenseUniversityHospital, 6Centro de Genética da Reprodução Prof. Alberto Barros, Odense, Denmark, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Porto, Portugal, 7UCIBIO/REQUIMTE, Departamento de Hospital, Vejle, Denmark Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Bioquímica, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal Introduction:Dystrophinopathiesarecausedbypathogenic variants in the DMD-gene. Whole exon deletions or Introduction: Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies duplications account for the majority of cases of DMD- (D/BMD) are caused by pathogenic variants in the dystro- related disease (~65%). When these variants are found it is phin (DMD) gene. Being the largest locus of the human important to investigate whether they alter the reading genome (2.3Mb, Xp21.1), DMD is particularly prone to frame, and special care should be taken when found inci- genomic rearrangements, often intragenic multi-exonic dentally or prenatally since not all DMD-duplications or deletions or duplications (~70% of cases). Single nucleo- deletions cause disease. tidevariantsareidentiﬁedinmostoftheremainingD/BMD Materials and method: Blood and chorionic villus cases, whereas complex genomic rearrangements encom- samples were analyzed using chromosome microarrays passing DMD are rarer. and FISH. Materials and Methods: Routine techniques failed to Results: We report three cases with incidental ﬁnding of detect pathogenic DMD variants in a BMD patient with an intragenic duplication encompassing exon 45-51 (out of progressive muscle weakness, mild intellectual disability 79 exons) in the DMD-gene by chromosome microarray and dystrophic muscle showing irregular dystrophin label- analysis. Case 1 is an asymptomatic 44-year-old male, ling.DMDtranscriptanalysis(RT-PCRandcDNA-MLPA) investigated as a parental control to an amniotic sample. was performed, as well as low-coverage whole-genome Case 2 is a male fetus referred because of increased risk of sequencing (WGS) using the 10xGenomics Chromium trisomy21atﬁrsttrimesterscreen.Theduplicationwasnot system. inherited from the mother. Unfortunately, the father was Results: RNA analysis showed the absence of exons 75- unavailable for study. Case 3 is also a male fetus referred 79. While automated structural variant calling from WGS because of increased risk of trisomy 18 at ﬁrst trimester was inconclusive, visual BAM ﬁle inspection showed a screen. The duplication was inherited from a healthy possible breakpoint within intron 74 of DMD. Some reads mother. The duplicated material was in all cases inserted hadhomologywitharegionlocatedupstreamofthePRDX4 in chromosome 17q. gene (Xp22.11). Similarly, some reads in that location Conclusion: DMD duplications are a known cause of showedhomologywithinvertedintron74DMDsequences. DMD-related disease. However, caution should be made Breakpoint PCR and Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed the when found incidentally and prenatally, and assumptions presence of a ~8Mb inversion. Abnormal DMD transcripts regarding disease prediction should not be made without were subsequently identiﬁed, some of which contained furtherinvestigations.Thisisespeciallyimportantregarding segments from the region upstream of PRDX4. duplications since they can be inserted in other chromo- Conclusions: The patient’s phenotype is explainable by somes and thus do not affect the DMD-reading frame. thisDMDinversionwithconcomitantlossoftheC-terminalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 327 M. Faurholdt Lauridsen: None. K. Magaard Koldby: This study was supported by PTC Therapeutics and None.L.NylanstedKrogh:None.J.Graakjaer:None.T. University of Buenos Aires, Argentina. Dyrsoe Jensen: None. C. Fagerberg: None. J.M. L.N. Luce:None. M.M.Carcione: None.C.Mazzanti: Hertz: None. None. I. Szijan: None. F. Giliberto: None. P10.21A P10.22B Molecular analysis of an argentine dystrophinopathy ECEL1-relateddistalarthrogryposis:Thetaleofthetongue cohort:diagnosticalgorithm,geneticassessmentandDMD gene characterization M.E. C. Meuwissen1,D.Beysen2,E.Reyniers1,F. Kooy1, B. Ceulemans2 L. N.Luce1,2,M. M.Carcione1,2,C. Mazzanti1,2,I. Szijan1, F. Giliberto1,2 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital/ Antwerp University, Edegem, Belgium, 2Dept. of Pediatric 1Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Farmacia y Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium Bioquímica, Cátedra de Genética, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2CONICET - Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Introduction: Distal arthrogryposis (DA) a an important Inmunología, Genética y Metabolismo (INIGEM), Buenos subgroup of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, character- Aires, Argentina ized by congenital joint limitations with involvement of especially, butnotexclusively, thedistal extremities.It isa Introduction: Dystrophinopathies are X-linked recessive heterogeneous condition. However, in many DA patients, diseases caused by mutations in DMD gene. Hitherto there the genetic defect remains to be elucidated. Recently, is no effective treatment for these pathologies, which mutations in ECEL1 were identiﬁed as a novel cause of enhances the importance of performing genetic assessment autosomal recessive distal arthrogryposis. in order to detect mutation carriers and prevent diseased Materials and methods: We report on a girl with newborns. However, two mutation-speciﬁc gene therapies congenital DA with ﬂexed ﬁngers and adducted thumbs, wererecentlyapproved:Exon51Skipping(Eteplirsen)and limited ﬂexion of the knees, abnormal position of the toes PrematureStopCodonRead-through(Ataluren).Therefore, and vertical grooves on both shins. Already at birth, a accurate detection and characterization of the causing striking central atrophy of the tongue was noted. In mutation is essential to allow genetic counseling, patient addition, she had a right-sided ptosis and limited facial follow-up and determine the suitable gene therapy. expression. Radiographs demonstrated dysplastic acetabu- Materials and methods: We have analyzed 200 boys lae and a right-sided hip luxation. Brain MRI was normal. with clinical diagnosis of Dystrophinopathy, 12 sympto- Family history was unremarkable, apart from parental matic women, 240 females at-risk of being carriers and 15 consanguinity. prenataldiagnoses.Adiagnosticalgorithmwasdesignedfor Results: Sanger sequencing of ECEL1, located in a 24 each case, implementing MLPA, PCR, Whole Exome Mb homozygous region, demonstrated the homozygous Sequencing,SangerSequencing,STRssegregationanalysis c.2023G>A, p. Ala675Thr variant affecting a highly and HUMARA assay. conserved amino acid and previously associated with distal Results: The selected strategy allowed disease conﬁrma- arthrogryposis. Discussion: Our case demonstrates the tion in 71.7% (152/212) of the affected boys and classic ECEL1 phenotype. Besides DA, the central atrophy symptomatic females. 12 were candidates for Eteplirsen, ofthetongueispresentinthemajorityofcases.Congenital while 22 were suitable for Ataluren. On the other hand, we ptosis and limited facial expression are also frequent were able to establish as carriers 72/255 women/fetuses, ﬁndings. Previously unreported, but remarkable ﬁndings while could exclude from being carriers/affected 143/255. in our patient were the vertical grooves on the shins. Long As for gene characterization, we could establish an term complications may include scoliosis and hyperlordo- association between the most frequent deletion/duplication sis, as well as restrictive respiratory insufﬁciency. We intron breakpoints and the abundance of STR loci and, we demonstrate that the ECEL1-phenotype is clinically recog- have detected 3 haplotypes blocks within the SNPs nizable enabling single gene analysis for the diagnosis of identiﬁed by the Exome technique. this speciﬁc DA subtype. Conclusions: In thepresentwork, we have characterized M.E.C. Meuwissen: None. D. Beysen: None. E. aDystrophinopathyargentinepopulationandcontributedto Reyniers: None. F. Kooy: None. B. Ceulemans: None. the understanding of the genetic/molecular basis of these pathologies328 J.delPicchia P10.23C Santos: None. J. Abreu-Silva: None. J. Sequeiros: None. Phenotypic signiﬁcance of variants in the TTR promoter: I. Alonso: None. A. Sousa: None. C. Lemos: None. Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy (TTR-FAP) onset P10.24D M.Alves-Ferreira1,2,3,A.Azevedo1,2,3,T. Coelho4,D.Santos1,2, Anewformoffetalakinesiasyndromeisduetomutations J.Abreu-Silva1,2,J.Sequeiros1,2,3,I. Alonso1,2,A.Sousa3,1,2, in the SLC5A7 gene C. Lemos3,1,2 O.Caluseriu, M.Banerjee, D.Arutyunov, D.Brandwein, 1i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, C. Janetzki-Flatt, S. Hume,H.Kolski, N.Leonard,J.Watt, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2UnIGENe,IBMC - A. Lacson,M.Baradi, E. M.Leslie,E. Cordat Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3ICBAS- Instituto de Ciências University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Unidade Clínica de Paramiloidose (UCP), Centro Introduction:Severefetalakinesiaresultsinarecognizable Hospitalar do Porto (CHP), Porto, Portugal deformation sequence with variable pre- and postnatal phenotype including: polyhydramnios, reduced sponta- Introduction:Val30Metvariantintransthyretingene(TTR) neous movements, arthrogryposis, and pulmonary hypo- is causative for Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy (FAP). plasia. The primary causes are genetic, heterogeneous, and Substantial phenotypic heterogeneity has been described in due to defects of the motor pathway. A subgroup of these patients with Val30Met, including in age-at-onset. Conse- conditionsischaracterizedbyendplatespeciﬁcmutationsof quently, other variants in TTR locus, beyond the TTR-FAP the neuromuscular junction. Recently, recessive mutations causing variant, could play a regulatory role in its expres- in the SLC5A7 protein coding for the high afﬁnity choline sion level and modify disease expressivity. We aim to transporter CHT1 have been related to a continuum of identify genetic modiﬁers of disease onset that may con- phenotypes characterized by congenital myasthenia and tribute to this clinical variability. episodicapnea(Bauchéetal.,2016,Wangetal.,2017).We Materials & Methods: We genotyped the promoter and reporttheindependentidentiﬁcationandcharacterizationof codingandﬂankingregionsofTTRgeneinVal30MetTTR a new family with a lethal form of disease due to a novel carriers. An intensive in silico analysis was performed in homozygous mutation in SLC5A7 and review the two order to understand a possible regulation of gene previously published families with a similar phenotype expression. proposing a genotype-phenotype correlation for a new Results:Weidentiﬁed12knownvariantsinthepromoter subclass of lethal fetal akinesia. regionand 2 known intronic (rs36204272,rs1791228), one Materials and methods: A detailed clinical description 3’ UTR (rs62093482) and 2 known exonic variants ofanewconsanguineousfamilywithtwoaffectedchildren (rs28933981 and rs1800458). Importantly, our analysis with fetal akinesia isprovidedaswell asinvitrofunctional revealed variants signiﬁcantly associated with age-at-onset, characterization of the novel CHT1 mutation including a one of which is a CA repeat (rs71383038) in promotor rescue experiment. region. In addition, unreported and very interesting results Results: While SLC5A7 cell-surface biotinylation intheinsilicoanalysiswerefoundsinceweobservedsome showed that the mutant is able to reach the plasma alterations in the mechanism of splicing, transcription membrane, no choline transport was detected. Functional factors binding and miRNAs binding. rescue of the mutant with different chemical chaperones Conclusions:Ourﬁndingsraiseaninterestingpossibility failed to compensate the altered function. that TTR variants could be genetic modiﬁers in Val30Met Conclusions: This study brings further clinical and carriers and might inﬂuence disease variability. Further- functional evidence for a novel pathogenic mutation in more, our ﬁndings suggest that variants within promoter CHT1, and proposes that recessive mutations of the region can modify disease expressivity and have the intracytoplasmic protein domains of SLC5A7 are respon- potential to be a biomarker to identify disease onset within sible for a lethal form of fetal akinesia. asymptomatic carriers at risk of developing TTR-FAP O. Caluseriu: None. M. Banerjee: None. D. Arutyu- promoting a better follow-up of Val30Met carriers. nov: None. D. Brandwein: None. C. Janetzki-Flatt: MA-FreceivedsupportfromFCTfellowship(SFRH/BD/ None. S. Hume: None. H. Kolski: None. N. Leonard: 101352/2014). None.J.Watt:None.A.Lacson:None.M.Baradi:None. M. Alves-Ferreira: None. A. Azevedo: None. T. E.M. Leslie: None. E. Cordat: None. Coelho: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Pﬁzer. D.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 329 P10.25A Conclusion: Thegeneticcause ofﬂoppychildsyndrome Wholeexomesequencinginﬂoppychildsyndromepatients was found in 27/120 (22.5%) patients. The ﬁrst-line withaparticularconsiderationofneuromusculardisorders analysisfor the presence ofmutations inknown neuromus- cular genes seems to be a good starting point for further M.Gos1,E.Dębek1,A.Madej-Pilarczyk2,A.Potulska-Chromik3, studiesofnewgenesrelatedtotheetiologyof“ﬂoppychild T. Gambin4,1,J.Pilch5, R.Śmigiel6, R.Posmyk7, B.Wojtaś8, syndrome”. B. Gielniewski8,J. Fijak-Moskal9,A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, The study was supported from National Science Centre A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk10,A. Kostera-Pruszczyk3,J.Bal1, grant no. UMO-2015/17/B/NZ5/01368 M.Jędrzejowska2 M. Gos: None. E. Dębek: None. A. Madej-Pilarczyk: None.A.Potulska-Chromik:None.T.Gambin:None.J. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Pilch: None. R. Śmigiel: None. R. Posmyk: None. B. Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Neuromuscular Department, Wojtaś: None. B. Gielniewski: None. J. Fijak-Moskal: MossakowskiMedicalResearchCentre,PAS,Warsaw,Poland, None. A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: None. A. Jakubiuk- 3Department of Neurology, Warsaw Medical University, Tomaszuk: None. A. Kostera-Pruszczyk: None. J. Bal: Warsaw, Poland, 4Institute of Computer Science, Warsaw None. M. Jędrzejowska: None. University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Pediatrics and Neurology for Children and Adolescents, P10.26B Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 6Department Targetedmethyl-SeqquantiﬁcationbyNGStechnologyfor of Pediatrics and Rare Disorders, Wrocław Medical routine diagnostic of FSHD University, Wrocław, Poland, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Podlaskie Medical Centre, Białystok, Poland, F. Scharf,S.Bulst, A.Benet-Pagès, J. Romic-Pickl, A. Abicht, 8LaboratoryofMolecularNeurobiology,NeurobiologyCenter, E. Holinski-Feder Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS, Warsaw, Poland, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Jagiellonian Medical Genetics Center MGZ, Munich, Germany University, Cracow, Poland, 10Department of Pediatric NeurologyandRehabilitation,MedicalUniversityofBiałystok, Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy (FSHD) is Białystok, Poland associated to hypomethylation of the D4Z4 microsatellite, leadingtoanincreasedexpressionoftheDUX4genewhich Introduction: The,,ﬂoppy child syndrome” is one of the is proposed to cause progressive muscle atrophy and ulti- most unambiguous medical condition presenting at birth or mately FSHDpathology.Chromatinchangesarecaused by in early infancy. We aimed to assess the etiology of this contractions to less than 11 units of the D4Z4 repeat condition with focus on neuromuscular symptoms. (FSHD1)orbypathogenicvariantsinchromatinregulatory Material and methods: Till now, 120 probands present- proteins (FSHD2). We developed a novel NGS-based inggeneralizedhypotoniaatbirthorinneonatalperiodwith method that allows us to diagnose FSHD and distinguish excludedmajorgeneticcauses(e.g.SMA),wereincludedin FSHD1 from FSHD2 in a single approach. Enrichment of the study. For 75 of them, the exome sequencing (WES) 4qA(A)and4qAL(AL)associatedD4Z4repeatsaswellas was performed using QXT Sure Select Human All Exome all 4q35 D4Z4 repeat units (DUX4) was performed using v.6.Inselectedcases,directedanalysisusingclassicSanger nested PCRs after bisulﬁte conversion of genomic DNA sequencing / MLPA was performed. (EpiTect). DNA libraries were prepared with the NEBNext Results: Directed analysis revealed the presence of Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit and sequenced on an Illumina pathogenic variants in MTM1 in three patients with MiSeq System. Reads were mapped to A and AL using myotubular myopathy and in ACTA1 in four patients with bwameth.Mean methylationlevelswerecalculated with an nemaline myopathy. First analysis of WES data included in-house script. We analyzed 21 patients with a conﬁrmed known genes related to neuromuscular disorders. The most FSHD diagnosis and 21 negative controls. We could reli- common mutated genes were: LMNA (4 patients with de ably conﬁrm the hypomethylation status in all patients. novo variants) and RYR1 (5 patients, 2 compound Furthermore, the results show a correlation of methylation heterozygotes, 3 heterozygotes). In single patients, poten- levelstothediseasestatus.Inaddition,wecoulddistinguish tially pathogenic variants in LAMA2, PIEZO2, SEPN1, FSHD1 from FSHD2 by DUX4 methylation levels, as due PMP22, SGCA, PIGA, DNM2, PPP2R1A, COL12A1 or to a chromatin dysregulation DUX4 is hypomethylated in COL6A1 genes were found, analyzed for the inheritance in FSHD2 as well. In conclusion, sensitive detection of families and conﬁrmed to be related to the patient speciﬁc methylation levels in the D4Z4 array can give insight into phenotype. the clinical progression levels more exactly than currently330 J.delPicchia available methods. Additionally, a much higher yield and novel published genes and variants. Supported by: MH CR throughput in FSHD diagnostics can be achieved. AZV 16-30206 F.Scharf:None.S.Bulst:None.A.Benet-Pagès:None. L. Sedlackova: None. P. Lassuthova: None. J. Neu- J. Romic-Pickl: None. A. Abicht: None. E. Holinski- pauerova: None. D. Safka Brozkova: None. D. Stanek: Feder: None. None. J. Haberlova: None. R. Mazanec: None. P. Seeman: None. P10.27C Whole-exome sequencing is effective for clariﬁcation of P10.28D unsolved causes of hereditary neuropathies in Czech Diagnostic utility of clinical exome sequencing in a cohort patients of patients with hereditary polyneuropathies L. Sedlackova1,P. Lassuthova1,J.Neupauerova1, D.Safka M.Rogac,A. Maver, K.Writzl, G.Rudolf, B.Peterlin Brozkova1,D.Stanek1,J.Haberlova2,R.Mazanec3,P.Seeman1 Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia 1DNA laboratory, Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and Normal 0 false false false EN-GB X-NONE X-NONE /* University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, Style Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style- 2DepartmentofPediatricNeurology,2ndFacultyofMedicine, name:"Table Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso- Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, tstyle-colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style- Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Neurology, 2nd priority:99;mso-style-parent:"";mso-padding-alt:0cm5.4pt Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and 0cm 5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0cm; mso-para-margin-bot- University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic tom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font- size:12.0pt; font-family:"Calibri",sans-serif; mso-ascii-font- Introduction: Inherited peripheral neuropathies (IPN) are family:Calibri; mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin; mso- the most common monogenic neurological disorder. It is a hansi-font-family:Calibri; mso-hansi-theme-font:minor- clinically and genetically extremely heterogeneous group latin; mso-ansi-language:EN-GB;} Introduction: We with more than 90 genes already involved. Whole-exome describe clinical characteristics in a cohort of patients with sequencing(WES)wasusedinpatientspreviouslyunsolved hereditary polyneuropathies (N=50) and compare them to using standard diagnostic methods and clinical experience. the results of clinical exome sequencing (CES). Methods: Patients and Methods: Here we present WES results of A cohort was devided in two clinical groups. First group 47 undiagnosed patients with IPN from 38 unrelated with positive CES ﬁndings (N=21) and second with families tested previously in our diagnostic lab for better negative CES ﬁndings or variants of unknown signiﬁcance known IPN types and genes. (N=29).Clinicalandgeneticcharacteristics wereanalyzed. Results: Causative mutations were found in thirteen Results: In the ﬁrst group almost half of the patients patients (34%) and in twelve genes to date. In six patients (N=10) had clinical presentation of Charcot-Marie-Tooth wedetectedmutationsinknownIPNgenes(SOD1,MFN2, polyneuropathy with positive electromyography ﬁndings, BSCL2, DNM2, SMN1, AIFM1) and in four of them the slowlyprogressiveclinicalcoursewithmoderateseverityof found mutation could conﬁrm previous just novel ﬁndings disease,withabeginningaschildrenorasyoungadultsand (MORC2, SLC25A45, DRP2, GNB4). But we also revealed positive family history. Four patients with Charcot-Marie- three novel causative gene-IPN associations in frame of Tooth polyneuropathy were sporadic cases, four patients internationalcollaboration(ATP1A1,HARS).Weuncovered had additional central nervous system ﬁndings and three mutations even in well-known genes previously tested in patients were found to have myopathy based on molecular single gene tests, which highlights that WES may detect results. Negative CES ﬁndings were mostly (N=13) corre- also variants that have been missed by Sanger sequencing lated to sporadic cases and electromyography ﬁndings of duringroutinediagnostics.Someofthecausativemutations axonal polyneuropathy. Conclusions: Clinical exome were identiﬁed immediately after publication of their sequencing was found to be conclusive specially in her- causality by the WES data reevaluation. editarypolyneuroptahieswithCharcot-Marie-Toothclinical Conclusion: WES represents efﬁcient tool for clariﬁca- presentation and positive family history. Yield of CES in tion of rare, novel or unusual IPN types and it has an cases of hereditary polyneuropathy was 42%. Sporadic important potential for novel candidate genes in familiar cases with electromyography ﬁndings of axonal poly- cases. In unsolved patients WES data should be re- neuropathywereoftenfoundnegative.<!--EndFragment--> evaluated every 6 months due to the continual increase of M.Rogac:None.A.Maver:None.K.Writzl:None.G. Rudolf: None. B. Peterlin: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 331 P10.29A F. Stregapede, L. Travaglini,C. Aiello,V. Alesi, A.D'Amico, Spectrum of genetic causes of hereditary spastic A. Cioﬁ, A.Bruselles, S.Pizzi, G.Zanni,S. Loddo,S.Barresi, paraplegias among Czech NON-SPG4 patients G.Vasco, M.Tartaglia, E.Bertini, F.Nicita A. U.Meszarosova1,D.S. Brozkova1,P. Lassuthova1, Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, Rome, Italy D.Stanek1,M.Bittoova2,I.Soldatova2,P. Seeman1,2 Background: Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are 1DNA laboratory, Department of Paediatric Neurology, 2nd clinical and genetic heterogeneous diseases with more than School of Medicine Charles University and Faculty Hospital eighty disease genes identiﬁed thus far. Studies on large Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Centre for Medical Genetics cohorts of HSP patients showed that, by means of current andReproductiveMedicineGENNET,Prague,CzechRepublic technologies, the percentage of genetically solved cases is close to 50%. Notably, the percentage of molecularly con- Introduction: Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are ﬁrmed diagnoses decreases signiﬁcantly in sporadic clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders of the patients. central motoneuron. Typical clinical feature is progressive Objectives:Todescribeourdiagnosticmoleculargenetic bilateral spasticity and weakness of the lower limbs. All approach on patients with pediatric-onset pure and types of inheritance and causative variants in already more complex HSP. than 70 genes hase been described in HSP. The most Methods: Forty-seven subjects with HSP from 44 common cause are pathogenic variants in the SPAST unrelated families underwent molecular screening of 113 (SPG4) gene. knownandcandidatediseasegenesbytargetedcaptureand Materials and methods: We aimed to map the genetic massivelyparallelsequencing.Negativecasesweresucces- spectrum of HSPs in 72 Czech non-SPG4 uncomplicated sively analyzed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe HSP patients. Fourty-three patients were with positive ampliﬁcation (MLPA) analysis for the SPAST gene, and family history and 29 were sporadic.Targeted Enrichment high-resolution SNP array analysis for genome-wide CNV of all coding exons of 38 genes associated with uncompli- detection. cated HSP with our probe design was used for MPS. Results: Diagnosis was molecularly conﬁrmed in 29 out Results:Causalvariantswerefoundin16patientsamong of 47 (62%) of patients, most of whom had clinical the group of 72 HSP patients (22.2%). Slightly more diagnosis of cHSP. Although SPG11 and SPG4 remain the patientswere detected in the group of familial patients (10/ mostfrequentcauseofrespectivelycomplexandpureHSP, 43; 23.3%) vs. sporadic patients (6/29; 20.1%). Causative a large number of pathogenic variants were disclosed in variants were found in SPG11 (4 x), REEP1/SPG31 (3 x), POLR3A, FA2H, DDHD2, GLUT1, ENTPD1, ERLIN2, KIF5A/SPG10 (2 x), SPG7 (2 x), NIPA1/SPG6, CYP7B1/ CAPN1, ALS2, ADAR1, RNASEH2B, TUBB4A, ATL1 and SPG5,KIAA0196/SPG8,FA2H/SPG35andSPAST(all1x). KIF1A. In a subset of these disease genes, phenotypic Surprisingly ATL1 variant was found only once and it expansionand novel genotype-phenotype correlations were ﬁnaly turned to not causal because of presence in the recognized. Notably, SNP array analysis did not provide healthy parent. any signiﬁcant contribution in increasing the Conclusion: SPG11 seems to be the most common type diagnostic yield. of HSP among Czech non-SPG patients. SPG3A and Conclusion: Our ﬁndings document the high diagnostic SPG7 seemnottobesofrequent then inother populations. yield of targeted sequencing for patients with pediatric- Together nine genetic types of HSP were found among 72 onset, complex and pure HSP. MLPA for SPAST and SNP Czech uncomplicated non-SPG4 HSP patients. Project array should be limited to properly selected cases based on supported by: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic clinical suspicion. grant nr.15-31899A. F. Stregapede: None. L. Travaglini: None. C. Aiello: A.U. Meszarosova: None. D.S. Brozkova: None. P. None.V.Alesi:None.A.D'Amico:None.A.Cioﬁ:None. Lassuthova: None. D. Stanek: None. M. Bittoova: None. A. Bruselles: None. S. Pizzi: None. G. Zanni: None. S. I. Soldatova: None. P. Seeman: None. Loddo: None. S. Barresi: None. G. Vasco: None. M. Tartaglia: None. E. Bertini: None. F. Nicita: None. P10.31C Theimpactofnextgenerationsequencingonthe diagnosis P10.32D of pediatric-onset hereditary spastic paraplegias: new HINT1 gene mutations are frequent cause of CMT in genotype-phenotype correlations for rare HSP-related Russia genes332 J.delPicchia T. B.Milovidova1,O.A. Schagina1,E. L. Dadali1, S.A. Romania, 3Neurology department, Clinical Pediatric Hospital Kurbatov2,A. V. Polyakov1 „Dr.V.Gomoiu”, Bucuresti, Romania 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Background: Mutations in ATP1A2 gene have been Federation, 2Regional Medical Diagnostic Centre, Voronezh, associated with autosomal dominant familial hemiplegic Russian Federation migraine type 2 syndrome. We aim to present an atypical presentation of a published pathogenic variant in the Introduction: Inherited peripheral neuropathies (IPNs) are ATP1A2 gene, in a patient that does not show the classic neuromuscular and neurodegenerative disorders that affect episodic attacks of hemiplegia, oculomotor and autonomic the peripheral nervous system (PNS). More than 100 dif- disturbances, nor the progressive cognitive impairment. ferentsubtypeshavebeenidentiﬁed.HINT1mutationswere Method: The patient was referred from the neurology revealed as the reason of IPNs and Charcot-Marie-Tooth clinic for diagnosis and genetic counselling. Clinical neuropathy (CMT). assessment and whole exome sequencing(trio) was Materials and Methods: Massive parallel sequencing performed. (MPS), multiplex ligation depended probe ampliﬁcation Results: The 15 years old male patient had a history of (MLPA) and Sanger’s sequencing have been used. We failuretothrive,gastroesophagealreﬂuxsinceage2months, investigated 700 patients without mutation in genes of delay in motor development(sits at age 1 year, walks at 4 frequent CMT from 2000 CMT patients. Also 1000 years), choreoathetotic movements, difﬁculty in walking uninspected unrelated persons were tested. and dystonia, without seizures. He has normal hearing, but Results: In four of ﬁve Russian patients with neuromio- difﬁculty in speech. Brain MRI, performed at different toniaandaxonalneuropathythehomozygousc.110G>C(p. times(age5,10,13and15years)didnotshowabnormalities. Arg37Pro) HINT1 mutation were identiﬁed. Thirty CMT Brain spectroscopy performed at age 15 years, was patients from 700 with c.110G>C homozygous mutation unremarkable. Normal nerve speed conduction and EEG have been revealed. Two compound-heterozygotes were repeatedly normal. Parents are healthy not consangui- c.110G>C mutation with earlier not described mutations neous, without signiﬁcant family history. Whole exome (c.112-1delG and c.281A>G (p.Tyr94Cys)) were detected. sequencing revealed a heterozygous variant c.1816G>A p. Three heterozygotes of c.110G>C mutation in HINT1 have (Ala606Thr) in the ATP1A2 gene, segregation study been revealed during the research. We consider that CMT concludes de novo occurrence. No other variant relevant phenotypeofthesepatientsisn'tcausedbyHINT1mutation forthephenotypewasdetected.Theevolutionofourpatient andtheyarecarriersofc.110G>Cmutation.Thec.110G>C was progressive not episodic as described gene associated HINT1 mutation was revealed at 4 of 1000 persons. diseases. Therefore the carriage of c.110G>C mutation in the Russia Conclusions: Although there is a signiﬁcant candidate is1of250persons.ThusHINT1mutationsarenotlessthan variant in the ATP1A2 gene the phenotype is discordant. 1,6% of all CMT types in Russia. Questions that remain: Are they linked? Is this a new Conclusions: For the ﬁrst time in Russia the research of pathogenic implication of the ATP1A2 gene? HINT1 gene mutations at CMT is conducted. The unique I. Perva: None. A. Chirita Emandi: None. D. Epure: c.110G>C frequency data of heterozygotic carriages in None. M. Puiu: None. Russia are obtained. Two new mutations in HINT1 gene were described. P10.36D T.B. Milovidova: None. O.A. Schagina: None. E.L. NewmethodfordetectingmtDNAdeletionsfrommassively Dadali: None. S.A. Kurbatov: None. A.V. parallel sequencing data Polyakov: None. T. Suominen1,S. Penttilä1,M.Jokela2,J.Palmio2,B. Udd2,3,4 P10.35C An extension to phenotypic spectrum of ATP1A2 gene or 1Neuromuscular Research Unit, Tampere, Finland, an unsolved case? 2Neuromuscular Research Center, Department of Neurology, TampereUniversity Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 3Department I.Perva1,2, A.Chirita Emandi1,2,D.Epure3, M.Puiu1,2 of Neurology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland, 4Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Department of Medical 1VictorBabesUniversityofMedicineandPharmacy,Centerof Genetics, Medicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland Genomic Medicine, Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Louis Ţurcanu Children’s Clinical Emergency Hospital, Timiso̧ ara, Introduction:Humanmitochondrialgenome(mtDNA)isa circularDNAof16Mbinsize.MutationscancauseseveralAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 333 inherited diseases, many of which are neuromuscular. The MaggioredellaCarità,Novara,Italy,7SCNeurologia,IRCCS mutational rate compared to nuclear DNA is very high. Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy However, because every cell contains several copies of mtDNA, mutations are heteroplasmic (0-100%). All Genome Wide Association Studies identiﬁed over 100 mtDNA mutations have to exceed a threshold on the level Multiple Sclerosis (MS) risk loci. However, these studies of heteroplasmy to have an effect on the cell. Previously are usually focused on common variants, mainly located in used methods for detecting mtDNA deletions (real-time non-coding sequences. We aimed at searching for rare PCRs and Southern blot) do not deﬁne the breakpoints functional variants in MS associated loci and assessing if accuratelyandtheheteroplasmicrate isa rough estimation. thegenesintheseregionsshowanimbalanceofrarevariant Materials and methods: We have analyzed 60 samples frequencies (burden) between MS patients and healthy for mtDNA deletions. DNA was isolated from muscle. controls (HC). We sequenced the coding and UTR regions Samples included controls harboring a single mtDNA of 100 MS genes in 588 Italian MS and 408 matched HC, deletion (n=2) and multiple deletions (n=4). Ampliﬁca- pooled in groups of 12 individuals using an approach tion of the mtDNA was performed using long-range PCR implemented by our group (Anand 2016). The burden of followed by massively parallel sequencing. Analysis of rarefunctionalvariationsinMSsusceptibilitywasassessed mtDNAdeletionswasdonewithanewalgorithmgenerated with 3 gene-based statistical tests (Weighted-Sum Statistic, for detecting both single and multiple mtDNA deletions. C-alpha test, Fisher hybrid test). Variants were selected Results of the samples were also compared to results from using various ﬁltering criteria based on allelic frequency, MLPA analysis. functional impact according to in-silico prediction and Results:Usingthismethodwewereabletodetectsingle functional annotation of regulatory regions. Seventeen and multiple deletions and also deletions that are within genes showed a statistically signiﬁcant burden and were each other. In addition, the exact breakpoints are disclosed thus sequenced in an independent cohort of 504 MS and andtheheteroplasmicratedeﬁned.Basedontheanalysisof 504 controls, using the same pipeline developed for the thecontrolsamples,thenewmethodseemstobereliablein discoveryphase.Aftermeta-analysisofthetwocohorts,we detecting all types of mtDNA deletions. observed a signiﬁcant burden (p≤0.039) for three genes, Conclusions:OurnewdetectionmethodsetsthemtDNA each in a different MS region, with at least one ﬁlter and analysis to a new level and increases understanding of the one burden test. In conclusion, this work suggests that the mtDNA deletions’ variety and expectantly their clinical associationsignalinMSlocimaybedrivenbyaburdenof relevance. rare variants in a single gene and conﬁrms the role of rare T. Suominen: None. S. Penttilä: None. M. Jokela: variants in the susceptibility to autoimmune diseases, par- None. J. Palmio: None. B. Udd: None. ticularly to MS. Supporting grant: FISM 2015 N. Barizzone*: None. F. Clarelli*: None. E. Man- P10.37A gano*: None. C. Basagni: None. M. Zuccalà: None. S. Cumulative effect of rare functional variants in Multiple Anand: None. M. Sorosina: None. E. Mascia: None. G. Sclerosis associated genes DeBellis:None.F.Esposito:None.D.Vecchio:None.G. Predebon: None. C. Comi: None. R. Cantello: None. V. N.Barizzone*1,2,F. Clarelli*3,E. Mangano*4,C. Basagni1,2, Martinelli: None. G. Comi: None. M. Leone: None. R. M.Zuccalà1,2,S.Anand4,M.Sorosina3,E. Mascia3, G. De Bordoni*: None. F. Martinelli-Boneschi*: None. S. Bellis4, F.Esposito3,5,PROGEMUS, PROGRESSO,IMSGC, D'Alfonso*: None. D.Vecchio6, G.Predebon1,2,C. Comi6, R.Cantello6, V. Martinelli5,G.Comi5,M. Leone1,2,7,R. Bordoni*4, P10.40D F. Martinelli-Boneschi*3,5,S. D'Alfonso*1,2 NGS-testing using an expanded gene panel on Neuromuscular patients in Norway-results and limitations 1Department of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy, 2IRCAD (Interdisciplinary Research T. Fagerheim1,G.Å. M.Hansen1,B. Nygård1,K. Arntzen1, Center of Autoimmune Diseases), Novara, Italy, 3Laboratory K. Ørstavik2, M.Rasmussen2,Ø.Nilssen1, C.Jonsrud1 of Human Genetics of Complex Neurological Disorders, Institute of Experimental Neurology (INSPE), Division of 1University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsoe, Norway, Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 2University Hospital of Oslo, Oslo, Norway 4National Research Council of Italy, Institute for Biomedical Technologies, Segrate, Milan, Italy, 5Department of Introduction: Neuromuscular disorders (NMDs) contain a Neurology, Division of Neuroscience, Scientiﬁc Institute San broad group of disorders often with overlapping clinical Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 6MS Centre, SCDU Neurology, AOU signs difﬁcult to differentiate. Some of the more frequent334 J.delPicchia diseases such as Limb-Girdle muscular dystrophy and della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino, Italy, 6The Charcot-Marie-Tooth are getting increasingly hetero- Neuroscience Institute of Torino, Torino, Italy geneous as genetic discoveries proliferate and different genetic testing strategies evolve. Through a 2-year period, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by we have offered an expanded gene panel based on Next- motor neuron degeneration in the primary motor cortex, generation Sequencing (NGS) of patients with NMDs. We brainstem and spinal cord. The hexanucleotide repeat performed NGS-analysis with a gene list starting with 256 expansion in C9ORF72 gene (C9ORF72-HRE) is the most genesthatwereexpandedto328genesduringthestudyon frequent genetic cause of ALS. Since many familial pedi- 200 patients where standard testing had yielded no speciﬁc grees showed incomplete penetrance and heterogeneous diagnosis. clinicalsigns,severalgeneticfactorshavebeenanalyzedas Methods and Results: NGS was performed using possiblemodiﬁerinALS.ThelengthofGCGrepeatinnon- Illumina TruSight One Sequencing panel (4813 genes) imprinted in Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome 1 (NIPA1), and run on an Illumina NextSeq 500 Desktop Sequencer. identiﬁed as risk factor for ALS susceptibility, has been Analyses were done using Illumina BaseSpace BWA investigated as a possible modiﬁer factor for C9ORF72- EnrichmentWorkﬂow andannotation,ﬁltration andvariant HRE ALS patientsNIPA1 long alleles frequency was sig- curation were done using Cartagenia Bench and Alamut niﬁcantly higher in C9ORF72-HRE sporadic ALS carriers Vision. Among 200 patients, we received a diagnosis in (15.2%)(vs5.5%inallothersporadicALScasesand3.9% approximately40%ofthepatients,includingsomepatients incontrols;Dekker2016)whilenodifferencewasobserved with variants considered to be of uncertain clinical in C9ORF72-HRE ALS carriers (3.0%) compared to con- signiﬁcance (VUS). Many of the patients presented with trols (3.5%) (Van Blitterswijk 2014). Based on this, we atypical phenotypes in relation to the genetic diagnosis. investigate the possible role of NIPA1-GCG repeat length Low coverage on exon 1 is a common problem, and asmodiﬁeroftheC9ORF72phenotypeinalargecohortof detection of rearrangements is a limitation of the method, 558ItalianALSsporadiccasesand483Italiancontrols.To particularly in NMD patients. evaluate the effect of short or long repeat length we Conclusions: An extended gene panel designed for dichotomized NIPA1 alleles as ‘normal’ ((GCG) 7-8), or NMDs resulted in a high diagnostic rate similar to whole ‘long’ (>8 GCG repeats). We didn’t observe a higher fre- exom sequencing studies (WES) on NMD patients. We quency of NIPA1 long alleles in C9ORF72-HRE carriers recommend using a broad gene panel for NMDs as (4%)comparedtoC9ORF72-HREnegativepatients(4.4%) phenotypic overlap is getting more evident from recent and healthy controls (5%). This sample size allowed to genetic ﬁndings. replicate the modiﬁer effect observed in the literature (92% T. Fagerheim: None. G.Å.M. Hansen: None. B. power,p.=0.05).Inconclusion,wedidnotconﬁrmaroleof Nygård: None. K. Arntzen: None. K. Ørstavik: None. NIPA1 repeat length as a modiﬁer factor of the C9ORF72 M. Rasmussen: None. Ø. Nilssen: None. C. ALS phenotype. Jonsrud: None. L. Corrado *: None. A. Di Pierro: None. M. Brunetti: None. N. Barizzone *: None. M. Barberis: None. R. P10.41A Croce:None.E.Bersano:None.F.DeMarchi:None.A. EvaluationofNIPA1repeataspotentialdiseasemodiﬁerin Calvo: None. C. Moglia: None. L. Mazzini: None. A. Italian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cases carrying Chiò *: None. S. D' Alfonso *: None. C9ORF72 expansion P10.43C L. Corrado*1, A.DiPierro1, M.Brunetti2,N.Barizzone*1, SMA-affected individuals with one copy of SMN2 gene M.Barberis2,R. Croce1,E. Bersano3,F. DeMarchi3, A. Calvo4,5,6, C.Moglia4,5, L.Mazzini3,A.Chiò *4,5,6,S.D' V. Zabnenkova,T.Milovidova, O.Schagina,A. Polyakov Alfonso*1 Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian 1Human Genetics Lab, Department of Health Sciencs, Federation University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy, 2"Rita Levi Montalcini" Department of Neuroscience, Neurology II, ALS Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuro- center, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 3ALS center AOU degenerative disease characterized by loss of lower motor Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy, 4ALS center, "Rita Levi neurons of spinal cord. SMA is caused by mutations in the Montalcini"DepartmentofNeuroscience,UniversityofTorino, telomeric copy of the survival motor neuron gene (SMN1). Torino, Italy, 5The Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Città Affected individuals with damaged SMN1 gene seem to have milder form of the disease with increased copyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 335 numbersofthecentromerichomologicalcopyofSMNgene Carlsbad, CA, United States, 5Center for Rare Diseases, (SMN2) producing only 10% of functional protein. On the University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany contrary in this study an attention has been turned to patients with one copy of the SMN2 gene. Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a ﬁrst Materials and methods: Eight SMA patients with genetic condition for which ASO therapy has been FDA- pathogenic variants in SMN1 gene and one copy of and EMA-approved. SPINRAZA are splice-correcting SMN2 gene have been analyzed. MLPA and sequence ASOs targeting SMN2 RNA which produce increased analysis have been performed previously. (Tab. 1) Tab.1 SMN levels. Despite impressive clinical improvements in Characteristics of patients in current study somepatients,thereisstillaneedforadditionaltherapeutic approaches to treat the full spectrum of SMA patients. Therefore, identifying additional SMN-independent ther- Sample Age SMAType SMN1 SMN1, SMN2 № copynumber minor copynumber apeuticapproachesarewarranted.Weidentiﬁedneurocalcin mutation delta(NCALD)reductionasaprotectivegeneticmodiﬁerin asymptomaticSMN1-deleted individualsandacrossspecies 690 4m 1 0 – 1 (Riessland et al., AJHG 2017). 1485 3m 1 0 – 1 Materials and methods: In collaboration with IONIS 1510 9m 1 0 – 1 Pharmaceuticals, Ncald-ASOs were developed to reduce 4291 11m 1 0 – 1 NCALDlevel.30Ncald-ASOsweregeneratedandtestedin 7600 10d 0 0 – 1 cellsandadultmice;thethreemostefﬁcientweretestedfor 9664 12d 0 0 – 1 tolerability and efﬁciency in the neonatal Taiwanese SMA 8589 8y8 2 1 p.Thr274Ile 1 mouse model. Ncald3-ASO showed the optimal viability, m with non-toxic effects and the best decrease of protein 8826 1y7 2 1 p.Thr274Ile 1 expression: 75% in brain and 80% in spinal cord. m Results: Upon optimization, we performed a blinded preclinical study using presymptomatic injection of low- dose SMN+Ncald-ASOs compared to SMN+control- Results: The SMA types had varied from Type 0 with ASOs, where Ncald- or control ASOs were injected ICV reduced fetal movements, respiratory failure immediately at P2 and SMN-ASOs subcutaneously at P1. Our results after birth, lack of the joints mobility and severe muscle showed a signiﬁcant increase in compound muscle action weakness to Type 2 “strong”. Patients with Types 0 and 1 potential, neuromuscular junction size and proprioceptive have had homozygous deletion of the SMN1 gene. And input in SMN+Ncald treated SMA mice at P21 and P90 patients with milder SMA type 2 have been compound and analyses for P180 are in progress. heterozygotes (with deletion and pathogenic SMN1 variant Conclusion: These ﬁndings suggest that a combinatorial p.Thr274Ile close to a wild type). approach using SMN-dependent and SMN-independent Conclusion: The variability of the SMA phenotypes is ASO-therapy - resembling a condition found in asympto- observedevenwith asingle copy ofthe SMN2gene. It can matic individuals - further ameliorates disease symptoms. be important of the new opportunities in the therapy Acknowledgments:DFG, CMMC, SMA-Europe and O. of SMA. Päsel foundation V. Zabnenkova: None. T. Milovidova: None. O. S. Schneider: None. L. Torres-Benito: None. V. Schagina: None. A. Polyakov: None. Grysko: None. R. Rombo: None. K.K. Ling: None. F. W. Rigo: None. C.F. Bennett: None. B. Wirth: None. P10.44D Combined therapy using low-dose SMN plus Ncald ASOs P10.45A further ameliorates disease symptoms in a severe mouse Prenataldiagnosisofspinalmuscularatrophyin2couples model for spinal muscular atrophy withunusualgenearrangementintheSMAregionat5q13 S. Schneider1,2,3,L. Torres-Benito1,2,3, V.Grysko1,2,3, H.Law,G.Tan,C. Yoon,Y. Tan,A. H.M.Lai R. Rombo1,2,3, K.K. Ling4,F. W.Rigo4,C. F.Bennett4, B. Wirth1,2,3,5 KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore 1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a com- Molecular Medicine (CMMC), Cologne, Germany, 3Institute monautosomalrecessivediseasewithacarrierrateofabout for Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 4Ionis Pharmaceuticals, 1/50 worldwide. It is characterized by progressive muscle336 J.delPicchia weaknessandatrophy.TherearethreemajortypesofSMA diseases after thalassemia in Iran. Autosomal recessive distinguished by the severity and age of onset. More than (AR) forms of diseases are more common in populations 94% of SMA patients, regardless of clinical type, have withhigherrateofconsanguineousmarriages.Autozygosity homozygous absence of SMN1 gene. We report 2 cases of mappingisapowerfultechniquetotrackthedefectivegene prenatal diagnosis with previous birth of SMA affected in consanguineous populations like Iran. children due to absence of SMN1 gene. Methods: In this study, all suspected patients to SMA Materialsandmethods:PresenceofSMN1geneexons7 were examined by MLPA to screen for deletion/ duplica- and8inthefetuseswasdetectedbyHinfIandDdeIdigests. tions of SMN1,2 genes. Subsequently the families with no Copy numbers of SMN1, SMN2 and NAIP genes of both mutationwereinvestigatedbyhomozygosity mapping with families were further analysed by MLPA (P021 MRC- the help of STR markers linked to the DNAJB2, Holland) to conﬁrm the results and to determine the phase IGHMBP2, SIGMAR1, and PLEHG5 genes. These genes of gene arrangement. are the responsible for atypical form of SMA with AR Results: inheritance. The patients who showed linkage to the mentioned genes were directly sequence. Finally, Whole Exome sequencing (WES) was done for the5 patients who Gene Father Mother SMAchild Fetus did not show any linkage with any of genes in this study. Couple1 NAIP 1 3 1 2 Result: From 150 studied families, a mutation in SMN1 SMN1 1 1 0 1 genes identiﬁedin115families. Homozygosity mapping in SMN2 1 2 2 0 44 families (29.3%) showed linkage in three families to Couple2 NAIP 1 2 1 2 three different genes. The mutations were in DNAJB2, SMN1 1 1 0 2 SIGMAR1, and PLEKHG5 genes. In 5 families tested by SMN2 1 2 3 0 WES, 3 families had a pathogenic variant in the TNNT1, TPM3 and TTN genes. ACMG guideline were used to assess the pathogenicity of the new variants. Conclusions: Both pregnancies were unaffected. One of Conclusion:TheuseofMLPAinconcomitantwithSTR themwasacarrierandbothcarriednoSMN2genes.MLPA markers in typical SMA cases can increase the rate of analysis conﬁrmed the phase of gene arrangement for mutation detection with a very low cost. couple1,butpresentedmorepossibilitiesforcouple2.This Z.Shariﬁ:None.H.Noferesti:None.F.Golnabi:None. ﬁnding shows the complexity of gene arrangement due to A. Sarhadi Bandehi: None. F. Forouzesh: None. M. deletion/gene conversion in the SMA region. Hashemi: None. M. Abiri: None. S. Zeinali: None. S. H.Law:None.G.Tan:None.C.Yoon: None.Y.Tan: Bahramizadegan: None. None. A.H.M. Lai: None. P10.48D P10.47CSpinalMuscularAtrophydiagnosisin150Iranian Molecular analysis of CAG repeats in ﬁve spinocerebellar families with affected child ataxias: The distribution and reference ranges ofSCA1, 2, 3, 6 and 7 Z. Shariﬁ1,2,H.Noferesti1,F. Golnabi1,A. SarhadiBandehi1, F. Forouzesh2,M. Hashemi2,M.Abiri3,S. Zeinali4,1, M.Lee,J. Hyun, E.Kim, E.Lee S. Bahramizadegan5 Greencross labs, Yongin-si, Korea, Republic of 1KawsarHumanGeneticsResearchCenter(KHGRC),Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of genetics, Islamic Introduction: The Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) is auto- Azad University, Tehran medical sciences branch, Tehran, somal dominant diseases characterized by heterogeneous Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Department of Medical Genetics, group of nuerodegerative disorders with variable expres- School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, sion. CAG repeat expansions in the causative genes have Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Molecular Medicine been used for the diagnoses of patients with ataxia. We Department,BiotechnologyResearchCenter,PasteurInstitute investigated ﬁve types of SCAs in 149 unrelated patients of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 5Kawsar Human withataxiatoelucidatethedistributionofCAGrepeatsand GeneticsResearchCenter(KHGRC),Tehran,IslamicRepublic the mutation spectrum of SCAs in Korea. of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Materialsandmethods:InordertoevaluateCAGrepeat size ranges of SCAs by capillary electrophoresis analysis, Background: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is highly Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood using heterogeneous disorder and the second most common theChemagicDNABlood200Kit(Chemagen,Baesweiler,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 337 Germany). Ampliﬁed products were injected into an ABI was available for this study. Initially, the target region of 3500xLGeneticanalyzer(AppliedBiosystems,FosterCity, MYOcap consisted of exons and UTRs of 180 known or CA,USA).Ampliconlengthwascalculated bycomparison putative myopathy-causing genes. MYOcap has since been with the GS500-ROX molecular weight standard by using gradually expanded to target 328 genes. Furthermore, the GeneMarker v.2.2 software (SoftGenetics, State Col- sensitivity of the assay has been enhanced by optimising lege, PA, USA). the probes targeting the low covered regions. Results: The normal and pathologic CAG repeat size Results:Irrespectiveofversion,thecoverageofMYOcap ranges were established at ﬁve SCA loci. The total reached at least 20X in 94% of the target region. However, prevalence of the ﬁve types of SCAs was 14.8% in the recurrent low coverage (<20X) areas were detected. 149 patients with ataxia, regardless of their family history. Optimisedprobedesignimprovedthecoverageformajority The most frequent type was SCA 2 (5.6%), followed by of these regions but some low covered areas remained. SCA 6 (5.4%). SCA1, SCA7, and SCA 3 were less These are areas that are difﬁcult to sequence or frequent, affecting 3.0%, 2.5%, and 0.9% of the cases, unambiguously map. respectively. Conclusions:Therearegenomicregionsthatareresistant Conclusions:WedeterminedtheCAGrepeatsizeranges to even targeted MPS. Currently, these areas have to be of each SCA type on normal and pathologic alleles. This studied by complementary methods. studywillprovidethecharacteristicsoftheSCAmutations, S. Lehtinen: None. S. Penttilä: None. M. Arumilli: and an effective strategy for the molecular diagnosis of None. P. Hackman: None. J. Palmio: None. B. SCAs in Koreans. Udd: None. M. Lee: None. J. Hyun: None. E. Kim: None. E. Lee: None. P10.50B A Faroese founder variant in TBCD causes early onset, P10.49A progressive encephalopathy with a homogenous clinical Improving coverage of muscle speciﬁc genes in targeted course massively parallel sequencing J.Ek1,S. Grønborg1,2,L. Risom1,K. B.Larsen3,4, D.Scheie3, S. Lehtinen1, S.Penttilä1,M.Arumilli2, P.Hackman2, Y. Petkov5,V. A.Larsen6,M.Dunø1,F. Joensen7, J.Palmio3,B. Udd2,3,4 E. Østergaard1 1Neuromuscular Research Unit, University of Tampere, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Tampere, Finland, 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Center for Rare Department of Medical Genetics, Medicum, University of Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Helsinki,Helsinki,Finland,3NeuromuscularResearchCenter, Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Department of Department of Neurology, Tampere University Hospital, Pathology, University Hospital Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Tampere, Finland, 4Department of Neurology, Vaasa Central Denmark, 4Department of Neuropathology and Ocular Hospital, Vaasa, Finland Pathology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospital, Headington, United Kingdom, 5Department of Introduction: Massively parallel sequencing (MPS) meth- Pediatrics, Sydvestjysk Sygehus, Esbjerg, Denmark, odshavetransformedthegeneticanalysisofneuromuscular 6Department of Radiology, University Hospital Copenhagen, disorders. These disorders are both genetically and pheno- Copenhagen, Denmark, 7Department of Pediatrics, National typically heterogeneous and therefore laborious to study. Hospital of the Faroe Islands, Tórshavn, Faroe Islands However, low coverage regions challenge the comprehen- siveness of MPS studies. Introduction: Faroe Islands isanarchipelago of18islands OurresearchunitutilisesatargetedMPSassay,MYOcap, with around 49,000 inhabitants, which is situated between in clinical diagnostics of myopathy. The aim of this study IcelandandNorwayintheNorthAtlanticSea.TheFaroese was to systematically survey the target coverage and population originates from a small settlement and several especially concentrate on deﬁning the low covered regions geneticdisordershaveanincreasedincidenceinthepresent in different versions of MYOcap. Furthermore, we wanted population due to founder effect, e.g. mitochondrial ence- to examine the effect of probe design optimisation on phalomyopathy due to a SUCLA2 variant and Aicardi boosting the coverage of the target region. Goutières syndrome. Variants in a host of structural Materials and methods: Approximately 1500 samples microtubulin-associated proteins have been identiﬁed to had previously been analysed with one of the ﬁve versions cause progressive neurodegenerative disorders. TBCD is of MYOcap. Coverage information from the whole cohort one of ﬁve tubulin-speciﬁc chaperones and is required for338 J.delPicchia reversible assembly of tubulin-heterodimer. Recently, nystagmus in some. Identical to the Saudi family, the mutations in TBCD have been identiﬁed in patients with homozygous missense variation (c.1478A>G or p. distinct progressive encephalopathy with a broad clinical His493Arg) located in the second active site of the TDP1 spectrum. gene (tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1), was found to Materials and methods: Patients with encephalopathy segregate in these two families. SNP array analysis in both were collected from families originating from the Faroe probands identiﬁed a unique and shared haplotypic back- Islands. All were tested negative for the Faroese SUCLA2 ground. The single genetic defect against which SCAN1 founder variant. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was occurs would explain the relative phenotypic homogeneity performed to search for a disease-causing variant. observed between affected individuals. In line with the Results: By WES, we found several patients to be geographic distribution of this rare clinical entity, our homozygous for a TBCD missense variant, with a high observations suggest a common origin of the TDP1 carrier frequency in the Faroese population. These patients c.1478A>G molecular alteration. presented with an early-onset, progressive encephalopathy P. Scott: None. A. Al-Kindy: None. R. with features of primary neurodegeneration and a homo- Nandhagopal: None. genousclinicalcourse.Wepresentadetaileddescriptionof the variant including functional studies, clinical ﬁndings, P10.52D neuropathology,andMRimagingcharacteristicsofasubset A new case of rare TRIP4-related neuromuscular disease of these patients, adding insight into the phenotype of TBCD-related encephalopathy. E. Tsoutsou1,R. Pons2,K. Kekou1,E. A. Makrygianni2, Conclusions: The ﬁnding of a Faroese founder variant O.Kenteroglou1, S.Psoni1,S. Amenta3,P. Willems4, willallowtargetedgeneticdiagnosticsinpatientsofFaroese H.Fryssira1 descent as well as improved genetic counseling and testing of at-risk couples. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, National J.Ek:None.S.Grønborg:None.L.Risom:None.K.B. and Kapodistrian University of Athens, "Aghia Sophia" Larsen: None. D. Scheie: None. Y. Petkov: None. V.A. Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece, 21st Department of Larsen: None. M. Dunø: None. F. Joensen: None. E. Pediatrics, NKUA, "Aghia Sophia" Children's Hospital, Østergaard: None. Athens, Greece, 3"MITERA" Maternity Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4"GENDIA" Genetic-Diagnostic, Antwerp, Belgium P10.51C Possible TDP1 founder mutation underlying Introduction: Autosomal recessive variants in the TRIP4 spinocerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy gene are known to cause a particular form of congenital muscular dystrophy, type Davignon-Chauveau (OMIM P. Scott1, A.Al-Kindy2,R.Nandhagopal3 #617066) and a congenital spinal muscular atrophy with bone fractures type 1 (OMIM #616866) as well. Both dis- 1Molecular Genetics and Genomics Laboratory, Sultan ordersareveryrare.Theyhavebeendescribedinonlyafew Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman, 2Genetics and families and they have overlapping phenotypic features. Developmental Medicine Clinic, Sultan Qaboos University MaterialandMethods:WereportanewcaseofTRIP4- Hospital, Muscat, Oman, 3Neurology Unit, Sultan Qaboos related neuromuscular disease. A 14-year-old female University Hospital, Muscat, Oman patient, the ﬁrst child of two healthy apparently non- consaquineous parents, presented with extremely low body Spinocerebellarataxiawithaxonalneuropathy(SCAN1),an weight (BW:23 Κg<<3rd centile), fatigue, muscular weak- autosomal recessive form of hereditary ataxia, has so far ness and severe scoliosis since the ﬁrst year of life. been reported in a single extended Saudi Arabian family. Neurological examination revealed muscular weakness, We here describe the ﬁrst independent observation of the mainly involving truncal and proximal lower limps. condition in two apparently unrelated Omani families. Examination of the respiratory, gastrointestinal and cardi- Clinical presentation consisted of early-adulthood onset of ovascular systems did not reveal abnormalities. Her progressiveataxiawithperipheralaxonalmotorandsensory intelligence was normal. Whole Exome Sequencing neuropathy.Detailedexaminationrevealedsigniﬁcantdistal (WES) of the patient and both parents was performed. lower limb weakness, fasciculation, amyotrophy and hypo/ Results: A pathogenic homozygous TRIP4:c.1678 areﬂexia and variable degrees of such ﬁndings in the distal +1_1678+2insC novel variant was identiﬁed in intron 12 upper limbs, distal sensory neuropathy in lower limb and of the TRIP4 gene. The variant is predicted to disrupt the high steppage gait with tandem ataxia, in addition to mild normal splice site as conﬁrmed by splice site prediction ﬁnger to nose incoordination and ill sustained gaze evokedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 339 software. It was present in heterozygous state in both We evaluated several tools and propose a unique variant parents whose origin is from the same Greek island. prioritization score called MPA. MPA is based on curated Conclusion: TRIP4 gene encodes the thyroid receptor- interpretation for previously reported variants, biological interacting protein 4, one of the four subunits of the assumptions,spliceand missensepredictorsto prioritize all tetrameric ASC-1 transcriptional cointegrator complex types of SNV variants. We validated our approach by which is identiﬁed to play a signiﬁcant role in myogenic comparing MPA versus prediction tools in dbNSFP differentiation and skeletal myotube growth. The use of including CADD using a dataset composed of DYSF, WES has been proven powerful in expanding the DMD,LMNA,NEBandTTNvariantsextractedfromexpert- phenotypical and genetic spectrum of rare congenital reviewed (missense n=246; splice n=190 pathogenic muscle diseases. variants) and ExAc database (missense n=603; splice E.Tsoutsou:None.R.Pons:None.K.Kekou:None.E. n=3441 neutral variants). A. Makrygianni: None. O. Kenteroglou: None. S. Psoni: MPA obtained the best annotation rate for missense and None. S. Amenta: None. P. Willems: None. H. splice variants. As MPA aggregates results from several Fryssira: None. predictors,individualpredictorserrorsarecounterweighted, improving sensitivity and speciﬁcity of missense and P10.53A splicingvariantsprédictions,especiallyinTTN.Wepropose Evaluation of missense and splicing in silico predictions a sequential use of MPA, beginning with selection of toolsandimplementationofanefﬁcientSNVprioritization variants with higher scores, followed in the absence of NGS pipeline for molecular diagnosis of Myopathies and candidate variants, by consideration of variants with lower Muscular Dystrophies scores. We provide scripts and documentation for an free K.Yauy1,D.Baux1,H.Pegeot1,C.VanGoethem2,C.Mathieu1, academic use validated annotation and prioritization pipe- T. Guignard3, R.JuntasMorales1,D.Lacourt1,M. Krahn4,5, line.Thispipelineisscaledforpanelandexomesequencing V. Lektokari6,G.Bonne7,S. Tuffery-Giraud8, M.Koenig1,8, in molecular diagnosis of MMD. M.Cossee1,8 K. Yauy: None. D. Baux: None. H. Pegeot: None. C. Van Goethem: None. C. Mathieu: None. T. Guignard: 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Montpellier, None. R. Juntas Morales: None. D. Lacourt: None. M. Montpellier,France,2LaboratoiredeBiopathologieCellulaire Krahn: None. V. Lektokari: None. G. Bonne: None. S. et Tissulaire des Tumeurs, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, Tuffery-Giraud: None. M. Koenig: None. M. France,3DépartementdeGénétiqueMédicale,MaladiesRares Cossee: None. etMédecinePersonnalisée,CentredeRéférenceAnomaliesdu Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Plateforme P10.54B Recherche de Microremaniements Chromosomiques, Hôpital UNC13A causes a severe and recognizable phenotype in ArnauddeVilleneuve,CHUMontpellier,Montpellier,France, humans 4Université d’Aix Marseille, Inserm, GMGF INSERM-AMU UMRS910, Marseille, France, 5APHM, Hôpital Timone S. Dyack1,2,N.Snow1, M.Gregoire1,2,A. Oveido1,3 Enfants, Département de Génétique Médicale, Marseille, France, 6The Folkhalsan Institute of Genetics and the 1IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada, 2Department of Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 7Sorbonne 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06; INSERM U974; Center of Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada Research in Myology; Institut de Myologie, Paris, France, 8Laboratoire de Génétique des Maladies Rares, EA7402, We report an infant with encephalopathy, seizures, neuro- Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France muscular features, and progressive respiratory failure asso- ciated with a homozygous null mutation in UNC13A, Interpretation of Next Generation Sequencing huge amount further reﬁning the phenotype and conﬁrming its role as a ofdataconstitutesthemainlimitationinmoleculargenetics disease causing gene in humans. Our patient was non dys- diagnosis. In diagnosis of Myopathies and Muscular Dys- morphic with normal growth parameters who presented trophies(MMD),anothermajorissueistoefﬁcientlypredict with hypertonia and encephalopathy immediately after pathogenicity of variants identiﬁed in large genes, espe- birth. EEG revealed burst suppression. MRI of brain non cially TTN, since current in silico prediction tools show diagnostic. Seizures were uncontrolled and severe global limitations to predict and rank the numerous variants of hypotonia developed, with limited movement. A Morgagni such genes. diaphragmatic hernia, an umbilical hernia, and340 J.delPicchia kyphoscoliosis developed in infancy. She had severe con- 25% of the patients presented positive ﬁndings with the stipation and urinary retention. She died at 8 months of NGS panel and in 15% the diagnosis of the dystrophy respiratory failure and had not met any signiﬁcant devel- subtype was conﬁrmed by molecular study. Of the 20 opmental milestones. Autopsy revealed an unusual pattern patients, 2 homozygous patients were identiﬁed for dys- ofmyelinationofthebrainnotpreviouslydocumented.EM functional dysfunction and an atypical family case with a of skin revealed lysosomal inclusions. Exome trio analysis heterozygous mutation in DYSF. One of the patients was revealed a UNC13A variant, c.1188delC p. compound heterozygote for calpain and another presented (Asp397Thrfs*107), homozygous and in trans. UNC13A variantsofuncertainsigniﬁcanceintheCALPN3andDYSF protein is located in cholinergic neuromuscular synapses genes in spite of despite the fact that they fulﬁlled clinical and in the majority of glutamanergic synapses in the brain. criteriaformusculardystrophy.NGSisausefultoolforthe Mice with Munc13a homozygous null mutations are diagnosis of patients with clinical symptoms of LGMD, paralysed and die. Two patients with homozygous muta- even in patients with atypical clinical characteristics. We tions have been reported in the literature, with features that found novel mutations not previously reported in the lit- may include global delay, microcephaly, seizures, fatal eratureandararemutationinDYSFpreviouslydescribedin myasthenia with respiratory failure, hypotonia, myopathy. Ashkenazi Jewish population in two members of a family. Our patient had progressive hypotonia, myopathy and sei- The NGS should be implemented as a ﬁrst-line diagnostic zures, and a fatal course with features strikingly similar to tool in these pathologies the two reported patients. Umbilical hernia, Morgagni her- V. Martínez-Montoya: None. L.M. Gonzalez-Huerta: nia,normocephalyandnewlyreportedpathologicalﬁndings None. M.R. Rivera-Vega: None. J.M. Valdes-Miranda: addtotheclinicalphenotypeandconﬁrmhomozygousnull None.R.Vega-Gama:None.N.Xilotl-DeJesus:None.M. mutations in UNC13A cause a unique, recognizable, and G.Tovar-Ayala:None.A.Martínez:None.S.A.Cuevas- severe phenotype in humans. Covarrubias: None. S. Dyack: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Shire, Alexion.F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;Biomarin. P11 Multiple Malformation/anomalies syndromes N. Snow: None. M. Gregoire: None. A. Oveido: None. P11.001A P10.55C Detection of concomitant intragenic variants in inherited Molecular characterization in Mexican patients with limb- 16p13.11 microdeletions explaining phenotypic girdle muscular dystrophy inconsistencies V. Martínez-Montoya1,L. M.Gonzalez-Huerta1, M.R. Rivera- M.Zollino1,S. Frangella1,D.Orteschi1,P. Doronzio1, Vega1,J. M.Valdes-Miranda1,R. Vega-Gama1,N.Xilotl- S. Lattante1, G.Vento2,G.Zampino3,C. Leoni3,I.Contaldo4, DeJesus1,M.G.Tovar-Ayala1,A. Martínez2,S. A.Cuevas- D.Battaglia4,G.Marangi1 Covarrubias3 1InstituteofGenomicMedicine,UniversitàCattolicadelSacro 1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico DF, Mexico, Cuore,Roma,Italy,2Departmentfortheprotectionofwomen's 2Genetica,HospitalGeneraldeMexicoFacultaddeMedicina, health and the nascent life, child and adolescent, Fondazione Universidad Nacional Autonoma d Mexico, Mexico DF, Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Roma, Italy, 3Center for Mexico, 3Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Facultad de Rare Disease and Congenital Defects, Fondazione Policlinico Medicina,UniversidadNacionalAutonomadeMexico,Mexico UniversitarioA.Gemelli,Roma,Italy,4ChildNeuropsichiatry, DF, Mexico Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Roma, Italy Bone ring muscular dystrophies are neuromuscular dis- The recurrent 1.2-1.5 microdeletion of chromosome region orders of genetic origin. Currently, there are more than 16p13.11haslongbeenclaimedtobeasusceptibilityfactor 30subtypesofwaistdystrophies.Subtype2orLGMD2isa for neurocognitive impairment, autism and epilepsy, with group of entities with an autosomal recessive inheritance highly variable phenotypic manifestations, in a double hit pattern. In this study, the genetic proﬁle was characterized model of pathogenesis. In most cases the deletion is through NGS, DNA direct sequencing and MLPA in inherited from a healthy parent. Two patients we observed Mexican patients with LGMD. Genomic DNA was with 16p13.11 microdeletion inherited from a healthy par- obtained from peripheral blood of 20 patients. Variants ent presented with a severe phenotype, including severe were analyzed with SIFT and Mutationtaster softwares; microcephaly associated with a complex brain malforma- UMD-DYSF was used for dysfelinopathies . In this work, tion, and microcephaly associated with choreoatetosis andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 341 dystonia, respectively. The complex brain abnormalities 16p13.11. FISH reanalysis on nuclei conﬁrmed the (corpus callosum agenesis, pachygyria, cerebellar hypo- tetrasomy. plasia and colpocephaly) in the ﬁrst case prompted us to Conclusions:Wereporttheﬁrstcaseof19qtertetrasomy perform direct sequencing of the NDE1 gene. A nonsense by intrachromosomal triplication, which was not distin- variantontheremainingallelewasidentiﬁed,leadingtothe guishable from duplication by conventional cytogenetics, diagnosis of autosomal recessive type 4 lissencephaly. Our butwasclearlyidentiﬁedbymicroarrayanalysis.Thisresult second patient was analyzed by WES (trio analysis). We allowed us to interpret the signal pattern of FISH on detectedadenovomissensevariantinGABRB2,whichhas metaphases revealing that the middle repeat of the recently been reported in a group of patients with an triplication was inverted. Cytogenetic and cytogenomic overlapping phenotype including choreoatetosis, dystonia, characterization of the rearrangement supports the mole- microcephaly and severe ID with white matter abnormal- cular mechanisms postulated for the formation of intra- ities.Ourresultsconﬁrmthat16p13.11deletionitselfisnot chromosomal triplications. Microarray analysis allowed the sufﬁcient to cause the disease, with two possible opposite detection ofacryptic microduplication at16p.Itisdifﬁcult scenarios:1)themicrodeletionisinvolvedintheetiologyof to establish a phenotype-genotype correlation due to the theobservedcondition,whenitunmasksarecessivevariant absence of other reported cases and the probable additive on the remaining allele (i.e.: hemizygosity of a pathogenic effect of the 16p13.11 microduplication. NDE1 variant); 2) the microdeletion acts as innocent V.S. Bugatto: None. W. Montes: None. J.F. Martini: bystander of a different gene variant. None. S.P. Duarte: None. S. Massara: None. M. Delea: M. Zollino: None. S. Frangella: None. D. Orteschi: None. L. Espeche: None. B. Warszatska: None. A. None. P. Doronzio: None. S. Lattante: None. G. Vento: Solari: None. M. Pérez: None. M.E. Mollica: None. L. None. G. Zampino: None. C. Leoni: None. I. Contaldo: Furforo: None. S. Rozental: None. None. D. Battaglia: None. G. Marangi: None. P11.004D P11.003C Investigation of genetic variants underlying variability in First case of 19q triplication: clinical and cytogenomic patients with 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome characterization K. Ziemkiewicz1,M.Smyk1,T. Gambin2,A. Kutkowska V. S.Bugatto, W.Montes, J.F. Martini, S.P. Duarte, Kaźmierczak1,D.M.McDonald-McGinn3,T. B. Crowley3, S. Massara,M.Delea,L. Espeche,B. Warszatska, A. Solari, M.Piotrowicz4,D.Gieruszczak-Białek5,B. A. Nowakowska1 M.Pérez, M. E.Mollica, L. Furforo, S. Rozental 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and CentroNacionaldeGenéticaMédica,BuenosAires,Argentina Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Computer Science, Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland, 3Human Introduction: Intrachromosomal triplications leading to Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, tetrasomy for the corresponding segment is a rare complex Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Department of Genetics, chromosomal rearrangement.It hasbeenreportedfor afew Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital Research Institute, Łódź, chromosomes but, to our knowledge, there is no case Poland, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Children’s involving chromosome 19 so far. Here we describe a Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland 13 months old girl with 19q terminal triplication, marked hypotonia, developmental delay, dysmorphic features, Introduction: The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (DS) is the abnormal skull shape and premature thelarche and mostcommonmicrodeletionsyndromewithanincidenceof pubarche. 1 in 2000 births. Major clinical characteristics are intellec- Methods and Results: GTW banding technique (550 tual disability, congenital heart anomalies, immune system band level) showed extra material on 19q. As parental defects, velopharyngeal abnormalities, facial dysmorphism karyotypes were normal, SKY analysis was performed. It and psychiatric disorders. Affected individuals have a revealed that the derivative chromosome presented a hemizygous 1,5-3Mb deletion at chromosome 22q11.2, uniform coloration corresponding to speciﬁc sequences of which includes about 50 known genes. Highly variable chromosome 19 suggesting a probable duplication expressivityoftheclinicalfeaturescanbeobservedevenin 19q13.33q13.43. The FISH pattern on metaphase chromo- the patients carrying the same deletions. In the project we somes with 19q subtelomeric probes was not conclusive. focusedontwoofthepotentialmechanismsunderlyingthis Microarray analysis identiﬁed a 3.7Mb triplication of the variability:allelicvariationwithinthe22q11.2regionofthe 19q13.42q13.43 segment anda 1.7Mbmicroduplication at non-deleted chromosome and variants in modiﬁer genes outside of the deletion.342 J.delPicchia Materials and methods: To identify rare and likely Materials and methods: To identify CNVs in genome, phenotype inﬂuencing variants Illumina whole exome other than 22q11.2 deletion, CNV calling algorithm sequencing (WES) in 50 patients with DS was applied. CoNIFER was implemented on the exome sequencing data Detailed phenotyping of all patients was performed to set of 40 patients. estimate correlation between WES results and speciﬁc Results: In three patients, additionally to 22q11.2 loss, phenotypes. we found onedeletionand three duplication calls that were Results: Analysis of the hemizygous region of 22q11.2 veriﬁed by aCGH. In the ﬁrst patient showing, unusual for revealedrarenonsynonymousSNVsinHIRAandMRPL40 22q11.2 DS, regression of cognitive functions and demen- genes. In the region outside of the deletion we found 14 tia, atypical ~3,34 Mb 22q11 deletion encompassing variants that may be considered as a probable phenotype TUBA8 gene was present. In second, male patient we modiﬁers;7rarenonsynonymousSNVsingenesassociated found 365 kb potentially pathogenic duplication of Xq22.3 with congenital heart malformations were found in the encompassingthePRPS1geneandexons1-5ofMID2gene groupof34patientswithheartdefects(CITED2,MED13L, that is associated with X-linked mental retardation. In the NKX2-5, NODAL, TLL1, CHD7, MYH6); 6 rare non- third patient two additional CNVs with uncertain clinical synonymous SNVs and 1 frameshift insertion were signiﬁcance were found: 667 kb deletion of 3p26.3 consistent with patients’ clinical features, including one encompassing exons 1-2 of the CNTN4 gene and 618 kb variant in gene from genetic pathway of 22q11.2 region duplication of 7q21.3q22.1 including NPTX2 gene. (CDH15). Conclusions: In patients with 22q11.2 DS diagnosed by This work was granted from National Science Centre MLPA or FISH further investigation of CNVs is (OPUS NCN 2015/17/B/NZ5/01357 to BN). recommended. K. Ziemkiewicz: None. M. Smyk: None. T. Gambin: This work was granted from National Science Centre None. A. Kutkowska Kaźmierczak: None. D.M. McDo- (OPUS NCN 2015/17/B/NZ5/01357 to BN) nald-McGinn: None. T.B. Crowley: None. M. Piotro- M. Smyk: None. K. Ziemkiewicz: None. T. Gambin: wicz: None. D. Gieruszczak-Białek: None. B.A. None. A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: None. M. Piotro- Nowakowska: None. wicz: None. D. Gieruszczak-Białek: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. B.A. Nowakowska: None. P11.005A Additional CNVs modifying phenotypes of patients with P11.006B 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome detected from exome Next-generation sequencing (NGS) of ninecandidate genes sequencing data with custom AmpliSeq in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome patients M.Smyk1,K. Ziemkiewicz1,T. Gambin1,2,A. Kutkowska- Kaźmierczak1,M.Piotrowicz3,D.Gieruszczak-Białek4, A. G.Dantas1,N.Nunes1, C.A. Kim2, D.C.Q.Soares2,V.A. A. Pietrzyk5, B.A. Nowakowska1 Meloni1,S.I.Belangero1,G.G.Carvalheira1,M.I.Melaragno1 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of 1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, Computer Science, Warsaw University of Technology, 2Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Genetics, Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital Research Institute, Łódź, Poland, 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) results from 4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Children’sMemorialHealth hemizygous 3 Mb deletions of chromosome 22 usually Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Genetics and ﬂanked by low copy repeats (LCR) which represents a Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland substrate for aberrant recombination. Even though most 22q11.2DS patients have the same size deletions, the phe- Introduction: The most common microdeletion in humans notype is highly variable among individuals. is 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (DS) caused by deletion of a Thepresenceofsinglenucleotidevariants(SNVs)onthe 1.5–3Mbregionatchromosome22q11.2andoccurringin1 remaining allele of 22q11.2 or in other genes outside in 2,000 births. This disorder is associated with variable 22q11.2regionissuggestedtohavearoleinthephenotype phenotypes, such as congenital cardiac defects, velophar- variation observed. yngeal abnormalities, characteristic facialappearance, renal Weperformed IonAmpliseq inperipheral blood from 30 anomalies, intellectual disability and psychiatric disorders. 22q11.2DS patients to sequence the coding regions of nine One of the potential genetics mechanisms underlying this candidate genes located in and outside the 22q11.2 variabilityisthepresenceofadditionalcopynumbervariant hemizygous region. We identiﬁed 30 SNVs in 3’UTR (CNV) elsewhere in the genome. regionsand21SVNsinexons,being12missenseandnineAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 343 synonymous SNVs. To predict the pathogenic potential of describe three new patients of 3MC syndrome in a Turkish theSNVs,weperformedinsilicoanalysisbyusingthetools family with a novel mutation of MASP1 gene. Different Mutation Taster, FATHMM, PolyPhen 2 and SIFT. The clinical features of patients, follow-up, management and SNVs found in the CRKL, PI4KA, MAPK1, ZFPM2 and mutation type of MASP1 gene will be discussed in detail. TANGO2 genes led to aminoacid substitution, changes on M. Basdemirci: None. A. Sen: None. S. splicing sites or RNA's polyA tail alteration. Of the 51 Ceylaner: None. variantsanalyzed,11variantswerepredictedasdeleterious, onevariantwaspredictedasprotectiveand19variantswere P11.008D predicted to be tolerable to mutations. Novel frameshift-mutation in EOGT gene in a female Someofourﬁndingswerenotpreviouslydescribedinthe individualwithasevereautosomalrecessiveAdams-Oliver literature, which represents a great potential for further Syndrome with neurological ﬁndings and squamous cell studies and contribution to the ﬁeld, after validation. The carcinoma useofgenepanelswithcandidategenescouldacceleratethe search for genetic modiﬁers and improve the treatment of H.Gaspar,S. Gallati, J.Sanz 22q11.2DS patients. Financial support: FAPESP, Brazil. A.G. Dantas: None. N. Nunes: None. C.A. Kim: None. Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, D.C.Q.Soares:None.V.A.Meloni:None.S.I.Belangero: Inselspital,BernUniversityHospital,UniversityofBern,Bern, None. G.G. Carvalheira: None. M.I. Melaragno: None. Switzerland P11.007C Adams-Oliver Syndrome (AOS) is deﬁned by aplasia cutis Novel mutation in MASP1 gene in three new patient with congenita (ACC) of the scalp and terminal transverse limb 3MC syndrome defects(TTLD).Theclinicalﬁndingsarevariable,therecan becardiac,neurologic,renalandophthalmologicalﬁndings. M.Basdemirci1,A. Sen2,S. Ceylaner3 Several genes have been identiﬁed: ARHGAP31, DLL4, NOTCH1, and RBPJ are associated with autosomal domi- 1Şanlıurfa Education and Research Hospital, Medical nant inheritance, DOCK6 and EOGT with autosomal Genetics, Şanlıurfa, Turkey, 2Fırat University School of recessive inheritance. In autosomal dominant families, the Medicine,MedicalGenetics,Elazığ,Turkey,3İntergenGenetic penetrancecanbereducedandneurologicﬁndingsarevery Center, Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey rare. To our knowledge, only 8 families have been descri- bed with mutations in EOGT to date. Three different 3MC syndrome encompasses the four autosomal recessive mutationswere detected sofar, 2 missensemutationsanda conditions Malpuech syndrome, Michels syndrome, Min- frameshiftmutation,whichwasfoundin6ofthe8families, garelli syndrome, and Carnevale syndrome. The main fea- suggesting a founder mutation in consanguineous families tures of these syndromes are facial dysmorphism that of Arabic ancestry. We here report on a 12 year old girl includes hypertelorism, blepharophimosis, blepharoptosis, from Iraq with consanguineous parents. She was born with and highly arched eyebrows. Cleft lip and palate, postnatal a severe AOS with a large scalp defect (ACC) which was growth deﬁciency, cognitive impairment, and hearing loss not treated until recently. Molecular genetic analysis (next are also consistent ﬁndings. Craniosynostosis, radioulnar generation sequencing) revealed a novel frameshift muta- synostosis, and genital and vesicorenal anomalies occur in tion in the EOGT gene, most probably in homozygous 20 to 30% of cases. 3MC syndrome can be caused by constellation. Clinically, the girl showed TTLD on both mutations in either COLEC11or MASP1 genes. Recently, hands and feet, and she had neurological ﬁndings: spastic COLEC10genewasdiscoveredasthecauseofthedisease. paresis, epilepsy, microcephaly, and suspicion of intellec- The 7,5 months old infant was referred to our genetic tual deﬁcits. In the course of treatment, a squamous cell policlinic because of her dysmorphic appearance. Frontal carcinoma was detected, she developed a hydrocephalus. bossing, highly arched eyebrows, hypertelorism, blephar- AnassociationbetweensquamouscellcarcinomaandAOS ophimosis, ﬂattened nasal root, umbilical hernia, sacral has not been described in literature so far. However, this dimple were observed in physical examination. Horseshoe case report shows another hint, that autosomal recessive kidney was detected on ultrasound. Her sister and brother AOS might be associated with a more severe phenotype. also had the similar symptoms. Parents were ﬁrst degree H. Gaspar: None. S. Gallati: None. J. Sanz: None. cousins.Pedigreeanalysisshowedautosomalrecessivetrait. Boththepatientandhersiblingswerediagnosedwith3MC P11.009A syndrome.SequenceanalysisoftheMASP1geneidentiﬁed Unravelling the genetic architecture in an extensive cohort anovelnotpreviouslydescribedmutation.Inthisreport,we of Adams-Oliver syndrome patients344 J.delPicchia J.A. N.Meester1, M.Sukalo2,K. C.Schröder2,D.Schanze2, 1CENTRE FOR DNA FINGERPRINTING AND G.Vandeweyer1,R. Trembath3,L. Van Laer1,B. L.Loeys1, DIAGNOSTICS, HYDERABAD, India, 2Kasturba Medical M.Zenker2,L. Southgate3,4,W.Wuyts1 College, Manipal, India, 3All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India 1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 2Institute of Human Introduction: In human and other mammalian cells, a Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, unique large tRNA multi-synthetase complex organizes 9 Germany,3DivisionofGenetics&MolecularMedicine,King’s cytoplasmic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases consisting of College London, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, bifunctional, aswell asthe monospeciﬁc tRNA synthetases 4Molecular and Clinical Sciences Research Institute, St and 3 non-enzyme factors, namely p43 (AIMP1), p38 George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom (AIMP2) and p18 (AIMP3). The p38/AIMP2 protein is a keycomponentofthemulti-ARScomplexandiscrucialfor Introduction: Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare the assembly of the complex. AIMP1 has been associated developmentaldisorder,characterizedbyscalpaplasiacutis with hypomyelinating leukodystrophy-3 characterized by congenita (ACC) and transverse terminal limb defects progressive neurodegeneration, microcephaly, spasticity, (TTLD).Severalcausativegeneshavebeendiscoveredover coarse facies, progressive contractures, generalized brain recentyears.AutosomaldominantformsofAOSarelinked atrophy and early death. to mutations in ARHGAP31, DLL4, NOTCH1 or RBPJ, Materials andmethods:Weascertained twoconsangui- while DOCK6 and EOGT underlie autosomal recessive neous families with two affected children each with inheritance. Despite these advances, data on the frequency microcephaly, refractory seizures, intellectual disability and distribution of mutations in large cohorts is currently and spastic quadriparesis. Brain MR imaging showed limited. The purpose of this study was to comprehensively atrophyofcerebrum,cerebellumandspinalcord,prominent examine the genetic architecture of AOS in an extensive cisterna magna, symmetric T2 hypointensities in the European cohort. bilateral basal ganglia and thinning of corpus callosum. Material and Methods: Molecular diagnostic screening Whole exome sequencing was carried out on peripheral of a cohort of 194 AOS/ACC/TTLD probands and their leucocyte DNA of the affected individuals from both families was conducted using a combination of custom- families. capture, whole-exome and capillary sequencing analyses. Results: Whole exome sequencing of three affected Results: In total, we identiﬁed 63 likely pathogenic individuals from the two unrelated families revealed mutations, of which 22 were novel, providing a molecular c.105C>A [p.(Tyr35Ter)] variant in homozygous state in diagnosis 30% of patients. In familial cases, the diagnostic AIMP2. The variant is present in a shared homozygous yield was 37%. NOTCH1 is the major contributor, under- region, likely due to a founder effect. lying 10% of AOS/ACC/TTLD cases, with DLL4 (6%), Conclusion: The phenotype of our patients shares DOCK6 (6%), ARHGAP31 (3%), EOGT (3%), and RBPJ marked similarity with that of mutations in closely related (2%) representing additional causality in this cohort. gene, AIMP1. We hereby report the ﬁrst human disease Conclusions: We conﬁrm the relevance of genetic associated with deleterious mutations in AIMP2. screening across the AOS/ACC/TTLD spectrum, high- A. Dalal: None. A. Shukla: None. A. Das Bhowmik: lighting important but limited genotype-phenotype correla- None.M.Hebbar:None. R.Kv: None. G. Km: None.N. tions. The presented cohort offers potential for further in- Gupta: None. depth screening and novel gene identiﬁcation to address missing heritability. P11.011C J.A.N. Meester: None. M. Sukalo: None. K.C. DetectionofasomaticmosaicvariantintheAKT3geneina Schröder: None. D. Schanze: None. G. Vandeweyer: patient with clinical diagnosis of Macrocephaly-Capillary None. R. Trembath: None. L. Van Laer: None. B.L. Malformation Loeys: None. M. Zenker: None. L. Southgate: None. W. Wuyts: None. G.Gordo1,N.Agra1,L. Rodriguez-Laguna1, P.Lapunzina1, M.J. Lindhurst2,L. G.Biesecker2,V. Martinez-Glez1 P11.010B c.105C>A [p.(Tyr35Ter)] in AIMP2 causes microcephaly, 1INGEMM-CIBERER-IdiPaz-Hospital Universitario La Paz, intellectual disability, seizures and spastic quadriparesis Madrid, Spain, 2The National Human Genome Research Institute, US National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, A.DALAL1,A.Shukla2,A.DasBhowmik1,M.Hebbar2,R.KV2, United States G.KM2,N.GUPTA3Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 345 Introduction: Activatinggerm-line andsomatic variantsin Methods: A 14 year old boy was admitted for cardiac AKT3 have been reported in 24 patients with hemi/mega- murmur and fatigue after minor exertion. lencephaly and/or segmental cortical dysplasia. There is Results: The patient had a good general state, with a also one patient reported with a germ-line variant in AKT3 Grade II Aortic and Mitral heart murmur. The ECG and clinically diagnosed with Macrocephaly-Capillary revealed sinus rhythm, slight tachycardia. Echocardiogra- Malformation (MCAP), a syndrome caused by somatic physhowed:aGradeIIAorticandMitralregurgitation.Lab activating PIK3CA variants and included in the PIK3CA tests were normal, without any signs of streptococcal Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS). infection: ASLO, throat swab and blood cultures were Materials and methods: We clinically evaluated one normal. Antibodies for collagen disease were negative. patientwith a diagnosis ofMCAP,and screened by NGS a Therefore we excluded rheumatic fever, endocarditis and series of genes associated to the PI3K-AKT-mTOR path- collagen disease. The particular facial aspect with discrete way in blood, buccal swab and affected tissue samples. exophthalmia of the left eye, coloboma with a particularly Candidate variants were validated by pyrosequencing. shaped pupil and iris anisocorya made us send the patient Results: The AKT3 variant c.863C>T; p.(Thr288Ile) was for an ophthalmic exam, where Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome detected in 24% (59/246) of the readings by NGS in skin was suspected. Recently, mutation of FKHL7 gene was sample, 21% (49/232) in buccal swab, and 1% (5/775) in provedtocausedefectsoftheheartvalves.Genetictestsare blood. The variant is not described in control population, in progress. The patient was discharged after bacterial cancer, or patients with PROS. Clinically, the patient had endocarditis prophylaxis was implemented. macrocephaly, prominent forehead, widely spaced eyes, Conclusions: Usually, Mitral and Aortic valve insufﬁ- capillary malformation in philtrum and right knee, 2-3 ciency is presented in rheumatic fever, bacterial endocardi- cutaneous syndactyly in the feet, hypotonia, lower limb tisorcollagendisease.Inthiscase,afterweexcludedthem, asymmetry, and cerebral anomalies: segmental cortical duetotheeyeinvolvementwithcorectopiapupiloftheiris dysplasia, polymicrogyria, cavum septum pellucidum and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome was the correct diagnose. The cavum vergae, supratentorial ventriculomegaly, and hydro- lackofcasesreportedinliterature,determinedustopresent cephalus. The combination of all these features is this patient. compatible with MCAP. G.S. Doros: None. A. Ardelean: None. A.V. Popoiu: Conclusions: We describe the ﬁrst patient with MCAP None. C.I. Olariu: None. A. Dumitrescu: None. R. and a somatic mosaic variant in AKT3. Functional analysis Stroescu: None. R. Isac: None. M. Gafencu: None. R. is underway. M. Steﬂea: None. G. Gordo: None. N. Agra: None. L. Rodriguez- Laguna: None. P. Lapunzina: None. M.J. Lindhurst: P11.014B None. L.G. Biesecker: None. V. Martinez-Glez: None. Identiﬁcationofanewmutationconﬁrmstheimplicationof IFT27 in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS19) P11.013A Axenfeld-Riegersyndrome-etiologyforMitralandAortic E. Schaefer1,C. Stoetzel1, V.Geoffroy1,L. Mary2, C.Marks3, valve insufﬁciency M.Holder4,J.Ghoumid4, H.Dollfus1,J.Muller1,2 G.S.Doros1,2, A.Ardelean1,2, A.V. Popoiu1,2,C. I.Olariu1,2, 1Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale UMRS_1112, IGMA, A. Dumitrescu2,R. Stroescu1,2,R. Isac1,2,M. Gafencu1,2,R.M. FacultédeMédecine-UDS,Strasbourg,France,2Laboratoire Steﬂea1,2 de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Service des explorations de 1"Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, la fonction visuelle, CHRU Lille, Lille, France, 4Hôpital Timisoara, Romania, 2"Louis Turcanu" Emergency Hospital Jeanne de Flandre, Service de Génétique Clinique, CHRU for Children, Timisoara, Romania Lille, Lille, France Objective: To present a child with features of Axenfeld- Background:Bardet-BiedlSyndrome(BBS;MIM209900) Rieger syndrome, initially suspected of rheumatic fever is a recessive and genetically heterogeneous ciliopathy carditis. Although rare, Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is an characterizedbypostaxialpolydactyly,retinitispigmentosa, autsomal dominat disease, known to be associated with obesity, hypogonadism, cognitive impairment and kidney valvular and other cardiac disease. When the PITX gene is dysfunction. At the time of this study, 21 BBS genes were involved, malformations of several different organs is identiﬁed,withthelastreportedonesbeingfoundinoneor possible. very few families.346 J.delPicchia Methods and Results: Exome sequencing was per- Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark, 8West Midlands Regional formed in a child presenting with typical BBS features Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom, (retinitis pigmentosa, postaxial polydactyly of four extre- 9Beckwith–Wiedemann Support Group UK, Dorset, United mities, brachydactyly, obesity, hypogonadism with micro- Kingdom, 1010Italian Association of Beckwith–Wiedemann penis, cognitive impairment, neurosensorial deafness and syndrome (AIBWS), Vergiate, Italy, 11Bologna University, atrioventricular septal defect) as no mutations were Bologna, United Kingdom, 12Aix-Marseille Univ et Assistance identiﬁed in known BBS genes by different molecular Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille (APHM),, Marseille, France, approaches (Sanger Sequencing of BBS1, BBS10 and 13Pediatric Orthopaedic Unit IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, BBS12; Targeted High-Throughput Sequencing including Milan, Italy, 14Sidra Medical and Research Center, Doha, BBS1toBBS16genes).TwomutationswerefoundinIFT27 Qatar, 15Southmead Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 16The gene (NM_ 006860: c.[107A>G];[352+1G>T], p. Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, [Tyr36Cys];[?]). Familial segregation was consistent with 17Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 18Royal autosomal recessive inheritance as each parent carried one Manchester Children’s Hospital, Manchester, United mutation. Functional studies on ﬁbroblast cells of the Kingdom, 19CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en patient showed that the c.352+1G>T mutation led to the Red de Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain, 20University of exon 5 skipping. IFT27 mutations have been already Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 21Regina Margherita Children’s reportedonceinaconsanguineousBBSfamily(Aldahmesh Hospital, Turin, Italy, 22Hôpitaux Universitaires de et al., 2014) with a typical presentation (obesity, mild Strasbourg, Strasburg, France, 23Istituto Auxologico Italiano, intellectual disability, polydactyly of all extremities, renal Milan, Italy, 24Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, failure, retinitis pigmentosa and hypogenitalism). London,UnitedKingdom,25StGeorge’sUniversityofLondon, Conclusions: This is the second report of IFT27 London, United Kingdom, 26San Paolo University Hospital, mutations in BBS patients conﬁrming IFT27 as a BBS Milan, Italy, 27Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, gene(BBS19).Thisreportconﬁrmedalsotheimplicationof Denmark, 28ohannes Gutenberg University Medical Center, IFT-pathway in BBS pathogenesis as previously reported Mainz, Germany, 29Technical University of Aachen, Aachen, with mutations in IFT27 and secondarily in IFT172 Germany, 30University of Southampton, Southampton, United (Bujakowska et al., 2015). Kingdom, 31University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Caserta, E. Schaefer: None. C. Stoetzel: None. V. Geoffroy: Naples, Italy None. L. Mary: None. C. Marks: None. M. Holder: None. J. Ghoumid: None. H. Dollfus: None. J. Beckwith-Wiedemannsyndrome(BWS),ahumangenomic Muller: None. imprinting disorder, is characterised by phenotypic varia- bility that might include overgrowth, macroglossia, P11.015C abdominalwalldefects,neonatalhypoglycaemia,lateralized International consensus group statement on Beckwith- overgrowth and predisposition to embryonal tumours. Wiedemann syndrome Delineation of the molecular defects within the imprinted 11p15.5regioncanpredictfamilialrecurrencerisksandthe E.R.Maher1,F.Brioude2,J.M.Kalish3,A.Mussa4,A.Foster5, risk (and type) of embryonal tumour. Despite recent J.Bliek6,G.B. Ferrero4,S.Boonen7,T. Cole8,R. Baker9, advances inknowledge, there is marked heterogeneity in M.Bertoletti10,G.Cocchi11, C.Coze12,M.De Pellegrin13, clinical diagnostic criteria and care. An international con- K. Hussain14,A.Ibrahim15,M. D.Kilby5,M. Krajewska- sensus group agreed upon 72 recommendations for the Walasek16,C.P.Kratz17,E.J.Ladusans18,P.Lapunzina19,Y.Le clinical andmolecular diagnosis and management ofBWS, Bouc2,S. Maas6, F.Macdonald8,K. Õunap20,L. Peruzzi21, including comprehensive protocols for the molecular S.Rossignol22,S.Russo23,C.Shipster24,A.Skórka16,K.Tatton- investigation, care and treatment of patients from the pre- Brown25,J.Tenorio19,C.Tortora26,K.Grønskov27,I.Netchine2, natal periodto adulthood. The consensusrecommendations R. C.Hennekam6, D.Prawitt28,Z. Tümer27,T. Eggermann29, apply to patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum D.J.G.Mackay30,A. Riccio31 (BWSp), covering classical BWS without a molecular diagnosis and BWS-relatedphenotypes with an 11p15.5 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, molecular anomaly. The consensus group recommended a 2Sorbonne Université, Pierre and Marie Curie-Paris VI tumour surveillance programme targeted by molecular University (UPMC) Université, Paris, France, 3Children’s subgroups (though it recognised that surveillance might Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, differ according to the local health-care system e.g. in 4University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 5University of United States) and the results of targeted and universal Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6University of surveillance should be evaluated prospectively. Interna- Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Zealand University tional collaboration,including a prospective audit of theAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 347 results ofimplementingtheconsensusrecommendations,is nor described in scientiﬁc literature, but considering its required to expand the evidence base for the design of position and type it is considered likely pathogenetic. optimum care pathways Conclusion: We report a further case of BOS with a E.R. Maher: None. F. Brioude: None. J.M. Kalish: novel mutation in ASXL1 gene. Our case enlarges the None. A. Mussa: None. A. Foster: None. J. Bliek: None. knowledge about the clinical and molecular data of BOS G.B.Ferrero:None.S.Boonen:None.T.Cole:None.R. and conﬁrms the previously reported genotype-phenotype Baker: None. M. Bertoletti: None. G. Cocchi: None. C. correlation.Weareperformingfunctionalstudiesaboutthis Coze: None. M. De Pellegrin: None. K. Hussain: None. mutation in order to discover if the RNA transcript is A. Ibrahim: None. M.D. Kilby: None. M. Krajewska- degraded. Walasek:None.C.P.Kratz:None.E.J.Ladusans:None. F. Guidolin: None. A.M. Spinelli: None. F. Faletra: P. Lapunzina: None. Y. Le Bouc: None. S. Maas: None. None. M. Faleschini: None. I. Bruno: None. P. Magini: F.Macdonald:None.K.Õunap:None.L.Peruzzi:None. None. A. Fabretto: None. P. Gasparini: None. S. Rossignol: None. S. Russo: None. C. Shipster: None. A. Skórka: None. K. Tatton-Brown: None. J. Tenorio: P11.017A None. C. Tortora: None. K. Grønskov: None. I. Efﬁcient CrispR/Cas9-based nucleotide editing to model Netchine: None. R.C. Hennekam: None. D. Prawitt: cardiovascular anomalies of Cantú syndrome in zebraﬁsh None. Z. Tümer: None. T. Eggermann: None. D.J.G. Mackay: None. A. Riccio: None. H.I.Roessler1,F. Tessadori2,S. M.Savelberg1,J. Bakkers2, M.M.van Haelst3,G.vanHaaften1 P11.016D Myopia, developmental delay and a new mutation in 1Department of Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, ASXL1: a case report of Bohring-Opitz syndrome University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Centre F. Guidolin1,A. M.Spinelli2, F.Faletra3,M.Faleschini3, Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical I.Bruno3,P. Magini3,A. Fabretto3, P.Gasparini3 Genetics, Amsterdam Medical Center and Free University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands 1University of Padova -Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2University of Padova - Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3I.R.C. Cantú Syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by C.S. Brulo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in genes encoding the pore-forming (Kir6.1, KCNJ8) and regulatory (SUR2, Introduction: Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) is a rare ABCC9) subunits of an ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) syndrome characterized by intrauterine growth retardation, channel. CS is characterized by facial anomalies, hyper- poor feeding, profound mental retardation, trigonocephaly, trichosis, extensive cardiac abnormalities and dilated cere- dysmorphismsandatypicalposturewithelbowﬂexionand bral blood vessels. CS is debilitating with no speciﬁc wrist deviation. Only 30 cases have been reported and 20 therapy available. Hence, we applied a novel CrispR/Cas9- mutations were found. Based on these cases, diagnostic based genome editing approach to create CS zebraﬁsh criteria have been set up for clinical diagnosis. models for therapeutic drug screening. Casereport.Ourpatientisa2-year-oldboy,bornatterm We efﬁciently introduced three CS-speciﬁc point muta- to healthy, non-consanguineous Caucasian parents. During tions in abbc9 and kcnj8 of zebraﬁsh by combining the thepregnancy,avesicoureteralreﬂuxwasfound. Thepost- CrispR/Cas9 system with a short template oligonucleotide natal history was charachterized by: profound neurodeve- harboring the site of mutation. To demonstrate functional lopment delay and failure to thrive (height on the 10th validity, we performed live high-speed video-imaging of centile, weight and HC below the 3rd centile); severe zebraﬁsh heart and cardinal vein to assess cardiovascular myopia (diagnosed at three months); microcephaly and function at 5 days post fertilization. Additionally, cerebral trigonocephaly; hypertelorism, upslanting palpebral ﬁs- blood vessels were examined for dilations in live kcnj8 sures, exophthalmus, ﬂat nasal bridge, forehead nevus mutants in a Tg(kdrl:GFP) transgenic background. ﬂammeusandBOSposture.Theseﬁndingsledtoaclinical Analogous to CS patients, knock-in ﬁsh reveal signiﬁ- diagnosis of BOS. In agreement with the clinical data, the cantly enlarged ventricles with enhanced cardiac output, analysis of the ASXL1 gene (NM_015338.5) revealed a de contractility and development of pericardial edema. A novoframeshiftmutation(c.4127dupG,p.Pro1377Serfs*3). signiﬁcantly reduced vein blood ﬂow velocity can be This mutation was not previously reported on the online associated with diminished vascular tone reported in databases for healthy (dbSnp, 1000g, ESP6500, Exac, patients. Additionally, kcnj8 mutant ﬁsh display distinct gnomAD) and affected (HGMD professional) individuals348 J.delPicchia cerebral vasodilation in a structure resembling the human mutations in the terminal part of the protein are more circle of Willis. severe and penetrant. Accordingly, the transcriptional We developed a novel technique to establish CS-speciﬁc dysfunction occurs with the mutations associated with zebraﬁsh that closely model cardiovascular features and syndromic and severe CCHS. therefore open the possibility of phenotyping-based drug Conclusions: our classiﬁcation is useful for the genetic screening potentially repurposing sulfonylureas already counselling and our data show that the functional clinically applied to inhibit GOF KATP channels involved differences among the mutations belonging to different in neonatal diabetes. Consequently, future studies in our frame subgroups are the underlying cause of the ANS model will improve understanding and clinical disorders associated with CCHS. management of CS. Funded by: Telethon Foundation (GGP13055), AIRC E-Rare grant I-2101-B26 (No. 11501), Associazione Italiana per la Sindrome da H.I. Roessler: None. F. Tessadori: None. S.M. Savel- Ipoventilazione Centrale Congenita (A.I.S.I.C.C.). berg: None. J. Bakkers: None. M.M. van Haelst: None. S. Di Lascio: None. R. Benfante: None. E. Di Zanni: G. van Haaften: None. None.S.Cardani:None.A.Adamo:None.D.Fornasari: None. I. Ceccherini: None. T. Bachetti: None. P11.018B Structural and functional differences in PHOX2B P11.020D frameshift mutations underlie isolated or syndromic NeuroradiologicabnormalitiesinCHARGEsyndromeand congenital central hypoventilation syndrome guidelines for cranial imaging S. DiLascio1,R. Benfante1,2,E. DiZanni3, S.Cardani1, C.M.deGeus1,2,R.H.Free3,1,B.M.Verbist4,5,L.C.Meiners6,1, A. Adamo3, D.Fornasari1, I.Ceccherini3, T. Bachetti3 C. M.A. vanRavenswaaij-Arts2,1 1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Medicine, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, Groningen, Centre of Expertise for CHARGE syndrome, 2CNR- Neuroscience Institute, Milan, Italy, 3UOC Genetica Groningen,Netherlands, 2University of Groningen,University Medica, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen,Netherlands, 3University of Groningen,University Introduction: heterozygous mutations in the PHOX2B Medical Center Groningen, Department of gene cause congenital central hypoventilation syndrome Otorhinolaryngology, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Leiden (CCHS), characterised by defective autonomic control of University Medical Center, Department of Radiology, Leiden, breathing. CCHS can be isolated or syndromic (i.e., asso- Netherlands, 5Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, ciated with other autonomic dysfunctions such as Hirsch- Department of Radiology, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6University sprung disease (HSCR) and neuroblastoma (NB)). Among of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, PHOX2B mutations, polyalanine expansions are mostly department of Radiology, Groningen, Netherlands associated with isolated CCHS, whereas frameshift muta- tions (FS) with syndromic CCHS. Our study aimed at Introduction: CHARGE syndrome is a rare congenital identifyingthemolecularmechanismsunderlyinggenotype- malformation syndrome (6 per 100,000 newborns) with phenotype correlations and the predisposition to the severe high and variable comorbidity. As a result, clinicians may associated diseases. struggle to provide comprehensive care. As patients with Materials and methods: PHOX2B FS mutations identi- CHARGE are at risk for peri-anesthetic complications, it is ﬁedsofarwereclassiﬁedintermsofframechange,protein paramount to combine necessary imaging procedures. To translation, inheritance and clinical associations. Further- enable efﬁcient and high quality imaging, we used recom- more,weanalysedthefunctionaleffectsofFSmutationsin mendations from literature and data from our CHARGE terms of promoter transactivation of the genes involved in cohort to propose a guideline for cranial imaging in autonomic nervous system (ANS) development and the CHARGE syndrome. Methods: We evaluated MRIs of 38 pathogenesis of HSCR and NB. CHARGEpatients.Additionally,weperformedastructured Results: the type and the position of translational frame literature review to examine all existing advice regarding affecttheproteinstructure,thepredispositiontoHSCRand/ cranial imaging. or NB, and pattern of inheritance: the majority of inherited Results: mutations occur upstream the polyalanine region, andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 349 genehemizygosity(potentialtoproducephenotypewhen NeuroradiologicabnormalitiesinCHARGEcohort hemizygous) Vestibularsystema/dysplasia 100% (2) Clivusabnormalities 84% genesuprazygosity(potentialtoproducephenotypewhen Olfactorysystema/hypoplasia 76% duplicated) Cerebellarabnormalities(vermishypoplasia,foliation 53% (3) defects,other) phenotypehemizygosity(regionsassociatedwithspeciﬁc Widelateralventricles 30% haploinsufﬁcient phenotypes) Frontalhypoplasia 27% (4) abnormalitiesofcorpuscallosum(n=2),of incidental phenotypesuprazygosity(regionsassociatedwithspeciﬁc myelinisation(n=2),ofgyrationpattern(n=4), (<15%) excess phenotypes) hippocampalmalrotation(n=3) GeneClassiﬁcation #Hemizygous #Suprazygous Recommended imaging from literature comprises a temporalboneCTandMRIofthebrain,labyrinth,olfactory Noclinicaleffect 156 147 structures, pituitary gland and basiocciput. Riskfactor 17 5 Conclusions: Cranial abnormalities are very common in Conditional 45 1 CHARGE syndrome and may aid in diagnosis or require Lowpenetrance 8 1 specialized treatment. We propose an imaging protocol in Causal 15 1 whichwerecommendcombiningatemporalboneCTanda Lethal 0 0 comprehensive MRI in 3 directions and describe dedicated Unknown 23 108 sequences to assess abnormalities seen in CHARGE PhenotypeClassiﬁcation #Hemizygous #Suprazygous syndrome. Non-dosagemechanism 3 3 Grants: CHARGE syndrome foundation pilot grant and LowPenetrance 37 3 personal UMCG grant Causal 12 2 C.M. de Geus: None. R.H. Free: None. B.M. Verbist: Lethal 2 0 None. L.C. Meiners: None. C.M.A. van Ravenswaaij- Unknown 25 25 Arts: None. P11.021A These classiﬁcations are reﬁned and updated as new data Medical management of chromosome 18 abnormalities become available. This tool will help cliniciansquickly sift through the data available on each of the genes on J.D.Cody1,M. Hasi-Zogaj1, P.Heard1,A. Hill1, D.Rupert1, chromosome 18, determine their relevance, and formulate C. Sebold1, B.Soileau1,D.Hale2 an appropriate screening and management plan for individuals with chromosome 18 conditions. Supported by 1University of Texas Health Science Center at San Anotnio, the Chromosome 18 Registry & Research Society. SanAntonio,TX,UnitedStates,2PennStateMiltonS.Hershey J.D. Cody: None. M. Hasi-Zogaj: None. P. Heard: Medical Center, Hershey, PA, United States None. A. Hill: None. D. Rupert: None. C. Sebold: None. B. Soileau: None. D. Hale: None. Management of genetic conditions is complicated by vari- able expression and penetrance. These factors are com- P11.022B pounded in the case of chromosome abnormalities, making Maternaluniparentaldisomy22haspossibleimpactonthe binary designations such as “pathogenic” and “benign” phenotype: A case report and literature review wholly insufﬁcient to inform management of these condi- tions. When assessing the potential implications of copy M.Zelinová,J. Drábová,M.Malíková, D.Novotná, number variants involving multiple genes, clinicians must M.Turnovec, M.Macek jr.,M.Havlovicová quickly assess which genes are most relevant and what the likelihood is of each of the associated ﬁndings in order to Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles devise appropriate management and screening recommen- University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech dations. With this end in mind, we have developed a set of Republic annotated maps designed as four separate and customized tracks on the UCSC Genome Browser: Introduction: Only several cases of uniparental disomy of (1) chromosome 22 (UPD 22) were published, thus far.350 J.delPicchia Majority of reported patients did not have typical clinical establishing the accurate molecular diagnosis. This study features, with the exception of two cases, who both had a aims to improve the diagnostic yield by employing whole- ventricular septal defect (VSD). exome sequencing (WES) to study the potential genetic MaterialandMethods:Wepresentanewborngirl,who causes in patients that clinically resemble a ciliopathy was born after ﬁrst pregnancy of a 40 years old healthy phenotype. mother. The pregnancy had been monitored due to high Materials and methods: WES was performed in 166 levels of serum free-hCG detected during antenatal screen- unrelatedpatientswithaclinicalphenotypesuspectedtobe ing and intrauterine growth retardation of the fetus. The a ciliopathy. In a ﬁrst step, single-nucleotide and copy- childwasbornat34weeksofgestationwithbirthweightof number variants (CNVs) were analyzed within 140 known 1490 g. Cardiologic examination revealed VSD and the ciliopathy-related genes. Subsequently, exome-wide analy- child exhibits facial dysmorphism comprising broad nasal sis was offered in unsolved cases. bridge, low set dysplastic ears and preauricular pits. Results: Analysis of the ciliopathy-gene panel revealed Nonetheless, postnatal neurologic-, ophthalmologic- and likely causative variants in 42 highly suspicious ciliopathy otoacoustic emission examinations did not reveal any other patients (diagnostic yield 25%), which included CNVs in abnormalities. A full trisomy 22 in placental tissue was BBS1 and EVC. Exome-wide analysis revealed a diagnosis detected, while examination of peripheral blood revealed in 19 additional patients (11%), in whom there was often a karyotype46,XXwithnoevidenceoftrisomy22.Maternal moderately high suspicion for a ciliopathy. This resulted in UPD 22 was conﬁrmed in follow up cytogenetic a total diagnostic yield of 37%. Furthermore, various examination. potentially relevant mutations were identiﬁed in an addi- Conclusions:Basedonliteraturereview,andconsidering tional 51 patients (potential total yield up to 67%). This the presence of VSD, dysmorphic features in our case, low included various interesting candidate genes including frequency(andeventuallytissuespeciﬁc)trisomy22isstill KCTD3, DNHD1, and KIF14. possible. Clinical ﬁndings of our patient with full placental Conclusions: In conclusion, WES analysis has a trisomy 22 and maternal UPD 22 in lymphocytes will be diagnostic yield of 37% in patients suspected to have a discussed and compared to previously published cases. ciliopathy. Moreover, various interesting candidate genes Supported by MH CZ-DRO (FNM, 00064203) and were identiﬁed, that could potentially increase the yield to CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. upto67%.ThisindicatesthatWESstartingwithciliopathy M. Zelinová: None. J. Drábová: None. M. Malíková: gene panel analysis followed by exome-wide analysis is a None.D.Novotná:None.M.Turnovec:None.M.Macek powerfuldiagnostictoolforidentifyingthegeneticcausein jr.: None. M. Havlovicová: None. these patients. A.T. Vulto-van Silfhout: None. E.A. Faqeih: None. C. P11.023C E.M. de Die-Smulders: None. E.K. Vanhoutte: None. J. Whole-exome sequencing in patients suspected to have M. Cobben: None. E.A.M. Cornelissen: None. J. ciliary disorders has a high diagnostic yield and reveals Schoots: None. M.M. Oud: None. R. Roepman: None. novel candidate genes D. Lugtenberg: None. E.M.H.F. Bongers: None. A. T.Vulto-van Silfhout1,E. A. Faqeih2,C. E.M.deDie- P11.024D Smulders3,E. K.Vanhoutte3,J.M. Cobben4,E.A.M. Analysis ofRUNX2mutations in four Turkish patients with Cornelissen5,J. Schoots1,M.M.Oud1,R. Roepman1, Cleidocranial Dysplasia D.Lugtenberg1,E. M.H.F. Bongers1 E. Mihci1,B. N.Güzel2,A. Toylu3,V. Karaman4,A.R. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical Aghayev4,Z. O.Uyguner4 center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatric Subspecialties,Children’sHospital,KingFahadMedicalCity, 1Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Pediatrics Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, SchoolofMedicineDepartmentofPediatrics,Antalya,Turkey, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical 3AkdenizUniversitySchoolofMedicineDepartmentofMedical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatrics, Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Istanbul Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, SchoolofMedicineDepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Istanbul, Netherlands Turkey Introduction: Ciliopathies are clinically and genetically Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is a rare skeletal dysplasia highly heterogeneous conditions, which challenges that presents with classic triad of delayed closure of theAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 351 cranial sutures, hypoplastic or aplastic clavicles and dental matchingtheclinicalstudiesandtheriskoftype2diabetes. abnormalities. The frequency of CCD is one in 1.000.000 We also showed that VPS13B deﬁcient cells have a dis- and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with organized Golgi apparatus, which is associated to a strong mutations in RUNX2 gene. It is reported that 65% of the defect in protein glycosylation. Furthermore, absence of mutations occur de novo, though gonadal mosaicism in early endosome and presence of enlarged lysosomes sug- either parent could not be ruled out. Diagnosis of CDC is gest a crucial role of VPS13B in endosomal-lysosomal based on the typical clinical and radiographic ﬁndings trafﬁcking. All these results allowed us to edit new clinical supported by determined heterozygous pathogenic variant recommendations for the CS patients’ follow-up and will in RUNX2. In this presentation, we report four Turkish help us to understand other CS symptoms such as retino- children presented with classical ﬁndings ofCCD and their pathy and neutropenia that we are now exploring. molecular genetic test results.Two patients had missense L. Duplomb: None. R. Da Costa: None. V. Lhussiez: (c.569G>A,p.R190;c.577C>G,p.R193G),onepatienthad None. S. El Chehadeh-Djebbar: None. C. Thauvin- novel frame shift(c.443_445delTACCAGATGGGAinsG; Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None. p.V148Gfs*9) and one patient had gross deletion of exons 6-9. The aim of the present report is to increase the P11.026B awareness of CCD and discuss genotype and phenotype Complex chromosomal rearrangement associated to correlation. premature ovarian failure E.Mihci:None.B.N.Güzel: None.A.Toylu: None.V. Karaman: None. A.R. Aghayev: None. Z.O. A. Di-Battista1, M.Moyses-Oliveira1,V. Cabral1, Uyguner: None. D.Christofolini2, C.Kao3,F. Mafra3, M.Gonzalez3, R.Pellegrino3,A.Reymond4,H.Hakonarson3,M.I.Melaragno1 P11.025A Identiﬁcationofclinicalandfunctionaldisordersassociated 1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, to VPS13B mutations in Cohen Syndrome 2Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Santo André, Brazil, 3Children'sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,United L. Duplomb1,R. DaCosta1,V. Lhussiez1,S. El Chehadeh- States, 4University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Djebbar2,C. Thauvin-Robinet1,3, L.Faivre1,3 Correct molecular characterization at nucleotide resolution 1INSERM 1231 GAD, Université Bourgogne- Franche Comté, in complex rearrangements is an important strategy to ﬁnd Dijon, France, 2Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de genetic mechanisms associated with the patients’ pheno- Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 3Centre de Génétique et types. We describe a female patient, with secondary ame- Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et norrhea,areciprocaltranslocationbetweenchromosomesX SyndromesMalformatifs,FHUTRANSLAD,Hôpitald'Enfants, and 2, and two ~200 kb gains from material of both chro- Dijon, France mosomes involved in rearrangement. Breakpoints were mapped by 10x Genomics Chromium technology, a NGS- Cohensyndrome(CS)isarareautosomalrecessivedisorder based method using linked reads, combined to library pre- caused by mutations in the VPS13B gene, which encodes a parationandtargetenrichmentusingapremiumbaitdesign protein of the Golgi apparatus membrane. Intellectual (Agilent SureSelect) containing “bridging baits”, enriched deﬁciency,retinopathy,abnormalfatdistributionaroundthe for exonic regions. Translocation breakpoints were vali- waist,andneutropeniaareCSmainclinicalfeatures.Forthe dated at nucleotide level by low-coverage whole genome last 10 years, thanks to clinical and functional studies, we sequencing. Our results suggest a complex rearrangement focused on the improvement of CS diagnosis and patients’ structure, including a tandem duplication in the transloca- follow-up.Clinicalstudiesallowedustoshowthatbetween tion junction at the derivative X-chromosome. The SEPT6 2 and 6 years old, CS children already present with typical gene was found disrupted at one of the X-chromosome facialfeatures,whichcanhelptoshiftthediagnosistowards breakpoints. SEPT6 is coexpressed with genes related to CS. We also demonstrated that patients have a high risk of oocyte maturation during metaphase II, and the X- developing type II diabetes and cardiovascular diseases, as chromosome gain encompasses two genes (RPL39 and 70% of them have low HDL level. Functional studies UPF3B) highly expressed in the ovarian tissue, that could demonstratedthatVPS13Binvalidationleadstoaccelerated bealsorelatedtothephenotype.However,SEPT6knockout adipocyte differentiation, consequent to an increased mice’s phenotype does not include subfertility, so its response of cells to insulin stimulation. Later fat-full pathogenicity could not be conﬁrmed. Nevertheless, other VPS13B deﬁcient cells (CS ﬁbroblasts or VPS13B-invali- mechanisms, as position effect and TAD disruptions, could daded by siRNA technology) became resistant to insulin, be related tothe premature ovarian failure found in patient.352 J.delPicchia Thus, the junction point sequencing at nucleotide level reported as the causative gene of the autosomal dominant provided detailed information about pathogenic mechan- Skraban-Deardorffsyndrome(SKDEAS,OMIM#617616), isms possibly related to ovarian development and function. with clinical features that almost completely overlap the The improvement of linked-reads sequencing technologies 1q41q42 microdeletion syndrome. WDR26 is WDR can facilitate rearrangements elucidation, representing domain-containingproteinpresumablyinvolvedinmultiple remarkable advancement for cytogenomics research and disease-associated signalling pathways. The 3p25.3 break- clinical diagnostics. point disrupts IVS 1 of the ATP2B2 (OMIM *108733), Financial support: FAPESP#2016/22860-0; Children’s reported as a modiﬁer of the autosomal recessive deafness- Hospital of Philadelphia/Center Applied Genomics. 12 (DFNB12, OMIN #601386). The proband’s clinical A. Di-Battista: None. M. Moyses-Oliveira: None. V. features basically conﬁrm the phenotypic overlaps between Cabral: None. D. Christofolini: None. C. Kao: None. F. SKDEAS and the 1q41q42 microdeletion syndrome. In Mafra: None. M. Gonzalez: None. R. Pellegrino: None. conclusion, disruption of WDR26 by the 1q42.11 break- A. Reymond: None. H. Hakonarson: None. M.I. point most likely leads to its haploinsufﬁciency due to Melaragno: None. nonsense mediated RNA decay, resulting in a complex clinical phenotype, basically matching both SKDEAS and P11.027C the 1q41q42 microdeletion syndrome. Therefore, we con- Disruption of WDR26 by a translocation breakpoint ﬁrmitsmajorcausativeroleinthesephenocopysyndromes. conﬁrmsitscausalroleinSkraban-Deardorffand1q41q42 Research grant: FCT HMSP-ICT/0016/2013. microdeletion syndromes J.Freixo:None.M.Marques:None.J.Fino:None.M. E. Talkowski: None. C.C. Morton: None. D. J.Freixo1,M. Marques2, J.Fino2,M.E. Talkowski3,4,5,C.C. David: None. Morton4,5,6,7, D.David2 P11.028D 1Central Lisbon Hospital Center, Lisbon, Portugal, Genotype-phenotype correlations in six patients carrying 2Department of Human Genetics, National Institute of Health two large CNVs: A two-hit model as one of the possible Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Center for Human explanations for phenotypic variability in genomic Genetic Research, Departments of Neurology, Pathology and disorders Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United V. Cejnova1,L. Liskova1,L. Vancova1,V.Harmas1,M.Fiser2, States,5BroadInstituteofMITandHarvard,Cambridge,MA, M.Soukupova1,A. Peckova1, J.Lastuvkova1 United States, 6Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, and of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 1Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad MA, United States, 7University of Manchester, Manchester Labem, Department of Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Academic Health Science Center, Manchester, United Czech Republic, 2GENVIA, Prague, Czech Republic Kingdom Genomic rearrangements represent an important source of Microdeletions or contiguous gene syndromes (CGSs) are genetic variability. Rare, recurrent copy-number variants characterized by variable complex clinical phenotypes (CNVs) of pathogenic signiﬁcance, termed genomic dis- caused by hemizygosity of contiguous genes, deﬁned orders,wereidentiﬁedinpersonswithacharacteristicsetof mainly by a common deletion region, or of a major causal clinically recognizable features. gene locus. Identiﬁcation of breakpoints at nucleotide However, some CNVs are associated with genomic resolution of balanced chromosomal rearrangements loca- disorders with extreme phenotypic heterogeneity. For lizedwithintheseCGSregionsconstitutesakeystrategyfor example, 16p11.2 deletion has been associated with deﬁnitionofthephenotypicallyimportantgenes.Theaimof intellectual disability, obesity, schizophrenia, and 1% of this study is the identiﬁcation of molecular alterations sporadic cases of autism. Girirajan and Eichler (2010) responsible for an extremely complex clinical phenotype proposeda‘two-hit’modelinwhichaﬁrsthit(e.g.16p12.1 resembling 1q41q42 microdeletion syndrome (coarse facial deletions) in concert with a secondary hit (e.g. genetic, features, severe developmental delay, congenital heart dis- epigenetic or environmental insult) results ina more severe ease and congenital microcephaly) presented by an indivi- phenotype. dual with a t(1;3)(q42.11;p25.3)dn. Translocation We present genotype-phenotype correlations in six breakpoints were localized and conﬁrmed by large-insert patients carrying two large CNVs known to be associated whole-genome and Sanger sequencing, respectively. The with a genomic disorder or potentially associated with 1q42.11 breakpoint disrupts exon 12 of WDR26, recently disease. Array CGH revealed one large deletion (1,7 MbAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 353 15q13.2q13.3 deletion, 2,9 Mb 13q21.1q21.2 deletion, 7,8 short sentences, and 9/110 (8.2%) are capable of reading Mb5q14.3q15deletion,4,8Mb15q11.2q13.1deletion,1,3 and writing. Mb 17p12 deletion, 2,6 Mb 22q11.2 deletion) in all six Conclusion: The questionnaire was a pioneer in CDLS patients. As additional CNVs we identiﬁed: 506 kb patients and this study provides better understanding of the intragenic duplication of CNTN4 gene, 2 Mb clinical aspects of the disease, improving health assistance. 13q21.33q22.1 deletion, 1,6 Mb 16p13.11 deletion, 445 Half patients were ﬁrst-born child, reinforcing the impor- kb deletion of CHRNA7 gene, 452 kb 15q11.2 duplication tance of genetic counselling. and 1,7 Mb 16p13.11 duplication). All ﬁndings were V.E.H. Kim: None. I. Furquim: None. J.R.M. Ceroni: conﬁrmed by FISH and we also investigated the parental None.P.H.S. Castro: None.C.Olivati:None. C.Berlim: origin of chromosomal rearrangements. None. D.M.B. Lopes: None. L. Pimenta: None. R.S. Inoursixcases,thesecondhitswereinheritedmaternally Honjo: None. D.R. Bertola: None. C.A. Kim: None. or were de novo, and more often noted in phenotypically variable diagnoses than syndromic disorders. In summary, P11.030B additional CNVs can act as genetic modiﬁers, which may DrosophilamelanogasterasamodeltostudyWNTpathway contributetothevariablephehotypesofgenomicdisorders. alteration in Cornelia de Lange Syndrome V. Cejnova: None. L. Liskova: None. L. Vancova: None.V.Harmas:None.M.Fiser:None.M.Soukupova: P.Grazioli1,A.Selicorni2,C.Gervasini1,T.Vaccari1,V.Massa1 None. A. Peckova: None. J. Lastuvkova: None. 1Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2ASST P11.029A Lariana, Como, Italy Phenotype Assessment of a Brazilian Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CDLS) cohort Introduction:CorneliadeLangesyndrome(CdLS)isarare genetic disorder affecting neurodevelopment, gastro- V. E.H.Kim, I.Furquim, J.R. M.Ceroni, P. H.S. Castro, intestinal and musculoskeletal systems. CdLS is caused by C.Olivati,C.Berlim, D.M.B.Lopes,L.Pimenta,R.S.Honjo, mutations within NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21, or D.R. Bertola,C. A.Kim HDAC8genes.Thesegenescodifyforthecohesincomplex, a multiprotein structure playing a role in chromatid adhe- Instituto da Criança, São Paulo, Brazil sion, DNA repair and gene expression regulation. It has been demonstrated that a strong correlation exists between Introduction: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CDLS) is a cohesincomplexfunctionandWNTsignalling.Recently,it rare genetic disorder caused by mutations in ﬁve different has been observed that chemical activation of the WNT genes (NIPBL, SMC1A, HDAC8, SMC3, RAD21). The pathway in nipblb-loss-of-function zebraﬁsh embryos and disorder has a wide clinical variabilty, thus our objective is in NIPBL-mutated patient ﬁbroblasts rescued the adverse to assess the characteristics of 110 Brazilian patients. phenotype. Both embryos and ﬁbroblasts present similar Materials and methods: A questionnaire was ﬁlled by patternsofcanonicalWNTpathwayalterationsandCCND1 parents from the Brazilian CDLS association. downregulation. Results: Maternal age at conception varied from 15 to Materials and methods: Drosophila melanogaster is an 42y (mean 27.4 y) and 50% were the ﬁrst-born child. 42/ inexpensive model to study CdLS and to screen in vivo for 110 (38.2%) had clinical intercurrence during pregnancy. therapeutic compounds. Therefore, we have selected ﬂy 73/110(66.4%)werebornbyc-section,and47/110(42.8%) strains mutated in nipped-B and hdac3 genes (respectively were premature. Birth weight varied from 643 to 3740g NIPBL and HDAC8 in humans) for assessing the existing (mean 2126g) and birth lenght from 28 to 51cm (mean correlation between cohesin complex and WNT pathway 42.6cm). The age of clinical diagnosis varied from birth to andtoscreenforchemicalsthatreverttheCdLSassociated- 38y (mean 1.98 y, median 0.5 y). The current age varies phenotypes efﬁciently. from 1 mo to 43 y (mean 11.2y, median 8y). The main Results:Wehaveconﬁrmedthatmutatedﬂiesweight5% clinical ﬁndings are synophris (88.2%), feeding diﬁculties less than wild type. Moreover, we have tested lithium (81.1%), hypertrichosis (76.4%), short stature (72.7%), chloride (LiCl) as WNT activator, demonstrating that gastrointestinal malformations (65.5%), heart anomalies 250mM is the highest concentration tolerated. (36.4%) and limb defects (33.6%). All patients presented Conclusions:Hence,we hypothesize that WNT pathway neurologicdevelopmentaldelay,and73.6%alsohadmotor activation could improve mutant phenotype. We will be developmental delay. 76/110 (69.1%) have listening testing different doses of LiCl and other WNT activator to comprehension and 44/110 (40%) have speaking ability. assess whether some of those chemical compounds could 22/110 (20%) are capable of using words, 22/110 (20%) revert the syndrome-associated phenotype.354 J.delPicchia Grants: This work has been supported by Fondazione M. Pollazzon: None. I. Ivanovski: None. S.G. Carafﬁ: Cariplo, grant 2015-0783 to Valentina Massa. None. T.M. Strom: None. I. Parenti: None. F.J. Kaiser: P. Grazioli: None. A. Selicorni: None. C. Gervasini: None. L. Garavelli: None. None. T. Vaccari: None. V. Massa: None. P11.032D P11.031C Genetic and neuroradiological clinical correlations in Cri Patient with a novel variant in CREBBP exon 31 and Du Chat syndrome without a typical Rubinstein-Taybi phenotype V. G.C.Fergnani1,A.Guala2,C. Danesino3,R. Silipigni4, M.Pollazzon1,I. Ivanovski1, S.G.Carafﬁ1,T. M.Strom2,3, S.Guerneri4,E.Scola5,C.Cinnante5,M.Fumagalli6,S.Gangi6, I.Parenti4,F. J.Kaiser4,L. Garavelli1 O.Picciolini7,D.Greco8,L.Castiglia8,G.A.Cagnoli1,R.Villa1, F. Lalatta1,C. Romano8,M. F.Bedeschi1 1AUSL-IRCCS of Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 2Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, 3HelmholtzZentrumMünchen,Munich,Germany,4Instituteof OspedaleMaggiore Policlinico,Milano,Italy, 2Departmentof Human Genetics, Lübeck, Germany Pediatrics, Castelli Hospital, Verbania, Italy, 3Molecular Medicine Department, General Biology and Medical Genetics Wereporta17yearsoldpatientwithanin-framedeletionin Unit, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 4Medical Genetics CREBBP but without Rubinstein-Taybi phenotype. Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale The patient presented with developmental delay, severe Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 5Neuroradiology Unit, intellectual disability, ventricular septal defect, talipes, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore inguinal hernia, peno-scrotal fusion, brain anomalies, Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 6NICU, Department of Clinical feeding difﬁculties, self-injurious behavior. Our ﬁrst Sciences and Community Health, Università degli Studi di diagnostic hypothesis was Cornelia de Lange syndrome, Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore but extended sequencing panels of known associated genes Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 7Pediatric Physical Medicine & (including NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3, HDAC8, RAD21) RehabilitationUnit,FondazioneIRCCSCa’GrandaOspedale detected no pathogenic variants. By subsequent whole MaggiorePoliclinico,Milano,Italy,8OasiResearchInstitute- genome sequencing we identiﬁed a small deletion in exon IRCCS, Troina, Italy 31 of CREBBP. Variants in CREBBP were originally described as the genetic cause of Rubinstein-Taybi Introduction: Individuals with 5p deletions were ﬁrst syndrome (RSTS). This in-frame variant, NM_004380: reported in 1963 by Lejeune as having Cri-du-chat syn- c.5518_5544del (p.Val1840_His1848del), was found in drome. The incidence is estimated to be 1:15,000 to 32% of the reads and conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing in 1:50,000 live births and 1:350 among individuals referred both peripheral blood and ﬁbroblasts. Segregation analysis for Intellectual Disability (ID). 5p deletions can be telo- ontheparentsrevealedthatthevariantoccurreddenovoin meric or interstitial and occur at different breakpoints, thepatientandcan beclassiﬁed aspathogenic accordingto ranginginsizefromthetelomericregionatband5p15.3(5 ACMG standards. Mb) to nearly the whole short arm of chromosome 5 (40 Recently,individualswithmissensevariantsinexons30- Mb). Cri-du-chat syndrome is observed in patients with 31 of CREBBP without typical RSTS phenotype were deletions encompassing a critical region between 5p15.2 described. All of them show atypical facies and variable and 5p15.3, ﬁrst deﬁned by Niebuhr in 1978. The classic featuresincludingshortpalpebralﬁssures,telecanthus,short phenotype includes a characteristic cry, peculiar facies, nose with depressed bridge, anteverted nares, short microcephaly, growth retardation, hypotonia, speech and columella and long philter. They also show psychomotor psychomotor delay and ID. There is a wide spectrum of developmentdelay(11/11),behavioral anomalies including clinical manifestations that can be attributed to differences self-injury (8/11), microcephaly (7/11), feeding difﬁculties in size and localization of the 5p deletion. (7/11),transmissiblehypoacusia(7/11),shortstature(5/11), Results: Ten patients with 5p deletions have been recurrent infections (5/11), large 1st toe (3/11). included in the present study (6 males and 4 females, age In conclusion, we report a novel variant in CREBBP ranging from birth to 28 years). Brain and brainstem MRI resultinginanatypicalphenotype,differentfromRSTSand was performed on all patients. The deletions were with only some resemblance to the 11 atypical cases characterized by array-CGH. MRI ﬁndings included described with missense mutations in exons 30-31. isolatedpontinehypoplasia,vermianhypoplasia,ventricular anomalies,abnormalbasalangle,wideningofcavumsellae,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 355 increased signal from white matter, corpus callosum craniofacial dysmorphism, ventricular septal defect and anomalies, abnormal cortical development. neurodevelopmental problems. Conclusions: Several critical regions related to some of Asagroup,thesechildrenwithCTNND1variantspresent the main features (such as the cry, the peculiar facies, the with neurodevelopmental disorders and craniofacial dys- developmental delay) have been identiﬁed. The aim of this morphisms, including orofacial clefts, and heart defects; study is to further deﬁne the genotype-phenotype correla- their phenotype is different from BCD. Moreover, the tionsin5pdeletion syndrome withparticularregardstothe results of our functional assays suggest that CTNND1 is a speciﬁc neuroradiological ﬁndings. neurocristopathy gene due to its effect on structures of V.G.C.Fergnani:None.A.Guala:None.C.Danesino: neural crest origin, and potentially a key oral clefting gene. None. R. Silipigni: None. S. Guerneri: None. E. Scola: R.Alharatani:None.W.Ji:None.A.Ververi:None.S. None.C.Cinnante:None.M.Fumagalli:None.S.Gangi: Lakhani: None. J. Hurst: None. M. Hosey: None. R. None. O. Picciolini: None. D. Greco: None. L. Castiglia: Newbury-Ecob: None. R. Scott: None. M. Khokha: None. G.A. Cagnoli: None. R. Villa: None. F. Lalatta: None. A. Beleza-Meireles: None. K. Liu: None. None. C. Romano: None. M.F. Bedeschi: None. P11.034B P11.033A Mutations in epigenetic and transcriptional regulation Novel Mutations in CTNND1 Cause Cranial Neural Crest genes cause majority of human developmental disorders Associated Anomalies and Neurodevelopment Disorders D.Li1,E.Bhoj1,S.Vergano2,T.Wenger3,M.Harr1,Y.Zarate4, R. Alharatani1,W.Ji2,A. Ververi3,S. Lakhani2, J.Hurst3, W.Tan5, P.Mark6,S. White7,M. Falk1,C. Murali1, J.Barea8, M.Hosey1,R.Newbury-Ecob4,R.Scott3,M.Khokha2,A.Beleza- T. Tan7,H.Stalker9,K. Hill-Harfe9,J.Mueller9,C. Bupp6, Meireles5,1, K.Liu1 A. Hing3,E. Zackai1,H.Hakonarson1 1Centre for Craniofacial & Regenerative Biology, King's 1The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, CollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,2PediatricCritical United States, 2Children's Hospital of The King's Daughters, Care Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, Norfolk, VA, United States, 3Seattle Children's Hospital, United States, 3Clinical Genetics Unit, Great Ormond Street Seattle,WA,UnitedStates,4UniversityofArkansasforMedical Hospital, Great Ormond Street, London, United Kingdom, Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States, 5Boston Children's 4DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,UniversityHospitalsBristol Hospital,Boston,MA,UnitedStates,6SpectrumHealth,Grand St Michael's Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 5Guy's Rapids, MI, United States, 7Murdoch Children's Research Hospital, London, United Kingdom Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 8University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States, 9University of Florida, The aim of this project was to identify novel pathogenic Gainesville, FL, United States gene variants in children with multiple unexplained phe- notypes, as part of an on-going Cleft-Tooth Anomalies Multiple congenital anomaly with dysmorphic features, Study taking place at the South Thames Cleft Unit at St heartdefectsand/orneurodevelopmentalmanifestationsisa Thomas’ Hospital, using whole exome sequencing. We group of phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous have identiﬁed four unrelated patients with novel de novo developmental disorders (DD) affecting ~2-5% of children. variants in the CTNND1 gene. We recruited 228 unrelated patients via broad-reaching Although CTNND1 is a well-known protein that plays collaboration, systematically phenotyped these individuals, crucial developmental functions, human variants have not and undertook a focused study using exome sequencing. been discovered until recently, with a report of three We successfully identiﬁed causal mutations in known variants in patients with Blepharocheilodontic syndrome Mendelian genes for 35.1% of kindreds (n=80). In addi- (BCD).Otherwise,littleisknownaboutthephenotypesthat tion, we discovered likely pathogenic variants in 5 genes are associated with mutations in this gene. notpreviouslyimplicatedinDDin3.1%ofpatients(n=7). WehaveinitiallydiscoveredaCTNND1genevariantina The identiﬁed mutations were mostly de novo dominant patient with unexplained craniofacial anomalies including (n=56, 76%), consistent with the majority of cases arise cleft lip/palate and oligodontia, cardiac defects, autism sporadically without familial occurrence, but also X-linked (ASD)andotherphenotypessuggestiveofayetunexplored or autosomal recessive (n=21, 24%). 58.6% of these 87 syndrome. In addition, three more patients with variants in resolvedkindredsareduetomutationsingenesinvolvedin CTNND1 were found in the Deciphering Developmental transcriptionalprocessesandrelatedepigeneticmodiﬁcation Disorders Study (DDD) UK, one of which shares the same pathway, including TP63 (2), SMARCE1, ACTB, DDX3X, variant as our patient. He presents with very similar FOXP1, FOXC1, SMC1A, SF3B4 (2), EFTUD2, EP300,356 J.delPicchia MED13L (2), KANSL1, SOX2, ASXL3, CTNNB1 (2), retrognathia, narrow thorax, slender digits and anterior CTNND1,STAG2,TBR1,MAF,CUL4B,SATB2(2),ADNP placement of anus. First patient also has a heart defect and (2),HNRNPK,HIVEP2,TFAP2A(2),MLL,MLL2,DEAF1, tibial osteochondrosis. Tentative diagnosis of MRD7 was GLI3, KMT5B, KAT6A, KAT6B, H3F3A, MED12 (7), put forward and a known heterozygous variant c.613C>T GTF3C5, NKAP, CHD3, and U2AF2, which highlights the (p.R205*) was identiﬁed in DYRK1A. This diagnosis made fundamental roles of global and local regulation of tran- usthinkaboutthesecondpatient,whohadbeendischarged scription in DD. We ﬁrst discovered three de novo novel withoutdiagnosis.DYRK1Aanalysisrevealedanewvariant nonsense and frameshift indels in MED12 in three female c.665-5_665-4delTT. First patient´s mother told us about a patients with Hardikar syndrome - all having cleft palate, thirdgirlattendingearlyinterventionprogramwithphysical congenital heart disease, biliary abnormalities, renal resemblancetoherdaughter.Thesamevariantasinpatient abnormalities, and retinal pigmentation. All three indivi- 2 was found. All variants occurred de novo. duals showed extreme skewed X-inactivation (99:1). Our Discussion: we present the ﬁrst patients clinically results reveal insights into genetic control of human diagnosedwithMRD7,mainlycharacterizedbyID,autism, development. epilepsy, microcephaly and recognizable craniofacial fea- D. Li: None. E. Bhoj: None. S. Vergano: None. T. tures. Uncommon features such as anteriorly placed anus Wenger: None. M. Harr: None. Y. Zarate: None. W. and tibial osteochondrosis could help to better delineate its Tan: None. P. Mark: None. S. White: None. M. Falk: phenotype. The identiﬁcation of the same variant in two None.C.Murali:None.J.Barea:None.T.Tan:None.H. unrelated patients points to a new hostpot mutation. Stalker:None.K.Hill-Harfe:None.J.Mueller:None.C. Haploinsufﬁciency of DYRK1A results in a clinically Bupp: None. A. Hing: None. E. Zackai: None. H. distinct and probably underdiagnosed entity, which should Hakonarson: None. be considered in individuals with Angelman syndrome-like syndromes. P11.035 V. López González: None. A. Serrano-Antón: None. CIntellectual disability caused by de novo heterozygous M.Sánchez-Soler:None.M.Ballesta-Martínez:None.L. mutations in DYRK1A gene: ﬁrst clinically diagnosed Rodríguez-Peña: None. R. Gil-Ferrer: None. S. Ibáñez- patients and a new hotspot mutation Micó: None. H. Alarcón-Martínez: None. E. Martínez- Salcedo: None. R. Domingo-Jiménez: None. M. García- V. LópezGonzález1,2, A.Serrano-Antón1, M.Sánchez-Soler1, Hoyos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; M.Ballesta-Martínez1,2,L. Rodríguez-Peña1,R. Gil-Ferrer1, Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). Valencia. S. Ibáñez-Micó3, H.Alarcón-Martínez3,E. Martínez-Salcedo3, Spain. E. Guillén-Navarro: None. R.Domingo-Jiménez3,M.García-Hoyos4,E.Guillén-Navarro1,2 P11.036D 1Sección de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Balanced de novo translocation disrupting EFNA5 in a Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca. IMIB-Arrixaca, patientwithdysmorphicfeatures,bilaterallycloudycornea Murcia, Spain, 2Grupo Clínico Vinculado al Centro de and portosystemic venous shunt Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, A.Skórka1,2,M.Młynek3,V.M.Pienkowski4,5,P.Gasperowicz4, Spain, 3Sección de Neuropediatría. Servicio de Pediatría. M.Sykulski6,J. Kosińska4,M.Rydzanicz4,M. Białecka2, Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca. IMIB D.Gieruszczak-Białek1,M.Kucharczyk2,R.Płoski4 Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 4Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN), Valencia, Spain 1Department of Pediatrics Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw,Poland,2DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Children's Introduction: Pathogenic variants in DYRK1A resulting in Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of gene haploinsufﬁciency are responsible for autosomal Medical Genetics, Children's Memorial Health Institute, dominant intellectual disability (ID) type 7 (MRD7, MIM Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw 614104).Itaccountsfor0.5%ofindividualswithIDand/or MedicalUniversity,Warsaw,Poland,5PostgraduateSchoolof autism. Hitherto 61 molecularly conﬁrmed patients have Molecular Medicine, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, beenpublished,allidentiﬁedbyexomesequencingwithout Poland, 6Department of Medical Informatics and a clinical suspicion. Telemedicine,MedicalUniversityofWarsaw,Warsaw,Poland Clinical cases: we report on three unrelated female patients aged 8, 9 and 5. They all present with micro- Primaryvitreousregressionisacriticaleventinmammalian cephaly, ID, autism, stereotypies, seizures and hyperopia. eye development required for proper ocular maturity and Their clinical phenotype includes deep-set eyes, unhindered vision. Failure of this event resultsinpersistentAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 357 hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV), also identiﬁed as and the most frequent pathogenic mutation in this gene persistent fetal vasculature (PFV). In 2014 Son AI et al. (NM_001256442.1:c.649dup, p.Arg217Profs*8) was not suggested a critical role of ephrin-A5 in regulating proper detectedbecauseitisincludedinanhomopolymerregionof cell migration into the primary vitreous during early eye 9 Cytosine. From Oct, 2013 until Dec, 2016 only 3 morphogenesis in mice. So far there were no reports of pathogenic mutations have been identiﬁed within PRRT2 studies of EFNA5 gene in humans. Here we present a boy genebyNGS.Sincetheimplementationofthenewmethod born with bilateral cloudy cornea and subsequent diagnosis in Jan, 2017, 14 additional pathogenic mutations were of persistent fetal vasculature, in whom de novo balanced identiﬁed (100% coverage of PRRT2) increasing our translocation disrupted EFNA5 gene. This 3 years old boy pathogenic mutations detection rate up to 400%. Then, was born with dysmorphic features, hypotonia, bilateral PRRT2 mutations represent 1.9% of our cohort. Two types cloudycornea,heartdefectandportosystemicvenousshunt, of CNVs have been found, a complete gene deletion and a diagnosed as Abernethy malformation type 2. The oph- complete gene duplication. The most known single base thalmologic evaluation lead to diagnosis of persistent fetal duplication(c.649dup,p.Arg217Profs*8)wasfound7times vasculature(PFV).Karyotypeintheboyshowedadenovo as well as 1 deletion at the same position (c.649del, p. translocation 46,XY,t(5:8)(q22q13). Microarray-based Arg217Glufs*12). A second duplication within an homo- comparative genomic hybridization showed normal polymerof7Cytosinewasalsodetectedonce(c.629dup,p. results. Shallow genome-wide mate-pair library sequencing Ala211Serfs*14).Theuseofanappropriatetechnologyand wasappliedtoidentifytheareawherethebreakpointswere a powerful bioinformatics software allowing the simulta- present. The PCR product was sequenced with Sanger neousdetectionofCNVs,SNVsorInDelsinsimpleregion sequencing. The region containing the break point on as well as in homopolymer region is highly required for chromosome 5 was found to disrupt the 3rd intron of diagnostic purpose. EFNA5gene,whileonchromosome8itwaslocatedinnon S. Mary: None. O. Froment: None. D. Lederer: None. codingDNA.Totheextentofourknowledgethisistheﬁrst N.Simonis:None. A.Tahon:None. C.Colaux: None. E. report associating EFNA5 defect with human disease. This Bressy: None. M. D'Amico: None. X. Deghorain: None. studywassupportedbytheNCNGrantNo.UMO-2016/21/ M. Tubé: None. V. Benoit: None. P. Hilbert: None. K. B/NZ5/02541 Dahan: None. A.Skórka:None.M.Młynek:None.V.M.Pienkowski: None. P. Gasperowicz: None. M. Sykulski: None. J. P11.038B Kosińska: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. M. Białecka: A novel mutation in MYCN gene causes an unusual None. D. Gieruszczak-Białek: None. M. Kucharczyk: presentation of Feingold syndrome None. R. Płoski: None. A. Peleg1,L. Sagi-Dain1,V. Adir1,A. Kurolap2,C.Gonzaga- P11.037A Jauregui3,J. Overton3,A. Mori2,A. Shuldiner3, H.Baris2, AnalysisofPRRT2gene:improvementofNGStechnology R. Wolstein1 allows us to detect 400% more mutations within homopolymer region as well as CNVs 1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Rambam Medical Center,Haifa,Israel,3RegeneronGeneticsCenter,Tarrytown, S. Mary,O.Froment, D.Lederer,N.Simonis,A. Tahon, New York, NY, United States C. Colaux,E.Bressy, M.D'Amico, X. Deghorain, M.Tubé, V. Benoit, P.Hilbert, K. Dahan Background:Feingoldsyndrome1(FS1)(OMIM#164280) is an autosomal dominant malformation syndrome char- IPG, Gosselies, Belgium acterized by digital anomalies, microcephaly, facial dys- morphism, gastrointestinal atresia and mild to moderate The use of multi-gene panels in routine diagnostic of learning disability. Mutations in the MYCN gene complexpathologieslikeepilepticencephalopathiesismore (OMIM#164840) are known to cause FS1. Congenital and more essential. However, using a reliable technology AbsenceoftheFlexorPollicisLongus(CAFPL)tendonisa associated with powerful bioinformatics software is highly rare sporadic hand anomaly. We describe a pedigree with required to improve diagnostic rate. Here, we compare the CAFPL, consistent with an autosomal dominant inheri- use a 150 genes panel (pyrosequencing technology), tance. Physical and radiographic examinations of family involved in epileptic encephalopathies and intellectual members revealed variable features of Feingold syndrome. deﬁciency(sinceOct,2013)andasecond capturebased70 Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing of 5 genes panel (SophiaGenetics and Illumina sequencing). related patients from the same family and one unaffected With the ﬁrst panel, PRRT2 gene had a coverage of 98%, married-into the family relative (n=6). Bioinformatic358 J.delPicchia analysis focused on an autosomal dominant Rouen, France, 20Service de génétique, Rouen, France, inheritance model. 21Service de foetopathologie, Dijon, France Results: Whole exome analysis revealed a novel hetero- zygous mutation (c.1171C>T; p.Arg391Cys) in the MYCN Multiple Congenital Anomalies (MCA) are deﬁned by the gene. Full segregation conﬁrmed the association between association of at least 2 congenital malformations. The the phenotype and the mutation in the family. etiological diagnosis of these conditions is needed for Discussion: CAFPL diagnosis should be considered if a genetic counseling and prenatal or preimplantation diag- patient is unable to ﬂex the interphalangeal joint of the nosis. The rate of diagnosis for MCA fetuses is about 30% thumb. A hypoplastic thumb or an absent interphalangeal withcurrentdiagnostictests.Mostparentsarenotprovided joint crease may be a diagnostic feature. Most cases are with accurate genetic counseling. We aimed to assess the sporadicand,tothebestofourknowledge,nofamilialcases contribution of whole exome sequencing (WES) to fetal have been published so far. Variants in MYCN have not MCA diagnosis after conventional genetic testing. We beenpreviouslyassociatedwithCAFPL.Thisreportwidens performed solo WES in 105 fetuses (58 male and 47 the spectrum of MYCN-related disorders suggesting that female) with MCA and normal array-CGH. Fetal exam- MYCNgenemutationsshouldbeincludedinthedifferential ination did not suggest any clinical diagnosis. The 105 diagnosis of patients presenting with familial fetuses presented with facial dysmorphism (50%), and "isolated" CAFPL. intrauterine growth retardation (39%), as well as brain A.Peleg:None.L.Sagi-Dain:None.V.Adir:None.A. (46%), heart (38%), skeletal (33%), urogenital (27%), Kurolap:None.C.Gonzaga-Jauregui:None.J.Overton: digestive (23%), respiratory (21%) or distal limb (15%) None. A. Mori: None. A. Shuldiner: None. H. Baris: anomalies. WES identiﬁed a pathogenic variant in 17 None. R. Wolstein: None. fetuses (21%), a variant of unknown signiﬁcance in 4 fetuses (5%) and a candidate gene in 4 fetuses (5%). This P11.039C diagnostic yield is lower than in other postnatal MCA Contributionofwholeexomesequencinginthediagnosisof cohorts. This result is probably due to extreme, atypical or syndromic developmental abnormalities in fetuses unspeciﬁc phenotypes identiﬁed in fetuses, the lack of neurodevelopmental data in this population and the small M.Lefebvre1,2,Y.Duffourd2,A.Bruel2,M.Assoum2,P.Kuentz2, number of studies performed in fetuses, which limits data E. Schaefer3,S. El Cheahadeh3,M. Antal4, J.Mandel3, sharing.Toconclude,theefﬁcacyofsoloWESinfetusesis D.Lehalle5,N.Jean-Marçais5,S. Moutton5,C. Philippe2, lower than for the postnatal period for MCA. Sporadic A. Vitobello2,F. TranMau Them2,N.Marle6,L. Lambert7, variants could be easily identiﬁed through trio analysis of L. Lambert7,P. Jonveaux8,B. Foliguet9,J.Mazutti9, thenegativecasesbysecond-stepparentalWES,increasing E.Ginglinger10,D.Gaillard11,C.Poirisier11,F.Arbez-Gindre12, the rate of candidate variants and the identiﬁcation of S. Odent13,C. Quelin14,M.Fradin13, M.Willems15,N.Bigi16, new genes. P. Loget14,S. Blesson17,C. Francannet18,A. Beaufrere19, M. Lefebvre: None. Y. Duffourd: None. A. Bruel: S. Patrier19, A.Guerrot20,A. Goldenberg20,N.Laurent21, None. M. Assoum: None. P. Kuentz: None. E. Schaefer: J.Thevenon2,L. Faivre2,5,C.Thauvin-Robinet2,5 None. S. El Cheahadeh: None. M. Antal: None. J. Mandel: None. D. Lehalle: None. N. Jean-Marçais: 1Génétique et embryologie Médicale, Paris, France, 2GAD None.S.Moutton:None.C.Philippe:None.A.Vitobello: EA4271 « Génétique des Anomalies du Développement » None. F. Tran Mau Them: None. N. Marle: None. L. (GAD), FHU-TRANSLAD, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, Lambert: None. L. Lambert: None. P. Jonveaux: None. France,3Servicede génétique,Strasbourg,France, 4Service d B. Foliguet: None. J. Mazutti: None. E. Ginglinger: efoetopathologie, Strasbourg, France, 5Service de génétique, None. D. Gaillard: None. C. Poirisier: None. F. Arbez- Dijon, France, 6Service de cytogénétique, Dijon, France, Gindre: None. S. Odent: None. C. Quelin: None. M. 7Service de génétique, Nancy, France, 8Service de Fradin: None. M. Willems: None. N. Bigi: None. P. cytogénétique, nancy, France, 9Service de foetopathologie, Loget: None. S. Blesson: None. C. Francannet: None. A. Nancy, France, 10Service de génétique, Mulhouse, France, Beaufrere:None.S.Patrier:None.A.Guerrot:None.A. 11Service de génétique, Reims, France, 12Service de Goldenberg: None. N. Laurent: None. J. Thevenon: foetopathologie, Besançon, France, 13Service de génétique, None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. Rennes,France,14Servicedefoetopathologie,Rennes,France, 15Service de génétique, Montpellier, France, 16Service de P11.040D foetopathologie, Montpellier, France, 17Service de Another case of Galloway-Mowat Syndrome associated foetopathologie, Tours, France, 18Service de génétique, with a homozygous mutation of the OSGEP gene Clermont-Ferrand, France, 19Service de foetopathologie,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 359 S. Bulk1, S.d’Otreppe1,M.Tebache2,J.Lombet2,J. Caberg1 Introduction: The generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA) is characterized by lymphatic malformations (LM) and 1CHU de Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2CHR de la Citadelle, Liège, osteolysis.Itsgeneticcauseisunknown,althoughitspattern Belgium of distribution is suspected to be a mechanism of genetic mosaicism, probably limited to lymphatic endothelial cells Introduction: Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GWS) is a rare (LEC).The isolation of LECs from affected tissue of disease entity associating microcephaly and developmental patientsaffectedbyGLAhasnotbeendescribedsofar,and delay with glomerular proteinuria progressing to cortico- willallowthedetectionofpossiblemutationsinmosaicthat resistant nephrotic syndrome and end-stage renal disease. cause the disease. Six genes are now known to be implicated in GWS Materials and methods: We present a protocol for including the OSGEP gene. isolation of LECs derived from LM both sporadically and Here,wedescribeanothercaseofGWSassociatedwitha from a patient with GLA. The fresh tissue is enzymatically homozygous missense mutation of the OSGEP gene. digested and the cells are subjected to a Percoll density Results: At 30 weeks gestation, fetal MRI conﬁrmed the gradient. The isolated cells are expanded in culture and presence of microcephaly associated with bilateral frontal selected by immunomagnetic methods (MACS), using pachygyria in our patient. Proteinuria was detected soon speciﬁc markers of LECs: CD31 and Podoplanin (PDPN). after birth (3g/l). At 6 months, the child presented severe ThepuriﬁedLM-LECsareveriﬁedbyimmunoﬂuorescence developmentaldelay,diedattheageof8months.Theindex withothermarkersofLECs(VEGFR3,PROX1andLYVE- case also presented several dysmorphic features, as 1). previously described associated with KEOPS-complex Results: The enzymatic digestion of the tissue with mutations. collagenaseiscriticaltoobtainahighyieldandviabilityof Our index case was the ﬁfth child of consanguineous thestartingcellpopulation.ThePercollgradientreducesthe parents;theparentshadhadtwo children bornwith ‘avery contaminationbynon-endothelialcells,whichfacilitatesthe small head’ who had died in infancy of terminal renal subsequent selection by MACs and allows obtaining a failure. population of pure LECs. These results require further SNP-array showed multiple regions of homozygosity phenotypic and functional studies: immunohistochemistry, including the 14q11.2 region. Sequencing of the OSGEP proliferation and apoptosis assays,, etc. gene revealed the presence of a homozygous c.953C>T Conclusions: We have established an isolation protocol missense mutation. andobtainedLM-LECsfromapatientwithGLA.Thiswill Conclusions:PathogenicmutationsofOSGEPhavebeen allow us to delve into the genetic causes of the disease, as showntoinducedefectsinthecytoskeletonandtodecrease well as perform functional studies that reveal possible the migration rate of podocytes, thus linking the major targets for new treatments manifestations of GWS, structural brain anomalies and N.Agra:None.L.Rodriguez-Laguna:None.G.Oliva- nephrotic syndrome. Molina: None. G. Herranz: None. G. Gordo: None. J. Hereby, we present another case of nephrotic syndrome López-Gutierrez: None. P. Lapunzina: None. V. Martí- with primary microcephaly and brain anomalies, also nez-Glez: None. known as GWS, associated with a homozygous mutatin of the OSGEP gene. P11.042B S.Bulk:None.S.d’Otreppe:None.M.Tebache:None. Whole Exome Sequencing identiﬁes WDR47 as a new J. Lombet: None. J. Caberg: None. candidate gene for heterotaxy syndrome P11.041A K. Breuer1,2,3,A. C.Hilger1,2, N.Müller3,B. Schaidinger3, Isolation of endothelial lymphatic cells from patients with R. Zhang1,2,J. Breuer3,H.Reutter1,2,4,K. M.Riedhammer5,6, generalized lymphatic anomaly J.Höfele5 N.Agra1,L.Rodriguez-Laguna1,G.Oliva-Molina1,G.Herranz1, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, G.Gordo1,J. López-Gutierrez2, P.Lapunzina1,V. Martínez- Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Glez1 UniversityofBonn,Bonn,Germany,3DepartmentofPediatric Cardiology,UniversityofBonn,Bonn,Germany,4Department 1INGEMM-CIBERER-IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, University of Madrid, Spain, 2Vascular Anomalies Center, Plastic Surgery, Bonn,Bonn,Germany,5InstituteofHumanGenetics,Klinikum Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich, Munich,360 J.delPicchia Germany, 6Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der upon Tyne, United Kingdom, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Isar, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany Kingdom, 3Newcastle upon Tyne NHS Foundation Trust, Plastic Surgery Department, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Introduction: Heterotaxy syndromes represent lateraliza- Kingdom, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom tion defects. The determination of left-right body axis dur- ing early embryogenesis depends on a leftward ﬂow The combination of iris heterochromia and patchy hair generated by rotating primary cilia of the primitive node. depigmentation is strongly suggestive of Waardenburg Heterotaxy syndromes comprise complex heart defects syndrome, but should not be considered pathognomonic. (CHD), abdominal situs abnormalities including intestinal Wereporta2yearsoldgirlwhopresentedatbirthwithiris malrotations, biliary atresia, asplenia, or polysplenia. The heterochromia and patchy depigmentation of hair. Oph- birth prevalence is 1/15.000. thalmological examination also showed unilateral hypo- Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing pigmentation of the fundus. Her mother reported early (WES) in ﬁve parent-child-trios to identify potentially de greying of hair. On physical examination, the patient also novo or autosomal recessive disease-causing variants. All had hypertelorism, epicanthus and left gum and palate patientshadCHDandavariableheterotaxyphenotype.All hypertrophy. Length was on the 75th centile and head cir- parentsandsiblings underwentthoroughultrasound studies cumference on the 98th centile; she had no other body to exclude mild phenotypes. WES ﬁlter criteria included: asymmetries,normalskinandnormaldevelopment.Genetic MAF≤0.1%, protein altering, high conservation and dele- testing for the known genes associated with Waardenburg terious in silico prediction (Sift, PolyPhen-2, CADD). syndrome was negative, and kidney ultrasound, performed IdentiﬁedvariantswerevalidatedusingSangerSequencing. because of the gum hemihypertrophy, was normal. A brain Results: Filtering of WES data revealed WDR47 as a MRI showed multiple bilateral subcortical hyperintensities novelcandidategene.Here,adenovovariant(c.2077G>A, suggestive of Tuberous Sclerosis (TSC) and a bony lesion p.Val693Ile;NM_001142550)wasidentiﬁedintheaffected of the left maxilla, likely due to ﬁbrous dysplasia. Genetic child. According tognomAD browser beta, the variant was testing for TSC showed a heterozygous de novo TSC1 found once in 30978 alleles. WDR47 encodes a protein pathogenic variant affecting a splice donor site, conﬁrming known to regulate autophagy and microtubule dynamic thediagnosisofTS.Whitetuftsofthehairand,morerarely, instability. Moreover, it is involved in developmental patchy area of iris depigmentation, have already been disorders of the brain, notably corpus callosum defects. describedinpatientswithTS, buttheassociationofbothis Discussion: WDR47 is a promising candidate gene for not a typical presentation (McWilliam and Stephenson, heterotaxy syndromes due to its central role in microtubule 1978; Rowley et al., 2001). An early diagnosis of TSC is dynamics and function. Screening of the identiﬁed candi- desirable to allow an appropriate management. This case date gene in larger patient cohorts is warranted. Additional conﬁrms that the ﬁnding of patchy depigmented hair and 15 families with heterotaxy syndromes will soon be irisdepigmentationshouldpromptcarefulskinexamination analyzed using WES and the data will be presented at the and that TSC should considered as a possible differential conference. diagnosis in these cases. Funded by SciMED Graduate Program, Faculty of M. Bertoli: None. M. Clarke: None. A. Henderson: Medicine, University of Bonn None. P. Hodgkinson: None. M. Splitt: None. K.Breuer:None.A.C.Hilger:None.N.Müller:None. B.Schaidinger:None.R.Zhang:None.J.Breuer:None. P11.044D H. Reutter: None. K.M. Riedhammer: None. J. A rare case of chromosomal mosaicism with seven cellular Höfele: None. lines that contains a jumping translocation that imply the chromosome14inanewbornwithcraniofacialdysmorphia P11.043C and multiple congenital anomalies Unexpected diagnosis in a patient presenting with iris heterochromia and white forelock M.Grămescu1,L.Caba1,R.Popescu1,S.Popa1,V.Martiniuc2, L. Păduraru1, M.Guzganu2,I.Pădureţ2, E.GORDUZA1 M.Bertoli1,M.Clarke2,A. Henderson1,P. Hodgkinson3, M.Splitt1 1"GrigoreT.Popa"UniversityofMedicineandPharmacyIaşi, 6600IASI,Romania,2"CuzaVodă"ObstetricsandGynecology 1Newcastle upon Tyne NHS Foundation Trust, Northern Hospital, 6600 IASI, Romania Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, NewcastleuponTyne,UnitedKingdom,2NewcastleuponTyne We present a premature boy born at 35 WA that has a NHSFoundationTrust,Ophthalmologydepartment,Newcastle plurimalformative syndrome characterised by:Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 361 dolicocephaly, sloping forehead, small nose, micrognathia, Montpellier, France, 4Service de génétique médicale, CHU abnormal ears (low set and posterior rotated), bilateral d'Angers, Angers, France, 5Service de génétique médicale, criptorhidy, cardiomegaly with persistent ductus arteriosus, CHU de Besançon, Besançon, France, 6Service de génétique cerebralventriculomegalyandagenesisofcorpumcalosum. médicale,CHUdeBrest,Brest,France,7Servicedegénétique We made GTG banding chromosomal analyse and we médicale,CHUdeCaen,Caen,France,8Servicedegénétique discovered a complex mosaicism characterised by the pre- médicale, CHU de Clemont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, senceofajumpingtranslocationthatimplythelongarmof France, 9Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Grenoble, chromosome 14. The chromosomal formula was:45,X,-14, Grenoble, France, 10Service de génétique médicale, CHU de der(Y)t(14;Y)(q11.2;q12)[76]/45,XY,-14,der(1)t(1;14)(q44; Marseille,Marseille,France,11Servicedegénétiquemédicale, q11.2)[8]/45,XY,-14,der(5)t(5;14)(q15.3;q11.2)[7]/45,XY,- CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 12Service de génétique 14,der(6)t(6;14)(q27;q11.2)[4]/45,XY,-14,der(21)t(21;14) médicale, CHU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 13Service (q10;q11.2)[3]/45,XY,-14,der(20)t(20;14)(q13.3;q11.2)[1]/ de génétique médicale, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 45,XY,-14,der(22)t(22;14)(q10;q11.2)[1]. We applied also 14Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, the MLPA with telomere probes (P-036 kit and P-070 kit, France, 15Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Rennes, MrcHolland®)andwediscoveredadeletionofapproximate Rennes, France, 16Service de génétique médicale, CHU de 2,21Mb located on chromosome 14. Using the P358 kit Nice, Nice, France, 17Service de génétique médicale, CHU de (MrcHolland®) we conﬁrmed the absence of segment Martinique, Fort de France, France, 18Service de génétique between the position 19,863,569 and 22,127,740 on chro- médicale, CHU de la Reunion, Saint-Denis, France, 19Service mosome 14. Jumping translocations are extremely rare and de génétique médicale, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, represents the translocation of the same chromosomal 20Servicedegénétiquemédicale,CHUdeLyon,Lyon,France, fragment to different other chromosomes in different cell 21Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Tours, Tours, lines.Themajorityofcasesweredescribedindifferenttype France, 22Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Dijon, of cancers, but also jumping translocations were found in Dijon,France,23Servicedegénétiquemédicale,AP-HPNecker constitutional cytogenetic associated with an abnormal enfants Malades, Bordeaux, France, 24Service d'onco patternofdevelopment.Thebreakpointsimpliedinjumping hématologie pédiatrique, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, translocations are located in chromosomal regions that France,25Centrederéférencedescytopéniesauto-immunesde contain repetitive DNA. This feature is present also in our l'enfant, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 26INSERM case,whenthebreakpointonchromosome14isonthelong U1211, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France arminproximityofcentromerewhiletherestofbreakpoints imply the telomeric region. In conclusion, we presume that Introduction: The kabuki syndrome (KS) (MIM 3147920 in our case the congenital anomalies were generated by the and 300867) is a rare malformative syndrome, including absence of a small segment of chromosome 14 produced speciﬁc facial features, moderate to severe intellectual dis- during the complex mechanism of jumping translocation. ability and various malformations. A high prevalence of M. Grămescu: None. L. Caba: None. R. Popescu: immunological manifestations is observed in Kabuki None. S. Popa: None. V.Martiniuc: None. L. Păduraru: patients. Immune function impairment reduces the prog- None. M. Guzganu: None. I. Pădureţ: None. E. nosis whereas this aspect is one of the less studied in the Gorduza: None. literature. To prove the importance of the management those manifestations, we measured the prevalence of P11.045A immune manifestations. We analyzed data to detect parti- Kabukisyndromeandimmunemanifestations:acohortof cularities of presentation, phenotypic associations and 176 patients therapeutic effectiveness on a large cohort. Methods: The 176 Kabuki patients included were H.Margot1, G.Boursier2,3, A.Guichet4,M.Serey5, P.Parent6, followed by 30 French centers and molecularly conﬁrmed. S. Weber7,V. Magry8,K. Dieterich9,J.Robbe10,B. Leheup11, (KDM6AorKMT2D).Questionnairesassessthepresenceof S. Baer12,A. Goldenberg13,S.Conrad14,M.Fradin15, immune deﬁcit and autoimmune diseases and on clinic and G.Morel16,E.Sarrazin17, M.Jacquemont18, S.Julia19, biological basis. T. Armand20,A. Toutain21, M.Lefevbre22,S. Lyonnet23, Results:44,6% of our patients had repeated infections Y. Perel24,25, D.Lacombe1,26,N.Aladjidi24,25,D.Genevieve2,3 (mainly ENT) and 61,6% had hypogammaglobinemia. 13.2% patients had an autoimmune disease and 5% had 1Servicedegénétiquemédicale,CHUdeBordeaux,Bordeaux, two or more. Prevalence in adult patients raised to 25,8%. France, 2Département de génétique médicale, Maladies rares The most frequent autoimmune manifestation is immune et médecine personnalisée, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, thrombocytopenic purpura (8,6%, RR: 215). Autoimmune France, 3INSERM U1183, Université de Montpellier, hemolytic anemia is observed in 4,0% (RR: 358). Among362 J.delPicchia non-hematological manifestations, vitiligo and auto- but the mutational analysis using customized TruSight One immune thyroiditis were frequents. Immune deﬁciency panel did not conﬁrm it. Nevertheless, NGS revealed a during childhood is correlated with susceptibility to novel frameshift deletion, c.4160_4161del/p.Tyr1387*, in autoimmunity in adults approximately 65% of X-linked KDM6A alleles derived Conclusion: We measure a high prevalence of immune from the patient’s leukocytes. This result might indicate a manifestations,demonstratingtheimportanceofanefﬁcient diagnosis of KS, that has been ﬁnally concluded after management of this frequent, treatable and sometimes analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation. Characteristic severe aspect of KS whereas during the time of our study, facial cue, abnormalities of growth and development, as data where incomplete. This phenomenon could be well skeletal anomalies seen in the presented patient were explained because Kabuki genes are indirectly involved in consistent with clinical expression of KS. B and Treg lymphocytes differentiation. Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report of a patient with H. Margot: None. G. Boursier: None. A. Guichet: mosaicmutationinKDM6AandclinicalfeaturesofKS.His None.M.Serey:None.P.Parent:None.S.Weber:None. KS phenotype is not consistent with previously reported in V.Magry:None.K.Dieterich:None.J.Robbe:None.B. KMT2D-positive patients with mosaicism, who had only Leheup: None. S. Baer: None. A. Goldenberg: None. S. mild facial dysmorphism. Genotype-ﬁrst approach com- Conrad: None. M. Fradin: None. G. Morel: None. E. binedwithreversephenotypinghasshowntobeapowerful Sarrazin: None. M. Jacquemont: None. S. Julia: None. tool in human genetics, especially in the era of next- T. Armand: None. A. Toutain: None. M. Lefevbre: generation sequencing. Study was supported by CMHI None. S. Lyonnet: None. Y. Perel: None. D. Lacombe: project S149/16. None. N. Aladjidi: None. D. Genevieve: None. E. Ciara: None. D. Wesół-Kucharska: None. D. Wicher: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. J. P11.046B Kosińska: None. P. Stawiński: None. M. Pelc: None. M. Mosaic mutation in KDM6B gene in patient with Kabuki Rydzanicz: None. J. Gajewska-Jahołowska: None. D. syndrome: analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation Rokicki: None. B. Chałupczyńska: None. D. Siestrzy- kowska: None. P. Halat-Wolska: None. P. Kowalski: E. Ciara1, D.Wesół-Kucharska2,D.Wicher1,D.Piekutowska- None. A. Madej-Pilarczyk: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. Abramczuk1,J. Kosińska3,P. Stawiński3,4, M.Pelc1, K.Chrzanowska:None.R.Płoski:None.M.Krajewska- M.Rydzanicz3, J.Gajewska-Jahołowska2, D.Rokicki2, Walasek: None. B. Chałupczyńska1,D.Siestrzykowska1,P. Halat-Wolska1, P. Kowalski1,A. Madej-Pilarczyk1,D.Jurkiewicz1, P11.047C K. Chrzanowska1, R.Płoski3,M.Krajewska-Walasek1 Improve Kagami-Ogata syndrome understanding through induced pluripotent stem cells from two patients with a 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial deletion not including the imprinting centers Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's Memorial C. Barilla'1,2,S.Suzuki2, K.Chosa2, D.C.Gruenert2,R.G. Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Medical Sargent2,A. Provenzano3,S. Giglio3,4,O.Zuffardi1 Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and 1Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland Pavia,Italy,2DepartmentofOtolaryngology-HeadandNeck Surgery, University of California-San Francisco, San Introduction: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare disorder Francisco, CA, United States, 3Department of Biomedical characterized by distinctive face, congenital anomalies and Experimental and Clinical Sciences "Mario Serio", University intellectual disability caused by mutations in KMT2D and of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit. Meyer KDM6A, two interacting chromatin modiﬁers responsible Children's University Hospital, Firenze, Italy for56-75%and5-8%ofKS,respectively.Todate,onlysix KSpatientswithmosaicKMT2Dmutationsweredescribed. Imprinting disorders are associated with the alteration of Any mosaicism in KDM6A have been reported so far. genes differentially expressed between maternal- and Methods and Results: A 2.5-years-old male is the ﬁrst paternal-inherited chromosomes, as a consequence of child of healthy non-consanguineous parents with negative abnormal methylation pattern in regulatory elements called familyhistory.Attheageof1yearhehadhisﬁrstmedical imprintingcenters(ICs).Kagami-Ogatasyndrome(KOS)is examination because of hypoglycemia and muscular a rare and sometime lethal congenital disorder caused by hypotonia. A diagnosis of glycogen storage disease type 0 alteration at the 14q32 maternal region, between DLK1- or fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase deﬁciency were suggested, DIO3.Theregionhoststwolong-RNAs,MEG3andMEG8,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 363 and clusters of small-RNAs. Although a few cases of KOS KBGsyndrome(KBGS)isadisordercharacterizedbyshort have been reported with partial deletion of the region, the stature, distinctive facial features and developmental/cog- speciﬁcroleofitsnon-codinggeneswithinthepathogenesis nitivedelay,causedbyANKRD11genemutations/deletions of KOS has not been yet clariﬁed. at 16q24. To improve the understanding of KOS mechanisms, we HerewedescribetheutilityofANKRD11RT-qPCRgene generated iPSCs from KOS sibship having a 130Kb expression analysis to investigate the effect, at transcript deletion at 14q32.2, which interrupted MEG3 and elimi- level,ofANKRD11sub-microscopicrearrangementsinfour nated several non-coding RNAs, inherited by the healthy patients with KBGS/KBGS-like clinical diagnosis. mother. We used a non-integrative system, to not alter RT-qPCR in the ﬁrst patient, with a de novo deletion patients’ genotype. involving the last two ANKRD11 exons, conﬁrmed the Mature iPSCs were characterized by Sanger sequencing, moleculardefectandidentiﬁednotonlyahalvedamountof qPCR and karyotyping to conﬁrm rearrangement stability wt transcript, which is indicative for KBG diagnosis, but and immune-ﬂuorescence to test iPSCs quality. We also an aberrant mRNA in the expected size, likely succeeded to obtain patient-derived iPSCs showing stem truncated and dysfunctional. cells features such as expression of speciﬁc markers and RT-qPCRprovedofgreatclinicalutilityinevaluatingthe pluripotency.Furtheranalysisrevealedthatthemethylation pathogenic effect of a partial ANKRD11 duplication in a status was not altered. patient with a less convincing KBGS phenotype, as it We created the ﬁrst human model of KOS maintaining revealed mRNA levels comparable to controls. patient’sgenotypeandmethylationstatus.Furthermore,our ANKRD11 haploinsufﬁciency was again conﬁrmed by modelallowstorevealacorrelationbetweenphenotypeand RT-qPCR in two furtherpatients: theﬁrst with aknown de individual genes in 14q32 domain because our patients’ novo molecular defect in IVS1 encompassing part of the rearrangementdoes notalter ICs functionality. Also, iPSCs ANKRD11 promoter region and concordant clinical fea- we generated allow to study the rearrangement in adult tures; and the second with a clear KBG clinical diagnosis tissues by direct differentiation in culture and rescuing the but negative molecular investigations. Consistent with the deleted genes through gene editing. RT-qPCR data further molecular characterizations were C.Barilla':None.S.Suzuki:None.K.Chosa:None.D. performed in the second patient and a 1.8 kb deletion C.Gruenert:None.R.G.Sargent:None.A.Provenzano: involving the gene promoter was identiﬁed. None. S. Giglio: None. O. Zuffardi: None. This preliminary data proved RT-qPCR is a helpful tool for molecular and clinical diagnosis both in patients with P11.048D ANKRD11 sub-microscopic rearrangements, in which Molecular deepening by ANKRD11 gene expression molecular effect is uncertain, and in molecularly unsolved analyses of KBG patients harboring submicroscopic KBGS patients. rearrangements M. Crippa: None. I. Bestetti: None. M. Falkenberg Smeland: None. S. Naik: None. O. Murch: None. A. M.Crippa1,I.Bestetti1,2,M.Falkenberg Smeland3,S. Naik4, Sironi: None. E. Adamo: None. H. Gåmh: None. S. O.Murch5,A. Sironi1,2, E.Adamo1,H.GÅMH3,S.Davies5, Davies: None. R. Evans: None. D. McMullan: None. D. R. Evans6,D.McMullan6,D.Milani7,L. Larizza1,K. Low8, Milani: None. L. Larizza: None. K. Low: None. P. P. Finelli1,2 Finelli: None. 1IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, Italy, P11.049A 2Dpt. of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, Macrophthalmia and large vessels aneurysms: a University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Dpt. of Medical Genetics, coincidence? University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women's Hospital, M.G.Serey-Gaut1,E. Faudi1,2,D.Schorderet3, E.Gillis4, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, M.Saleh2,C.Schwartz2,C.Cabrol1,A.Verstraeten4,B.Loeys4, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff,United Kingdom, 6West L. VanMaldergem1 Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratories, Birmingham Women’sandChildren’sNHSFoundationTrust,Birmingham, 1CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,UniversitédeFranche-Comté, United Kingdom, 7Medical Genetic Unit, Pediatric Highly Besançon,France,2DepartmentofOphthalmology,University Intensive Care, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Hospital, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 8Hospitals Bristol NHS 3Institute for Research in Ophthalmology, Sion, Switzerland, Trust, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom 4CentrumMedischeGenetica,UniversityofAntwerp,Antwerp, Belgium364 J.delPicchia Dilatation of large thoracic vessels, either in its isolated or Infantil., Badajoz, Spain, 5Servicio de Endocrinología syndromic form, is highly heterogeneous, with disease- pediátrica. Hospital Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain causing mutations in over 30 genes being identiﬁed so far. However, none of the associated syndromes presents with * Both authors contributed equally to this work. macrophthalmia. We report on a 31-year-old female with a Introduction:Wedescribefourindividualswithtruncat- history of HLAB27-related bilateral anterior uveitis in the ing variants in the paternally expressed allele of the, contextofsevereandrapidlyprogressivemyopiaoccurring maternally imprinted MAGEL2 gene, responsible for at 6 years of age. Exophthalmia was observed in the acute Schaaf-Yang syndrome (SYS). Patients suffering from phase andprogressed regularly thereafter,leading toretinal SYS present with hypotonia, global developmental delay detachments and painful disproportionate enlargement of (DD)/intellectual disability (ID) and feeding difﬁculties. eyeballs(transverse diameter >32mm,NR mean 24,5mm). Additional features include higher prevalence of autism At 12 years, a routine heart ultrasound detected an aortic spectrum disorder (ASD), joint contractures, sleep apnea dilatation(aorticroot+3SD,ascendingaorta+7SD),also and lowered bone density. progressive, prompting funnel replacement of aortic Materials and methods: - Variants were identiﬁed by ascending aorta at 18 years. Dilatation of the brachioce- whole exome sequencing or using a NGS custom panel phalic arterial trunk and bilateral carotid dysplasia are containing a set of genes involved in ID, ASD and other observed, raising the hypothesis of a connective tissue common genetic conditions. - Sanger sequencing was disorder. Blindness in the left eye with phtisis bulbum performed to determine whether the variant was de novo occurredat27years.Transientischemicattacksoccurredat or inherited. - Methylation-sensitive digestion followed by 29 years manifesting by focal neurologic deﬁcits. A 31 PCR ampliﬁcationwasusedtoascertaintheparentalorigin genes TAAD panel did not identify any mutation. A trio of the variants. WES yielded two relevant Results: a de novo CCDC51 Results: MAGEL2 variants were found on the paternal c.634C>T(p.R212X) variant and a BCORL1 compound allele in all four subjects. Two of them were paternally heterozygosity c.3158A>G(p.K1530R) and c.185T>C(p. inherited while the other two were de novo. A detailed L62P). No disease-causing mutation in BCORL1 has been clinical description of these individuals and a review of identiﬁedsofar.Wesuggestthatthissingularassociationof previously reported cases will be provided. progressive megalophthalmia and dilatation of the great Conclusions: MAGEL2 truncating variants are a hitherto vessels is not coincidental and represents a new entity unrecognized likely “common” cause of syndromic distal awaiting description of additional cases to be conﬁrmed. arthrogryposis but the exact proportion of cases explained Functionalstudiesareunderwaytoconﬁrmthishypothesis. bythisgenestillneedstobeascertained.Wesuggestthata M.G. Serey-Gaut: None. E. Faudi: None. D. Schor- speciﬁc analysis pipeline that does not include inheritance deret: None. E. Gillis: None. M. Saleh: None. C. ﬁltering should be used for the analysis of imprinted genes Schwartz:None.C.Cabrol:None.A.Verstraeten:None. suchasMAGEL2.Thisworkwassupportedbyagrantofthe B. Loeys: None. L. Van Maldergem: None. Spanish Institute of Health Carlos III, ISCIII (PI13/02010). M. Pacio Míguez*: None. F. Santos-Simarro*: None. P11.050B S. García-Miñaúr: None. P. Tirado Requero: None. E. Truncating variants in the paternally expressed allele of Vallespín: None. Á. del Pozo: None. M. Solís: None. D. MAGEL2 as a common cause of syndromic distal Rodríguez Galiano: None. R. Martín Arenas: None. H. arthrogryposis González Pecellín: None. V. Rufo Rabadán: None. E. Galán:None.A.MartínezBermejo:None.L.Salamanca M.PacioMíguez*1,F.Santos-Simarro*1,2,S.García-Miñaúr1,2, Fresno: None. P. Lapunzina Badía: None. M. Palo- P. TiradoRequero3, E.Vallespín1,2,Á. del Pozo1,2,M.Solís1,2, mares-Bralo: None. D.RodríguezGaliano1,2, R.Martín Arenas1,2,H.González Pecellín1,2,V.RufoRabadán1,E.Galán4,A.MartínezBermejo3, P11.051C L. SalamancaFresno5, P.Lapunzina Badía1,2,M. Palomares- Melorheostosis and vascular anomalies associated with Bralo1,2 KRAS mosaicism 1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) V. Seidel1, E.Guillén2, V.M. Martínez-Glez3,Á. M.Lancharro Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz., Madrid, Spain, Zapata4,F.BallesterosTejerizo5,V.A.ParraBlanco6,A.García 2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Martín7,A.SalcedoPosadas8,A.CervantesPardo9,M.Campos Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII., Madrid, Spain, 3Servicio de Domínguez10 Neurología Infantil. Hospital Universitario La Paz., Madrid, Spain, 4Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital MaternoAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 365 1Clinical Genetics, Hospital MI Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, P11.052D Spain, 2Clinical Genetics, Hospital Clínico Universitario A microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarﬁsm type Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 3INGEMM, Hospital 2 case with a homozygous novel mutation in PCNT UniversitarioLaPaz,Madrid,Spain,4RadiologyDepartment, Hospital MI Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 5Pediatric Z. ManavKabayegit1,E. Can1,B. KipcakYuzbasi1,M. Altan1, Cardiology, Hospital MI Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, A. Jackson2,G.Bozkurt1,A. Tosun1 6Pathology Department, Hospital GU Gregorio Marañón, Madrid,Spain,7Orthopedics,HospitalMIGregorioMarañón, 1Adnan Menderes University, Aydın, Turkey, 2Institute of Madrid, Spain, 8Pediatric Pneumology, Hospital MI Gregorio Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, United Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 9Pediatrics, Hospital Clínico Kingdom Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 10Dermatology, Hospital MI Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Introduction: Microcephalic Osteodysplastic Primordial Spain Dwarﬁsm Type 2 (MOPD2) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome with extreme prenatal and postnatal growth Introduction: Melorheostosis is a rare sclerosing bone retardation, microcephaly, characteristic facial appearance dysplasia resembling dripping candle-wax along bones on and skeletal ﬁndings, caused by biallelic mutations in the radiographs and usually follows a sclerotomal distribution. Pericentringene(PCNT).WereportacaseofMOPD2with Often neighbouring extraosseous anomalies are associated, a novel mutation in PCNT. i.e. scleroderma-like skin changes. We present a case of Materials and methods: Targeted next-generation polyostotic melorheostosis with multiple vascular (arterial, sequencing (NGS) including PCNT gene was performed lymphatic) anomalies and a hyperpigmented patch. in the case with the clinical diagnosis of MOPD2 at the Case description: A 12 year old girl was referred for InstituteofGeneticsandMolecularMedicine,inEdinburgh assessment.Familyandprenatalhistorywereunremarkable. University. She was born preterm with normal birthweight. She had Results: A 17-year-old male who had a history of congenital chylothorax and aortic coarctation. Diffuse repetitive afebrile seizures, was consulted to the genetics pulmonary lymphangiomatosis caused a moderate restric- departmentwhilebeinginternedattheemergencywarddue tive lung disease. Stenosis of other arteries (superior to respiratory distress, confusion, and hypertension. The mesenteric artery, celiac trunk and right renal artery, case had severe growth retardation and microcephaly, with causing hypertension) were detected. Sclerosing bone a height of 98 cm [-11,35 SD], and OFC of 38 cm [-11,64 changes became apparent and affected only the upper left SD]. Dysmorphic features included a prominent nose, side of her body (from metacarpal bones to scapula, micrognathia, microdontia, sparse hair, hyper- extending to ribs and vertebral bodies, causing scoliosis), hypopigmented skin lesions and clinodactyly. MRI angio- characteristic of melorheostosis. She had normal growth graphy showed a “cigarette smoke” view that is suggestive parameters and no learning difﬁculties. On examination, ofMoyamoyadisease.X-raysshowedsmalliliacwingsand upper limb and rib cage asymmetry were evident.Also a coxa vara. Targeted NGS analysis of PCNT revealed a largehyperpigmentedpatchwithgeographicbordersonher novel homozygous variant, c.3465-1G>A, in the patient. trunk, and a reddened soft plaque at the lower neck Parents were heterozygous for the same variation. It is (lymphatic malformation on biopsy). predicted to be disease causing by disrupting the splice Results:NGSofthecervicallymphaticmalformationand region of the exon 18. the hyperpigmented patch revealed mosaicism for a Conclusion: MOPD2 signiﬁcantly overlaps with the heterozygous KRAS mutation (Q61H): 40% and 4%, Primary autosomal recessive microcephaly/Seckel syn- respectively. The mutation was absent in blood leukocytes. drome spectrum, but deﬁnitive diagnosis is important Conclusions: The same KRAS mutation was detected in regarding follow-up of vascular central neural system another case of melorheostosis with no vascular anomalies. complications, such as Moyamoya disease. Identiﬁcation Our case contributes to the hypothesis of a postzygotic of the disease-causing mutation is important for early mosaicismasthediseasecausingmechanismofmelorheos- prenatal diagnosis. tosis and widens the clinical spectrum of mosaic Z. Manav Kabayegit: None. E. Can: None. B. Kipcak RASopathies. Yuzbasi: None. M. Altan: None. A. Jackson: None. G. V. Seidel: None. E. Guillén: None. V.M. Martínez- Bozkurt: None. A. Tosun: None. Glez: None. Á.M. Lancharro Zapata: None. F. Balles- teros Tejerizo: None. V.A. Parra Blanco: None. A. P11.053A García Martín: None. A. Salcedo Posadas: None. A. Growth pattern and morphologicalcharacteristics of the Cervantes Pardo: None. M. Campos Domínguez: None. ﬁngers in Mowat-Wilson syndrome366 J.delPicchia S. MIZUNO1, M.Inaba1, Y. Muramatsu1,H. Taniai1, sever laxity of wrist joints, delayed bone age, ﬂat feet and K. Yamada2,N.Wakamatsu3 cryptorchidism. Material & methods: Whole Exome Sequencing were 1Central Hospital Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, used to enrich all exons of protein-coding genes as well as Aichi, Japan, 2Institute of Developmental Research, Aichi some important other genomic regions. Next generation Human Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan, 3Takamatsu sequencingwasperformedtosequencecloseto100million Municipal Hospital, Takamatsu, Kagawa, Japan readsonIlluminaSequencer.Bioinformaticsanalysisofthe sequencing results was performed using international Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MOWS) is caused by de novo databases and standard bioinformatics software. This heterozygous loss of function mutations or deletions of the mutation was conﬁrmed in proband and parents by sanger ZEB2 gene. Patients present with mental retardation, epi- sequencing. lepsy, and characteristic facies. Health care for genetic Result: Whole Exome sequencing identiﬁed a novel syndromes requires data on standard growth patterns; stopgain homozygous variant c.C958T p.R320X in exon 9 however, data on patients with MOWS have not been of the EXOC6B gene. The variant was assessed by documented in detail. We report growth patterns and other analytical software and multiple databases. Genotype- physicalcharacteristicsofpatientswithMOWS.Thisstudy Phenotype correlation and co-segregation analysis was collected physical measurements of patients with MOWS conﬁrmed among family members to conﬁrm the patho- and examined the ﬁnger morphology. Our results showed genicity of the alteration. that the physical ﬁndings characteristic of this syndrome Discussion: Here we report for the second time a novel included measurements at birth showing values within the mutationintheEXOC6Bgeneknowntocausethisdifferent normal range, with subsequent postnatal growth impair- typeofskeletaldysplasiainanIranianpatient.Tilldateonly ment, microcephaly and thin habitus. Fingers in patients onemutationwasreported inthisgene(Girishetal.,2016). with MOWS are bamboo-like, long and thin, with promi- S. Seyedhassani: None. Z. Ravesh: None. M. Ebra- nent joints. The skin is thin, mildly redundant, and hyper- himi: None. L. Najaﬁ: None. extensible. Combined with the typical facial characteristics of MOWS, these ﬁndings could be a clue to phenotypic P11.055C diagnosis in this syndrome. Analysis of mutational load in Joubert syndrome genes in S. Mizuno: None. M. Inaba: None. Y. Muramatsu: affected individuals compared to controls None. H. Taniai: None. K. Yamada: None. N. Wakamatsu: None. I.G.Phelps1,J. Dempsey1,M. Grout1,D.Doherty1, R. Bachmann-Gagescu2 P11.054B Report of a case with multiple joint dislocation syndrome 1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, associated with a homozygous pathogenic mutation in the 2University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland EXOC6B gene Next-generation sequencing frequently uncovers multiple S. Seyedhassani1,2,Z. Ravesh2,M.Ebrahimi1,L. Najaﬁ3 rare, predicted-deleterious variants (RDVs) in different genes associated with the same recessive disorder in any 1Dr. Seyedhassani medical genetic center, Yazd, Iran, Islamic individual, described as “mutational load”. While such Republic of, 2Genomic research center, Shahid Beheshti RDVscouldcontributeto“oligogenicinheritance”oractas medical science university, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, “genetic modiﬁers”, their clinical signiﬁcance remains 3Kharazmi university, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of unclear. Focusing on the genetically highly heterogeneous recessive ciliopathy Joubert syndrome (JBTS), we under- Introduction: Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) took a systematic analysis of RDVs in 25 JBTS genes, is an inherited disorder characterised by joint dislocation at comparing~400affectedindividualswithJBTStoin-house birth, thin limbs, joint laxity, poor bone classiﬁcation and controls and to UK1958 birth-cohort per-sample exome delayed bone age. Skeletal dysplasia with multiple joint data. Using criteria for deleteriousness established in the dislocation are various group of disorders comprising dif- JBTS cohort, we identiﬁed a surprisingly large number of ferential diagnosis. controls harboring RDVs in JBTS genes (~30%), whereby Case: A 21 month old boy with multiple joint disloca- the type/distribution of variants in controls differed sub- tions joint laxity, born to consanguineous parents was stantially from the causal alleles in affected individuals, referred to our clinic of genetic. Patient suffered from hip, suggesting that despite the predictions, the majority of kneeandelbowdislocation,jointslackness,kyphoscoliosis, variants in controls are not disease-causing. RDVs in ≥2Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 367 geneswerecommoninaffectedindividualsandincontrols, Syndrome and explains our patient’s clinical ﬁndings. as predicted by allele frequencies in ExAC (probability of Parental karyotypes were normal. heterozygous RDVs in any 2 of 25 genes =~9%). 38% of Conclusions: Nablus mask-like facial syndrome is a rare affected individuals carried bi-allelic causal variants in one microdeletion syndrome. According to the literature, this is gene plus additional RDVs in other gene(s). Phenotypic the ﬁrst time that NMLFS and Klinefelter’s Syndrome are discordance was observed between 60% of affected indi- together in a patient. vidualssharingidenticalcausalalleles,supportingexistence Reference: Raas-Rothschild A., Dijkhuizen T. et al., of genetic modiﬁers. However, the presence of RDVs in European Journal of Medical Genetics 52(2009) 140-144 additiontocausalvariantsdidnotcorrelatewithphenotypic Ö. Anlaş: None. B. Sarıkepe: None. S. Zeybek: None. severity, indicating that simple addition of RDV numbers M. Öztürk: None. G. Bağcı: None. G.O. Çetin: None. has no predictive value. While interpretation of the pheno- typic effect of RDVs remains challenging, comparison of P11.057A variant types/distribution between causal alleles and con- NBASassociateddisease:furtherdeﬁningthephenotypeof trol/additional alleles can provide valuable insights. a recognizable syndrome I.G.Phelps:None.J.Dempsey:None.M.Grout:None. D. Doherty: None. R. Bachmann-Gagescu: None. D.Carli1, E.Giorgio2,3,F. Pantaleoni4,S. Barresi4, G.Baldassarre1,E. Riberi1,F. Licciardi1,S. Pizzi4,A. Ciolﬁ4, P11.056D A. Gazzin1,D.Montin1, C.Molinatto1, A.Brusco2,3, The co-existence of Nablus Mask-Like Facial Syndrome M.Tartaglia4,G.B. Ferrero1 and Klinefelter Syndrome 1University of Torino, Department of Public Health and Ö.Anlaş1,B.Sarıkepe2,S.Zeybek1,M.Öztürk1,G.Bağcı1,G.O. Pediatrics,Torino,Italy,2UniversityofTorino,Departmentof Çetin1 Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, 3Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Torino, 1Medical School Of Pamukkale University Department Of Italy, 4Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Medical Genetics, Denizli, Turkey, 2State Hospital, Adana, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy Turkey Introduction: Biallelic pathogenic variants in the NBAS Introduction:Nablusmask-likefacialsyndrome(NMLFS) geneareassociatedwithtwodifferentphenotypes:infantile is a rare microdeletion syndrome. A mask-like facial liverfailuresyndrome2(OMIM616483)andshortstature, appearance is the characterized symptom of disease. Here optic nerve atrophy, and Pelger-Huet anomaly (SOPH) we report the co-existence of NMLFS together with Kli- syndrome (OMIM 614800). nefelter Syndrome in a patient, for the ﬁrst time in the lit- Patients and Methods: two unrelated patients, a 4-year- erature, to the best of our knowledge. old female and a 7-year-old male, were referred to our Clinical Report: A ﬁve years old male patient was Genetics Unit. They presented with a highly overlapping referred to our clinic because of speech delay, growth phenotype, characterized by prenatal hyposomatism retardation,mentalretardationanddysmorphicfeatures.He evolved into harmonic short stature, persistent hypertransa- was a born at 38 weeks gestational age to non- minasemia, hypogammaglobulinemia and hypovision. The consanguineous parents. His weight, height and head second patient also presented congenital glaucoma and circumference percentiles were <3p at the time of physical primary hypothyroidism. They both presented slight examination. Microcephaly, hyperthelorism, upper epi- psychomotor delay and mild dysmorphic facial features canthus, wide nasal base, high arched plate, micrognatia, with hypotelorism, smooth philtrum and narrow mouth. protruding ears and hypomimic, mask-like face were the Both patients were enrolled in the Undiagnosed Patients otherphysicalexaminationﬁndings.Hiselectrocardiogram, Program of the Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù. Whole hearing test, abdominal USG and cranial MR were normal exome sequencing and cDNA analysis were performed on and Denver II developmental screening test showed probands’ genomic DNA and RNA extracted from PBMC, development delay. The patient’s karyotype was 47,XXY, respectively. compatiblewithKlinefeltersyndrome.Sincethiskaryotype Results: Both patients carried a nonsense mutation in wasnotenoughtoexplainthepatient’sdysmorphicfeatures NBAS (NM_015909.3; p.Arg501* and p.Ser230fs*4) in andmotor andmentalretardationwe performed microarray compound heterozygosity with the synonymous variant analysis. The microarray analyses revealed a 5,024 Kb c.6840G>A (p.Thr2280Thr). This variant (MAF< 0.00001, deletion on 8q21.3q22.1 which contains 17 OMIM genes. ExAC) affects the last nucleotide of exon 51, and cDNA This deleted region is the region associated with NMLF368 J.delPicchia analysisdemonstrateditspathogenicity,causingskippingof pending on variants validation by Sanger; and phenotypic the exon. and genotypic (WES) characterization is ﬁnished in 18 Conclusion: The presence of biallelic inactivating cases,ofwhich13(72.2%)havebeendiagnosed.In77%of variants in NBAS in the presently reported cases prompts diagnosed cases the causal variant corresponded to a ‘de theuniﬁcationofdependentinfantileliverfailuresyndrome novo’ mutation (frameshift and stopgain variants). 2 and SOPH syndrome in a single autosomal recessive Conclusions: For the still undiagnosed cases, functional condition characterized by variable association of hyper- studies are expected. Moreover, SpainUDP participates in transaminasemia, recurrent acute liver failure, short stature, international initiatives such as the European projects RD- bonefragility,oculardefectsandimmunesystemdisorders. ConnectandSolveRD,theUndiagnosedDiseasesNetwork D.Carli:None.E.Giorgio:None.F.Pantaleoni:None. International (UDNI), and the MatchMaker Exchange S.Barresi:None.G.Baldassarre:None.E.Riberi:None. platform, sharing phenotypic and genotypic data to ﬁnd F. Licciardi: None. S. Pizzi: None. A. Ciolﬁ: None. A. cases with similar proﬁles to get a diagnosis. Gazzin: None. D. Montin: None. C. Molinatto: None. A. B. Martínez-Delgado: None. E. López: None. S. Brusco: None. M. Tartaglia: None. G.B. Ferrero: None. Monzón: None. I. Cuesta: None. V. Aquino: None. A. Damián: None. I. Gonzalo: None. C. Rodríguez-Martín: P11.058B None. G. Gómez-Mariano: None. A. Navarro: None. S. Trio based exome analysis results at the Spanish Ramos: None. J. Lara: None. E. Román: None. M.R. Undiagnosed Rare Diseases Program, SpainUDP Cazorla:None.G.Iglesias:None.P.RosPérez:None.P. Tutor: None. S.T. Mellor: None. M.J. Cabrejas: None. B. Martínez-Delgado1,E. López1,S. Monzón2,I.Cuesta2, C.Jiménez:None.F.J.Alonso:None.E.Bermejo:None. V. Aquino1,A. Damián1,I.Gonzalo1,C.Rodríguez-Martín1, M. Posada: None. G.Gómez-Mariano1,A. Navarro1, S.Ramos1,J.Lara3, E. Román3,M.R. Cazorla3, G.Iglesias3,P. RosPérez3, P11.059C P. Tutor3,S. T.Mellor3, M.J.Cabrejas3,C. Jiménez3,F.J. Whole exome sequencing analysis candidates MRVI1 as a Alonso1,E. Bermejo1,M.Posada1 potential susceptibility gene for Moyamoya syndrome and cerebral arteriopathies in Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 1InstitutodeInvestigacióndeEnfermedadesRaras.Institutode SaludCarlosIII(IIER/ISCIII),Majadahonda,Madrid,Spain, C. Santoro1,T. Giugliano2,M.Kraemer3,A. Torella2, 2Bioinformatics Unit. Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), J.Schwitalla4,M. Cirillo5,P. Berlit6,V. Nigro6,S. Perrotta6, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Puerta de Hierro, G.Piluso6 Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain 1Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialistic Introduction: SpainUDP is the Spanish Undiagnosed Rare Surgery,Università degli Studi della Campania “Luigi Diseases Program, implemented by the Institute of Rare Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Medicina di Diseases Research (IIER) of the Institute of Health Carlos Precisione, Università degli Studi della Campania “Luigi III (ISCIII). Since 2015 works in collaboration with Hos- Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy, 3Department of Neurology,Alfried pital Puerta de Hierro (Madrid) which supports detailed KruppHospital,,Essen,Germany,4DepartmentofNeurology, clinicalexaminationandcomplementarystudiesofpatients. AlfriedKruppHospital,Essen,Italy,5eDipartimentodiScienze SpainUDP aims to ﬁnd a deﬁnitive diagnosis to patients Mediche, Chirurgiche, Neurologiche, Metaboliche e with undiagnosed rarediseases, throughamultidisciplinary dell'Invecchiamento,Università degli Studi della Campania approach (by clinicians, geneticists, bioinformaticians and “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy, 6Università degli Studi della researchers). Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy Materials and methods: Taking advantage of next generation sequencing techniques, mainly whole exome Introduction: Moyamoya disease (MMD) is a progressive analysis (WES) is performed by trio analysis. In addition, cerebral vasculopathy. The p.(Arg4810Lys) substitution in Phenotipssoftwareisusedforanaccurateandstandardized RNF213islinkedtoMMDinAsians.Recentlyseveralrare description of phenotypes (through HPO, Human Pheno- variants in RNF213 have been associated to MMD in eur- type Ontology). opeans. People with neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) are Results: In 2015-2017, 135 cases were accepted in particularly prone to develope this angiopathy thus called SpainUDP.Duringthistime,37cases(27.4%)droppedout syndrome (MMS). Intriguingly, most cases of NF1-related theprogramduetodiversereasons.Theremaining98cases MMS have been described in Caucasians, inverting the aredistributedasfollows:40casesareinadeepphenotypic population ratio for MMD observed in Asians. Additive characterization; WES is ongoing for 33 cases; 7 cases areAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 369 genetic factors, independent of the NF1 locus, may con- Patients and Results: We present the molecular proﬁle tribute to the pathogenesis of MMS. of 45 unrelated Polish NF1 and neuroﬁbromatosis-Noonan Methods:Wecarriedoutawholeexomestudyinalarge patients (and 26 affected family members), expanded by Italian family with MMS-NF1 co-occurrence in two ﬁrst analysis of potential modiﬁers within other nuclear genes cousinsandminorcerebralvasculopathiesinNF1relatives. and mtDNA. Using MLPA and NGS sequencing we Results:NoneoftheRNF213variantsalreadyreportedor identiﬁed 40 different pathogenic/probably pathogenic other rare variants were found yet the p.(Pro186Ser) NF1variants(includingwhole-genedeletions/duplications), substitution (rs35857561) in MRVI1 segregated with nearly half of them novel. Mutation detection rate in the MMSandotherminorcerebralvasculopathiesinourItalian entire study cohort was 92%, familial cases constituted family. 56%. To evaluate the potential inﬂuence of molecular Conclusions: MRVI1 is a functional partner of ITPR1, modiﬁers, clinical exomes of 37 NF1-positive probands PRKG1 and GUCY1A3, differently related to MMS and wereanalysed,revealingvariantsinotherclinicallyrelevant other vasculopathies, all involved in response to NO. The genes (oncologic, cardiac, neurologic, cutaneous or rs35857561 substitution has got a higher MAF in immune), including DNA repair-related genes. Co- Europeans than in Asians. The variant segregated with occurrence of another Ras/MAPK gene variant and two more patients with MMS form a further NF1 German concomitance of Silver-Russell syndrome were noted in 6 family.The11p15.4cytoband,whereMRVI1islocated,has and1patients,respectively.MitochondrialDNAanalysisin been linked to retinal vessel diameter, with the D11S1999 59 NF1 cases excluded known mutations, but did show marker closely located to the 5'UTR of MRVI1. These several secondary/synergistic/modiﬁer alterations or risk reasons support the hypothesis that MRVI, and the p. factorsforneurological,cardiovascular,metabolicdisorders (Pro186Ser) substitution, might really represent a suscept- or cancerogenesis. ibility factor for MMS in Caucasians with NF1. Conclusions:Ourstudycontributestofurtherdelineation C. Santoro: None. T. Giugliano: None. M. Kraemer: of the NF1 molecular proﬁle and presents new data None. A. Torella: None. J. Schwitalla: None. M. Cirillo: concerning potential factors inﬂuencing clinical variability None.P.Berlit:None.V.Nigro:None.S.Perrotta:None. of the disease. More detailed correlation/differentiation G. Piluso: None. studiesforNF1-relatedphenotypesmayleadtoanupdateof the diagnostic criteria and future therapeutics. P11.060D Supported by CMHI projects: S140/2014, 234/15. The molecular proﬁle of Polish patients with M. Pelc: None. P. Halat-Wolska: None. D. Wicher: neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 and neuroﬁbromatosis-Noonan None. E. Ciara: None. J. Kosińska: None. P. Stawiński: syndrome: do additional genetic factors affect the None. A. Cieślikowska: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramc- phenotypic variability among NF1-positive patients? zuk: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. D. Siestrzykowska: None. B. Chałupczyńska: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. P. M.Pelc1,P.Halat-Wolska1,D.Wicher1,E.Ciara1,J.Kosińska2, Kowalski: None. M. Jędrzejowska: None. R. Płoski: P. Stawiński2,3,A.Cieślikowska1, D.Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: None. K. D.Jurkiewicz1,D.Siestrzykowska1,B. Chałupczyńska1, Chrzanowska: None. M.Rydzanicz2, P.Kowalski1, M.Jędrzejowska1,R.Płoski2, M.Krajewska-Walasek1,K. Chrzanowska1 P11.061A Neuroﬁbromatosis-Noonan syndrome diagnosed in an 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial infant of a three-generation NF1 family Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, J.Kárteszi1,B. Elmont2,J. Bene3,M. Buzogány2, M.Tihanyi1 3Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland 1Genetic Laboratory, Zalaegerszeg, Hungary, 2Department of Paediatrics, Zalaegerszeg, Hungary, 3Department of Medical Introduction: Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a RASo- Genetics, Pécs, Hungary pathy characterized by neuro-cutaneous abnormalities and predisposition to tumorigenesis. Despite molecular homo- Neuroﬁbromatosis-Noonan syndrome (NFNS, MIM: geneity (NF1 gene mutations), signiﬁcant phenotypic 601321) is a peculiar entity characterized by the clinical variability is observed, not only among unrelated NF1 signs of both Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) and Noonan patients, but also within affected families. Consequently, a syndrome (NS). The features of Noonan syndrome mainly possible correlation of NF1 clinical spectrum with addi- facial dysmorphism and short stature accompany the char- tional genetic factors (“modiﬁers”) has been inferred. acteristicsofNF1ascafé-au-laitspotsandskeletalchanges.370 J.delPicchia Neuroﬁbromas and Lisch nodules are less frequently also been identiﬁed in 17 patients referred to as Sotos 2 or observedinthisNF1variant.Inmostofthecasespublished Malan syndrome (MS, MIM614753). until now a heterozygous mutation in NF1 gene was We present two brothers aged 23 and 7 years with ID, determined. It was also demonstrated that RAS-MAPK craniofacialdysmorphism(macrodolichocephaly,highfore- pathway is affected and neuroﬁbromin is a negative reg- head and anterior hairline, long face, downslanting ulatorofthissignaltransductionpathway.Therefore,NFNS palpebral ﬁssures, low-set dysplastic ears, prominent chin) belongs to the so called RASopathies with Noonan and andmusculoskeletal,ocularandCNSabnormalities.Exome Noonan-like syndromes. Classical mutations causing NF1 sequencing identiﬁed an identical de novo NFIX exon 2 phenotype can also cause NFNS. variantNM_001271043.2:c.370C>Tp.(Arg124Trp)inboth Wepresentathree-generationfamilywiththeclinicaland brothers. The variant was also in 1/95 reads in the father. genetic diagnosis of NF1 following autosomal dominant Thiscouldbeanerrororcontamination,butitmayindicate inheritance (all affected family members meet the NIH- mosaicism (including germline mosaicism). Paternal origin consensuscriteria forNF1).Theprobandisa6-months-old ofthevariantwassupportedalsobyhaplotypeanalysis:the boy with multiple café-au-lait spots, failure to thrive, brothers carried different copies of maternal 19p13 but relative macrocephaly and facial minor anomalies resem- sharedapaternalhaplotype.Thevariantwaspredictedtobe bling Noonan syndrome. Mutation was determined in the deleteriousandwasabsentfromalldatabases(ESP,ExAC, familytobec.499_502del4bpinheterozygousform.Asfar gnomAD,GEEVS).Asubstitutionaffectingtheneighbour- as we know this mutation was not published previously in ing residue, p.(Arg123Trp), has been reported in one MS connection with NFNS. patient. The origin of this interesting phenotype is still debated, These two new cases of MS help to deﬁne the clinical the most accepted concept keeps it an NF1 variant and a picture of MS and underscore the recent notion that a recent publication suggests that fetal environmental factors signiﬁcant fraction (4-10%) of de novo mutations can may also play a role in the evolvement. We discuss in our originate from germline mosaics, with consequences for poster the current knowledge about the pathogenesis of recurrence risks. RASopathies and focus on the unanswered questions Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203. regarding NFNS. M. Havlovicová: None. M. Hančárová: None. J. J.Kárteszi:None.B.Elmont:None.J.Bene:None.M. Vetička:None.D.Prchalová:None.V.Stránecký:None. Buzogány: None. M. Tihanyi: None. Z. Sedláček: None. P11.062B P11.063C Two brothers with Malan syndrome and identical Panel based next generation sequencing: pathogenicity seemingly de novo missense NFIX variant due to probable assessment of novel variants and their impact in genetic paternal germline mosaicism identiﬁed using exome counseling sequencing F. Cantarella1, G.Moya1,N.Loreti1,M.Capelli1,L. Espeche1, M.Havlovicová1,M. Hančárová1,J.Vetička2,D.Prchalová1, M.Samara1,S.López1,M.Obregón2,M.Villanueva3,A.Solari4, V. Stránecký3,Z. Sedláček1 P.Vega5,S.SantillánGarzón6,C.Moya6,M.Gil6,V.Ferreiro1 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical 1Genos S.A., Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Sección Genética. Faculty, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, DepartamentodePediatría.HospitalItalianodeBuenosAires, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Genetika Ostrava s. r. o., Ostrava, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3FLENI. Fundación de Lucha para Czech Republic, 3Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent las EnfermedadesNeurológicasdelaInfancia., BuenosAires, Medicine, Diagnostic and Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Argentina, 4Clínica Zabala., Buenos Aires, Argentina, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General 5Consultorio y laboratorio de neurogenética. Centro University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic universitario de neurología. Hospital J.M. Ramos Mejía., BuenosAires,Argentina,6SistemasGenómicosS.L.,Valencia, Overgrowth syndromes combine height greater than two Spain SDsabovethemeanandotherfeatures.Thebestrecognised is Sotos syndrome (MIM117550), an autosomal dominant Introduction: Identiﬁcation of disease-causing mutations disorder with distinctive facial features, intellectual dis- has been tremendously accelerated by Next Generation ability (ID), body overgrowth in early life and macro- Sequencing (NGS) implementation. However, the beneﬁts cephaly.MutationsinNSD1arefound in90%ofcases.De offered by NGS come with a number of challenges. Novel novo mutations in the initial exons of NFIX in 19p13 have variants`pathogenicityassignmentisoneofthebiggest,butAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 371 in some cases, it might be clarify by a detailed clinical P11.064D history and a multidisciplinary approach. Application of panel next generation sequencing in the Aim: Determine the pathogenicity of novel variants in diagnosis and clinical differentiation of patients with order to give the correct genetic counseling to families. Noonan syndrome clinical suspicion Materials and Methods: 80 non related cases were analyzed using NGS panels. Detailed clinical data and N.Bezniakow1, M.Gos1,A. Landowska1,A. Abramowicz1, genealogies were noted. Written informed consent was O.Kordowska1,S. Rzońca1, J.Sawicka1,T. Gambin2, obtained from all families before testing. The NGS capture J.Klapecki1,A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1,J. Wierzba3,4, panelsweredesignedandvalidatedbySistemasGenómicos R. Śmigiel5,A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk6,M.Karpiński7, with CE marking certiﬁcate for diagnosis, and performed A. Doraczyńska-Kowalik8,M. Piotrowicz9, T. Chilarska9, withIlluminatechnology.Thevariantswereanalyzedusing R.Ślęzak8,E.Kaczorowska10,M.Krygier10,K.Wojciechowska11, GeneSystemssoftware.Familieswereassessedandadvised J.Pilch12,R.Posmyk13,E. Obersztyn1,J.Bal1 by clinical geneticists. Results:Novellikelypathogenicvariantswerefoundin5 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and families, and conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Computer Science, The table describes the variants found in patients, and Warsaw University of Technology, Warsaw, Poland, their clinical diagnosis. 3Department and Clinic of Pediatrics, Hematooncology, Oncology and Endocrinology, Medical University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland, 4Department of General Nursing, Medical Case Panel NovelVariation Gene Clinical zigocity diagnosis University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland, 5Department of Social 1 Intellectual NM_004456.4: EZH2 Weaver heterozygous Pediatrics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland, disability c.2030A>G Syndrome, 6Department of Pediatric Neurology and Rehabilitation, p.Asp677Gly (autosomal dominant) MedicalUniversityofBiałystok,Białystok,Poland,7Instituteof 2 Neurology NM_014946.3: SPAST Spastic heterozygous Cardiology, Jagiellonian University School of Medicine, c.165C>A Paraplegia4, p.Tyr55* (autosomal Cracow, Poland, 8Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical dominant) University,Wrocław,Poland,9DepartmentofGenetics,Polish 3 Cardiology NM_000116.4: TAZ Leftventricular hemizygous c.202A>T noncompaction, Mother’s Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Łódź, p.Asn68Tyr (rXecelsinsikveed) Poland, 10Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical 4 Epilepsy NM_001165963.1: SCN1A Epilepsywith heterozygous University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk, Poland, 11Department of c.2665G>A CACNA1A Ataxia, Children Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology, p.Ala889Thr (autosomal NM_000068.3: dominant) Children’s University Hospital, Lublin, Poland, 12Department c.6739C>T p.Arg2247Trp of Pediatric Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, 5 Skeletal NM_001287.5: CLCN7 Osteopetrosis, homozygous Katowice, Poland, 13NZOZ Genetics, Center for Clinical dysplasia c.2229dupC (autosomal (Allele p. dominant/ deletionwas Genetics, Białystok, Poland Ser744LeufsTer183 recessive) ruledout byaCGH) Introduction: The implementation of the next generation sequencing (NGS) technique allowed not only to identify After deep molecular, clinical and genealogy analysis, novel genes related to disease etiology, but also sig- further complementary tests in relatives were performed. niﬁcantly improved molecular diagnosis of Noonan syn- Theseresultsallowedtheassessmentofpathogenicityofall drome(NS)andrelateddisorders.Theaimofthestudywas novel variants. Genetic counseling of families will be the identiﬁcation of pathogenic variants in novel and can- discussed. didate genes related to NS syndrome pathogenesis. Conclusion: A detailed clinical history in addition to the Materials and Methods: One hundred twenty-eight panel-based NGS technology, might allow the determina- patients with Noonan syndrome clinical diagnosis and tion of the pathogenicity of novel variants, improving the excluded mutations in PTPN11, RAF1, SOS1 and KRAS genetic counseling of the families involved. genes were tested with custom designed NGS panel F. Cantarella: None. G.Moya: None. N.Loreti: None. (SeqCap EZ Choice Library, Roche Diagnostics). Func- M. Capelli: None. L. Espeche: None. M. Samara: None. tional in silico and in vitro (when possible) studies of new S. López: None. M. Obregón: None. M. Villanueva: mutations were performed. None. A. Solari: None. P. Vega: None. S. Santillán Results: Panel testing allowed to identify pathogenic / Garzón: None. C. Moya: None. M. Gil: None. V. potentially pathogenic variants in 67 (52.3%) probands. Ferreiro: None. ThirtyofthemhadmutationinknownRASopathies-related genes including: NF1 (10pts, all patients besides facial372 J.delPicchia dysmorphy and other NS related symptomspresented CAL MAPK1,NKX3-2,HMX1,MYT1,OTX2,GSC,PUF60,and spots), BRAF (6pts), RIT1 (4pts, including twin sisters HOXA2, by Ion PGM System for Next-Generation suspected for NF1/NFNS), CBL (4pts) and SHOC2 (2pts, Sequencing (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc). In 89 individuals c.4A>G variant). The NGS panel also included genes studied(77patientsand12relatives),weidentiﬁedatotalof relatedtodisordersclinicallysimilartoNSandpathogenic/ 194 variants in DNA extracted from peripheral blood. In potentially pathogenic variants in these genes (particularly order to infer the potential pathogenicity of these variants, KMT2D,ARDI1A,ARID1B,CREBBP,KAT6B)werefound in silico analysis was performed using the prediction tools in24patients.Also,variantsinRASA2,MAP3K8,LZTR1or MutationTaster,FATHMM,PolyPhen2,andSIFT,aswell A2ML1 genes were found in single patients. No variants in as clinical databases such as ClinVar. Using these approa- SOS2 or PPP1CB were found. ches, seven SNVs, foundingenes YPEL1,MAPK1,CRKL, Conclusions: The implementation of panel testing is OTX2, and MYT1, were considered potentially pathogenic. beneﬁcial in the diagnosis of Noonan syndrome and other Also,44SNVswithunknownsigniﬁcancewerefound.Our RASopathies, although it seems that mutations in “novel” data conﬁrms the possible genetic heterogeneity in OAVS. genes are incidental. Financial Support: FAPESP 2016/18781-7. Supported from NCN research projects no. 2013/09/B/ M. Zamariolli: None. L.C. Santos: None. M.E.S. NZ2/03164. Colovati: None. A.B. Perez: None. S. Bragagnolo: None. N. Bezniakow: None. M. Gos: None. A. Landowska: M.I. Melaragno: None. None. A. Abramowicz: None. O. Kordowska: None. S. Rzońca: None. J. Sawicka: None. T. Gambin: None. J. P11.067C Klapecki: None. A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: None. J. Three unrelated Lithuanian cases of oculodentodigital Wierzba: None. R. Śmigiel: None. A. Jakubiuk-Tomas- dysplasia: phenotypic analysis and comparison to the zuk: None. M. Karpiński: None. A. Doraczyńska- literature Kowalik: None. M. Piotrowicz: None. T. Chilarska: None. R. Ślęzak: None. E. Kaczorowska: None. M. A. Matulevičienė1,2,K. iaurytė3, L.Cimbalistienė1,2, Krygier:None.K.Wojciechowska:None.J.Pilch:None. B.Burnytė1,2,L.Ambrozaitytė1,2,R.Mekienė1,2,V.Kučinskas2,4, R. Posmyk: None. E. Obersztyn: None. J. Bal: None. A. Utkus2 P11.065A 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Ten candidate genes sequenced in patients with oculo- Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human auriculo-vertebral spectrum and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, M.Zamariolli, L. C. Santos, M.E.S. Colovati,A. B. Perez, 3Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, S. Bragagnolo,M.I.Melaragno 4Lithuanian Academy of Sciences, Vilnius, Lithuania Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil Introduction: Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome, caused by a hetero- Oculo-auriculo-vertebralspectrum(OAVS)isacraniofacial zygous mutation in the GJA1 gene on chromosome 6q22. developmental disorder that mainly affects the structures Around 300 cases have been described in the scientiﬁc lit- derived from the ﬁrst and second pharyngeal arches. The erature. Features of ODDD include facial, skeletal, neuro- phenotype is heterogeneous and typically characterized by logical,cardiac,andocularanomalieswithhighpenetrance, abnormal mandibular, oral, and ear development. The intra-andinterfamilialphenotypicvariability,andadvanced spectrum’s etiology is complex and heterogeneous since paternal age in sporadic cases. genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors seem to be Materials and Methods: Three unrelated Lithuanian involved; however, the mechanisms are still not clear. patients with genetically conﬁrmed ODDD are reported. A Structure variations have been described as potentially girl,nowaged10,aboy,nowaged9,andagirl,nowaged pathogenic for the disorder, but evidences of single 2, with typical features of ODDD presented bilateral nucleotidevariants(SNVs)onspeciﬁcgenesarestillscarce. epicanthus, prominent columella, hypoplastic alae nasi, So far, MYT1 gene has been the only gene implicated in and enamel hypoplasia. Sanger sequencing of coding some patients with OAVS. Therefore, the investigation of regions of the GJA1 gene was performed for all cases. All single nucleotide variants (SNVs) on more candidate genes three identiﬁed variants were analyzed with previously is crucial to understanding this complex disorder. We reported ODDD phenotypes. investigated the coding and UTR regions of ten candidate Results: Molecular genetic analysis of the coding genes that may be relevant to OAVS: CRKL, YPEL1, sequences of GJA1 (NM_000165.4, NP_000156.1)Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 373 identiﬁedsuchpathogenicvariantsc.412G>A(p.G138S)in hypotrophy, growth retardation, GH deﬁciency, and osteo- the ﬁrst (CM086823), c.75G>T (p.W25C) in the second tendinous areﬂexia. The 2 brothers developed spinocer- (CM120084), and c.338T>C (p.L113P) in the third case ebellar ataxia, with cerebellar atrophy on MRI. Two (CM040074). Facial phenotype was consistent throughout heterozygous mutations of PNPLA6 (NM_006702) were the cases. In the literature these variants were associated identiﬁed [c.3241G>A / p.(Gly1081Arg) and c.3088C>T / with neurological anomalies, whereas in our cases such p.(Gln1030*)]. Recent identiﬁcation of biallelic mutations phenotype was not observed. Ocular ﬁndings as described of PNPLA6 gene in OMFS, conﬁrmed the autosomal for p.L113P, and p.W25C were only present in our case 2. recessiveinheritancesuspectedfrom many years (Hufnagel Cardiac phenotype for p.W25C has not been previously et al., 2015). Biallelic PNPLA6 mutations also induce 3 reported in association with ODDD, but was presented in other overlapping conditions: Boucher-Neuhauser syn- our case. drome(OMIM215470),Laurence-Moonsyndrome(OMIM Conclusions: Thorough examination, analysis of litera- 245800), and Gordon-Holmes syndrome (OMIM 212840). ture and molecular diagnosis are crucial for care improve- Mutations of PNPLA6 also caused an autosomal recessive ment and further disease management, especially when form of spasticparaplegia (OMIM 612020). Now, the term patients with rare syndromes are concerned. of « PNPLA6-related disorders » is used to designate this A. Matulevičienė: None. K. iaurytė: None. L. Cimba- group of diseases. listienė: None. B. Burnytė: None. L. Ambrozaitytė: G.Jedraszak:None.N.deRoux:None.F.Jobic:None. None. R. Mekienė: None. V. Kučinskas: None. A. R. Desailloud: None. H. Bony: None. S. Milazzo: None. Utkus: None. M. Mathieu-Dramard: None. G. Morin: None. P11.068D P11.069A Oliver-McFarlane syndrome: mutations of PNPLA6 and 14 years of experience of de Spanish Overgrowth Registry follow-up of 30 years in two brothers Consortium in the diagnostic of overgrowth disorders G.Jedraszak1,N.deRoux2,F.Jobic3,R.Desailloud4,H.Bony5, J.Tenorio,P.Arias,V.Romanelli,G.Gordo,S.García-Miñaur, S. Milazzo6,M.Mathieu-Dramard3, G.Morin3 F. Santos,I. Dapía,L. Rodríguez-Laguna, E.Vallespín, M.Palomares, A. DelPozo,F. García-Santiago,E. Mansilla, 1LaboratoryofHumanGenetics,Amiens,France,2Laboratoire M.Solís,K. Heath, Á.Campos, V. Martínez-Glez, de Biochimie-Hormonologie - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, T. Consortium, J.Nevado,P. Lapunzina France, 3Clinical Genetics, Amiens, France, 4Service of Endocrinology, Amiens, France, 5Pediatric Endocrinology, MedicalandMolecularGeneticsInstitute(INGEMM),Madrid, Amiens, France, 6Service of Ophthalmology, Amiens, France Spain Oliver-McFarlanesyndrome(OMIM275400)(OMFS),ﬁrst Introduction: Overgrowth syndromes (OGS) comprise a described in 1965, is a rare genetic condition associating heterogeneous group in which the main feature is the gen- multipleandcongenitalpituitaryhormonedeﬁciencies(GH, eralizedorpartialincreaseofgrowthabove2SD.Thereisa TSH, gonadotropins), trichomegaly, precocious and sever- high overlap of the clinical features among the OGS, echorioretinal atrophy chorioretinal atrophy chorioretinal making the clinical diagnosis a challenge. Since the estab- atrophy chorioretinal atrophy. If untreated, thyroid and GH lishment of the Spanish Overgrowth Registry (SOGRI) in abnormalities result in short stature and intellectual deﬁ- 2004,morethan2,000patientshavebeenstudied.Thus,the ciency. Most of patients have hypogonadism, congenital or aim of this project is to reﬂect our experience in of this revealed during adolescence, impacting their reproduction group of patients. capacity. Half of cases have progressive neurological trou- Material and Methods: This project was approved by bles (spinocerebellar ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, spastic the ethical committee of the hospital. To study the initial paraplegia). We report on 2 brothers, suspect of OMFS clinical suspicious, a battery of different methodologies from childhood (Mathieu et al., 1991). The eldest had were applied. For those patients who were negative for the severe temporal and occipital alopecia, long eyelashes and targeted analysis, screening for other genomic alterations eyebrows, hypolasia of tooth enamel, early chorioretinal was performed through SNP-arrays, cGH-arrays, NGS and atrophy with low vision, peripheral neuropathy, hypogo- functional validation if necessary. nadotropichypogonadism,GHdeﬁciency,andshortstature. Results: The average diagnostic yield in the total The youngest had the same physical appearance, tricho- syndromic and non-syndromic overgrowth was 50% and megaly, less severe alopecia, enamel tooth anomalies, ret- 25%, respectively. Up to date, three new entities were inal degeneration with low vision, micropenis, testicular described: CLAPO and Tenorio syndromes and a374 J.delPicchia ch19p13.3microdeletion/microduplicationsyndrome.Also, careful search in medical literature identiﬁed seven similar our group was involved in the development of several additional families, all of them being compatible with an clinical guidelines for overgrowth syndromes. AD mode of inheritance. Unfortunately, the corresponding Conclusions: Overall, the molecular conﬁrmation of an papersweretoooldtoallowareevaluation.BasedonWES initial clinical suspicious was about 50% in the SOGRI and segregation analysis performed in the current two cohort. Three new clinical entities and their underlying pedigrees, a variant in an interesting candidate gene was molecular defects were described, highlighting the impor- identiﬁed. Additional families will be necessary to conﬁrm tance of the application of new technology to study the this preliminary result. negatives cases. There are a relatively high number of M.G. Serey-Gaut: None. C. Cabrol: None. J. Vallat: patients without molecular conﬁrmation, suggesting the None. L. Tatu: None. B. Loeys: None. L. Van existence of new molecular mechanism that remain Maldergem: None. unknown and must be explore in the future. Grants: FIS-PI15/01481 P11.071C J.Tenorio:None.P.Arias:None.V.Romanelli:None. A new recognizable syndrome caused by mutations in the G. Gordo: None. S. García-Miñaur: None. F. Santos: PITX1 gene None. I. Dapía: None. L. Rodríguez-Laguna: None. E. Vallespín: None. M. Palomares: None. A. Del Pozo: M.Rossi1,2,G.Lesca1,2,N.Chatron1,2,A. Labalme1, None. F. García-Santiago: None. E. Mansilla: None. M. D.Sanlaville1,2,A.Fassier3,F. Escande4, S.Manouvrier5, Solís: None. K. Heath: None. Á. Campos: None. V. L. Faivre6,P. Edery1,2,D.Geneviève7 Martínez-Glez: None. T. Consortium: None. J. Nevado: None. P. Lapunzina: None. 1Service de génétique, Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Centre de Compétence Maladies Osseuses P11.070B Constitutionnelles, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, Autosomal dominant recurrent parotitis: an under- 2INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, Centre de Recherche en reported entity Neurosciences de Lyon, GENDEV Team, Bron, France, 3Service d’orthopédie pédiatrique, Centre de Compétence M.G.Serey-Gaut1,C. Cabrol1,J.Vallat2,L. Tatu3,B.Loeys4, Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles, Hospices Civils de L. VanMaldergem1 Lyon, Bron, France, 4Institut de Biochimie et Génétique moléculaire, CBP, CHRU de Lille et EA7364 Université de 1CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,CHUBesançon,Universitéde Lille, Lille, France, 5Clinique de Génétique médicale, Hôpital Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, 2Service de neurologie, Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille et EA7364 Université de Centre de Référence Neuropathies Périphérique Rares, CHU Lille, Lille, France, 6Service de Génétique et Centre de Limoges, Limoges, France, 3Service de Neurologie, CHU Référence Anomalies du Développement, Hôpital d'Enfants, Besançon, Université de Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 7Département de génétique, 4CentrumMedischeGenetica,UniversityofAntwerp,Antwerp, maladiesraresetmédecinepersonnalisée,CentredeRéférence Belgium MaladiesRaresSORO,InsermU1183,UniversitéMontpellier, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France Familial salivary glands inﬂammation is a rare condition of unknownaetiology,affectingmostlyparotidglands.Onlya We report the clinical and molecular characterization of a single British pedigree is referenced in OMIM. By evalu- previously undescribed syndrome observed in a family ating a 34 y-old French female patient suffering chronic (mother and son) and an unrelated child. recurrent parotitis since the age of 6 years, we uncovered a Patient 1, aged 3.5 years, presented with mandibular similar involvement in her father and her son, making hypoplasia, knee ﬂexion deformity, hyperlordosis, and autosomaldominant(AD)inheritancelikely.Inadditionthe prenatal-onset short stature (-2,5SD). Psychomotor devel- patient had a progressive distal four limbs muscle wasting, opment was normal as were cardiac and renal ultrasounds paresis and camptodactyly corresponding on nerve biopsy scans,andchromosomalmicroarray.Hismother(patient2) to focal alterations of the myelin sheet suggestive of a showed a similar phenotype: mandibular hypoplasia, knee demyelinating peripheral neuropathy, contrasting with instability requiring surgery, hyperlordosis, short stature apparently normal NCV. We are unable to conclude if the treatedbygrowthhormone(adultheight:160cm),recurrent motor impairment is coincidental or belonging to the clin- otitis during childhood, and myopia. Patient 3 was an ical spectrum of AD chronic parotitis since her affected unrelated child presenting with Pierre-Robin sequence and relatives had no motor impairment. Another family eval- patellar agenesis leading to knee ﬂexion deformity. uatedinBelgiumwasalsosuggestiveofADinheritance.A Psychomotor development and cardiac/renal ultrasoundsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 375 scanswerenormal.Radiologicalfeaturesincludedastriking hypoplasiaandribdefect1/21.Occasionalﬁndingsinclude: mandibular obtuse angle and narrow iliac wings. congenitalheartdefectfoundin7/21cases,spasmophylia2/ Whole exome sequencing detected heterozygous mis- 21andcleftlip/palatein1/21cases.Genetictestshavebeen sensemutationsinthehomeoboxtranscriptionfactorPITX1 normal. The evolution in time has been constant. In con- gene(c.793G>T inpatients1and2;c.412A>Cinpatient3 clusion, Poland anomaly is more common in boys than and, in a mosaic status, in hisasymptomatic father). PITX1 girls, and the right side is affected approximately twice as anomalieshavebeenreportedtocausedifferentsyndromes: often as the left. Most cases arise sporadically. However, i)Liebenbergsyndrome,characterizedbymalformationsof because we have identiﬁed an affected sibship, we upper limbs that acquire radiological features of the legs, appreciate that in-depth genetic testing should be causedby5q31.1rearrangementsinvolvingputativePITX1 performed. regulatory elements by disruption of a TAD; ii) Mirror- G.E. Girnet: None. R. Popescu: None. M. Gramescu: image polydactyly/tibial agenesis, caused by intragenic None. I. Resmerita: None. M. Panzaru: None. L. deletion; iii) Congenital clubfoot with or without preaxial Butnariu: None. E. Gorduza: None. C. Rusu: None. polydactylyandrighttibialhemimelia,causedbydominant negative mutation. The patients here described showed a P11.073A distinct recognizable allelic picture, whose hallmarks are Redeﬁning the mutational spectrum and gene-phenotype mandibular hypoplasia, narrow iliac wings, patellar hypo- correlates in pontocerebellar hypoplasia: results of a aplasialeadingtokneeﬂexiondeformity,andpossibleshort multicentric Italian study stature. M.Rossi:None.G.Lesca:None.N.Chatron:None.A. A. Micalizzi1, R.Romaniello2,S. Nuovo1,3, F.Arrigoni4, Labalme:None.D.Sanlaville:None.A.Fassier:None.F. M.Ginevrino1,5,A. Casella1, T.Mazza6,G.Zanni7,E. Bertini7, Escande: None. S. Manouvrier: None. L. Faivre: None. R. Borgatti2,E. Valente1,5 P. Edery: None. D. Geneviève: None. 1Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, P11.072D Italy, 2Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit, Poland Sequence - long time follow-up of 21 cases Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Italy, 3Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of G.E. Girnet1,R.Popescu2,M. Gramescu2,I.Resmerita2, Salerno,Salerno,Italy,4NeuroimagingUnit,ScientiﬁcInstitute M.Panzaru2,3,L. Butnariu2,3,E. Gorduza2,C. Rusu2,3 IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Italy, 5Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 1”St.Mary” Children's Hospital Iasi, Iasi, Romania, 2”Gr. T. 6Laboratory of Bioinformatics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iasi, Iasi, Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 7Laboratory of Romania, 3”St.Mary” Children's Hospital, Iasi, Romania Molecular Medicine, Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of Neurosciences, Poland sequence is a rare disorder that associates unilateral IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy defect of pectoralis muscle and syndactyly of hand on the same side. The disorder is considered “a non-speciﬁc Introduction:Pontocerebellarhypoplasias(PCH)comprise developmental ﬁeld defect” occurring at 6 weeks of fetal a heterogeneous group of inherited autosomal recessive or development, for the moment the cause being unknown. It X-linked disorders characterized by concurrent hypoplasia is suggested that diminished blood ﬂow through the sub- of the pons and the cerebellum and variable clinical and clavian artery that goes to the arm may be the precipitating imaging features. The current classiﬁcation includes 11 cause. Rare cases are thought to be caused by a genetic PCH subtypes, and 20 associated genes are known to date. change that can be passed down in families, but no related Materialsandmethods:Weperformeddeepclinicaland genes have been identiﬁed. We have performed a clinical imaging phenotyping in 62 Italian probands (39 females) study on 21 cases of Poland sequence diagnosed in Iasi with neuroradiological diagnosis of PCH, who underwent Medical Genetics Center, aiming to identify defects asso- NGS-based panel sequencing of all known PCH-associated ciatedtothemainfeatures,aswellastheclinicalevolution. genes (TruSeq Custom Amplicon technology on a MiSeq Our group included 13 males and 8 females. Thirteen platform) and MLPA for CASK exon rearrangements. patientshadright-sidedPoland'ssyndrome,eightleft-sided. Results: The responsible genetic defect was identiﬁed in Twopatientswererelated(brothers).Majorclinicalﬁndings 44 probands(71%).Interestingly, thecommonest causative include: hypoplasia/aplasia of pectoralis muscle 21/21 gene was CASK (40%), which harbored both SNVs and cases, symbrachydactyly 12/21, hypoplastic/absent nipple CNVsandwasmutatedinfemalesandmales,withstriking 5/21, hand hypoplasia 4/21, scoliosis 3/21 and forearm genotype-phenotype correlates. The European founder376 J.delPicchia mutation TSEN54 p.A53T and pathogenic variants in Copy Number Variants (CNVs) has been poorly investi- EXOSC3 only accounted for 18% and 8% cases, respec- gatedsofar,makingitdifﬁculttocounselfamiliesasregard tively. Single patients with peculiar phenotypes were this genetic test. mutatedinRARS2,VLDLRandTOE1.Weconﬁrmedsome Materials and methods: CNVs were assessed either by previously reported associations, e.g. retinopathy and CGH- or SNP-array in a cohort of 111 probands with microcephaly with CASK, lower motor-neuron signs with various PFMs. Detailed neuroimaging assessment led to EXOSC3 and cerebellar cysts with TSEN54. However, we classifythepatientsinthefollowinggroups:Dandy-Walker could not replicate other gene-phenotype correlates: for malformation (DMW, n=10), isolated vermis hypoplasia instance, we failed to observe univocal correlations of (IVH,n=12),wholecerebellarhypoplasia(WCH,n=12), TSEN54 p.A53T with hyperkinetic movement disorders, cerebellar dysplasia (CD, n=18), ponto-cerebellar hypo- nor with the typical “dragonﬂy appearance” of cerebellar plasia (PCH, n=18), non-progressive cerebellar atrophy hemispheres. (NPCA, n=13) and other PMFs (n=28). A logistic Conclusions: CASK represents the major gene causative regression model was used to assess the proportion of of PCH in Italy. Phenotypic variability of PCH subtypes is CNVs in PFM classes. wider than previously thought, with signiﬁcant clinical and Results: Pathogenic heterozygous CNVs (all deletions) neuroimaging overlap among distinct conditions. were identiﬁed in 9 (8%) probands, including 5 (50%) Funding: ERC Starting Grant 260888; Ricerca Finaliz- DWM, 1 (8%) IVH, 1 (8%) WCH and 2 (11%) CD. No zata NET-2013-02356160. CNVs weredetected inthe PCH and NPCA groups. CNVs A. Micalizzi: None. R. Romaniello: None. S. Nuovo: were signiﬁcantly commoner in DWM than in non-DWM None. F. Arrigoni: None. M. Ginevrino: None. A. (log-odds = 3.078, p < 0.001), while their frequency was Casella: None. T. Mazza: None. G. Zanni: None. E. not signiﬁcantly enriched in the other PFM categories. The Bertini: None. R. Borgatti: None. E. Valente: None. identiﬁed genomic deletions were in most cases associated to a syndromic phenotype. Deletion of 3q24 region was P11.074B conﬁrmed as a DWM-associated CNV. Assessment of genome-wide burden of rare genic CNVs in Conclusions: Screening is being extended to a larger posterior fossa malformations cohort of PFMs. CNVs analysis is advised in patients with DWM, and in other PFMs when associated to a syndromic S. Nuovo1,2,C. Cesario3,L. Bernardini3,R. Battini4,5, phenotype. F. Arrigoni6, R.Romaniello7,G.Zanni8, E.Del Giudice9, Funding: ERC Starting Grant 260888; Ricerca Finaliz- G.Vitiello9,10,R. Borgatti7, E.Bertini8,E. Valente1,11 zata NET-2013-02356160. S. Nuovo: None. C. Cesario: None. L. Bernardini: 1Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, None. R. Battini: None. F. Arrigoni: None. R. Roma- Italy, 2Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of niello: None. G. Zanni: None. E. Del Giudice: None. G. Salerno,Salerno,Italy,3CytogeneticsUnit,CasaSollievodella Vitiello: None. R. Borgatti: None. E. Bertini: None. E. Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo FG, Italy, Valente: None. 4Department of Developmental Neuroscience, IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa, Italy, 5Department of Clinical and P11.075C Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, Co-occurrenceoftworecurrentcopynumberalterationsin 6Neuroimaging Laboratory, Scientiﬁc Institute, IRCCS a child with complex phenotype EugenioMedea,BosisioParini,Lecco,Italy,7Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit, Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS Á.Till1,2,K.Hadzsiev1,2,A.Szabó1,2,Z.Bánfai1,2,B. Melegh1,2, Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 8Department of J.Berente Bene1,2, M.Czakó1,2 Neurosciences,UnitofNeuromuscularandNeurodegenerative Disorders, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, 1University of Pécs, Medical School, Pécs, Hungary, Italy, 9Department of Translational Medicine-Section of 2Szentagothai Research Center, Pécs, Hungary Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 10CEINGE- Advanced Biotechnologies, Naples, Italy, 11Department of Introduction:twocopynumbervariationsobservedonthe Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy same chromosome in a patient is a very rare condition. In our patient beside of the 17p11.2 microduplication an Introduction: Posterior fossa malformations (PFMs) additional deletion of 17q12 region has been detected. include a wide spectrum of congenital abnormalities, het- Methods:routinecytogeneticinvestigationwasindicated erogeneous with respect to neuroimaging ﬁndings, genetic in a 8 months old baby because of neonatal hypotonia, cause and recurrence risk. The contribution of genomic developmental delay, renal cysts, hearing loss and minorAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 377 anomalies which resulted in normal karyotype. Because of médicale,CentreHospitalierUniversitaire,ClermontFerrand, the complex clinical symptoms array CGH analysis using France, 12Service de Génétique - Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, Agilent Sureprint 8x60K oligo-array (ISCA v.2) was France, 13Service de génétique médicale, Centre Hospitalier performed. Universitaire de Bordeaux-GH Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, Results: array CGH detected a 3,573 Mb recurrent 14Unitédegénétiquechromosomiqueoucytogénétique,Centre microduplication of 17p11.2 and additionally a 1,638 Mb Hospitalier Universitaire, Nantes, France, 15Service de deletion affecting 17q12. The unexpected results provided génétique médicale, Nantes, France, 16Service de Génétique explanation of the complex clinical features allowing for a Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Bretagne Atlantique, Vannes, moredetailedgenotype-phenotypeanalysis.Ourpatienthas France, 17Centre de Génétique et Centre de référence been diagnosed as having Potocki-Lupski syndrome and Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome at the same time. CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 18UMR-Inserm 1231 GAD Conclusions: the high-resolution array CGH analysis in team, Génétique des Anomalies du développement, Université patients with a complex phenotype is of great importance de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 19Fédération and it is recommended to carry-out this test ﬁrst. The Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et application of array CGH in patients with unusual Anomalies du Développement (FHU TRANSLAD), Centre compound phenotype may enable more accurate estimates HospitalierUniversitairedeDijonetUniversitédeBourgogne- of the incidence of similar cases and can lead to the Franche Comté, Dijon, France exploration of development of multiple copy number alterations in the same patient. Primrose syndrome is characterized by variable intellectual Á. Till: None. K. Hadzsiev: None. A. Szabó: None. Z. deﬁciency,behaviordisordersandfacialdysmorphismwith Bánfai: None. B. Melegh: None. J. Berente Bene: None. macrocephaly. The phenotype is progressive with distal M. Czakó: None. muscle wasting, contractures, hearing loss and ectopic cal- ciﬁcations of the ears and brain. In 2014, ZBTB20 variants P11.076D were identiﬁed as responsible of Primrose syndrome. Primrose syndrome: a phenotypic comparison of patients Indeed, ZBTB20 plays an important role in cognition, with a ZBTB20 single-nucleotide variant versus a 3q13.31 memory, and learning processes, and has a transcription microdeletion including ZBTB20 repressive effect on numerous genes. A more severe, pro- gressivephenotypewasfoundinasmallnumberofpatients A. Juven1,S. Nambot1,A. Piton2, P.Callier3,C. Philippe4, with single nucleotide variants (SNVs) than in those with N.Jean-Marçais1,A. Munnich5, M.Rio6, L.Colleaux7, large deletions. Here, we report on the clinical and mole- S. Rondeau6,J. Steffann7,T. Attie-Bitach5,S. Thomas5,S.El cular results of 14 patients, seven carrying ZBTB20 SNV, Chehadeh8,C. Vincent Delorme9,S. Bouquillon9, andsevencarrying3q13.31deletions,recruitedthroughthe C. Francannet10,F. Laffargue10,L. Gouas11,S. Blesson12, French AnDDI-Rares network. We compared their pheno- D.Lacombe13, M.Vincent14,B.Isidor15,H.Journel16, types and reviewed data in the literature, in order to C. Thauvin17,18,L. Faivre1,19,18 establish more powerful phenotype-genotype correlations between the two groups of patients. All patients presented 1Centre de génétique du C.H.U. de Dijon, Dijon, France, mild-to-severe ID and/or a psychomotor delay. Facial fea- 2Unité de Biologie et de Génétique Moléculaire, Centre turesweresimilarwithaprominentforehead,down-slanting Hospitalier Universitaire de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, palpebral ﬁssures, ptosis and large ears but macrocephaly 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, C.H.U de Dijon, was more frequent in patient with SNVs (p=0.026). Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, UF Hearing loss (p=0.004), pinna calciﬁcation and pro- Innovation en diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, gressive muscular wasting and contractures were observed Plateau Technique de Biologie, Centre Hospitalier only in patients with SNVs. Corpus callosum dysgenesis Universitaire de Dijon, France., Dijon, France, 5Institut (p=0.003), diabetes and hypothyroidism were more fre- Imagine, Paris, France, 6Département de Génétique, Hôpital quentinthisgroup.However,themedianagewas9.7years Necker-Enfants Malades,, Paris, France, 7Département de inpatientswithdeletionscomparedwith17.5yearsinthose Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, with SNVs. Longer follow-up will be necessary to deter- 8Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier mine whether the phenotype of patients with deletions is Universitaire de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 9Service de alsoprogressive,andtoadaptinformationgiventofamilies. Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Centre A. Juven: None. S. Nambot: None. A. Piton: None. P. HospitalierRégionalUniversitaire,Lille,France,10Servicede Callier: None. C. Philippe: None. N. Jean-Marçais: GénétiqueMédicale,CentreHospitalierUniversitaireEstaing, None.A.Munnich:None.M.Rio:A.Employment(fullor Clermont Ferrand, France, 11Service de cytogénétique part-time); Modest; 5. Département de Génétique, Hôpital378 J.delPicchia Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, Institut Imagine We are further investigating the speciﬁc mutations in a cell Paris. L. Colleaux: A. Employment (full or part-time); culture expression model. Modest; Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker- Results: We identiﬁed candidate missense mutations in Enfants Malades, Paris, France, Inserm U781, Hôpital the PTK7 gene which encodes a membrane receptor Necker-EnfantsMalades,Paris,France.S.Rondeau:None. tyrosine kinase acting in the canonical and non-canonical J. Steffann: None. T. Attie-Bitach: None. S. Thomas: Wnt-signaling as well as the planar cell polarity pathways. None.S.ElChehadeh:None.C.VincentDelorme:None. So far, the gene is known to play a role in Müllerian duct S. Bouquillon: None. C. Francannet: None. F. Laffar- and neural tube development. Knockout mice embryos gue: None. L. Gouas: None. S. Blesson: None. D. presentwithasimilarseveremalformationpattern.qPCRof Lacombe: None. M. Vincent: None. B. Isidor: None. H. liver tissue of the fetus conﬁrmed a decrease of Journel: None. C. Thauvin: None. L. Faivre: A. PTK7 mRNA. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Centre de Conclusions: PTK7 is a candidate gene for a novel génétique, Centre hospitalier universitaire de Dijon, human MCA syndrome. WES can be used in individual 3. Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Transla- families with undiagnosed lethal MCA syndromes to tionnelle et Anomalies du Développement (FHU TRANS- discover novel disease genes, provided that the fetal LAD), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon et phenotype can be correlated to a particular developmental Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon,, pathway in embryogenesis. Proof of pathogenicity of the 4.UMR-Inserm1231GADteam,GénétiquedesAnomalies mutations in such ultrarare disorders can be challenging. du développement, Université de Bourgogne Franche- N.Meier:None.E.Bruder:None.O.Lapaire:None.S. Comté, F-21000 Dijon, France.. Tercanli: None. I. Filges: None. P11.077A P11.078B PTK7-a candidate gene for a novel human malformation Purasyndrome:anemergingneurodevelopmentaldisorder phenotype S. Bigoni1, G.Garani2,G.Santen3,M.Della Monica4, N.Meier1,2,3,E. Bruder4,3,O.Lapaire5,3,S. Tercanli6,3, C. Graziano5,C. Ruivenkamp6, E.Ballardini2,R. Guerrini7, I.Filges1,2,3 P. Magini8,E. Procopio9,E. Parrini10,A. Suppiej11, D.Colavito12,V. Maritan13, M.Hoffer6,D.Ognibene14, 1Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical Genetics and A. Ferlini14 Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Department of Clinical Research, University Hospital Basel, 1UOL of Medical Genetics, University-Hospital S.Anna, Basel, Switzerland, 3University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, Ferrara, ferrara, Italy, 2NICU, University-Hospital S.Anna, 4Pathology, Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, Ferrara,ferrara,Italy,3LDGA,,leiden,Netherlands,4Medical University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5Department of Genetics SOD, Meyer University Chldren Hospital, ﬂorence, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Basel University Hospital, Basel, Italy,5MedicalGeneticsUnit,Sant'OrsolaMalpighiPolyclinic, Switzerland, 6Centre for Prenatal Ultrasound, Basel, Basel, Bologna, Italy, 6LDGA, Leiden, Netherlands, 7Pediatric Switzerland Neurology Unit and Laboratories, Meyer Children University Hospital, ﬂorence, Italy, 8Medical Genetic Unit, S.Orsola- Introduction: Prenatal ultrasound identiﬁes an increasing Malpighi Polyclinic, Bologna, Italy, 9Unit of Metabolic and number of fetal malformations. We report on a fetus with Muscular Disease, Meyer Children University Hospital, brain malformations, Müllerian duct aplasia, bile duct Florence, Italy, 10Pediatric Neurology Unit and Laboratories, atresia, unilateral anophthalmia and bilateral cleft palate. Meyer Children University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 11Child Our aim was to identify the genetic cause for this novel Neurology Unit, Paediatric University Hospital, Padua, Italy, multiple congenital anomaly (MCA) phenotype. 12Research & Innovation SRL Genetic Laboratory, Padua, Methods: We perform trio whole exome sequencing Italy, 13Regional Centre for Low Vision, Children Pediatric (WES) and prioritize variants according to their frequency, University Hospital, Padua, Italy, 14Section of Microbiology disruptive potential and their presence in genes involved in and Medical Genetics, Ferrara University, ferrara, Italy early developmental processes. We correlate the malforma- tion pattern, conﬁrmed by autopsy, to the candidate PURA Syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder char- genotypes.Theadditionalcomparisonofhumanandanimal acterizedbymoderate/severecognitiveimpairment,delayed morphologyvalidatespotentialcandidate genes.UsingRT- or absent speech and difﬁculties in acquiring independent PCR and qPCR we study expression on fetal FFPE-RNA. ambulation. At birth, newborns present central hypotonia, hypothermia, lethargy, swelling-feeding difﬁculties,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 379 frequent hiccups and respiratory abnormalities that may on PSIQUIQ library, using molecular interaction databases need intensive care for life-threatening risk. In the 90% of (Biogrid,IntAct,MINT,Reactome,UniProt,etc.)regarding the patients a heterozygous mutation in PURA gene is to previous 13 genes. present, revealed mostly through WES analysis; in the Results: We detected pathogenic/probably pathogenic remaining 10% a deletion of 5p31.3 encompassing the variants (P/PP) in the 35%(23/66) of the patients, in the PURA gene is detected using Array-CGH. Until last year, 41% (27/66) were detected one or several variant of 71 patients had been described, but the number is rapidly unknown signiﬁcance (VUS), and in the 24% (16/66) no growing. We report 4 Italian patients (age range 6 month - variants of interest (VI) were identiﬁed. 88 VI (P/PP or 11 years). At birth, all of them exhibited axial hypotonia, VUS)weredetectedin26differentgenes,PTPN11wasthe swallowing difﬁculties and hypoventilation. Two had neo- most mutated gene (15% of variants, 12 P/P and 1 VSI) natal respiratory failure requiring intensive care and recur- followed by ANKRD11 (10%, 9 VSI), SRCAP (9%, 8 VSI) rent hiccups. Recurrent dysmorphic features were and SOS1 (8%, 3 P/PP and 4 VSI). The 65% of VI (all anteverted nostrils, thin and sparse eyebrows. Neurodeve- classiﬁed as VUS) was detected in candidate genes. lopmentwasdelayedinallpatients,withabsentspeechand Conclusions: We show the results of applying an limited walking autonomy in older patients. De novo het- extended NGS panel in a cohort of 66 patients. According erozygous mutations in PURA gene were found in 2/4 to the literature, PTPN11 and SOS1 were the most mutated patientsbyWES,usinganNGSpanelin1patientandade RASopathiesrelatedgenes.Remarkably,wedetectedahigh novo 2,6 Mb deletion in 5q31.2q31.3 was detected using percentage of VUS in candidate genes that could have array-CGH in the remaining patient. PURA Syndrome, is clinical implications. However, further familiar and func- now a frequently recognized neurodevelopmental disorder tional analysis must be done to conﬁrm this. which should be considered in the differential diagnosis of J. López Montiel: None. J. Lezana Rosales: None. C. syndromes manifesting with the neonatal hypotonia and Torres Fernández: None. S. Franco Freire: None. C. early respiratory abnormalities. SánchezLinares:None.C.BenitoLópez:None.J.López S. Bigoni: None. G. Garani: None. G. Santen: None. Siles: None. M. Della Monica: None. C. Graziano: None. C. Ruivenkamp: None. E. Ballardini: None. R. Guerrini: P11.080D None. P. Magini: None. E. Procopio: None. E. Parrini: The smallest SATB2 exon-deletion detected by arrayCGH. None. A. Suppiej: None. D. Colavito: None. V. Maritan: Further delineation of a new emerging syndrome None. M. Hoffer: None. D. Ognibene: None. A. Ferlini: None. E. Lloveras, L.Barranco, A.Canellas, M.Costa, B. Mendez, N.Palau,M.Piqué,D.Yeste, S. Martin,C. Pérez P11.079C Analyzing 66 cases of RASopathies with an extended NGS Departament de Genètica. SYNLAB International Group, panel Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain J.López Montiel1,J. LezanaRosales1,C. TorresFernández1, Introduction: Few cases of recurrent 2q33.1 deletion with S. FrancoFreire2,C. SánchezLinares1,C. BenitoLópez2, size variability have been reported in the literature. Hap- J.López Siles1 loinsufﬁciency of one gene, SATB2, within the deleted regionhasbeensuggestedtoberesponsibleformostofthe 1M.G.C. Genetaq, Málaga, Spain, 2UGC Laboratorio H.R.U. featuresoftheaffectedpatientsandanewsyndromenamed Málaga, Málaga, Spain SATB2-associated syndrome (SAS) has been proposed. Herein,wepresentacasewiththesmallestSABT2deletion Introduction: RASopathies areagroup ofgenetic diseases detected by arrayCGH, to our knowledge. caused bymutationsingenesencodingproteinsintheRas/ PatientandResults:Thepresentcaseisaboyevaluated MAPK pathway. RASopathies include several syndromes: inthePediatricNeurologyconsultationattheageof3years neuroﬁbromatosis-1, Noonan/LEOPARD, Costello, Legius with developmental growth retardation. Conventional andcardio-facio-cutaneous syndromes,etc. Thephenotypic chromosome analysis of the patient revealed a normal spectrum is wide and overlapping. karyotype.X-fragilewasnormalandanarrayCGHanalysis Material and Methods: We present a cohort of 66 was performed. The CytoSure™ Constitutional v3 4x180k patients from different populations with suspicion of (Oxford Gene Technology, UK) was used, scanned using RASopathies. We used an extended NGS panel (TruSight- the Agilent Microarray Scanner according to the manufac- One,Illumina)including13RASopathiesassociatedgenes. turer’s protocol. High-resolution microarray analysis of the Other 32 candidate genes were selected by R custom script patientdetecteda5,24Kbdeletionintheregion2q33.1,arr380 J.delPicchia [GRCh37]2q33.1(200212030_200217267x1) including (marked with EEA1). We have observed a signiﬁcant exon 8 of SATB2 gene. The main features of the patient decrease of the AB in the patient’s ﬁbroblasts when 1-40 were concordant with those related to SAS: intellectual comparedwithcontrols.Inconclusion,wehaveidentiﬁeda deﬁcit, autistic traits, hypotonia, elongated face, atypical promising biomarker (AB ) that could help to better 1-40 teeth, micrognathia, local hypertonia, atypical thumbs and understandthepathophysiologyoftheSHFYNGsyndrome nails, sparse hair. and to monitor the effect of therapeutic drugs. Grants: Comments: Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad - Intragenic SATB2 deletions are very rare and only four (SAF2014-56562-R; FECYT, crowdfunding PRECIPITA). cases have been described. Review of clinical records Catalan Government (2014SGR932) showed similar clinical features among these patients, R. Urreizti: None. L. Castilla-Vallmanya: None. H. including severe developmental delay and tooth abnormal- Franco-Valls: None. G. Cunill: None. D. Grinberg: ities as the present one. None. S. Balcells: None. - CytoSure™ Constitutional v3 array offers an enhanced exon-level coverage and has allowed the detection of the P11.082B smallest SATB2 deletion described until now. CASE REPORT OF SHAAF-YANG SYNDROME WITH E. Lloveras: None. L. Barranco: None. A. Canellas: A DE NOVO MUTATION IN MAGEL2 GEN None. M. Costa: None. B. Mendez: None. N. Palau: None.M.Piqué:None.D.Yeste:None.S.Martin:None. G.Pi1,A.Caro2,A. Zúñiga2,F.Martínez2,J.Cervera2 C. Pérez: None. 1Serv.Pediatría.HospitaldelaRibera.,Alzira,Spain,2Unidad P11.081A de Genética. HUP La Fe., Valencia, Spain Identiﬁcation of new biomarkers for MAGEL2 truncating mutations in Schaaf-Yang syndrome Introduction: Shaaf-Yang syndrome (SHFYNGS; #MIM 615547) is an autosomal dominant multisystem disorder R. Urreizti, L. Castilla-Vallmanya, H.Franco-Valls, G.Cunill, characterized by delayed psychomotor development, intel- D.Grinberg,S. Balcells lectual disability, hypotonia, and behavioral abnormalities. Additional features include contractures, feeding difﬁcul- Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty ties, and variable dysmorphic facial features. MAGEL2 is ofBiology,University ofBarcelona,IBUB, IRSJD,CIBERER, located in the Prader-Willi critical region 15q11-13, and Barcelona, Spain have been reported to cause SHFYNGS. Individuals are affected only if the mutation occurs on the paternal allele, Schaaf-Yang syndrome (SHFYNG) is due to truncating since MAGEL2 is a maternally imprinted gene. mutations in MAGEL2, a gene included in the Prader-Willi Case Report: Female patient with polymalformative region(15q11-q13).Thissyndromeischaracterizedmainly syndrome, fetal hypokinesia, arthrogryposis, small feet, byneurodevelopmentaldelay,contractures andcraniofacial hypotonia, and psychomotor retardation. At[AZC1] dysmorphology and around 100 patients have been identi- 22 months of age, she was not able to keep standing ﬁed worldwide so far. MAGEL2 is an essential component without support, had not speech development, clamp nor oftheretromer,involvedintheretrogradetransport(backto steps. She developed trunk obesity, not associated with the trans-Golgi network). Previous studies have shown that increased intake. She did not show hyperphagia and the depletion of MAGEL2 leads to a change in the sub- presented feeding problems. No alterations in brain, spinal, cellular localization of integrin alpha-5 and that the altera- abdominal, renal or cardiac MR imaging studies. Normal tion of VPS35, a MAGEL2 partner, leads to alterations in array-CGH. Metabolic study including HBA1c, lipid the APP transport in the endosome. We have analysed metabolism, liver function and cortisol normal. Genetic differentbiomarkersinﬁbroblastsof3SHFYNGpatientsin study was performed by PCR ampliﬁcation of exonic and comparison with 6 healthy controls. Intracellular localiza- intronic regions of MAGEL2 gen, and analyzed by Sanger tion of Integrin alpha-5 was assessed by immunocy- sequencing method. An heterozygous variant was detected, tochemistry while the levels of the amyloid-beta (1-40) c.1850G>A (p.Thr617Ter; NM_01966) and it was de novo were measured by ELISA. Cell viability was measured by since parents were not carriers. Reported cases of the MTT assay. We observed no difference in the viability SCHYNGS inherited usually a paternal mutated allele. In of the ﬁbroblasts of the patients when compared with con- theabsenceofpaternaldeletionof15q11-15q13ormaternal trols and no alteration in the integrin alpha-5 levels in the uniparentaldisomy15,asearchforintragenicmutationson cellular membrane while we notice a slight increase in the paternal allele of MAGEL2 should be proposed for integrin alpha-5 co-localization with early endosomes fetuses with reduced movements, polyhydramnios, andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 381 distal arthrogryposis, newborns with severe undiagnosed K. Weiss: None. T. Paperna: None. H. Baris: None. S. central hypotonia, or children for whom PWS is clinically Whalen: None. S. Whalen: None. S. Heidi: None. B. suspected. [AZC1] Keren: None. K. Lachlan: None. G. Pi: None. A. Caro: None. A. Zúñiga: None. F. Martínez: None. J. Cervera: None. P11.084D First Prenatal Diagnosis of a Rare STAR Syndrome P11.083C Utilizing facial recognition software in individuals with G.Larom-Khan, A.Peleg, L. Sagi-Dain, A.Harari-Shaham Sifrim Hitz Weiss Syndrome Carmel medical center, Haifa, Israel K. Weiss1,T. Paperna1, H.Baris1,S. Whalen2,S. Whalen2, S. Heidi2,B. Keren2,K. Lachlan3 Introduction: STAR syndrome (Syndactyly, Telecanthus, Anogenital malformations, Renal malformations) is a very 1Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, rarex-linkeddominantdisorder.Loss-of-functionmutations Israel,2AP-HP,DépartementdeGénétique,HôpitaldelaPitié of the FAM58A gene were previously reported to be Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, associated with STAR syndrome. Less than 20 patients Southampton University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, have been described thus far, two of them displaying mild Princess Anne Hospital, Southhampton, United Kingdom developmental delay. Case presentation: The parents were referred to genetic Introduction:Sifrim-Hitz-Weisssyndrome(SIHIWES)isa counseling at 27 weeks of gestation during their ﬁrst recently described form of syndromic intellectual disability pregnancy due to a sonographic demonstration of absent associated with congenital heart defects, hypogonadism, gallbladder. No consanguinity or abnormal medical condi- macrocephaly and additional features. The condition is tions were reported, and the pregnancy was uneventful. As caused by de novo missense variants in CHD4, which partofgeneticevaluation,theparentsweretestedforCystic encodes an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeler. Most Fibrosis, and fetal Chromosomal Microarray Analysis reported variants are missense and lie within the ATPase/ (CMA) was recommended. helicase domains.A few variants were identiﬁed outside of Results: CMA testing yielded a female karyotype with thishotspotregionandthereforetheireffectisunclear.The Xq28 deletion sized 117kb, which included 3 clinically aim of this study was to investigate whether facial recog- signiﬁcant genes - FAM58A gene (raising a suspicion of nition software can be utilized for facial gestalt recognition STAR syndrome) and two genes related to recessive and aid in variant interpretation in SIHIWES. disorders. Parental CMA testing was normal. Magnetic Methods: We used the deep convolutional neural Resonance Imaging was performed, yielding no abnormal network architecture provided by Face2Gene (FDNA Inc, ﬁndings. Following a throughout discussion, the parents USA)on16photographsofindividualswithvariantsinthe decided to continue the pregnancy. The newborn girl was ATPase/helicase domain of CHD4. In addition, a compar- deliveredat38weeksofgestation.Shewasdiagnosedwith ison of SHINWES individuals to control groups was unilateral 2-4 toe syndactyly, with no evidence of conducted using across-validation approach. Then, we dysmorphism or renal/anogenital malformations. At the evaluated the ability of the software to recognize the age of 2 months the parents report normal congenital and SIHIWES gestalt in two individuals with de novo variants motor development. outside of the hotspot region. Conclusions: To the best of our knowledge, we describe Results: The cohort of individuals with SIHIWES and the ﬁrst prenatal diagnosis of STAR syndrome, with mild variants in the ATPase/helicase domain differed signiﬁ- abnormal features. This case is an interesting example of a cantlyfromacontrolgroupof32healthyindividuals(AUC challenging genetic counseling in the face of very limited 0.917,p-value0.009).Forthetwoindividualswithvariants clinical information. outsideoftheATPase/helicasedomains,SIHIWESwasthe G. Larom-Khan: None. A. Peleg: None. L. Sagi-Dain: second and ﬁfth top syndrome suggested by the software None. A. Harari-Shaham: None. supporting these variants result in a similar phenotype. Conclusions: Facial gestalt recognition is sometimes P11.085A used by clinicians in the interpretation of novel variants in Stormorken syndrome and York platelet syndrome share disease causing genes. Here we show this can also be the same mutation of STIM1 and the same ultrastructural applied by facial recognition software. platelet anomalies382 J.delPicchia G.Morin1, V.LiThiao Te2,G.Jedraszak3,F.Jobic1, Mosaicism is deﬁned as the presence of two or more M.Mathieu-Dramard1,B. Roussel4,J.Bordet5,J.Rochette3 genetically distinct cell lines. With the introduction of increasingly sensitive technologies for DNA mutation 1Clinical Genetics, Amiens, France, 2Pediatric Hematology, detection such as microarrays and next‐generation sequen- Amiens, France, 3Laboratory of Human Genetics, Amiens, cing, the importance of mosaicism for human diseases is France, 4Laboratory of Hematology, Amiens, France, now being more fully appreciated. However, extracting 5Laboratory of haemostasis, Lyon, France information on mosaicism from targeted sequencing, espe- cially exome data, can be challenging because read cover- In 1985, Stormorken et al. reported a unique family with a agevariesbetweenregionsandthetargetislimitedto~3% new phenotype associating thrombocytopathia, thrombo- of the genome. In the present study, we aimed to evaluate cytopenia, muscle fatigue, asplenia, miosis, migraine, dys- the efﬁciency of a new targeted approach to detect mosai- lexia and ichthyosis. In 2000, Mizobuchi et al. found cism involving structural/numerical chromosomal altera- tubular aggregates on the muscle biopsy in another family tions of DNA samples previously characterized by SNP- with this phenotype. In 2014, three groups including ours, array. We used a focused exome panel supplemented by found that « Stormorken syndrome » (OMIM 185070) was backbone and SNPs probes that express a larger repre- related to a speciﬁc gain-of-function mutation in STIM1 sentation of the human genome. A total of 9 DNA muta- gene[c.910C>T/p.(Arg304Trp)]. STIM1encodes acalcium tionsrangingfrom400Kbto35Mbandwithdifferentlevel sensor involved in Store-operated calcium entry. With the of mosaicism (10-50%) were used as positive control for mutation, this system seems permanently activated, even targeted sequencing analysis. Our approach correctly iden- whenintracellularstocksofcalciumarefull.Independently, tiﬁed7 alterations (7/9), pointingto a sensitivity of81% of White et al. reported from 2003 a new platelet disease, our test. The two cases that were not detected are below characterizedinelectronicmicroscopybythepresenceof2 30% of mosaicism. Although in both cases it was possible types of platelet organelles (opaque and target organelles). toobserveagreaterdispersionofprobesthatdeviatedfrom In2015,theyfoundthat“Yorkplateletsyndrome”wasalso the50%heterozygosisline,thealgorithmsdidnotcorrectly caused by mutations of STIM1 gene, including the integrate the information of copy number and B allele fre- c.910C>T [p.(Arg304Trp)] (Markello et al., 2015). The quency to make a call. Our results point out that it is pos- patients shared several symptoms with patients affected by sible to improve the methodology for the identiﬁcation of Stormorken syndrome: thrombocytopathia, thrombocyto- structural mosaicism from sequencing data based on the penia, muscle weakness, rimmed vacuoles on muscle analysis of allelic frequency. biopsy,andsometimesmiosisorsplenichypoplasia.Asthe D. Villela: None. S. Da Costa: None. A. Vianna- 2conditionsweresecondarytothesamemutationofSTIM1 Morgante: None. A. Krepischi: None. C. gene, and patients had a rather similar phenotype, we Rosenberg: None. assumed that they constituted one unique disease, only investigated by different approaches. In this work, we P11.087C showed for the ﬁrst time that ultrastructural platelet Sweeney-Coxsyndrome:reportofthethirdpatientaffected anomalies described in York platelet syndrome, were also bythisnewdelineatedsyndromeharboringanovelvariant found in platelets of patients with Stormorken syndrome. in TWIST1 This result suggests that York platelet syndrome and Stor- morken syndrome are one and the same disease. D.Bertola1,2, C.M. Musso2,K. Rocha2, G.L. Yamamoto1,2, G.Morin: None. V.LiThiao Te:None. G.Jedraszak: M.Passos-Bueno2 None. F. Jobic: None. M. Mathieu-Dramard: None. B. Roussel: None. J. Bordet: None. J. Rochette: None. 1Instituto da Criança - University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Instituto de Biociências da Universidade de São P11.086B Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil Detection of mosaicism involving structural and numerical chromosome aberrations from targeted sequencing data Introduction: Sweeney-Cox syndrome (SCoS) is a new syndrome reported in two individuals presenting hetero- D.Villela, S. DaCosta, A.Vianna-Morgante, A. Krepischi, zygous missense variants in residue 117 in TWSIT1, C. Rosenberg showing a dominant-negative effect. Previously, hetero- zygous mutations in this gene, leading to happloinsufﬁ- University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil ciency, were known to cause Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS). In SCoS, the craniofacial involvement isAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 383 fundamentally different from the one seen in SCS and cause aberrant processing of the transcript with complete premature closure of cranial sutures has not been a loss of the RBM10 mRNA. hallmark. Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the second CasuisticandMethods:theprobandisa4year-oldmale individual with TARP syndrome who survived at the ﬁrst patientshowingtypicalfacialfeaturesofSCoSandcoronal decade of life, allowing a ﬁrst depiction of the natural craniosynostosis.Atargetedgenepanelforcraniosynostosis historyofthisdisorder.Thesedataindicatethatanadequate was performed in the proband, followed by Sanger intensiveneonatalcarecanovercomethesupposedlethality sequencing in the proband and his parents. of TARP. This should to be taken into consideration in Results: a novel, de novo, missense variant (p. counselling. Asp141Glu) in TWIST1 was found in the proband. Funding information: Fondazione Bambino Gesù (Vite Conclusions: This is the third patient reported with Coraggiose), Italian Ministry of Health (RC 2017). SCoS. Although the facial features are typical for this new M. Niceta: None. S. Barresi: None. F. Pantaleoni: recognized syndrome, the patient presented with coronal None. M.L. Dentici: None. R. Capolino: None. S. Pizzi: craniosynostosis,similartowhatisseeninSCS,suggesting None. A. Ciolﬁ: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. M. that this speciﬁc variant could cause a phenotype compris- Tartaglia: None. M.C. Digilio: None. ing clinical characteristics of both SCoS and SCS. The variant found in TWIST1 changes the aminoacid aspartate P11.089A for a glutamin in position 141. Different variants in the Whole Exome Sequencing reveals novel biallelic UBE3B same residue have been reported associated with SCS. It is mutations in two unrelated patients with undiagnosed possible to speculate that a substitution for a more similar condition aminoacid, as it is the case here, could lead to a dominant- negative effect, similar to what was proposed for the A. Pagliazzi1,A. Provenzano1,F. Peluso1,S. Bargiacchi2, variants in residue 117. Further functional studies are M.Della Monica2,G.Carignani1, G.Forzano1,S.Ciabattoni3, required to prove this preliminary impression. FAPESP E. Agostini4,P. Fiorini4,A. LaBarbera1,S. Guarducci2, 2015/21783-9; 13/08028-1; CNPq 304130/2016-8 M.Pantaleo2, B.Lucherini2,S. Giglio5 D.Bertola:None.C.M.Musso:None.K.Rocha:None. G.L. Yamamoto: None. M. Passos-Bueno: None. 1Medical Genetics Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's University P11.088D Hospital,Florence,Italy,3MedicalGeneticsUnit,SantaMaria TARP syndrome: clinical characteristics of a 10 year- Nuova Hospital, Florence, Italy, 4Neonatal Intensive Care surviving patient and review of the literature Unit, Meyer Children's University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Unit, University of Florence, Meyer M.NICETA, S.Barresi, F. Pantaleoni,M.L. Dentici, Children's University Hospital, Florence, Italy R. Capolino, S.Pizzi,A. Ciolﬁ, B.Dallapiccola, M.Tartaglia, M.C. Digilio We report two unrelated patients with severe congenital malformations and distinctive facial appearance, for whom Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale we have primarily hypothesized Marden-Walker syndrome Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, Roma, Italy intheﬁrstcaseandCHARGEsyndromeinthesecondone. In both cases, exome sequencing (WES) was performed in Introduction: TARP syndrome, comprising Talipes equi- ordertovalidateourclinicalsuspicion.WESrevealednovel novarus, atrial septal defect, Robin sequence, and persis- biallelic variants in the UBE3B gene: in the ﬁrst case we tence of the left superior vena cava, is a severe X-linked found homozygosity for a novel truncating mutation condition that has been considered lethal in affected males. (c.2169_2170insGp.Ile725Aspfs)withintheHECTdomain The disease is caused by inactivating mutations in RBM10, of UBE3B protein, while in the second case compound whichencodesforaRNAbindingmotifproteininvolvedin heterozygosity for two novel missense mutations regulation of alternative splicing of diverse mRNA (c.214A>G p.Ser72Gly; c.838T>C p.Ser280Pro). Biallelic precursors. mutations of UBE3B have recently been associated with Materials, Methods and Results: By using a trio-based Kaufman oculocerebrofacial syndrome(KOS), a rare entity WES approach, coupled with an in-house implemented within the blepharophimosis-metal retardation syndromes, pipeline, we identiﬁed a maternally inherited RBM10 characterized by typical clinical features but often mis- frameshift variant in a survived 10-year-old male with diagnosed. Affected subjects present microcephaly, poor clinical features ﬁtting TARP syndrome. The RBM10 growth, respiratory difﬁculties, gastrointestinal and geni- variant was conﬁrmed by Sanger and was documented to tourinary anomalies and a peculiar constellation of facial384 J.delPicchia features, like blepharophimosis, hypertelorism, depressed Results: frameshift variants in KAT6B, (p.S1303Vfs*31) nasal bridge, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears and and(p.K1199Rfs*26),werefoundinthefemalepatients.A micrognathia. To date only 19 patients from 16 unrelated nonsense variant in KAT6A (p.R1129*) was found in the families were reported and in all cases an initial different malepatient.Sangersequencingconﬁrmedadenovoevent diagnosis were made. KOS represents a rare disease that, in the latter. despite showing a characteristic phenotype, represents a Conclusions: this is the ﬁrst patient with KAT6A challenging clinical diagnosis based only on clinical mutationshowingpatellarhypoplasia.Duetothesimilarity aspects.WESallowedustomakeadiagnosisofKOSinour of function between KAT6A and KAT6B, this result could cases reducing cost and time of the diagnostic pathway, expand the phenotype of this autosomal dominant mental demonstrating, once again, its capability in establishing the retardation syndrome, suggesting the disorder has over- clinical diagnostic rate, and its impact on medical man- lapping features with GPS. Moreover, one of the proband agement in a large paediatric centre. WES, moreover, pro- with GPS presented with preaxial polydactyly, which has vides a unique glimpse into the complexity of genetic not been previously reported. FAPESP 2015/21783-9; disorders. CNPq 304130/2016-8 A. Pagliazzi: None. A. Provenzano: None. F. Peluso: S. Estrella: None. D. Bertola: None. G.L. Yamamoto: None. S. Bargiacchi: None. M. Della Monica: None. G. None. R. Honjo: None. J.R. Ceroni: None. C.A. Carignani: None. G. Forzano: None. S. Ciabattoni: Kim: None. None. E. Agostini: None. P. Fiorini: None. A. La Barbera:None.S.Guarducci:None.M.Pantaleo:None. P11.091C B. Lucherini: None. S. Giglio: None. Dual overlapping phenotype recessively inherited due to paternal unipaternal disomy of chromosome 2 (pUPD2) in P11.090B a patient Overlapping phenotypes in patients harboring heterozygous mutations in KAT6A and KAT6B E. F.Percin1,G.Kayhan1, A.Sezer1,A. Koc1,2,M.A. Ergun1 S.Estrella,D.Bertola,G.L.Yamamoto,R.Honjo,J.R.Ceroni, 1Medical Genetics Department, Gazi University Hospital, C. A.Kim Ankara,Turkey,2GeneticDiagnosticCenter,TepecikTraining and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey Instituto da Criança, São Paulo, Brazil Introduction:Blendingoftwodifferentdiseasephenotypes Introduction: KAT6A and KAT6B encode a lysine acetyl- in a single patient may apparently suggest a new clinical transferase, playing a role in chromatin regulation. Hetero- phenotype or prevent the diagnosis of the other. Whole- zygous variants in KATB have been associated with Say- exome sequencing (WES) can provide insight into the Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson and genitopatellar syn- relationship between observed clinical phenotypes and dromes (GPS), both showing developmental delay/mental underlying genotypes. Here we present, a patient with both retardation and dysmorphic features. Although these two Warburg Micro syndrome-1 (WARBM1) and Hypotonia, disorderswerewellcharacterizedsyndromes,somepatients infantile, with psychomotor retardation and characteristic present overlapping clinical features, hampering a straight- facies2syndrome(IHPFR2)causedbypUPD2detectedby forward genotype-phenotype correlation. Heterozygous WES analysis. variants in KAT6A have been recently associated with PatientandResults:WESanalysisofa14-year-oldmale mental retardation, microcephaly and variable dysmorphic patient whose parents are unrelated, with characteristic features.Patellaranomalyisconsideredacardinalfeatureof WARMB ﬁndings revealed two novel homozygous muta- GPS within this group. tions in both of the RAB3GAP1 (c.664delC) and UNC80 Casuistic and Methods: we report on three non-related genes (c.C1459A). Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed that the individuals, two female patients with typical ﬁndings of same mutations was present in the patient’s heterozygous GPS,oneofthemwithpreaxialpolydactyly,andnofamily father but not in the patient’s mother. In the homozygosity history for polydactyly, and a male patient with severe analysis,itwasfoundthatpUPD2.Inthepatient,becauseof developmental delay, absent speech, microcephaly, facial overlapping ﬁndings of the both syndrome, the presence of dysmorphisms and patellar hypoplasia. A targeted gene IHPFR2 syndromeinthepatient wasundiagnosed untilthe panel and sanger sequencing was performed in the two end of the analysis. female probands and whole-exome sequencing in the male Conclusion: To date, the UPD2, especially of paternal proband. origin, has been very rarely described in the literature. When considering literature data there are no paternallyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 385 imprinted genes on chromosome 2 that have a major effect procedure to facilitate accurate diagnosis of ciliopathy on growth or development. With the exception of various patients. autosomalrecessivedisorderstheirphenotypeisnormal.In M.M. Oud: None. D. Lugtenberg: None. E.M.H.F. patient with multiple molecular diagnoses, the phenotypic Bongers: None. R. Roepman: None. L.E.L.M. complexity of disorder can make it difﬁcult for doctors to Vissers: None. diagnose it. Genomewide analyses may reveal more than one Mendelian disease that is relevant for a patient and the P11.093A patient’s family. SHROOM4 as a candidate gene for VATER/VACTERL E.F. Percin: None. G. Kayhan: None. A. Sezer: None. association and characterization in a zebraﬁsh model A. Koc: None. M.A. Ergun: None. G.C.Dworschak1,2,3,F.Thieme1,K.U.Ludwig1,B.Odermatt2, P11.092D H.Reutter1,4 Towards a novel diagnostic strategy using patient-derived URECs to diagnose ciliopathies 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Anatomical Institute, University of Bonn, Bonn, M.M.Oud,D.Lugtenberg,E.M.H.F.Bongers,R.Roepman, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital, L. E.L. M.Vissers University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Neonatology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands The acronym VATER/VACTERL association refers to the Introduction: Diagnostic exome analysis frequently leads rare, non-random co-occurrence of the following compo- toan inconclusive molecular diagnosis due tothe detection nent features (CFs): vertebral defects (V), anorectal mal- of variants of unknown signiﬁcance. Functional tests eval- formations (ARM) (A), cardiac defects (C), uating the effect of genetic variants on protein level could tracheoesophagealﬁstulawithorwithoutesophagealatresia elucidate their pathogenicity. Urine-derived renal epithelial (TE), renal malformations (R), and limb defects (L). cells (URECs) provide a non-invasive source of patient Patients may present with additional congenital anomalies material. We used patient-derived URECs to functionally however, the clinical diagnosis requires the presence of at evaluate the pathogenicity of genetic variants potentially least three CFs. The pathogenesis of VATER/VACTERL associated with ciliopathies (disorders caused by cilium association is heterogeneous and remains to further be dysfunction). elucidated. Materials and methods: URECs were obtained from In a multiplex family with VATER/VACTERL associa- patient’s urine and used for functional tests: (1) the ciliary tion, we performed whole exome sequencing (WES). phenotype was analyzed using immunoﬂuorescence cyto- Pedigree information suggested an underlying X- chemistry and (2) URECs and blood cells were used to chromosomalrecessivemodeofinheritancewhichappeared study mRNA splicing. likely since the index female patient showed skewed X- Results:Wetestedthepathogenicityoftwoheterozygous inactivation. We detected her maternally-derived X chro- variants of unknown signiﬁcance in IFT140, identiﬁed by mosome being activated in 84% of lymphocytes, while WES in a Mainzer-Saldino syndrome patient. IFT140 array-based analyses were normal. Consecutive WES and encodes a protein involved in ciliary intraﬂagellar transport ﬁltering for rare X-chromosomal variants prioritized one (IFT). Patient-derived URECs showed abnormal IFT in novel variant in SHROOM4 (p.E314K). comparison to healthy controls, which conﬁrmed the We are currently re-sequencing SHROOM4 in 310 male pathogenicity of both variants and validated the patient’s patients with VATER/VACTERL, VATER/VACTERL- diagnosis.WealsostudiedmRNAsplicingofDYNC2H1in like, A only, or TE only phenotype utilizing a targeted re- anotherciliopathypatientwithaheterozygoussynonymous sequencing approach with molecular inversion probes. change. DYNC2H1 encodes a subunit of the IFT dynein Expression studies of shroom4 in zebraﬁsh larvae (zﬂ) motor. mRNA splicing revealed exon skipping and showed expression from 48 until 72 hours post fertilisation premature transcription termination. Together with the intheregionoftheterminalgut.Forfunctionalanalysis,we pathogenic variant on the second allele, this functional have initiated Morpholino-knock-down (MO) experiments assay helped to diagnose this patient. in zﬂ to describe morphological changes in Shroom4 MO- Conclusion: The increasing number of variants with morphants. Preliminary data suggests increased death rates uncertain pathogenicity requires functional testing to and a clear morphologic alteration of the cloaca, as well as improve diagnostics. Functional tests using urine-derived differences in ﬂuorescent in vivo dye uptake and excretion patient cells have proven to be an attractive non-invasive386 J.delPicchia assay. However, the ﬁndings are not yet fully conclusive EDN3 gene, likely pathogenic but never described in and further analysis is warranted. literature, inherited from both his parents. Grant: Bonfor-O-120.0001.1 This is the ﬁrst case of WS due to EDN3 mutation with G.C. Dworschak: None. F. Thieme: None. K.U. urinary tract involvement, psychomotor delay and epileptic Ludwig: None. B. Odermatt: None. H. Reutter: None. seizures. This report aims to show new features in WS caused by P11.094B EDN3 mutations, that may lead to a deeper understanding Urinary tract abnormalities associated with Waardenburg of genotype-phenotype correlations and better clinical Syndrome due to mutations in EDN3 gene: a new management at early stage. phenotype D. Ognibene: None. G. Garani: None. L. Raimondi: None. S. Melchionda: None. E. Di Muro: None. P. D.Ognibene1,G.Garani2,L.Raimondi2,S.Melchionda3,E.Di Gamba: None. P. Greco: None. D. Morano: None. A. Muro3,P. Gamba4,P. Greco5,D.Morano5,A. Franchella6, Franchella:None.E.Cacciatore:None.A.Ferlini:None. E. Cacciatore2,A. Ferlini1,7,S. Bigoni7 S. Bigoni: None. 1SectionofMicrobiologyandMedicalGenetics,Departmentof P11.095C MedicalScience,FerraraUniversity,Ferrara,Italy,2Neonatal Novel phenotypic and molecular insights in families with IntensiveCareUnit,DepartmentofReproductionandGrowth, Waardenburg syndrome University-Hospital St Anna, Ferrara, Italy, 3Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San A. Shukla1,P. Somashekar1,S. Nampoothiri2, GiovanniRotondo,Italy,4PediatricSurgeryUnit,Womanand K. Gowrishankar3,R.Rama Devi4,N.Gupta5,D.Lakshmi N6, Children's Health Department, University of Padua, Padova, A. Kaur7,S.Bajaj8,S. Jagadeesh9,G.KM1 Italy, 5Obstetric and Gynecology Unit, Department of Reproduction and Growth, University-Hospital St Anna, 1Kasturba Medical College and Hospital, Manipal, India, Ferrara, Italy, 6Pediatric Surgery Unit, Department of 2Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Reproduction and Growth, University-Hospital St Anna, Cochin, India, 3Apollo Children’s Hospitals, Chennai, India, Ferrara, Italy, 7UOL of Medical Genetics, Department of 4Sandor Proteomics Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad, India, 5All India ReproductionandGrowthandDepartmentofMedicalScience, Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 6Nizam's University-Hospital St Anna, Ferrara, Italy Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, India, 7PGIMER, Chandigarh, India, 8Seth G.S. Medical College and KEM We report the case of a male newborn come to our obser- Hospital, Mumbai, India, 9Mediscan Systems, Chennai, India vationfortheevidence,atbirth,ofawhiteforelockofhair. Family history reported several cases of unspeciﬁc Introduction: Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a type of prematuregrayingofhair(onsetinchildhood-adolescence). neurocristopathy. It is clinically and genetically hetero- The parents were ﬁrst degree cousins. During pregnancy, geneous disorder characterized by auditory and pigmentary bilateral hydroureteronephrosis, megacystis and ureteral abnormalities. stenosiswereobservedattheXXthwwprenatalultrasounds Materials and methods: We investigated a cohort of 15 examination. Karyotype and Array CGH on amniotic ﬂuid patients from 13 Indian families clinically diagnosed with were normal. In the ﬁrst days of life, abdominal distension WS. Candidate gene sequencing for PAX3 in four families became evident and failure of meconium passage was and whole exome sequencing for twelve families was observed. He underwent several multiple surgery interven- carried out. Extended exome analysis and Real-time PCR tions due to subsequent intestinal blocks. Intestinal biopsy were carried out for copy number variant analysis. was suggestive for Hirschprung disease. Ophtalmologic Results: Nine novel variants in PAX3, MITF, SOX10, evaluation was normal. Otoemissions revealed bilateral EDNRB, EDN3 and a reported pathogenic variant in MIFT profoundsensorineuralhearingloss.Renalandurinarytract were identiﬁed. Intra-familial phenotypic variability was instrumental investigations conﬁrmed the prenatal ﬁndings. observedin onea family and non-penetrancewas observed He underwent a surgical intervention of right ureteral intwofamilies.Weobservedlowlevelgermlinemosaicism reimplantation. At 50 days he developed epileptic seizures. in an asymptomatic father of two affected siblings with Central hypotonia and psychomotor delay were observed. pathogenic variant, c.256A>T in PAX3. Biallelic novel In the strong suspicious of a Waardenburg Syndrome missense variant, c.1021C>G in MITF was identiﬁed in a (WS) type 4, molecular analysis of EDN3, EDNRB and patient with WS 2 for the ﬁrst time in literature. SOX10 genes was performed. This analysis revealed an Homozygous c.673G>A in EDNRB was identiﬁed in a homozygous nonsense variant c.364G>T (p.Glu122*) in patientwithoutanysignsofHirschsprungdisease.ExtendedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 387 exome analysis for copy number variations revealed 0.17 Based on clinical signs, elevated CK and radiological MbheterozygousdeletionencompassingSOX10inapatient ﬁndings with brain and eye malformations, the tentative with WS 4. Additionally, in two patients fulﬁlling the diagnosis WWS was established. Molecular panel analysis diagnostic criteria for WS, we identiﬁed a homozygous revealed a homozygous nonsense mutation in POMK known stop-gain variant, c.71G>A in GJB2, which causes (OMIM*615247) in both twins. These molecular ﬁndings Deafness, autosomal recessive 1A and a novel biallelic conﬁrmed the diagnosis of a POMK associated WWS stop-gainvariant, c.1608C>G inADGRV1, known tocause (OMIM#615247). Usher syndrome 2C. So far, with only ﬁve different POMK mutations Conclusion: We herein present novel phenotypic and published in three families (Jae et al., 2013, von Rennesse molecular insights into Waardenburg Syndrome. et al. 2014, Di Constanzo et al., 2014), POMK mutations Funding: Science and Engineering Research Board, represent a very rare cause of alpha-dystroglycanopathies. Government of India, India (YSS/2015/002009) Meningo/encephaloceleshavebeenreportedsofarasarare A. Shukla: None. P. Somashekar: None. S. Nam- ﬁnding in WWS including one patient with POMK-related poothiri:None.K.Gowrishankar:None.R.RamaDevi: WWS (Jae et al., 2013). The observation of occipital None. N. Gupta: None. D. Lakshmi N: None. A. Kaur: meningoceles at identical positions in both twins appears None.S.Bajaj:None.S.Jagadeesh:None.G.Km:None. interesting and might point to a more important role of POMK in the pathogenesis of neural tube defects. P11.096D A. Kuechler: None. M. Elgizouli: None. K. Rupprich: POMK-associated Walker-Warburg Syndrome (WWS) in None.A.Stein:None.M.Dzietko:None.A.Iannaccone: monozygotic twins with occipital meningocele None. A. Köninger: None. B. Schweiger: None. H. Kölbel: None. U. Schara: None. U. Hehr: None. A. Kuechler1, M.Elgizouli1,K. Rupprich2, A.Stein2, M.Dzietko2,A. Iannaccone3,A. Köninger3,B. Schweiger4, P11.097A H.Kölbel2,U.Schara2,U.Hehr5 Whole exome sequencing in Polish patients as an experience of one Genetic Out-patients Clinic 1InstitutfürHumangenetik,UniversitätsklinikumEssen,Essen, Germany, 2Klinik für Kinderheilkunde I, Universitätsklinikum R. Smigiel1,A. Doraczynska-Kowalik1,M. Biela1, M.Bloch1, Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Klinik für Frauenheilkunde und E. Szmida1,A. Walczak2, G.Kostrzewa2,J.Kosinska1, Geburtshilfe, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, M.Rydzanicz2, P.Stawinski2, A.Biernacka2,M.Sasiadek1, 4InstitutfürDiagnostischeundInterventionelleRadiologieund M.Gos3,R. Ploski2 Neuroradiologie,UniversitätsklinikumEssen,Essen,Germany, 5Praxis für Humangenetik und Zentrum für Humangenetik, 1Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Medical University, Universitätsklinikum Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany Warsaw,Poland,3InstituteofMotheriChild,Warsaw,Poland Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS) represents the most Whole exome sequencing(WES) isan universal diagnostic severeendofaphenotypicspectrumofdisorderscausedby test that can be carried out in relatively short time. WES is defective glycosylation of alpha-dystroglycan. Alpha- commonly used in clinical practice, especially in patients dystroglycanopathies are genetically heterogeneous auto- with ambiguous manifestations. somalrecessivedisorders;mutationsin16underlyinggenes Materials and methods: WES was performed using have been identiﬁed so far. SureSelectV5kitandHiSeq1500sequencingin107Polish We report on monozygotic male twins with strikingly patientsfromsingleGeneticOut-PatientsClinic:1foetus,6 similarmanifestationsofWWSinprenatalultrasonography newborns, 10 infants, 84 children and 6 adults. The most (hydrocephalus, occipital meningocele, hypoplastic cere- common ﬁndings were psychomotor development delay, bellum). Postnatal examination conﬁrmed the meningocele intellectual disability, epilepsy or epileptic encephalopathy, and revealed eye anomalies in both. CK was increased dysmorphic syndromes, athrogryposis, ataxia syndromes, >1000U/l. cMRI scans showed an occipital meningocele manifestations of neuromuscular disorders, connective with dorsally enlarged fourth ventricle, hypo-/aplasia of tissue diseases as well as central nervous, cardiovascular, cerebellar vermis, cortical malformation with generalized urinary, skeletal and eye congenital anomalies. The polymicrogyria-like cobblestone malformation, temporo- suspicion of a multigenic syndromes or spectrum of occipital subcortical band heterotopia, and eye malforma- syndromes was established in 78 persons. 29 patients tions (microphthalmia with coloboma and caudal cyst / showed highly unspeciﬁc clinical symptoms. persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous body and posterior Results: Pathogenic mutations consistent with patients’ staphyloma). phenotypes were detected in 64 of 107 (60%) cases. The388 J.delPicchia diagnosis was established in 58 of 78 (74%) patients with (38%)in12genesaffectedbydenovovariantsand3genes clinicalsuspicionofamultigenicsyndromesorspectrumof affected by biallelic variants (11/15 new genes). Interna- syndromes and in 16 of 29 (55%) patients with completely tional datasharing allowed to identify additional patients unspeciﬁc manifestations. Final diagnoses were in accor- carrying variants in the same gene with a consistent dancewithclinicalsuspicionsin31of58(53%)cases.The genotype-phenotype correlation, conﬁrming implication in most common diagnoses were: 13 cases (12%) - early human phenotypes. Moreover, 5 patients were found to infantile epileptic encephalopathy, 5 - metabolic defects carry a VUS (9%), but datasharing and literature review including mitochondrial disorders, 3 - Schaaf-Yang syn- were insufﬁcient to better classify these variants. drome, 2 - Joubert syndrome, 2 - GPI, 2- NBIA5, 2 - Conclusion: Trio-based WES analysis is a powerful MICPCH and 2 - spastic paraplegia 47. second step strategy for patients affected by DD/ID. It Conclusions: In our experience WES proved to be reducesanalysistime,limitsSangersequencingvalidations, especially useful in patients with infantile onset of non- and promises tobe an invaluableapproach for translational speciﬁc and severely debilitating neurological syndromes. research and identifying new genes. R. Smigiel: None. A. Doraczynska-Kowalik: None. M. S. Moutton: None. F. Tran-Mau-Them: None. C. Biela: None. M. Bloch: None. E. Szmida: None. A. Philippe: None. A. Vitobello: None. A. Bruel: None. J. Walczak:None.G.Kostrzewa:None.J.Kosinska:None. Thevenon: None. D. Lehalle: None. N. Jean: None. V. M. Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawinski: None. A. Biernacka: Carmignac: None. C. Poe: None. T. Jouan: None. M. None. M. Sasiadek: None. M. Gos: None. R. Chevarin:None.N.Houcinat:None.P.Kuentz:None.J. Ploski: None. Saint-Onge: None. A. Masurel: None. S. El Chehadeh: None.A.Mosca:None.N.Marle:None.J.Rivière:None. P11.098B P.Vabres:None.P.Callier:None.Y.Duffourd:None.L. Trio whole exome sequencing as an efﬁcient second step Faivre: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. strategy to decipher molecular basis of developmental disorders after negative ﬁrst-tier solo clinical WES P11.099C Clinical whole exome sequencing and its potential as a S. Moutton,F. Tran-Mau-Them,C. Philippe, A.Vitobello, diagnostic and disclosing tool A. Bruel, J.Thevenon,D.Lehalle, N.Jean,V. Carmignac, C.Poe,T.Jouan,M.Chevarin,N.Houcinat,P.Kuentz,J.Saint- S. M.Al Tala1,N.Nahavandi2, C.Betz2,O.Birkholz2, Onge,A. Masurel, S.El Chehadeh,A. Mosca,N.Marle, S. Neuber2,C. Neuhaus2,E. Decker2, S.Lenzner2,S. Brunck2, J.Rivière, P. Vabres, P. Callier, Y. Duffourd,L. Faivre, M.Hartig2,K.Haug2,M.Drasdo2,O.Brandau2,N.Bachmann2, C. Thauvin-Robinet M.H.Elsunni1,C.Bergmann2 Servicedegénétiquemédicale-CHUdeDijon,Dijon,France 1Armed Forces Hospital, Khamis Mushayt, Saudi Arabia, 2Bioscientia,CenterforHumanGenetics,Ingelheim,Germany Purpose: Developmental disorders (DD) and intellectual disability(ID)arefrequentdisordersaffectingaround1-3% Whole-exomesequencing(WES)isincreasinglyusedasan of the worldwide population. Genetic defects are estimated effective diagnostic tool for patients with complex pheno- to account for approximately 80% of DD/ID etiology, but types. Here we report our experience with WES in 282 the diagnosis yield is currently 30-40% when clinical index patients and assess the result in respect to the rate of assessment,array-CGH,sequencingofsinglegenesorgene molecular diagnosis among phenotypic groups and the panels and clinical whole exome sequencing (cWES) ability to introduce novel disease variants and genes. The focusingonknowndisease-causing genes arecombined. In patients were primarily pediatric (259 [91%] younger than laboratoriesusingsolocWESstrategyasaﬁrst-tieranalysis, 10 years old; 113 females [40%], 169 males [60%]) asubsequenttrio-basedstrategyisexpectedtofacilitatethe demonstrating diverse clinical manifestations, most often selectionofcandidatevariantsthankstorapididentiﬁcation including neurological dysfunctions. We could genetically of de novo and compound heterozygous variants, and diagnose122patients(43%)basedonapathogenicorlikely therefore increase diagnostic yield. pathogenicvariantfromwhich58havenotbeenpreviously Methods: We selected patients affected by DD/ID who reported.Thesevariants aredetected indisease genes (e. g. did not get a molecular diagnosis after multiple investiga- GLRB, HPS1, ASNS, PLA2G6, SERAC1, MYO18B, tionsincludingsolocWES,andthedatawerere-analyzedin PLOD1,SUOX,KMT2D,CASKandTBX1)withsigniﬁcant a trio-based strategy. phenotypic overlap with probands’ clinical picture. Given Results: Second step trio WES analysis of 53 DD/ID the parental consanguinity of the majority of the examined patientsselectedlikelypathogenicvariantsin15individuals individuals, recessively inherited phenotypes were mostAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 389 frequent (73%). However several variants (24%) causative efﬁciently and effectively establish genetic diagnoses for fordominantlyinheriteddiseasessuchasKabuki,Cowden, children withmedicalcomplexity,andthatcohortsofthese DiGeorge and Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome have been also children are enriched for novel genetic disorders. observed. In further 63 patients a variant of unknown sig- Screening 542 children with medical complexity from a niﬁcance was identiﬁed. Several new disease candidate single Complex Care Program yielded 126 children (23%) genes have been also observed, namely PTK7 for holo- suspected of having an undiagnosed genetic condition prosencephaly. Our results once again highlight the feasi- despite previous genetic testing. Eligible participants were bilityandusefulnessofthewhole-exomesequencinginthe evaluated through a clinical genetic assessment; WGS was clinical setting for timely medical interventions. The high performed in parallel with any outstanding conventional yield of variants from dominant diseases in a largely con- genetic testing. sanguineous cohort underlines the need for unbiased eva- In the ﬁrst 21 probands with WGS data (including 13 luation and highlights subsequent TRIO analyses as trios, 1dyad,and7singletons),11havereportableprimary reasonable next step in negative cases. diagnostic variants. We identiﬁed seven pathogenic/likely S.M. Al Tala: None. N. Nahavandi: None. C. Betz: pathogenic variants in known disease genes, including one None.O.Birkholz:None.S.Neuber:None.C.Neuhaus: small structural variant, one intronic variant predicted to None. E. Decker: None. S. Lenzner: None. S. Brunck: affect splicing, and one mosaic variant; as well as a None. M. Hartig: None. K. Haug: None. M. Drasdo: promising variant of uncertain signiﬁcance. De novo None. O. Brandau: None. N. Bachmann: None. M.H. missense variants were also identiﬁed in three genes Elsunni: None. C. Bergmann: None. without published disease associations: FBXW7, H3F3B, and RAC3. Importantly, by using public databases (DECI- P11.100D PHER, Matchmaker Exchange, and ClinVar), similarly Whole genome sequencing as a tool for genetic diagnosis affectedindividualswererapidlyidentiﬁedaroundtheglobe and gene discovery in children with medical complexity and collaborations have been established to publish our joint ﬁndings. G.Costain1,2,R.Z. Hayeems3,4,M.Snell5,M. Marano6, Our initial experience applying WGS to children with M.Reuter7, D.Veenma7,S. Walker7,R. Basran8,E. Cohen6,1, medical complexity suggests that trio-based genome-wide R. D.Cohn6,1,C. R.Marshall5,8,7,S.W. Scherer7,9,10, sequencing is a high yield testing strategy for this patient C. Shuman2,9,D.J.Stavropoiulos8,11, J.Orkin6,3,M. Meyn12,2,9 population, which appears to be enriched for de novo mutations and novel genetic disorders. (Funded by 1Department of Paediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, University of Toronto and Hospital for Sick Children ON, Canada, 2Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, grants). Hospital for SIck Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The G. Costain: None. R.Z. Hayeems: None. M. Snell: Institute of Health Policy Management and Evaluation, None. M. Marano: None. M. Reuter: None. D. Veenma: University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Program in None. S. Walker: None. R. Basran: None. E. Cohen: Child Health Evaluative Sciences, Hospital for SIck Children, None. R.D. Cohn: None. C.R. Marshall: None. S.W. Toronto,ON,Canada,5CentreforGeneticMedicine,Hospital Scherer: None. C. Shuman: None. D.J. Stavropoiulos: for SIck Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Department of None. J. Orkin: None. M. Meyn: None. Paediatrics,HospitalforSIckChildren,Toronto,ON,Canada, 7TheCentreforAppliedGenomics,HospitalforSIckChildren, P11.101A Toronto, ON, Canada, 8Department of Paediatric Laboratory Familial case of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome with atypical Medicine, Hospital for SIck Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, deletion and asymptomatic carrier 9Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 10Program in Genetics and Genome Y. Kozlova1,2,E.Dadali1, Z.Markova1,N.Shilova1, Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, D.Khmelkova3,F. Konovalov3,I.Kanivets3 11Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, UniversityofToronto,Toronto,ON,Canada,12UWCenterfor 1Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for Human Genomics and Precision Medicine, University of Medical Genetics” of the Russian Academy of, Moscow, Wisconsin, Madison, WI, United States RussianFederation,2MoscowStateUniversityofMedicineand Dentistry, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Genomed Ltd., Children with medical complexity have ≥1 chronic condi- Moscow, Russian Federation tion(s), functional limitations, multiple subspecialist invol- vement, and high healthcare utilization. We hypothesized Introduction: Inheritance of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome that whole-genome sequencing (WGS) has the potential to (WHS) due to familial deletions is reported quite rare. We390 J.delPicchia describe 4 y.o. boy with mild dysmorphic features, devel- Singapore, 13Reproductive Biology Laboratory, Academic opmental and speech delay and seizures. Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands Materials and metods, Results: The ﬁrst performed test with 561-gene customized NGS-platform for the most The amphibian Xenopus tropicalis is extremely well posi- frequent genes associated with congenital epilepsy using tionedformodelinghumandisease.Itshareswithzebraﬁsh IlluminaNextSeq500amendedtosuggest4pdeletionona the easy manipulations associated with its external coverage basis. Subsequently Microarray analysis with embryonic development, but it manifests unique features Affymerix Cytoscan Optima array conﬁrmed 1,5 Mb making it a more favorable organism. (1) Unlike zebraﬁsh, deletion in region 4p without critical WHS region (NSD2 Xenopus tropicalis has a true diploid genome. Hence, gene gene) involvement. The same deletion was also conﬁrmed disruptionstudiesarenotsufferingfromredundancyand(2) in proband’s phenotypically normal mother. Although her its genome shows high synteny with humans, greatly hybridization proﬁle was suggestive for mosaicism, a 4p- facilitating identiﬁcation of human disease gene orthologs. subtelomericFISHinbloodsampleswasperformed,butdid We employed a CRISPR/Cas9 based pipe-line for rapid not conﬁrm this version. identiﬁcation of genes inﬂuencing limb development and Conclusion: Thus, discrepancy in phenotypes of mother collaborated on a human clinical study on WNT signaling and proband could be explained by possible existence of associated amelia. The four R-SPONDIN secreted ligands undescribed imprinted genes in this region or different are considered to act via their cognate LGR4/5/6 and expression proﬁles which are to be determined. RNF43/ZNRF3 co-receptors to amplify WNT signaling. Y. Kozlova: None. E. Dadali: None. Z. Markova: Here we document an allelic series of recessive RSPO2 None. N. Shilova: None. D. Khmelkova: None. F. mutations in humans causing Tetra-Amelia Syndrome. Konovalov: None. I. Kanivets: None. CRISPR/Cas9 mediated knockout of rspo2 in Xenopus tropicalis also caused tetra-amelia, conﬁrming earlier ﬁnd- P11.102B ings in mouse knockouts. Unexpectedly, the triple and R-SPONDIN2 inhibition of RNF43/ZNRF3 Dictates Limb ubiquitousknockoutofLgr4,Lgr5andLgr6inmicedidnot Numbers Independentlyof LGR4/5/6 recapitulatetheknownRspo2LOFphenotypes.Instead,we found that TALEN mediated concurrent deletion of rnf43 T. Naert1,2,E. Szenker-Ravi2, U.Altunoglu3,M.Leushacke2, and znrf3 in Xenopus embryos was sufﬁcient to induce C. Bosso-Lefèvre2,4,M.Khatoo2,T. Hong1,R. Noelanders1, super numerous limbs. Our results establish that A. Hajamohideen2,C.Beneteau5,S. Bernardo deSousa6,7, RSPO2 serves as a direct ligand of RNF43/ZNRF3 but, B. Karaman3,X. Latypova5,S.Başaran3,E. BörklüYücel8, surprisingly, acts independently of LGR4/5/6. This signal T.Thong2,L.Vlaeminck1,S.S.Nayak9,G.KattaMohan9,C.Le constitutesamasterswitchthatgovernslimbnumbersinthe Caignec5,10,N.Soshnikova11, Z.O.Uyguner3,N.Barker2, embryo. In conclusion, the combined data clearly demon- H.Kayserili3,7,K.Vleminckx1,B.Reversade2,4,8,12,13 strates that the currently accepted paradigm for the LGR- dependent R-SPONDIN signaling pathway is incorrect in 1Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent, the context of limb formation. Belgium, 2Institute of Medical Biology, A* STAR, Singapore, T.Naert: None.E.Szenker-Ravi:None.U.Altunoglu: Singapore, 3Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical None. M. Leushacke: None. C. Bosso-Lefèvre: None. M. Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Khatoo: None. T. Hong: None. R. Noelanders: None. A. Paediatrics, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Hajamohideen: None. C. Beneteau: None. S. Bernardo Singapore, 5CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, deSousa:None.B.Karaman:None.X.Latypova:None. Nantes, France, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, S. Başaran: None. E. Börklü Yücel: None. T. Thong: Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, None. L. Vlaeminck: None. S.S. Nayak: None. G. Katta Portugal, 7Faculdade de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade da Mohan: None. C. Le Caignec: None. N. Soshnikova: Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal, 8Medical Genetics None. Z.O. Uyguner: None. N. Barker: None. H. Department, Koç University School of Medicine (KUSOM), Kayserili: None. K. Vleminckx: None. B. Istanbul, Turkey, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Reversade: None. Medical College, Manipal University, Manipal, India, 10INSERM, UMR 957, Laboratoire de Physiopathologie de la P11.103C Résorption Osseuse et Thérapie des Tumeurs Osseuses Broader spectrum of OBSL1 mutations Primitives,UniversitédeNantes,Natues,France,11Instituteof Molecular Biology (IMB) GmbH, Mainz, Germany, 12Institute K. Stuurman,M.vanSlegtenhorst of Molecular and Cellular Biology, A* STAR, Singapore, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, NetherlandsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 391 Case: A 2.5-year-old boy presented with cleft palate, mortality. Still, a signiﬁcant number of patients die within developmentaldelayanddysmorphicfeatures.Hewasborn few years from the disease onset, mainly due to the resis- term with birth weight of 4242 gram. The cleft palate was tance to post-operative radioiodine treatment. There is a seenshortlyafterbirth.Overtheyearshedevelopedgrowth needformarkersallowingforstratiﬁcationoflowandhigh- retardation,aunilateralconductivehearinglossandaglobal risk PTC patients. developmental delay. His facial features showed long eye In this study we analyzed impact of the germline lashes, broad nasal bridge, vertical line in lower lip, dental rs2910164 polymorphism in miR-146a-3p on the overall problems, prominent ears with broad and biﬁd earlobes, survival of PTC patients and on the expression of the micrognathia. He also had ﬂeshy hands and feet and ﬂat sodium-iodide transporter NIS. feet. He is the second child of a Polish father and Thai The study included 2441 patients (2163 women, 278 mother. Family history is non-contributory. men), including 359 cases with follicular variant of DNAtesting:A‘congenitalanomaly’genepanelshowed papillary thyroid carcinoma (fvPTC). Tumor/blood DNA compound heterozygosity for variants of unknown sig- was used for rs2910164 genotyping. Overall survival was niﬁcance (missense) in the OBSL1 gene. Both parents are assessed retrospectively (median follow–up 10.25 years). carriers.Thevariantshavenotbeendescribedbefore.Atan The miR:NIS interactions were analyzed using in vivo and earlier stage DNA testing for Kabuki syndrome did not radioactive iodine uptake assays. show any abnormalities. Rs2910164 functional variant within miR-146a-3p is Discussion: OBSL1 gene mutations are involved in 3M associated with increased overall mortality among fvPTC syndrome type 2. 3M syndrome is characterized with female patients. The deaths per 1000-person-years were extremely short stature, skeletal abnormalities and in 29.7 in CC vs. 5.08 in GG/GC-carriers (HR=6.21, general normal intelligence. Our patient, however, does P=0.006). Higher mortality of CC vs. GG/GC carriers not have extremely short stature and does not show was also observed in patients with lower clinical stage radiological ﬁndings seen in 3M syndrome. Additionally, (HR=22.72,P<0.001), smaller tumor (HR=25.05, our patient has a developmental delay. The question rose if P<0.001), lack of extrathyroidal (HR=9.03,P=0.02) and thesevariantsarecausingthisboy’ssymptoms.AreOBSL1 nodular (HR=7.84,P=0.002) invasion, lack of metastases gene mutations causing a broader spectrum than skeletal (HR=6.5,P=0.005)andolder(HR=7.8,P=0.002).Wealso problems? Are there other patients with a similar showed that miR-146a-3p directly regulates NIS. Inhibition phenotype? ofmir-146a-3prestorestheexpressionandfunctionofNIS, K. Stuurman: None. M. van Slegtenhorst: None. increasing radioactive iodine uptake. We propose a novel molecular marker of the clinical outcome of PTCfv patients. Rs2910164 increases the P12 Cancer genetics overall mortality with inhibition of NIS and disruption of radioiodine uptake as a possible mechanism. P12.001A M. Kotlarek: None. A. Kubiak: None. M. Czetwer- rs2910164 in miR-146a-3p is associated with increased tyńska: None. M. Świerniak: None. W. Gierlikowski: mortality in thyroid cancer patients None. M. Kolanowska: None. E. Bakuła Zalewska: None. S.M. Jhiang: None. K. Jażdżewski: None. A. M.Kotlarek1,2,A.Kubiak1,2,M.Czetwertyńska3,M.Świerniak1,2, Wójcicka: None. W.Gierlikowski2,M.Kolanowska1,2,E.BakułaZalewska4,S.M. Jhiang5,K.Jażdżewski1,2,A.Wójcicka1,2 P12.002B A novel translocation of t(2;14)(q31;q32) in B-cell 1Centre of New Technologies, Warsaw, Poland, 2Genomic precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Nuclear Medicine & Endocrine Oncology, M.S. Yildirim1,O.Ceneli2,L. Simsek1, A.G.Zamani1 Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of 1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Pathology,MariaSklodowska-CurieMemorialCancerCenter NecmettinErbakanUniversity,Konya,Turkey,2Departmentof and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Hematology, Meram Medical Faculty, Necmettin Erbakan Physiology and Cell Biology, The Ohio State University, University, Konya, Turkey Columbus, OH, United States Introduction: Cytogenetics is among most useful tools of Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), the most common predicting prognosis and choosing appropriate therapy for thyroid cancer subtype, is considered a disease of low haematological diseases. Translocations of 14q32 where392 J.delPicchia IGH gene resides, are found approximately 5% of acute Results: Mutations were found in 343/620 (55.3%) lymphoblastic leukemias. Among this group of transloca- patients and were more often detected in patients with tions, t(2;14)(q31;q32) with B-cell precursor acute lym- normal karyotype (p = 0.001). The presence of FLT3-ITD phoblastic leukemia has not been reported in literature mutation was associated withadverse overallsurvival (OS) so far. and relapse-free survival (RFS) (p=0.005 and p=0.009, Materials and methods: Here we present a 27 years old respectively). Increasing FLT3-ITD allelic ratio (≥0.5) female patient who referred to our clinic with diagnosis of correlated with low OS (p=0.028). Patients with single B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. GRAALL- NPM1 mutation reached signiﬁcantly better OS and RFS 2003 protocol initiated after evaluation. During chemother- compared to other patients (p=0.040, p=0.049, respec- apy, she developed mucormycosis in nasal region. Four- tively). The negative inﬂuence (tendency) of DNMT3A nier's gangrene developed at 36th day of the patient’s mutations and IDH1 polymorphism rs11554137 was found admission and debridement surgery with colostomy per- (p=0.112, p=0.186, respectively), whereas the presence formed immediately. of IDH1 mutations correlated with better outcome com- Results:Karyotype from bone marrow resulted as:46,XX pared to group without mutations (p = 0.092). In 144 [6]/46,XX,t(2;14)(q31;q32)[9], FISH analysis from same patients various combinations of mutations (from 2 to 5) sample revealed signal patterns consistent with IGH were detected. The presence of 2 mutations in one patient rearrangement in 50% of interphases. Probes targeted to signiﬁcantly reduced OS compared to patients with one cMYC,p16del, MLL andBCR/ABL showednoabnormal mutation(p=0.003).Theworstprognosiswasforpatients signal. RT-PCR of BCR/ABL was negative. Histopatholo- withcombinationsofNPM1+/FLT3-ITD+,NPM1+/FLT3- gicalandﬂowcytometryfrombonemarrowwereconsistent ITD+/DNMT3A+, DNMT3A+/FLT3-ITD+ mutations. with B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Conclusions:Mutationsinanalyzedgenesarefrequentin Conclusion: The patient died a day after debridement intermediateriskgroupofAMLpatients.Theysigniﬁcantly surgery due to respiratory failure. affect the prognosis, wherein it is important to consider the Considering detrimental clinical course, short survival type of mutation, its allele ratio and the presence of and age of this patient, it seems reasonable that this additional mutations. Complex analysis of genetic aberra- translocation is concordant with the putative knowledge of tionsinAMLpatientsprovidesthemostaccurateprognosis 14q32 translocations occuring at an early age and leading prediction and planning of targeted therapy. poor prognosis. In view of being ﬁrst case reported, we E. Motyko: None. I. Martynkevich: None. O. Blau: hope this case would be a contribution to literature and a None. L. Polushkina: None. L. Martynenko: None. M. furtherstepforcomprehensionofmechanismslyingbehind Bakaj: None. N. Cybakova: None. Y. Ruzhenkova: this disease and ultimately, to discovery of an effective None. E. Kleina: None. N. Pavlenko: None. A. therapy for patients affected. Chechetkin: None. M.S. Yildirim: None. O. Ceneli: None. L. Simsek: None. A.G. Zamani: None. P12.006B NIPBL a new player with NPMc+ in the onset of acute P12.005A myeloid leukemia Molecular mutations, their cooccurrences & prognostic value in acute myeloid leukemia M.Mazzola1, G.Fazio2,G.Deﬂorian3,L. Ferrari3, M.Spreaﬁco1,C.Saitta2,L.Ferrari1,E.Bresciani4,A.Biondi2, E. Motyko1,I. Martynkevich1,O.Blau2,L. Polushkina1, F. Cotelli5,M.Fumagalli6,M.Parma6,P. Riva1,A. Marozzi1, L. Martynenko1,M.Bakaj1,N.Cybakova1,Y. Ruzhenkova1, G.Cazzaniga2,A. Pistocchi1 E. Kleina1,N.Pavlenko1,A. Chechetkin1 1Dip. Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, 1Russian research institute of hematology and transfusiology, UniversitàdegliStudidiMilano,Milan,Italy,2CentroRicerca St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Charite clinic, Berlin, Tettamanti, Clinica Pediatrica Università di Milano-Bicocca, Germany CentroMariaLetiziaVerga,Monza,Italy,3IstitutoFondazione FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare IFOM, Milan, Italy, Theaimoftheresearchwastoanalyzetheprognosticeffect 4Oncogenesis and Development Section, National Human of typical for AML patients mutations. Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Materialsandmethods:Thestudyincluded620patients Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Dip. Bioscienze, Università fromGermanyandRussia.Screeningofmutationsingenes degliStudidiMilano,Milan,Italy,6HaematologyDivisionand FLT3, NPM1, DNMT3A, IDH1/2 was performed by PCR BMT Unit, Ospedale San Gerardo, Monza, Italy and sequencing.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 393 Cohesins form a multimeric protein complex (SMC1A, Introduction: allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell trans- SMC3, RAD21, STAG and additional proteins NIPBL, plantation represents the most effective treatment for MAU2,ESCO1,HDAC8)involvedinthecohesionofsister patients with high-risk Acute Myeloid Leukemia, but post- chromatids,post-replicativeDNA repairand transcriptional transplant relapses remain frequent. Next generation regulation. Recently, recurrent somatic mutations and sequencingallowstheinvestigationofrelapsemechanisms, deletions of cohesins have been reported in the 10% of the but tumor heterogeneity, clonality and genomic complexity patients with Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) or other demands for ad-hoc bioinformatics solutions. myeloidneoplasms.Frequently,mutationsincohesingenes Methods: we combined whole exome sequencing and co-occurred with the known AML-associated gene nucleo- RNA-Seq to characterize AML samples collected and phosmin(NPM1)that,whenmutated,aberrantlyrelocatesto puriﬁed from 14 patients before (preTx) and after allo- the cytoplasm (NPMc+). Forced NPMc+ expression in HSCT (postTx). We used alt-aware aligners to efﬁciently zebraﬁsh embryos causes an expansion of hematopoietic map reads to hg38DH reference, and alignment-free stem cells (HSCs) according with AML patient features. quantiﬁcation of RNA-Seq data to detect differentially In our cohort of adult AML patients, we observed a regulated transcripts. Somatic variant-call was performed speciﬁcandsigniﬁcativereductionoftheNIPBLexpression both on DNA/RNA sequencing data. in NPMc+ patients. We generated a zebraﬁsh model of Results:wedetectedanaverageof15damagingsomatic nipblb haploinsufﬁciency to investigate the hematopoietic mutations per leukemic sample, a total of 54 exclusive to phenotype and the interactions between NPMc+ and relapses. The mutational burden increased signiﬁcantly nipblb. In nipblb-loss-of-function zebraﬁsh embryos, we from pre-to-postTx (p=0.02, Wilcoxon) and consistently, observed an increase in myeloid progenitors, a phenotype clonal-analysis evidenced the emergence of new clones at resembling the NPMc+ zebraﬁsh model. Therefore, we relapse in 8 patients. Relapse-speciﬁc mutations encom- characterizethefunctionalinteractionbetweenNPMc+and passed known AML driver-genes including WT1 and NIPBLintheonsetoftheaberranthematopoieticphenotype KRAS but no gene evidently related to immune function. in zebraﬁsh and showed the involvement of the canonical By linear-model analysis of RNA-Seq data we found ~500 Wnt pathway in this process. genes signiﬁcantly deregulated in blasts at postTx-relapse. WedemonstratefortheﬁrsttimearoleforNIPBLduring Incontrasttothegenomicdata,mostofthesegenesbelong zebraﬁsh hematopoiesis and that its decreased expression, to immune-related categories, including antigen-processing due to NPM1 mutations, might play a role in and presentation viaHLA ClassII andT cell costimulation leukemia onset. pathways. Funding grant: My First AIRC grant (MFAG) 18714 Conclusions: postTx-relapses originate upon a complex M. Mazzola: None. G. Fazio: None. G. Deﬂorian: process, in which leukemia clonal evolution intertwines None. L. Ferrari: None. M. Spreaﬁco: None. C. Saitta: with immune-driven changes in patient-speciﬁc combina- None. L. Ferrari: None. E. Bresciani: None. A. Biondi: tions, on which precision treatments should be tailored. None. F. Cotelli: None. M. Fumagalli: None. M. Parma: G. Bucci: None. L. Zanotti: None. F. Santaniello: None. P. Riva: None. A. Marozzi: None. G. Cazzaniga: None. D. Biancolini: None. D. Cittaro: None. D. None. A. Pistocchi: None. Lazarevic: None. G. Tonon: None. F. Ciceri: None. L. Vago: None. P12.007C Genomic and transcriptional proﬁling of acute myeloid P12.008D leukemia by next-generation sequencing unravels patient- Noassociationbetweenrs1534309genepolymorphismand speciﬁc patterns of post-transplantation relapse FLT3 ITD mutation in patients with acute myeloid leukemia G.Bucci1,2,L. Zanotti2,F. Santaniello1,2, D.Biancolini1, D.Cittaro1,D.Lazarevic1, G.Tonon1,F. Ciceri3,L. Vago2,3 F. Tripon1,A. Crauciuc1,E. Lazar1,A. Trifa2, C.Banescu1,3 1Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tirgu Mures, Tirgu IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Unit of Mures,Romania,2UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy"Iuliu Immunogenetics, Leukemia Genomics and Immunobiology, Hatieganu", Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 3Center for Advanced IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Unit of MedicalandPharmaceuticalResearch,UniversityofMedicine Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, IRCCS San and Pharmacy Tirgu Mures, Tirgu Mures, Romania Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy Introduction: Rs1534309, one of the polymorphism of minichromosome maintenance complex component 7394 J.delPicchia (MCM7) gene, was reported to be associated with several functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), namely types of cancer. The aim of our study was to evaluate if rs2853669, in the gene that encodes telomerase reverse there are any correlation between the mentioned poly- transcriptase (TERT) with the risk of acute myeloid leuke- morphism, the risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia mia in a Romanian population. (AML),FLT3 ITD mutation status, overall survival and Materials and methods: One hundred and forty-three cytogenetic risk. AML patients, and one hundred seventy-three healthy Material and Methods: A number of 143 patients and subjectswithnohistoryofanymalignancywereincludedin 375 healthy people were enrolled in the study. The FLT3 the present case-control study. ITD status was determined by RFLP-PCR and HRM Results: No association between variant allele of the techniques. ABI 7500 fast real-time PCR system and TERTrs2853669andAMLriskwasobserved(OR=1.55, TaqMan assay were used for rs1534309 genotyping. p = 0.71). We noticed a slightly shorter overall survival in Results: For rs1534309 we found the following geno- the cases with homozygous variant genotypes compared to types: 86 wild type in patients group and 252 in control thosewithwildtypehomozygousgenotype(p=0.048).In group,52heterozygousinpatientsgroupand114incontrol addition,weinvestigatedtherelationofvariantgenotypeof group, 5 homozygous with the variant allele in patients mentioned SNP and NPM1 and DNMT3A mutations in groupand9incontrolgroup.Inpatientsgroupanumberof AMLcasesbutnoassociationwasobserved.Inconclusion, 23 patients were positive for FLT3 ITD mutation (14 were we consider that TERT rs2853669 SNP is not a risk factor wildtypeforrs1534309,8heterozygousand1homozygous for the development of AML in our cohort. withthevariantallele).Noassociationswerefoundbetween Acknowledgement: This work was supported by a grant this polymorphism, AML risk and FLT3 ITD status. No oftheRomanianNationalAuthorityforScientiﬁcResearch signiﬁcant differences were detected between sex,ages, andInnovation,CNCS/CCCDI-UEFISCDI,projectnumber overallsurvival,cytogeneticriskordemographiccharacter- PN-III-P2-2.1- PED-2016-1076 within PNCDI III, contract istics and genotypes. no.147 PED/2017 Conclusion: For our population rs1534309 polymorph- C. Banescu: None. A. Crauciuc: None. V. Moldovan: ism is not a risk factor for AML, is not associated with None.A.Boglis:None.E.Lazar:None.F.Tripon:None. FLT3 ITD mutation and overall survival in AML patients. Acknowledgement:This work was supported by a grant of P12.010B the Romanian National Authority for Scientiﬁc Research Integrating multiple genetic analysis into the clinical and Innovation,CNCS/CCCDI-UEFISCDI,project number diagnosis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia: a case report PN-III-P2-2.1- PED-2016-1076 within PNCDI III, contract no.147PED/2017. A. Pansa1,S. Salmoiraghi2,R. Cavagna2, K.Buklijas2, F. Tripon: None. A. Crauciuc: None. E. Lazar: None. A. Michelato2,L. Zannino2,G.Cassina1,A. Rambaldi2, A. Trifa: None. C. Banescu: None. P. Fruscella1,B. Facchinetti1,O.Spinelli2, U.Giussani1 P12.009A 1Medical Genetics, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, No association between TERT rs2853669 polymorphism Italy, 2Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, and NPM1, DNMT3A gene mutations and acute myeloid Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Italy leukemia risk Introduction: Testing for genetic markers is strongly C.Banescu1,A.Crauciuc1,V.Moldovan1,A.Boglis1,E.Lazar2, recommendedbyallinternationalguidelines asanessential F. Tripon1 step for proper diagnosis, prognosis and subsequent mon- itoringofacuteleukemias.Intheabsenceofgeneticlesions 1Genetics Laboratory, Center for Advanced Medical and the decision-making process might become difﬁcult. We Pharmaceutical Research,University of Medicine and report a case of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) in a Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, young adult in which genetic analysis, performed at diag- 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, nosis according to European LeukemiaNet, showed no Tg. Mures, Romania alterations. Methods: Conventional cytogenetic analysis, ﬂuores- Introduction: Telomerase reverse transcriptase gene cence in situ hybridization (FISH), molecular assays as (TERT) which is important for the maintenance of chro- polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ampliﬁcation and frag- mosome stability and it was reported to be signiﬁcantly ments analysis, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) and associated with different cancer types, including malignant array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) were hemopathies. We investigated the association of aAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 395 applied for the identiﬁcation of genetic lesions in andmigrationwereinvestigatedbyMTTassay,microscopy leukemia cells. observation, AnexinV-PI and wound healing assay, respec- Results:CytogeneticanalysiswasunsuccessfulandFISH tively.ThemRNAlevelsofPI3KandAKTwereevaluated assay of TP53 and KMT2A provided normal results. using qRTPCR. The phosphorylated levels of PI3K and Molecular evaluation of RUNX1-RUNX1T1, CBFB- AKT were determined by ELISA. MYH11, BCR-ABL1 fusion genes and NPM1, CEBPA, Results: Metformin inhibited the cells proliferation and FLT3 mutations, proved negative. NGS analysis suggested migrationinasigniﬁcanttime-anddose-dependentmanner. a duplication of TET2 and KIT genes and a partial deletion It induced apoptosis and caused morphological changes in of RUNX1. Array CGH results conﬁrmed a trisomy of all examined cells. qRTPCR results showed that the PI3K chromosome 4 and a partial deletion of chromosome 21 and AKT mRNA levels were inhibited by metformin where the above genes are mapped. In addition, a partial (P<0.05).TherewasnochangeinthemRNAlevelofAKT tetrasomy of chromosome 13 and a partial deletion of following metformin treatment in C643 cell line (P>0.05). chromosome 17 were identiﬁed. The treatment of the TheELISAresultsshowedthatmetformintreatmenthadno patient was modiﬁed accordingly. effects on the phosphorylated levels of PI3K and AKT Conclusions: The laboratory evaluation of leukemias is (P>0.05). complex and has evolved signiﬁcantly with the incorpora- Conclusuions: The inhibition of proliferation by metfor- tion of advanced techniques. The combination of multiple minstronglywasassociatedwiththedownregulationofthe genetic approaches helped identifying prognostic markers molecules involved in the PI3K/AKT pathway. The exact leading to proper risk category stratiﬁcation and a better molecularmechanismofthemetforminontheinhibitionof patient management. PI3K/AKT pathway and subsequent suppression of cell A. Pansa: None. S. Salmoiraghi: None. R. Cavagna: proliferation has remained unclear and further studies are None. K. Buklijas: None. A. Michelato: None. L. required to its clariﬁcation. Zannino: None. G. Cassina: None. A. Rambaldi: None. Z. Nozhat: None. M. Hedayati: None. M. Zarkesh: P. Fruscella: None. B. Facchinetti: None. O. Spinelli: None.S.Mohammadi-Yeganeh: None.K.Tabaei:None. None. U. Giussani: None. F. Azizi: None. P12.011C P12.012D The Effects of Metformin on the PI3K/AKT Pathway in Transcriptional proﬁling reveals a potent activity of Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer Cell Lines anticancer imidazoacridinone C-1311 against prostate cancer cells expressing androgen receptor Z. Nozhat1,2,M.Hedayati1,M.Zarkesh1,S.Mohammadi- Yeganeh2,K. Tabaei1,F. Azizi3 M.Niemira1,A. Bielska1, Z.Mazerska2,M.Kwasniewski3, A. Kretowski1,A. Skwarska2 1CellularandMolecularEndocrineResearchCenter,Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic 1Centre Clinical Research, Medical University of Bialystok, Republic of, 2Biotechnology Department, School of Advanced Bialystok,Poland,2DepartmentofPharmaceuticalTechnology Technologies in Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of and Biochemistry, Chemical Faculty, Gdansk University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Technology, Gdansk, Poland, 3Centre for Bioinformatics and 3EndocrineResearchCenter,ResearchInstituteforEndocrine Data Analysis, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Science, Poland Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Introduction: The androgen receptor (AR) plays critical Introduction: Association between T2D with the thyroid role in the poor response of androgen-dependent and cancers was shown and it has been attributed to the insulin castrate-resistant prostate cancers to chemotherapy. Antic- resistance. Insulin has relevance to tumor growth and ancer imidazoarcidinone C-1311 (Symadex™) is a new metastasisanditcanexertitscellgrowth-stimulatingeffects inhibitor of topisomerase II and receptor tyrosine kinase via PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. The aim of the present FLT3 that has been tested in phase II studies against study was to indicate whether metformin could affect metastatic breast cancer. Here, we assessed the effect of C- insulin-promoting cell growth by regulation of the PI3K/ 1311 on the transcriptional proﬁles in prostate cancer cell AKT pathway. lines with different AR status. Material and Methods: Anaplastic thyroid cancer Materials and Methods: Prostate cancer cells were (ATC)-derived cells were treated with 0-60 mM metformin exposed toC-1311for 24 h.Global transcriptome proﬁling for 24, 48 and 72h. Cell viability, morphology, apoptosis, for LNCaP (AR+) and DU-145 (AR-) cells was performed396 J.delPicchia using Illumina Hiseq 4000 platform. The biological 6633), Bacillus cereus (ATCC 11778), andStaphylococcus relevance of dysregulated transcripts was assessed by aureus ATCC 29213, and the Gram-negative Escherichia Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software. coli (XL1), Xanthomonas campestris (ATCC 33013). Results:IPAanalysisoftranscriptsuniquelyexpressedin Results: These NPs at various concentrations demon- LNCaP and DU-145 cells exposed to C-1311 revealed strated high and signiﬁcant genotoxic, cytostatic and activation ofdiversesignalling pathways dependingon AR cytotoxic effects while the frequency of SCEs/cell was status.Themainenrichedtopcanonicalpathwaysidentiﬁed increased 4-6 times over the control level. Strong in LNCaP (AR+) cells were associated with multiple cell antibacterial activity of O2 was also observed against all cycle control and survival processing genes like ATM and thebacterialstrainsandfurthermoretheeffectofincreasing breast cancer signalling whereas glycolysis, gluconeogen- concentrations of the newly synthesized NPs on the esis and lipid metabolism pathways were predominantly integrity and electrophoretic mobility of pDNA showed dysregulatedinDU-145(AR-)cells.Furthermore,themain that both NPs mimic topoisomerase I enzymatic nicking upstreamregulators and their target genes in both cell lines activity. were involved in the different biological processes. Conclusion: These results suggest that the O1 and O2 Conclusion:Takentogether,ourﬁndingsuggestthatAR NPs exert strong genotoxic, cytogenetic, antimicrobial and status may signiﬁcantly affect the efﬁcacy of C-1311 pDNA damaging activity, providing a signiﬁcant property against prostate cancer cells. Association of speciﬁc that might support its possible involvement in DNA canonical pathways indicates the opposite mechanism of damaging phenomena and their possible clinical use as a action of imidazoacridinone C-1311 in both androgen- new potent anticancer agent. dependentandindependentprostatecancer.Foundedbythe K. Lafazanis: None. O. Antonoglou: None. A. Den- National Science Centre, Grant No 2013/09/D/NZ7/04185. drinou-Samara: None. T.S. Lialiaris: None. A. M. Niemira: None. A. Bielska: None. Z. Mazerska: Pantazaki: None. None. M. Kwasniewski: None. A. Kretowski: None. A. Skwarska: None. P12.014B Heterogeneity of KRAS, NRAS, PIK3CA and BRAF P12.013A mutationalstatusinprimarytumor,lymphnodesandliver O1 (CuFeO and O2 (Cu O) Nanoparticles (NPs) induced metastases obtained from patients with metastatic 2) 2 cytogenetic and genotoxic effects on human cultured colorectal cancer lymphocytes, antimicrobial activity on three bacterial strains and damaging effects on pDNA S. delCarmen1, J.Sayagués1, O.Bengoechea1,J.Alcazar1, R. Gervas1,J.Garcia1, A.Orfao2, M.Sarasquete1,M. Abad1 K. Lafazanis1,2,O.Antonoglou3, A.Dendrinou-Samara3,T.S. Lialiaris1,A. Pantazaki2 1Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain 1Demokrition University of Thrace, Medical School, Dept of Genetics, Alexandroupolis, Greece, 2Aristotle University of It is well known that activating mutations in the KRAS and Thessaloniki, Dept of Chemistry, Lab of Biochemistry, NRAS genes are associated with poor response to anti- Thessaloniki, Greece, 3Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, EGFRtherapiesinpatientswithmetastaticcolorectalcancer Dept of Chemistry, Lab of Inorganic Chemistry, Thessaloniki, (mCRC).Approximatelyhalfofthepatientswithwild-type Greece KRAS colorectal carcinoma do not respond to these thera- pies. This could be because the treatment decision is <META NAME="author" CONTENT="Χρήστης των determined by the mutational proﬁle of the primary tumor, Windows"> regardless of the presence of small tumor subclones har- Introduction:O1(CuFeO andO2(Cu O)nanoparticles boring RAS mutations in lymph nodes or liver metastases. 2) 2 (NPs) have been tested at various concentrations in human We analyzed the mutational proﬁle of the KRAS, NRAS, peripheral blood cells in vitro in order to investigate their BRAF and PI3KCA genes in samples of 26 paired primary genotoxic, cytotoxic and cytostatic effects. DNA damaging tumors, 16 lymph nodes and 34 liver metastases from 26 action was estimated by the Sister Chromatid Exchanges untreated mCRC patients. The most frequent mutations (SCEs)methodology,amethodforcontrollinggenotoxicity foundinprimarytumorswereKRASandPI3KCA,followed of human exposure to different mutagenic agents and by byNRASandBRAF.Thedistributionofthemutationsinthe DNA electrophoretic mobility experiments on pDNA 16 lymph node metastases analyzed was as follows: 4 in (pUC18).Theirantimicrobialactivitywasevaluatedagainst KRAS gene, 3 in NRAS gene and 1 mutation each in the Gram-positive bacterial strains Bacillus subtilis (ATCC PI3KCA and BRAF. The most prevalent mutation in liverAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 397 metastasiswasintheKRASgene,followedbyPI3KCAand family with BAP1-TPDS was observed, however, in the BRAF. Of the 26 cases studied, 15 displayed an overall Australian family, incomplete family history for the concordance in the mutation status detected in the lymph proband did not allow for assessment of cancer history. node metastases and liver metastases compared with pri- Conclusions: Detection of four deﬁnite and two likely mary tumor, suggesting no clonal evolution. The mutation deleterious variants in this focused assessment of BAP1 in proﬁles differed in the primary tumor and lymph node/ Australia suggests a need for a comprehensive worldwide metastasessamplesoftheremaining11patients,suggesting database of germline BAP1 variants and cancers present in intertumoral clonal evolution. Our results suggest the need carriers and development of reﬁned guidelines for clinical to perform mutational analysis in all available tumor sam- testing. ples of patients before deciding to commence anti-EGFR N.K. Hayward: None. S. Walpole: None. J. Palmer: treatment. None. A. Pritchard: None. M. Howlie: None. J. S. del Carmen: None. J. Sayagués: None. O. Bengoe- Symmons: None. H. Hamilton: None. O. Rolfe: None. chea: None. J. Alcazar: None. R. Gervas: None. J. A. Stark: None. M. D'Mellow: None. S. Warrier: None. Garcia:None.A.Orfao:None.M.Sarasquete:None.M. W. Glasson: None. Abad: None. P12.016D P12.015C ZNF384 gene fusions in BCP-ALL: A report of nine BAP1 germline variants in Australia Austrian cases secured by systematic FISH and array screening N.K. Hayward1, S.Walpole1,2,J.Palmer1,A. Pritchard1,3, M.Howlie1,J.Symmons1,H. Hamilton1,O.Rolfe4, A.Stark4, K.Nebral1,S.Haslinger1,A.Inthal1,M.König1,D.Schinnerl1, M.D'Mellow4, S.Warrier4, W.Glasson4 A. Attarbaschi2, G.Mann2,S.Strehl1,O.A. Haas1,2 1QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, 1Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Australia, 2University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria, 2St. Anna Children’s 3The University of the Highlands and Islands, Inverness, Hospital, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria United Kingdom, 4Queensland Ocular Oncology Service, Brisbane, Australia The subdivision of childhood B-cell precursor acute lym- phoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL), based on speciﬁc genetic Introduction: Germline mutations in BAP1 are linked to a features, such as gene fusions or ploidy and copy number spectrum of cancers, deﬁned as the BAP1 tumour predis- aberrations, provides the basis for treatment stratiﬁcation position syndrome (BAP1-TPDS). The most commonly and decisions. The so-called "B-other" group embraces all associated cancers are uveal melanoma (UM), mesothe- caseswithrare recurrentabnormalities thatarehithertoless lioma, cutaneous melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, cho- well-deﬁned. Because they include potential candidates for langiocarcinomaandmeningioma,however,thereislikelya targeted and personalized therapies, they are currently the ‘long tail’ of rare cancers also associated with the main focus of interest. One of these recently identiﬁed syndrome. subgroupsthataccountsforapproximately4%ofBCP-ALL Materials and Methods: To assess the prevalence of andupto10%ofB-othercases,involvestheZNF384gene, BAP1-TPDS in Australia, we screened Queensland UM whichisfusedtoatleasttendifferentpartners.Thesecases probands for BAP1 mutations (n=64), identiﬁed variants have commonly a CD10 negative (pro-B/BI) or CD10 low from published studies from Australia, and liaised with immunophenotype with myeloid markers and a distinct national clinical genetics services to ascertain families with gene expression pattern. To search for ZNF384 positive BAP1 germline variants. Variants with a population caseswescreenedallB-othercasesthatwereenrolledinthe frequency of <0.0005 were considered for a potential role ALL-BFM2009study with SNP/CGH arrays as well as an in BAP1-TPDS. additional selected cohort with a ZNF384-speciﬁc dual Results: We identiﬁed 4 truncating variants, all in color break apart FISH probe set. We found nine patients kindreds with classical features of BAP1-TPDS. Of the 11 with a ZNF384 fusion, which make-up approximately 5% missense variants, only 1 (p.T173C), is from a family with ofallB-othercases.FiveofthemhadaEP300-ZNF384and typical BAP1-TPDS features, and is predicted to impair two a TCF3-ZNF384 fusion. The remaining two had novel ubiquitin hydrolaseactivity. In silico prediction suggests8/ fusion partners, one of which was ascertained as CCAR1. 9 unique missense variants either alter splicing or damage The other one will be hopefully identiﬁed with whole proteinstructure,thoughallrequirefunctionalconﬁrmation. transcriptome RNA-sequencing, which is currently per- A promoter variant identical to that reported in an Italian formedinallcases.ThreeofthemhadIKZF1deletionsand398 J.delPicchia all but one are in remission, supporting the notion that P12.019C ZNF384 positive cases seem to respond well to current ExpressionpatternsanalysesofTCGAdatasetsrevealnew therapies. interactions and regulatory factors of immune response in K. Nebral: None. S. Haslinger: None. A.Inthal:None. bladder cancer M. König: None. D. Schinnerl: None. A. Attarbaschi: None.G.Mann:None.S.Strehl:None.O.A.Haas:None. P. Stempor1,2, P.Dobosz3,4,5,R. Leibowitz-Amit3,4 P12.017A 1The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, Development of BCR-ABL1 positive chronic myeloid United Kingdom, 2Department of Genetics, University of leukemia in a patient with JAK2 V617F positive Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Research polycythemia vera Centre, Oncology Department, Sheba Medical Centre Hospital, Ramat Gan, Israel, 4Oncology Department, Sackler S. Shin,J.Kim,M.Park,W. Song Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 5School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Hallym University Kangnam Sacred Heart Hospital, Seoul, Cambridge, United Kingdom Korea, Republic of Cancerimmunotherapyisbecomingincreasinglypopularin Introduction: The BCR-ABL1 oncogenic fusion gene is a both research and clinical medicine. The potential to har- hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Poly- ness the patient’s immune system to selectively destroy cythemia vera (PV) belong to a BCR-ABL1 negative mye- cancer cells is promising in theory, and indeed already loproliferativeneoplasm.TransformationofPVtoCMLhas yielded some impressive results in the clinic. However, the been rarely reported. Here, we present a secondary CML individual success rate of such therapies is still very low. case progressed from long-standing JAK2 V617F Many patients do not respond to treatment, while a small positive PV. percentage of others suffer from catastrophic side effects. Materials and Methods: A 68-year-old woman pre- The immune response is mediated by immunological sented with easy bruising. Complete blood count (CBC) synapse: an interface between lymphocytes and antigen showed elevated hemoglobin level (hemoglobin concentra- presentingcells(APCs),whichconsistsofco-inhibitoryand tion,17.9g/dL),leukocytosis(whitebloodcellcount,28.48 co-stimulatory checkpoint proteins. Therefore, a better x 109/L), and marked thrombocytosis (platelet count, 1779 understanding of immunological synapse will enable us to x 109/L). Bone marrow was hypercellular with a marked better design clinical trials and will provide us with better myeloid and megakaryocytic hyperplasia. diagnostics and therapeutics. Results:Allele-speciﬁcpolymerasechainreaction(PCR) In this study we focus on The Cancer Genome Atlas revealed heterozygous JAK2 V617F mutation and reverse- expressiondatasetsandcomputationalanalysestorevealthe transcriptase (RT)-PCR was negative for BCR-ABL1 regulatory patterns linking checkpoint genes to miRNA or rearrangement. G-banding showed normal karyotype. The other regulatory factors that might enhance or switch off patient was diagnosed with PV and treated with hydro- their activity. xyurea. Seven years following diagnosis, CBC revealed re- Themethodcanbegenerallyappliedtoalltypesofcancer occurrence of neutrophilia and thrombocytosis, and newly with sufﬁcient expression datasets. To showcase this developed basophilia (16% of white blood cells; basophil method, we have applied it to a bladder cancer (BLCA) count, 5.45 x 109/L). G-banding revealed Philadelphia cohort.ThegraphicalGaussianmodelshowsco-expression chromosome in all analyzed metaphases. RT-PCR showed of several checkpoint genes and anti-correlated expression positivity for BCR-ABL1 transcript and the patient was proﬁle of many miRNAs, most prominently mir-15a and diagnosed with CML. The patient has been followed with miR-15b. This model predicts miRNA as negative regula- imatinib and hydroxyurea. tors of immunological response, potentially serving as a Conclusions: In conclusion, we report a case of post-transcriptional regulator of checkpoint genes expres- secondary BCR-ABL1 positive CML progressed from sion. We have validated these interactions using the JAK2 V617F positive PV. Although the development of calculation of free-energy of miRNA-mRNA binding, and CML in PV is a rare event, careful examination including independentlyincelllinesusingqPCRexpressionproﬁling. molecular studies should be considered in patient with PV GrantRefs: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9464-7475 who showed severe leukocytosis and/or basophilia. P. Stempor: None. P. Dobosz: None. R. Leibowitz- S. Shin: None. J. Kim: None. M. Park: None. W. Amit: None. Song: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 399 P12.020D 4University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, Distrubition of BRAF gene mutations in the patients with 5Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore malignant melanoma Background: Results from BRCA1/2 germline mutation O.Cilingir1,M. Dincer2,S. Arslan1,B. DurakAras1, testing are important in guiding clinicians on cancer man- E. Erzurumluoglu1,O.Kutlay1,S. Aynacı1,S. Artan1 agement and surveillance strategies. The Manchester scor- ing system (MSS) helps identify patients indicated for 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, germline BRCA1/2 testing. The recent third iteration of DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Eskisehir,Turkey,2Eskisehir MSS showed improvements after including further adjust- Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of ments for triple negative breast cancer, high grade serous Medical Oncology, Eskisehir, Turkey ovarian cancer and HER2 receptor status. This study eval- uates the relative effectiveness of MSS1-3 in a Southeast The BRAF gene encodes a protein with serine/threonine Asian population. kinase activity involved in the mitogen activated protein Methods. We carried out a retrospective study of 330 kinase signaling pathway (MAPs). It causes cell prolifera- index patients that were genetically tested using next tion through the ras pathway. Somatic BRAF gene muta- generation sequencing (NGS) panels which included full tions were detected in 80% melanomas, 15% colorectal gene sequencing and coverage for large deletions/duplica- cancers(CRC), 45% papillary thyroid cancers(PLT) and tions in BRCA1/2. Clinicopathological features (e.g., 15% nonsmall cell lung cancers(NSCLC). Mutations are tumour histology, grade and age of diagnosis) and family frequently observed in the codon 600 (V600A, V600D, cancer history were collected to calculate MSS1-3 scores V600E and V600K,R,M), exons 15 and 11. The advent of and evaluated against genetic results with ROC analysis. therapeutics targeting the MAPK signal pathway has led to Calculations were performed using Medcalc17. great advances in the treatment of metastatic melanoma. Results In total, 47 (14.2%) patients were tested positive Thisstudywasdesignedtoinvestigatethemutationstatus for BRCA1 or BRCA2 germline mutation. Based on a 10% of 11th and 15th exons of BRAF gene in 83 melanoma likelihoodofBRCA1/2germlinemutationasathresholdfor patients. Sequence analysis from parafﬁn embedded tissue genetic testing, 43.0% (142/330) of patients were indicated samples was performed by pyrosequencing method The for testing under MSS3, compared to 35.8% (118/330) for overall incidence of somatic mutations within the BRAF MSS1 and 36.4% (120/330) for MSS2. In terms of model gene was 37,35%. The clinical subtypes of the melanomas effectiveness, MSS3 had a statistically signiﬁcant improve- werecomparedwiththemutationtypesandratio.Themost ment over MSS1 (p=0.037) and MSS2 (p=0.032), with prevalent type of BRAF mutation was c.1799T>A 91.5% sensitivity and 65.0% speciﬁcity at the 10% (27,71%). According to the literature, about 40-60% of threshold. melanoma patients have mutations. The ﬁndings of our Conclusion. Compared to previous iterations, the latest study were supported the literature. The detected mutations MSS3 is a better performing model and relative to the considered as potential drug targets in advanced melanoma United Kingdom population, is equally effective in therapy. distinguishing patients with BRCA1/2 germline mutations O. Cilingir: None. M. Dincer: None. S. Arslan: None. in a Southeast Asian population. B. Durak Aras: None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. O. W. Chew: None. R.B. Moorakonda: None. J.C. Allen: Kutlay: None. S. Aynacı: None. S. Artan: None. None. E. Courtney: None. H. Soh: None. L. Shao Tzu: None.Y.Chen:None.T.Shaw:None.G.Evans:None.J. P12.022B Ngeow: None. Assessing the effectiveness of the Manchester Scoring SysteminpredictingSoutheastAsianpatientswithBRCA1/ P12.023C 2germline mutations DetectionofBRCA1andBRCA2variantsincirculatingfree DNA by using a commercial kit W.Chew1,R. B.Moorakonda2,3, J.C. Allen2, E.Courtney1, H.Soh1,L. Shao Tzu1,Y. Chen1,T. Shaw1,G.Evans4, G.L. Capone1,A. L. Putignano1, A.Patuelli1,I.Paganini1, J.Ngeow1,5,2 R. Sestini1,F. Gensini1, A.Marozza2,B.Porﬁrio1, L.Papi1 1National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 1Medical Genetics, Department of Experimental and Clinical 2Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, Biomedical Sciences “Mario Serio”, University of Florence, 3Singapore Clinical Research Institute, Singapore, Singapore, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Firenze, Italy400 J.delPicchia Introduction: Patients with high-grade serous ovarian Reducing-Bilateral-Salpingo-Oophorectomy (RRBSO) is cancer with germline or somatic mutations in BRCA1/2 widely recommended for mutation carriers by professional genes can beneﬁt from PARP inhibitors treatment. While organizations (NCCN, NCI etc.). RR-BSO reduces ovarian germline mutational screening has become a routine prac- cancer by 95%, and decreases all-cause mortality. Various tice by Next Generation Sequencing, detection of somatic aspects inﬂuence decision-making-process regarding sur- mutation is challenging. The major advantage of using gery. By understanding these considerations, we could liquid biopsy,rather than tissuebiopsy astool for mutation increase RRBSO-rate. screening in cancer, is to scan allele status and frequencies Objective: to estimate RRBSO-rate among BRCA of a patient over time. In this preliminary study, we mutation carriers, and examine effect of demographic demonstrated that detection of both germline and somatic factors and cancer history on RRBSO-rate BRCA1/2 mutations in circulating free DNA (cfDNA) with Methods: Data on 543 female carriers of BRCA1/2 targeted amplicon sequencing is feasible and might be mutationsfromage35werecollectedfrommedicalrecords helpful in the standard diagnostic procedures. and attendance to our specialized-high-risk-clinic . Chi- Materials and Methods: cfDNA of patients, previously squared, Fisher-exact tests and student-t-test were used for screened for BRCA1/2 mutations, was extracted using categorical, continuous variables, respectively. QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit, while BRCA1/2 Results: Overall RRBSO-rate was 83.5% . There was mutation screening was performed using the Devyser positive correlation between mean age and RRBSO-rate: BRCA kit. In addition, two known reference standards 53.27(± 9.66)yrs. in those with RR-BSO vs. 44.17(± (BRCASomaticMultiplexIFFPEandStructuralMultiplex 8.56)yrs. in those without, p<0.001. Parous carriers were cfDNA Reference Standard) carrying different pathogenic more inclined to have RR-BSO than nulliparas: 84.5% vs. and not pathogenic variants with known percentage of 61.5%,respectively,p=0.045.Theseresultsareconsistent mutated allele were analyzed. with common medical recommendations based on age, Results: We conﬁrmed the presence of all germline birth-planning. No association was found between marrital mutations in cfDNA and the entire set of variants with status and RRBSO. Therewas positivecorrelation between known percentage of mutated alleles in the two reference breastcancer andRRBSO:92.2%with positivehistory,vs. standards achieving a sensitivity as low as 5% for somatic 81% without, p=0.033. Familial cancer history had no variants. signiﬁcant impact. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that cfDNA Conclusions: the vast majority of BRCA mutation mutation screening with a commercial kit allows the carriers that are attend our specialized-high-risk-clinic, detectionofbothgermlineandsomaticBRCA1/2mutations choosetoundergoRRBSO,inlinewithacceptablemedical at the same time, permitting to monitor the presence of recommendations. Age, parity, and personal history of possible reverse mutations, which could affect the efﬁcacy breast cancer are positive predictors of RRBSO. of PARP inhibitors. GRANT: RICATEN2017 R. Michaelson-Cohen: None. O. Reichman: None. T. G.L. Capone: None. A.L. Putignano: None. A. Goldstein: None. P. Mor: None. E. Levi: None. S. Patuelli: None. I. Paganini: None. R. Sestini: None. F. Lieberman: None. U. Beller: None. E. Levy- Gensini: None. A. Marozza: None. B. Porﬁrio: None. L. Lahad: None. Papi: None. P12.026B P12.024D DevelopmentofadualplatformstrategyfortargetedDNA Factors involved in decision to undergo risk reduction sequencing in genetic screening bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy in carriers of BRCA mutations C. A.Schumacher, A. M.Wood, S.Sandhu, J.Lenhart, L. Kurihara,V. Makarov R. Michaelson-Cohen, O.Reichman,T. Goldstein, P. Mor, E. Levi, S.Lieberman,U.Beller, E. Levy-Lahad Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Hebrew University, Jerusalem The use of next-generation sequencing (NGS) to assess Israel, Jerusalem, Israel genetic variation in genes involved in both inherited dis- eases, as well as cancer, is critical. However, obstacles The lifetime risk of ovarian cancer among BRCA1,2 including homology to pseudogenes and difﬁcult to mutationcarriersis36timeshigherthangeneralpopulation sequence motifs arise, making genes like CFTR, BRCA1, (50% vs. 1.4%, respectively), and risk of breast cancer is and BRCA2 challenging to sequence with short-read (SR) increased by 5.8 (70% vs 12%, respectively). Risk- chemistry. Long-read (LR) assays overcome these issues,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 401 but are restricted by limited available technologies. To mediated genetic testing, PM implemented changes to enhance the beneﬁts of each platform, we developed tar- pathologyreporting,appointmentscheduling,andin-service geted, single-tube, multiplexed amplicon assays that allow education for referring physicians. for overlapping, contiguous coverage. Methods: Following the implementation of new referral DNAfromMUTCF-2(CoriellInstitute)wasusedinboth and scheduling processes, a list of women diagnosed with the SR and LR assays. In the SR assay, an 87-amplicon SOCatPMbetween 2010-2016wasobtainedfromthePM panel comprehensively covered all exons (~10Kb) in Cancer Registry and cross-referenced against the genetics CFTR. The LR assay covered all the same exons, and 6 database. complete intronic regions, using 21 amplicons (~54Kb). Results:Of724womenwithSOC,68%werereferredfor DNA from BC01 (Coriell Institute) was used in the 246- GC and 93% attended their scheduled appointment. Of amplicon (~23Kb)SRassayandthe35-ampliconLRassay those who received GC, 96% proceeded with genetic (~86kB). While both comprehensively cover all exons, the testing, 22% of whom were found to have a pathogenic LR assay additionally covers 20 complete introns. For all variant in BRCA1/2. Notably, 25% of women with a genes,SRlibrariesweresequencedonanIlluminaMiniSeq pathogenic variant reported no family history of breast or and LR libraries were sequenced on a Paciﬁc Biosciences ovarian cancer. RSII. Greater than 95% on-target and coverage uniformity Conclusion:Despitesubstantialimprovementsinreferral was seen in libraries from both SR and LR assays, and the rates, many eligible women are not receiving GC. same number of variants were detected. Considering the high rate of pathogenic variants, therapeu- SR assays allow for screening of a wide range of targets tic implications, and the value of identifying high-risk for immediate and broad use. LR assays enable compre- families, it is imperative that all women with SOC are hensive sequencing of entire gene coding regions and offeredgenetictesting,irrespective offamilyhistory orage neighboringintrons,gainingadditionalinsightintovariants at diagnosis. Our study demonstrates that even simple in difﬁcult-to-sequence regions, large insertion/deletions, interventions can address barriers to GC. and structural variations. R. Demsky: None. S. Randall Armel: None. J. C.A. Schumacher: A. Employment (full or part-time); McCuaig: None. N. Maani: None. R.H. Kim: None. A. Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. A.M. Wood: A. Employ- Volenik: None. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. S. Sandhu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; P12.028D Swift Biosciences. J. Lenhart: A. Employment (full or Features of male breast cancer: Review from a single part-time);Signiﬁcant;SwiftBiosciences. L.Kurihara:A. Canadian hereditary cancer clinic Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Bios- ciences. V. Makarov: A. Employment (full or part-time); S. RandallArmel1, J.McCuaig1,R. Demsky1,S. Neil2,R.H. Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. Kim1, A.Volenik1 P12.027C 1Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada, Stillnot100%:A15yearevaluationofgeneticcounselling 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada ratesforserousovariancanceratasingleCanadiancancer centre Introduction:Malebreastcancer(MBC)accountsfor<1% of breast cancers cases, with an incidence of ~230/year in R.Demsky,S.RandallArmel,J.McCuaig,N.Maani,R.H.Kim, Canada. The limited data available on MBC suggests that A. Volenik ~18%arehereditary,thatmostarediagnosedwithadvanced (stage 3-4) disease, and are typically ER/PR+, Her2-. No Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada studies have examined Canadian MBC characteristics. A better understanding of the genetic and pathologic proﬁles Introduction: An estimated 15-20% of invasive serous of MBC would improve risk assessment and genetic ovarian cancers (SOC) are related to pathogenic variants in counselling. BRCA1/2.GuidelinesrecommendthatallwomenwithSOC Methods: A retrospective chart review examined the are offered genetic counselling (GC) irrespective of family characteristicsofmalesdiagnosedwithMBCbetween2000 historyorageatdiagnosis.Despitethis,mostcentersreport and 2017, and who received genetic testing at Princess suboptimalreferralrates.Priorto2009,only23%ofwomen Margaret Cancer Centre. with SOC were seen for GC at Princess Margaret Cancer Results: A total of 29 men were identiﬁed; 20 received Center (PM) in Toronto, Canada. While some centres have BRCA1/2 genetic testing and 9 received multi-gene panel approachedthisissuewithautomaticreferralsoroncologist- testing (MGPT). No pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in402 J.delPicchia BRCA1/2; however, 1 CHEK2 pathogenic variant was mutationsiteswhichwereproximaltoapoptoticdomainsof detected.Theaverageageofdiagnosiswas64.1years.The ankyrin and BRCT repeats respectively. For BRCA2 majority of men were diagnosed with invasive ductal variants, homologous recombination was impaired for carcinoma (86%), of which 55% were stage 1. 100% of BRCA2 c.9154C>T but not BRCA2 c.440A>G. cancerswereER+,83%PR+,and96%Her2-.62%ofmen To facilitate in reclassiﬁcation of variants, RAD51 reported a family history of breast and/or ovarian cancer, nuclearlocalizationassaycanbeperformedonhomologous 21% a second non-breast primary, and 7% a second breast recombination VUS. For BARD1, the right assay should be primary. chosen based on the affected functional domain - DNA Conclusions:Ourdatasupportsthecurrentliteraturethat repair or apoptosis. Inappropriate use of the assays may most MBC are ER/PR+ and HER2-. In contrast, our study misinform the variant’s pathogenic status. found an earlier stage of cancer and a relatively low M. Toh: None. S. Chan: None. N. Ishak: None. S. mutation rate. The absence of BRCA1/2 mutations in this Chong: None. J. Ngeow: None. unselected Canadian cohort of MBC demonstrates the role ofMGPTtoincreasethediagnosticyieldofgenetictesting. P12.031C S. Randall Armel: None. J. McCuaig: None. R. Germline loss-of-function variants in the BARD1 gene are Demsky: None. S. Neil: None. R.H. Kim: None. A. associated with familial breast cancer Volenik: None. N.Weber-Lassalle1,K. Weber-Lassalle1,J. Borde1, P12.029A G.Neidhardt1,C. Ernst1,B. Blümcke1,K. Klonowska2,A.E. Functional evaluation of variants of unknown signiﬁcance Volk3,C. Kubisch3,R. Baber4,C. Engel4,P. Kozlowski2, in the homologous recombination genes BARD1 and E. Hahnen1,R. K. Schmutzler1,J.Hauke1 BRCA2 1Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, University M.Toh1, S.Chan2,N.Ishak2, S.Chong2,J.Ngeow2,1 Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish 1Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, 2National Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Human Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore Genetics, Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 4LIFE-Leipzig Research Center for Civilization With the advent of personalized medicine, genetic testing Diseases, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany hasbecomeincreasinglyprevalent.Detectionofpathogenic variants facilitates enhanced screening measures, early Introduction: Recent studies revealed a weak association intervention and modiﬁed treatments. Unfortunately, a sig- of BARD1 germline loss-of-function (LoF) variants with niﬁcant portion of the genetic testing results are the non- breast cancer (BC). We determined the BARD1 mutation actionable variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS). Func- prevalence in n=3,348 well-characterized BC index tional studies speciﬁc to the altered functional domains are patientsoftheGermandescentandgeographically-matched needed to ascertain their pathogenicity. Here, we function- female control individuals (GMCs; n=2,196). ally assessed the pathogenicity of BARD1 and BRCA2 Methods: Female BC index patients and GMCs were clinical VUS identiﬁed among young colorectal cancer screened for LoF variants in the BARD1 gene by next patients. generation sequencing. All patients met the inclusion BARD1 and BRCA2 harbor domains for homologous criteria of the German Consortium for Hereditary Breast recombination via RAD51 nuclear localization while and Ovarian Cancer for germline testing. The SOPHiA BARD1 has additional apoptotic domains. RAD51 nuclear DDM® platform (SOPHiA GENETICS®) was applied for localization was assessed using nuclear-cytoplasmic frac- thedetectionofcopynumbervariations(CNVs)inasubset tions of patient-derived lymphoblastoid cells upon induc- of 2,810 BC patients. tionofDNAbreaks.Apoptoticfunctionwasdeterminedby Results:Weidentiﬁed14LoFvariants(excludingCNVs) immunoblotting of activated p53 and downstream marker, in 3,348 female BC index patients (carrier frequency activated caspase-3. [CF]:0.42%)comparedwith36inatotalof36,694controls Two BARD1 and one BRCA2 VUS were tested. DNA (CF:0.10%, OR=4.276, 95%CI=2.30-7.94, p=0.00004). repair was unaffected in BARD1 variants, evident from the The CF in each control dataset was 0.07% (GMCs; normal RAD51 nuclear localization and previous n=2,196), 0.11% (FLOSSIES; n=7,325) and 0.10% homology-directed repair studies. However, their apoptotic (ExAC; n=27,173), respectively. The BARD1 p.Gln564* function was impaired with failure of caspase-3 activation variant was found in 6/14 patients. CNVs affecting the uponinductionofapoptosis.Thiscorrelatedwellwiththeir BARD1 gene were identiﬁed in 3/2,810 BC index patientsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 403 (CNV CF=0.11%), which is higher than that observed in Karamzade: None. M. Saberi: None. N. Nourpour: the FLOSSIES database (2/7,325; CF=0.03%). For the 17 None. R. Behdad: None. BARD1 mutation carriers, the mean age of ﬁrst BC diagnosis was 46 years (range 24-60) compared with 47 P12.033A years (range 17-92) in the overall sample (n=3,348). Importance of verifying the location of duplicated Conclusion: We observed a signiﬁcant association of sequences-exampleofabenigncomplexduplicationinthe deleterious BARD1 variants with the BC phenotype and BRCA1 gene in a breast cancer patient conﬁrm BARD1 as a moderately-penetrant risk gene. The inclusion of CNVs is crucial for a comprehensive genetic M.Larsen1,E.Pohl1, C.Ernst1,K. Keupp1, S.Reichstein- screening of BC patients. Gnielinski1,Y.Delpu2,A.Petit2,J.Bertho2,B.Wappenschmidt1, N.Weber-Lassalle:None.K.Weber-Lassalle:None.J. E. Hahnen1,R. Schmutzler1 Borde: None. G. Neidhardt: None. C. Ernst: None. B. Blümcke: None. K. Klonowska: None. A.E. Volk: None. 1Center for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Cologne, C. Kubisch: None. R. Baber: None. C. Engel: None. P. Germany, 2Genomic Vision, Paris, France Kozlowski: None. E. Hahnen: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. J. Hauke: None. Approximately 24% of breast (BC) and/or ovarian cancer (OC) cases who met the inclusion criteria of the German P12.032D ConsortiumforHereditaryBreastandOvarianCancer(GC- Experience learned from BRCA1 and BRCA2 screening in HBOC) for germline testing are caused by pathogenic Iranian women mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene. About 1% of patientscarrydeleteriousCNVs(copynumbervariations)in M.Keramatipour, Z. Golchehre, A.Nasrollahzadeh, BRCA1 or BRCA2. According to the guidelines of the GC- M.Arabpour,A. Karamzade, M.Saberi, N.Nourpour, HBOC, conﬁrmed CNVs of every size are estimated as R. Behdad pathogenic,iftheyresultinaframeshiftandtherebydisrupt functional protein domains. While the pathogenicity of TehranUniversityofMedicalSciences,DepartmentofMedical deletions is less complicated to determine, the situation for Genetics, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of duplications is much more complex, because duplications canappeareitherintragenicorextragenic.Here,wepresent Breast cancer is the most common malignancy and second a case (BC at age 26) carrying a complex duplication in leadingcauseofcancer-relateddeathamongwomen.5-10% BRCA1. Initial MLPA analysis showed a duplication of of breast cancer cases are hereditary and several associated exon 1-8 and 11-12 of BRCA1. RNA and molecular locihavebeenidentiﬁed.BRCA1andBRCA2genesarethe combing experiments could not conﬁrm an intragenic most important genes involved in breast cancer. Here we duplication but gave evidence for a translocation of the investigated BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 240 women with duplicated sequence. The patient is carrying a pathogenic clinical presentations of breast cancer (n=141) or asymp- mutation in PALB2 as well (c.654del, p.(Asp219Thrfs*4)), tomatic females with positive family history of this cancer whichismostprobablythecauseoftheBCdisease.Thisis (n=99).Allexonsplusﬂankingregionswereenrichedand also supported by the fact that her healthy mother (57) sequencing was performed by Illumina platform. Classiﬁ- carries only the BRCA1 variant and not the PALB2 muta- cation of detected variants was done based on ACMG tion.Themajorityofduplicationsappearintandem,butthis guideline for variant interpretation 2015. 52 samples out of case shows the great importance of verifying this assump- 240 samples (21.6%) have at least one VUS (Variant of tion. When the duplicated fragment is translocated else- Uncertain Signiﬁcance), likely pathogenic, or pathogenic where in the genome, the mutation is most likely not variant. Among these 52 variants, 13 were pathogenic, 9 pathogenic, which has a great impact on clinical con- were likely pathogenic and 30 variants were VUS. 23 var- sequences and predictive testing of relatives. iantswerefoundinBRCA1and29inBRCA2gene.36of52 M. Larsen: None. E. Pohl: None. C. Ernst: None. K. variants were detected in symptomatic and 16 variants in Keupp: None. S. Reichstein-Gnielinski: None. Y. Delpu: asymptomatic women. Among 52 detected variants, 29 None. A. Petit: None. J. Bertho: None. B. Wappensch- were missense, 16 frameshift, 4 nonsense, and 3 splicing midt: None. E. Hahnen: None. R. Schmutzler: None. variants. Full data and analysis will be presented in the meeting. P12.034B M. Keramatipour: None. Z. Golchehre: None. A. BRCA1andBRCA2mutationalspectruminbreastcancer Nasrollahzadeh: None. M. Arabpour: None. A. patients from the Republic of Macedonia404 J.delPicchia M.Jakimovska1,I.Maleva Kostovska1,K. Popovska-Jankovic1, P12.035C K. Kubelka-Sabit2,M.Karadjozov2, L.Stojanovska3, Next Generation sequencing based detection of copy A. Arsovski3, S.Smichkoska4,E. Lazarova4,M. Jakimovska numbervariationsinhereditarybreast-andovariancancer Dimitrovska5,D.Plaseska-Karanﬁlska1 germline diagnostics 1Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology L. Lepkes,B. Blümcke, M.Larsen,A. Baasner,B. Versmold, “Georgi D. Efremov”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former J.Driesen, K.Keupp,C. Ernst, G.Neidhardt, J.Hauke, Yugoslav Republic of, 2Clinical Hospital Acibadem Sistina, B. Wappenschmidt, E.Hahnen, R.Schmutzler Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3Re- Medika General Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Cologne, Yugoslav Republic of, 4University Clinic of Radiotherapy and Germany Oncology, Medical Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)-based Republicof,5UniversityClinicofRadiology,MedicalFaculty, detectionofcopynumbervariations(CNVs)iswidelyused University“SsCyrilandMethodius”,Skopje,Macedonia,The in a routine diagnostic setting. The prevalence of CNVs in Former Yugoslav Republic of BRCA1/2 and other risk genes in patients with familial breast cancer (BC) orovariancancer (OC) remains elusive. Identiﬁcation of the spectrum of mutations in BRCA1 and Methods: We used the TruRisk® gene panel (Agilent BRCA2 genes in speciﬁc populations allows for imple- SureSelect) which covers 34 cancer risk genes/candidate mentation of a cost-effective genetic screening. Thus far, riskgenesforBC/OC.TheSophiaGeneticsDDMplatform theBRCA1/2mutationspresentamongtheBCpatientsfrom was employed to predict CNVs. conspicuous ﬁndings were the Republic of Macedonia have been largely unknown. veriﬁed by MLPA. Therefore, we used targeted next-generation sequencing, Results:Acohortof4,418indexpatients(3,846BC,445 Sanger DNA sequencing and multiplex ligation probe OC, and 127 BC/OC patients) was included. All cases met ampliﬁcation analysis to search for point mutations and the inclusion criteria of the German Consortium Hereditary deletions/duplications involving BRCA1 and BRCA2-cod- Breast- and Ovarian cancer for germline testing. Most ing regions. We have analyzed a total of 337 BC patients, CNVs predicted by DDM platform were detected in the enrichedforfamilyhistoryofcancer,earlyageofonsetand BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 genes. CNVs were also bilateraland/ortriplenegativeBC.Atotalof28pathogenic observed in further (candidate) cancer predisposition genes mutations were observed in 55 unrelated BC patients (55/ ATM, BARD1, FANCA, MLH1, MSH2, PALB2, PMS2, 337, 16.3%) with the predominance of BRCA2 mutations RAD50, RAD51C, RAD51D, TP53, but not in MSH6, (29/55, 52.7%). Nine novel mutations were identiﬁed; four CDH1, NBN, FANCM, PTEN, STK11. For BRCA1, 43 inBRCA1andﬁveinBRCA2.Themostprevalentmutations CNVs were predicted in 4,418 patients, of which 40 (93%) werec.181T>G,c.1102G>T,c.3700_3704del5,c.5212G>A could be conﬁrmed by MLPA. For BRCA2, 9 CNVs were and c.5266dupC in BRCA1 and c.5722_5723delCT, predicted, of which 5 could be conﬁrmed (56%). In total, c.5851_5854delAGTT, c.7879A>T and c.8317_8330del14 about 1% of all index patients carried CNVs affecting the in BRCA2 gene. Thus far, BRCA2 c.7879A>T and BRCA1/2 genes. c.8317_8330del14mutationshavebeendescribedinseveral Conclusions:Insummary,bioinformaticanalysisofNGS isolated cases however, our study is the ﬁrst one showing gene panel data detects CNVs. However, it remains to be that they have a founder effect among Macedonian popu- determined whether sensitivity/speciﬁcity of in silico CNV lation.Ninerecurrentmutationsaccountfor63.6%ofallof detection meets diagnostic criteria. thedetectedmutationsallowingforimplementationofafast L.Lepkes:None.B.Blümcke:None.M.Larsen:None. ﬁrst-step BRCA1/2 mutational screening strategy. In con- A.Baasner:None.B.Versmold:None.J.Driesen:None. clusion, this study provides a comprehensive view of K.Keupp:None.C.Ernst:None.G.Neidhardt:None.J. known and novel BRCA1/2 mutations in BC patients from Hauke: None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. E. Hahnen: the Republic of Macedonia and contributes to the global None. R. Schmutzler: None. spectrum of BRCA1/2 mutations in BC. M.Jakimovska:None.I.MalevaKostovska: None.K. P12.036D Popovska-Jankovic: None. K. Kubelka-Sabit: None. M. Identiﬁcationofdifferentialgenesinluminalbreasttumors Karadjozov: None. L. Stojanovska: None. A. Arsovski: bycomparisonofBrazilianandAmerican populationdata None. S. Smichkoska: None. E. Lazarova: None. M. Jakimovska Dimitrovska: None. D. Plaseska- R. M.RodriguesPeres1, M.Anurag2, J.T. Lei2,M.J.Ellis2, Karanﬁlska: None. L. O.Z.Sarian1Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 405 1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2Baylor College of Medicine, Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 3Unit of Bioinformatics Houston, TX, United States and Biostatistics, Department of Applied Research and Technological Development, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Introduction:Luminalbreasttumorsarethemostcommon Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy, 4Immunohematology & typeofdiagnosedbreastcancers,havingworseprognosisin Transfusion Medicine Service, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto thelong-term.Chemotherapyislesseffectiveinthisgroup, Nazionale Tumori, Milano, Italy, 5Medical Genetics, which makes research inthis ﬁeldnecessary. The objective Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di of this study was to compare data from Brazilian and Milano, Milano, Italy, 6Department of Pathology and American populations of luminal breast carcinomas to Laboratory Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale evaluate the differences in the ampliﬁed or deleted genes dei Tumori, Milano, Italy between these sets of samples. Subjects and Methods: 49 samples of luminal breast Introduction:Earlyageatonsetofbreastcancer(eoBC)is tumors from Brazilianwomen wereselectedby histopatho- considered to be suggestive of an increased genetic risk. logicalcharacterizationofbiopsyspecimens.Weperformed Althoughgenetictestingofknownhighpenetrancegenesis the chromosome microarray (CMA) technique to assess offered to all eoBC-affected women, in the absence of a Copy Number Variations (CNVs) and indels from these positive family history the detection rate of pathogenic tumors. Raw data was segmented by PSCBS followed by variants is <10%. This study aimed at assessing the role of normalization.Copynumberaberration(CNA)analysiswas constitutive promoter methylation at BC-associated loci as performed using GISTIC2. The Brazilian genes data found anunderlyingpredisposingeventinwomenwitheoBCand to be signiﬁcantly ampliﬁed or deleted were compared to negative family history. TCGA data obtained for American samples. Materialsandmethods:Promotermethylationat12loci Results: We found signiﬁcantly ampliﬁed or deleted (BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, CDH1, FANCM, STK11, NBN, genes that belong mainly to the FGF and Wnt signaling PALB2, PTEN, RAD51C, RECQL and TP53) was assessed pathways exclusively in the cohort of Brazilian breast by the EpiTYPER-MassARRAY assay in blood from 110 tumors. BRCA1/2 negative patients with eoBC and negative family Conclusions: These data suggest that there are differ- history,and60healthydonors(controls).Hypermethylation ences between Brazilian and American luminal breast was determined, within each promoter, by comparing the tumors at the genomic level, potentially affecting tumor patient’s mean methylation value with thresholds based on biology, inﬂuencing their prognosis and response to the upper limit of the 95% bootstrap conﬁdence interval of treatment. This comparison should bring light to the the controls’ mean. question of population differences in terms of genomics, Results: Only one patient, with mean methylation value of personal habits and the environment, having an effect on 26%, exceeds the threshold by 0.15 at the BRCA1 promoter. tumor genetics leading to resistance to the available Interestingly, analyses on FFPE BC from the patient reveal a treatments. mean BRCA1 methylation of 60-70% and the loss of the Financial Support: Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do unmethylated allele. Another patient, with mean methylation Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP), Brazil. level of 21%, exceeds the threshold by 0.05 at the RAD51C R.M. Rodrigues Peres: None. M. Anurag: None. J.T. promoter,thoughitsbiologicalsigniﬁcanceisyettobedeﬁned. Lei: None. M.J. Ellis: None. L.O.Z. Sarian: None. Conclusions: In isolated eoBC patients, BRCA1 consti- tutive promoter methylation appears to be an underlying P12.038B predisposing event. Further studies are required to deﬁne Constitutive promoter methylation analysis of breast the impact of slight methylation changes involving other cancerassociatedgenesinwomenwithisolatedearlyonset BC-predisposing genes. breast cancer J. Azzollini: None. C. Pesenti: None. S. Pizzamiglio: None. L. Fontana: None. C. Guarino: None. B. Peissel: J.Azzollini1,C.Pesenti2,S.Pizzamiglio3, L.Fontana2, None. M. Plebani: None. S. Tabano: None. S. Sirchia: C. Guarino4,B. Peissel1,M.Plebani3, S.Tabano2, S.Sirchia5, None. B. Paolini: None. P. Verderio: None. M. Miozzo: B. Paolini6, P.Verderio3, M.Miozzo2,S. Manoukian1 None. S. Manoukian: None. 1Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Medical Oncology P12.039C and Hematology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Largecase-controlstudyandfunctionalanalysesshowthat Tumori, Milano, Italy, 2Department of Pathophysiology & FANCMtruncatingmutationsareassociatedwithabreast Transplantation, Università degli Studi diMilano; Division of cancer risk magnitude that varies depending on their Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale location406 J.delPicchia G.Figlioli1,M.Bogliolo2,L. Caleca3,BCACcollaborators, S. SENECA1,2, J.DeGreve3,4,M.Bonduelle1,S. Joris3, P. Radice3,J.Surralles2,P. Peterlongo1 K. Keymolen1,M.De Rademaeker1, K.Stouffs1,A. Gheldof1,2 1Genome Diagnostics Program, IFOM, The FIRC Institute of 1UZ Brussel, Center for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, Molecular Oncology, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Genetics 2Neurogenetics Research Group, Reproduction Genetics and and Microbiology, Genetics Department of Hospital de les Regenerative Medicine Research Group, Vrije Universiteit SantesCreusiSantPau,UniversitatAutònomadeBarcelona, Brussel,1050,Belgium,3UZBrussel,DepartmentofOncology, and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Brussels, Belgium, 4Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 1050, Belgium Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 3Unit of Molecular Bases of Genetic Risk and Genetic Testing, Introduction: TheBelgiumcore genepanelfor analysisof Department of Preventive and Predictive Medicine, Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) patients FondazioneIRCCSIstitutoNazionaledeiTumori,Milan,Italy consists of 4 genes BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, TP53, along with the c.1100delC mutation in CHECK2 and inspection Breastcancer(BC)isthemostcommonfemaleoncological for copy number variations in BRCA1/2. Patients are disease. About 50% of the familial cases are explained by selected according to national guidelines (www.BeSHG. rare mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 and other high-risk be). Broadening the analysis with an identiﬁcation of genes, by mutations in moderate-risk genes including mutationsintheLynchgenesMLH1,MSH2andMSH6,and PALB2,ATMandCHEK2,andbycommonlow-riskalleles. screening for truncating mutations in the ATM, BRIP1, Previously, other and we showed that truncating mutations RAD51C/D genes has been proposed recently. within the FANCM gene are associated with BC risk, par- Methods: Mutation analysis was performed with the ticularly with ER-negative subtype. Also, we recently BRCA Hereditary Cancer MASTR Plus kit (Multiplicom). observed that upstream mutations cause more severe clin- Deletion/duplication analysis was performed with the ical phenotypes than those located in the C-terminus. MLPA kits P002-D1 and P045-C1 (MRC Holland). The Inthis study,the three most common FANCM truncating presence of reported variants is conﬁrmed with Sanger mutations p.Arg658*, p.Gln1701* and p.Arg1931* were sequencing. genotyped in 67,112 BC cases and 53,776 controls Results:Aretrospectivedataanalysisofthefastqﬁlesfor collectedwithintheBreastCancerAssociationConsortium. the gene pool proposal was performed for 700 patient Logisticregressionanalysesindicatedthatthep.Arg658*is samples previously analyzed. An additional 13 families a moderate risk factor for ER-negative and triple negative wereidentiﬁed,withthefollowingdiversiﬁcation:6ATM,3 BC (TNBC): OR=2.44 (1.12-5.34) and OR=3.79 (1.56- BRIP1,1RAD51C,1RAD51D,1MLH1and1MSH6gene 9.18), respectively. Similar analyses showed that the p. families. These patients were all negative for class 4 and 5 Gln1701* and p.Arg1931* may confer a lower risk in core gene panel variants. TNBC [OR=2.15 (1.05-4.38)] and ER-negative BC Conclusion: Broadening of the present core gene panel, [OR=1.98 (1.26-3.13)], respectively. asproposed,willresultintheidentiﬁcationofonlyalimited We are now testing these and other two patient-derived extra number (1.85%) of patients with germ line mutations truncating mutations subjecting transfected human as the possible molecular cause of their cancer. However, FANCM-/- cells to DNA-ICL inducing agents to measure this molecular diagnosis can have major inﬂuences on the survival rates and chromosome fragility. Consistently with treatment and follow-up of the index cases, while it also our genetic and clinical data, our initial functional results offers possibilities for predictive testing and family support the hypothesis that upstream FANCM truncation planning in at risk family members. could be associated with a higher BC risk and more severe S. Seneca: None. J. De Greve: None. M. Bonduelle: clinical phenotypes. These results will allow a better BC None. S. Joris: None. K. Keymolen: None. M. De riskestimateinFANCM-mutationcarriersfromfamiliesand Rademaeker:None.K.Stouffs:None.A.Gheldof:None. general population. Funded by AIRC (IG-16732 to P.P.) and by a FUV P12.041A fellowship (to G.F.). Identiﬁcation of ultra-rare loss of function variants in a G.Figlioli: None. M.Bogliolo: None. L. Caleca: None. west of Ireland breast cancer population P.Radice:None.J.Surralles:None.P.Peterlongo:None. U.M.McVeigh1, T.P. McVeigh2, N.Miller1, D.W.Morris3, P12.040D M.J. Kerin1 Germ line gene panel analysis in a HBOC population 1Discipline of Surgery, Lambe Institute for Translational Research, NUIG, Galway, Ireland, 2Department of ClinicalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 407 Genetics, Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin, team with 128 breast cancer patients having the same 17- Ireland, 3Discipline of Biochemistry, NUIG, Galway, Ireland genepanel.Ourphilosophythusfarhasbeentoinitiatemost testing with BRCA 1-2, followed by reﬂex testing to a Breast cancer is the most common female cancer globally. panel; this approach will underestimate the number of Approximately5-10%ofbreastcancersareduetoinherited patients harboring more than one mutation. The ﬁnding of variants in numerous breast cancer susceptibility genes, of multiple germline mutations in a few patients has led us to which 20-30% are in BRCA1/BRCA2. Variants in other reﬂect on the relative contribution of the mutations to their genes demonstrate reduced penetrance. The genetic het- clinical phenotypes and to risk assessment strategies for erogeneity of breast cancer means that next-generation their families. sequencing(NGS) using multi-gene panels is a cost- and Results: Two patients had BRCA mutations only (panel time-efﬁcient way to identify causative germline variants. testing done because of family history). Six patients had We aimed to use NGS to identify pathogenic variants mutations in other panel genes: ATM, BRIP1, PALB2, contributing to breast cancer susceptibility in an Irish CHEK2. 18% of patients had a VUS in one or two genes. population. A multi-gene panel was designed on a Roche- Two young patients with metastatic invasive ductal Nimblegen platform. Sequencing was performed on an carcinoma at diagnosis (grade 3, ER/PR-positive, Her-2 Illumina NextSeq. GATK best practices (2016) were fol- negative), neither of whom had a close family history of lowed for bioinformaticsanalysis. Sampleswere conﬁrmed cancer,hadmultiplemutatedgenes.Patient#1,age37,had to be unrelated using Plink1.9; population stratiﬁcation a synchronous renal cell carcinoma. She had germline using 1000 Genomes data conﬁrmed ethnicity. Variants in mutations in BARD-1, CHEK-2, and PALB2. Patient #2, 90 patients with breast cancer and 68 unaffected controls age 23, has Neuroﬁbromatosis type I, without prior were annotated using Snpeff, VEP, and Annovar. Con- signiﬁcant medical complications. She was found to have ﬂictingannotationwasclariﬁedbymanualinterpretationvia mutations in both the NF-1 and MUTYH genes. As UCSCgenomebrowser.Oneloss-of-function(LOF)variant literature on such cases is scant, multicenter reporting is wasidentiﬁedinBRCA1.Ultra-rarevariants(MAF≤1.5x10- needed todevelopmanagementstrategiesforsuchpatients. 5) were identiﬁed in genes frequently appearing on breast C.D. DeLozier: None. C. Stoehr: None. R. Kliewer: cancer riskpanels(n=3); genes implicated inbreastcancer None. I. Adelaja: None. susceptibility in GWAS (n=2); genes reported to be somatically mutated/hypermethylated in breast cancers (n P12.043C =2).PathogenicLOFvariantswereidentiﬁedinnineother Hereditary breast cancer gene variants- multigene panel genes including RECQL4, OBSCN, TTN, NOTCH3. Our testing outcome from Sri Lanka results show that NGS increases diagnostic yield, but also increases the yield of variants in genes with weak/uncon- P. M.Padeniya1,2, M.Abayasekara2, C.Thanaseelan2, ﬁrmed association with breast cancer. Further analysis is V. Gnanam2 required to determine if these variants are incidental ﬁnd- ings, or causal variants. 1Faculty of Medicine, Ragama, Sri Lanka, 2Credence U.M.McVeigh:None.T.P.McVeigh:None.N.Miller: Genomics Private Limited, Colombo, Sri Lanka None. D.W. Morris: None. M.J. Kerin: None. Introduction: Globally one in eight women develops a P12.042B breast cancer (BC) in her lifetime. As per the national sta- Multiple germline mutations in breast cancer patients- tistics,38.7%SriLankanwomenaged39-46yearsaccount useful? for BC which is ranked number one among all cancers. About 5–10% of BCs are clustered in families owing to C. D.DeLozier1,C. Stoehr2,R. Kliewer1,I.Adelaja2 germline mutations. In the era of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), a panel based genetic testing for her- 1Community Regional Medical Center, Fresno, CA, United editary BC is feasible and cost effective. States, 2Central California Faculty Medical Group, Fresno, Materials and Methodology: Credence Genomics pro- CA, United States vides NGS based screening for inherited predisposition to BC. A multi gene panel consists of 18 genes, including The use of multigene “panels” has become common in BRCA1, BRCA2, TP53, ATM, BARD1, BRIP1, CDH1, hereditary cancer testing, the result being more fortuitous CHEK2, MRE11A, MUTYH, NBN, NF1, PAL B2, PTEN, ﬁndings,variantsofunknownsigniﬁcance(VUS)and“low RAD50,RAD51C,RAD51D andSTK11areincorporatedin risk” mutations, which may not be clinically relevant. We thepanel.Adescriptive,retrospectivestudywascarriedout report here the experience of our multidisciplinary breast from July 2014–December 2017 of all the patients referred408 J.delPicchia for hereditary BC screening at Credence Genomics E.P. Silveira-lacerda: None. R.M. Goveia: None. B.S. laboratory. Gamba: None. T.B. Texeira: None. C.E. Anunciação: Results: A total of 53 patients either who have been None. R. Freitas-junior: None. affectedorwithafamilyhistoryofBCwereincludedtothe study. Pathogenic mutations were detected in 6(11%) P12.045A patients of which two were affected with BC and three DigenicinheritanceofRASSF1AandKLK3mutationsinan hadastrongfamilyhistoryofBC.FourpatientshadBRCA1 Iranian multiple-case breast cancer family gene variants(p.Arg1203Ter, p.Glu907Ter, p.Leu28Argfs and p.Glu23Valfs), one had BRCA2 gene variant(p. H.Radmanesh1,2,A.Sadr-Nabavi2,F. Homaei Shandiz2, Phe12Leufs), one had TP53 gene variant(p.Arg248Gln). S. ArdalanKhales2,T. Park-Simon1, P.Hillemanns1,D.Liu1, One patient had a benign deletion in BARD1 gene(p. A. Riahi1,3, R.Geffers4,T. Dörk1 Leu359_Pro365del). Conclusions: Of the pathogenic variants detected, p. 1Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Mashhad Leu28ArgfsmutationhasbeenpreviouslyreportedinAsian University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic patients. There is no reliable data for the incidence of the Republicof,3TunisMedicalSchool,Tunis,Tunisia,4Helmholtz other mutations in the Asian population. Center for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany P.M. Padeniya: None. M. Abayasekara: None. C. Thanaseelan: None. V. Gnanam: None. Introduction: Much of the hereditary breast cancer risk in families is still unexplained. Additional breast cancer sus- P12.044D ceptibilitygenesmightbedetectable viaexomesequencing Analysis of gene rearrangements in the BRCA1 and in multiple-case breast cancer families. BRCA2genes in patients with suspected hereditary breast Methods: To elucidate the molecular basis of breast and ovarian cancer syndrome in the Brazil-central region cancer in the Iranian population, we carried out exome sequencingofgenomicDNAfromanIranianpatientwitha E. P.SILVEIRA-LACERDA, R. M.GOVEIA, B. S.GAMBA, strong family history of breast cancer (4 ﬁrst-degree family T. B.TEXEIRA, C. E. ANUNCIAÇÃO,R. FREITAS-JUNIOR members affected) but negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. We then investigated speciﬁc mutations in FEDERAL UNIVERSITY OF GOIAS, GOIAS, Brazil twelve other members of this family. Furthermore, we directly genotyped speciﬁc mutations in a breast cancer The present study aimed to identify the prevalence of gene case-control series from Iran. rearrangements in BRCA1/2 in patients diagnosed with Results: Exome sequencing identiﬁed novel mutations breast cancer in central Brazil. We evaluated 47 patients with predicted pathogenicity in the three candidate genes with breast cancer who met the criteria of the National KLK3, RASSF1A, and FAM81B. The KLK3 truncating Health Agency published in the document "Annex II: mutation segregated with breast cancer in the family. The guidelines for use to cover supplementary health proce- KLK3 gene product, PSA, has been implicated in both dures” for research on HBOC syndrome. A 4mL blood breast and prostate cancer. However, a supportive segrega- sample was collected for DNA extraction using a com- tion pattern was also observed for a novel missense mercial kit and the MLPA (Multiplex Ligation dependent mutation in RASSF1A (p.S135F). This mutation eliminates Probe Ampliﬁcation) technique was performed using the the ATM phosphorylation site on the RASSF1A protein, a SALSA MLPA P002 BRCA1 and SALSA MLPA P045 known tumor suppressor in breast carcinomas. The BRCA2 / CHECK2 kits. The majority of the patients were truncating mutation in FAM81B did not segregate with female (95.75%) and the mean age of the patients was 39 breast cancer in this family. The KLK3 and RASSF1A years.ThemostcommonmolecularsubtypewasluminalA mutations were not observed in further 235 Iranian breast (50%) followed by triple negative tumors (27.27%). No cancer patients and 260 controls. patients were found with BRCA1 gene rearrangements. In Conclusions: Our ﬁndings illustrate the difﬁculties to BRCA2, one patient (2.12%) presented deletion in hetero- identifythecausalgeneifcandidatemutationsarerestricted zygosity of the exon 27, being this female, with to the single family and show a similarly plausible HER2 superexpressor tumor diagnosed at 24 years old and segregation pattern. Digenic or oligogenic inheritance may with a family history of prostate and stomach cancer. We contribute to breast cancer risk in such cases. can conclude that the frequency of gene rearrangements in H. Radmanesh: None. A. Sadr-Nabavi: None. F. the Central-Brazilian population is low. Homaei Shandiz: None. S. Ardalan Khales: None. T. Park-Simon: None. P. Hillemanns: None. D. Liu: None. A. Riahi: None. R. Geffers: None. T. Dörk: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 409 P12.046B I.Bozzarelli1,F.Isidori1, C.Diquigiovanni1,F. Buscherini2, Exomesequencingandcase-controlanalysesidentifyRCC1 R. Zuntini1,L. Godino3,S. Miccoli2,D.Turchetti1,4, as a candidate breast cancer susceptibility gene E. BONORA1 A. Riahi1,2, H.Radmanesh1,3,P. Schürmann1,N.Bogdanova1, 1UNIVERSITY OF BOLOGNA, BOLOGNA, Italy, 2Unit of R. Geffers4,R. Meddeb2,M.Kharrat2,T. Dörk1 MedicalGenetics,PoliclinicoS.Orsola-Malpighi,BOLOGNA, Italy, 3Unit of Oncology, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, 1Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Tunis BOLOGNA, Italy, 4Unit of Medical Genetics, Policlinico S. Medical University, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Mashhad University of Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Introduction: The two major genes BRCA1 and BRCA2, Germany together with rare high-penetrance genes (p53, PTEN, CDH1, STK11) and moderate-penetrance genes such as Introduction: Breast cancer is a genetic disease but the PALB2collectivelyexplain~30%offamilialBreastCancer known genes explain a minority of cases. RCC1, the Reg- (BC) risk. Expanding our knowledge to additional genes is ulator of Chromosome Condensation 1, is important for crucial to extend the beneﬁts of targeted surveillance/pre- replicationcontrolandpropermitoticspindleformationbut vention to a larger population of high-risk women. has not previously been associated with hereditary cancer. Materials and methods: Whole Exome Sequencing Methods: To elucidate the molecular basis of breast (WES)wasperformedonconstitutionalDNAwithNextera cancer in the Tunisian population, we performed exome codingexomelibraryenrichmentandannotatedusinganin- sequencing on six BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation-negative house pipeline. Mutation screening was performed via patients with familial breast cancer. We then directly TruSeq Custom Amplicon panel and VariantStudio. genotyped a Tunisian breast cancer case-control series for Expression studies were performed on MCF10A and the identiﬁed RCC1 mutation, and further analysed tumors MCF7 breast cell lines. from six mutation carriers for loss of heterozygosity. Results: WES on ﬁrst-degree affected cousin-pairs Results: Exome sequencing identiﬁed a novel frameshift identiﬁed detrimental variants in ROS1, RASAL1, POLN, mutation RCC1*c.1067_1086del19. Subsequent genotyp- and NPL genes. Analysis with a target custom-made kit in ing detected the 19-bp deletion in additional 5 out of 153 131 unrelated patients with familial and/or early onset BC (3%) breast cancer patients but in none of 400 female who had tested negative for BRCA1 and 2 revealed rare/ controls(p=0.0015).Thedeletionwasenrichedinpatients novel variants with a signiﬁcant allele frequency difference with a positive family history (5%, p=0.0009) and co- betweencasesandcontrols(p<10-3),inparticularinROS1. segregated with breast cancer in the initial pedigree. The MCF10A cells expressed ROS1 mRNA, whereas MCF7 mutant allele was lost in 4/6 breast tumors from mutation cells did not, suggesting that ROS1 absence may be carriers which may be consistent with the hypothesis that correlatedtotumordevelopment.Moreover,aROS1splice- RCC1 dysfunction provides a selective disadvantage at the site variant, detected in two affected cousins and in one stage of tumor progression. unrelated patient, resulted in altered splicing, demonstrated Conclusions:TheresultssuggestRCC1asanovelbreast viaminigeneapproach,andinsertedaprematurestop-codon cancer susceptibility gene and encourage further search for in the protein. germline RCC1 mutations in cancer patients from other Conclusion: We identiﬁed novel/rare damaging variants populations. Grant reference: This work was funded by the ingenesnotpreviouslyassociatedtoBCrisk.Replicationin German Ministry of Education and Research and the independent samples and further functional analysis are Tunisian Ministry for Higher Education and Scientiﬁc ongoing to elucidate their role in BC development. Research (TUNGER-70). Supported by Italian Ministry of Health- grant A.Riahi: None. H.Radmanesh: None.P. Schürmann: DIANE to EB. None. N. Bogdanova: None. R. Geffers: None. R. I.Bozzarelli:None.F.Isidori:None.C.Diquigiovanni: Meddeb: None. M. Kharrat: None. T. Dörk: None. None.F.Buscherini:None.R.Zuntini:None.L.Godino: None. S. Miccoli: None. D. Turchetti: None. E. P12.047C Bonora: None. Identiﬁcation of variants predisposing to breast cancer through a WES approach P12.048D Important Effect of BIBR1532 and Rapamycin Combination on Breast Cancer Stem Cells410 J.delPicchia Ç. BirayAvcı, F.DOĞAN, N.Özateş,B. Göker Bağca, (TSGs). Computational variant impact prediction (CVIP) C. Gündüz tools such as SIFT, PolyPhen, LINSIGHT, CADD and FATHMM can classify SNVs as benign or deleterious, EGE UNİVERSİTY MEDİCAL BİOLOGY, TURKEY, Turkey where deleteriousness suggests an alteration to protein structure or function. We sought to determine if CVIP can Introduction: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) have features of distinguish between GoF and LoF SNVs, including both self-renewal, proliferation, differentiation similar to normal smSNVs and germline mSNVs (gmSNVs). In order to stem cells. Targeting CSCs has been considered as a new answer this question, a database of n=28,744 GoF and approach in cancer therapy. The stemness and replicative LoFsmSNVsinn=530cancercausinggenes(CCGs)from properties of CSCs are related to telomerase activity. COSMIC were scored using FATHMM and CADD. A BIBR1532 has been used as a quite effective inhibitor of linear relationship was observed between scores (R2=0.05, hTERT. It is known that mTOR regulates telomerase p<1x10-10), and CADD scores were lower (less deleter- activity at the translational and post-translational level. ious) for variants predicted “CANCER” by FATHMM (p PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is common in breast cancer and <1x10-10). A similar trend was observed in n=7,664,768 the interaction between the mTOR pathway and hTERT is gmSNVs, where CADD scores were lower in CCGs important for the survival of cancer cells. (17.0±0.05) versus all genes (18.1±0.07; p<10-10). Materials and Methods: We performed cell culture in Scores were higher for gmSNVs in TSGs (19.7±0.2) ver- this study. The WST-1 solution was used to determine the sus OGs (18.7±0.2; p<10-10). These results suggest that cytotoxicity of BIBR1532. IC doses of Rapamycin and CVIP produces higher “deleteriousness” scores for LoF 50 BIBR1532 on BCSCs were calculated via CalcuSyn SNVs than for GoF SNVs, which can lead to inaccurate Version 2.0 software Annexin-FITC Detection Kit was classiﬁcation of causative GoF SNVs in cancer. used for apoptosis, Cycletest Plus DNA Reagent Kit was J.L. Rodriguez-Flores: None. R.G. Crystal: None. usedforcellcycle.RNAIsolationwasperformedandReal- time PCR was used for gene expression analysis (Qiagen). P12.050B Furthermore, hTERT gene expression was investigated. Identiﬁcationbyamulti-omicapproachofnewbiomarkers Results: The IC doses of Rapamycin and BIBR1532 indicativeofa constitutional defectin theTP53 andBRCA 50 were detected as 7.87 nM and 23 μM, respectively for in tumor suppressor genes 48th hour on BCSCs. The combination was increased apoptosis 4.79 fold compared to control. We observed S. Raad1, A.Tebani2,R. Lanos1,E. Kasper1,C.Derambure1, signiﬁcant changes in expression levels of mTOR related S.Coutant1,C.Afonso3,G.Bougeard1,T.Frebourg1,S.Bekri2, genes. BIBR1532 reduced hTERT activity compared to I.Tournier1 control. In addition, Rapamycin and BIBR1532 further reduced hTERT activity compared to only BIBR1532 1Inserm U1245, UNIROUEN, Normandy Univ, and treatment. DepartmentofGenetics,RouenUniversityHospital,Normandy Conclusion: Consequently we show that treatment of Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, BIBR1532 and rapamycin is effective on mTOR pathway, France, ROUEN, France, 2Inserm U1245, UNIROUEN, moreover, it is important to target to BCSCs. Normandy Univ, and Department of Metabolic Biochemistry, Ç. Biray Avcı: None. F. DoĞan: None. N. Özateş: Rouen University Hospital, Normandy Center for Genomics None. B. Göker Bağca: None. C. Gündüz: None. and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, ROUEN, France, 3UMR 6014 Laboratory of Organic and Analytical Chemistry P12.049A COBRA, IRCOF, UNIROUEN, Normandy Univ, Mont-Saint- Computational Variant Impact Prediction for Gain-of- Aignan, France, ROUEN, France Function Somatic Missense SNVs Theidentiﬁcationoftheconstitutionalmutationresponsible J.L. Rodriguez-Flores, R.G.Crystal for a genetic predisposition to cancer is essential to the clinical management of the patient and its relatives. With Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, United States the implementation of high-throughput sequencing to the diagnostic routine of these pathologies, the challenge no The majority of human mutations that cause cancer are longer lies in the detection of alterations but in their bio- somaticmissensesinglenucleotidevariants(smSNVs),and logicalandclinicalinterpretation.Whilespeciﬁctreatments tumors evolve through positive selection on somatic gain- are emerging, simple functional assays to help with the of-function (GoF) smSNVs in oncogenes (OGs) and loss- interpretation of the detected variants are needed. In this of-function (LoF) smSNVs in tumor suppressor genes context, we are currently evaluating the relevance of aAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 411 multi-omic approach combining high-throughput analysis of Turin, Turin, Italy, 12Interdepartmental Center for Studies of the transcriptome and the metabolome to identify new on Asbestos and other Toxic Particulates “G. Scansetti”, biomarkers able to discriminate cells with a deleterious University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 13Medical Genetics Unit, heterozygous mutation from wild-type cells. Using geno- AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza, Turin, Italy toxic drugs, we exacerbated the differences between the lymphocytes of 4 control subjects, 4 Li-Fraumeni patients Introduction: A direct correlation between the amount of carrying a deleterious mutation in the TP53 gene and 4 asbestos exposure and the risk of malignant pleural meso- patients carrying mutations in the BRCA genes involved in thelioma(MPM)isapparent,butnotallindividualsexposed hereditarybreastandovariancancers.Weperformedatotal to high level of asbestos develop MPM. This observation RNA-Seq experiment to analyze both coding and non- and the reports of families with multiple MPM cases sug- coding RNA transcripts. This analysis revealed a list of gest a role for inherited predisposition. BAP1 tumor pre- genes differentially expressed between wild-type and disposition syndrome (TPDS) includes mesothelioma in its mutantconditions.Inparallel,wewillperformnon-targeted tumor constellation, but we found BAP1 mutations in only analysisofthemetabolome(UHPLC-IM-MS)ofthesecells. 3/28 MPM probands withfamilial MPM. We hypothesized The data will then be integrated to target the key pathways that genes involved in other TPDS could also predispose and biological actors of these cellular responses. The to MPM. identiﬁedbiomarkerswillbeintegratedtosimplefunctional MaterialsandMethods:Weinvestigatedtheprevalence testsﬁttedtothediagnosticroutine.Thisworkissupported of germline variants in 94 cancer-predisposing genes in 93 bytheLiguecontreleCancer,theCanceropôleNord-Ouest MPM patients with a quantiﬁed asbestos exposure (Emerging Project), the Normandy Region and using NGS. Europe (ERDF) Results:Tenpathogenictruncatingvariants(PTVs)were S. Raad: None. A. Tebani: None. R. Lanos: None. E. identiﬁedinPALB2,BRCA1,FANCI,ATM,SLX4,BRCA2, Kasper: None. C. Derambure: None. S. Coutant: None. FANCC, FANCF, PMS1 and XPC, all genes involved in C. Afonso: None. G. Bougeard: None. T. Frebourg: DNA repair. Mutated patients (9.7%) had a signiﬁcantly None. S. Bekri: None. I. Tournier: None. lower asbestos exposure than non-mutated patients (p=- 0.0015). This result remains signiﬁcant (p<0.0001), when P12.052D four patients carrying BAP1 germline mutations are Germline mutations in DNA repair genes predispose included in the analysis. asbestos-exposed patients to malignant pleural Conclusions: These data suggest that patients with mesothelioma germline mutations in DNA repair genes show increased susceptibility to asbestos-induced MPM. Our preliminary M.Betti1,E. Casalone2,3,D.Ferrante4,A. Aspesi1, G.Morleo1, ﬁndings (Betti 2017) preceeded a paper (Robinson 2017), A. Biasi1,M. Sculco1,G.Mancuso5,S. Guarrera3,2,L. Righi6, thatreportedPTVsin12.2%of500patientswithmetastatic F.Grosso7,R.Libener8,M.Pavesi9,N.Mariani8,C.Casadio10, tumors (75% in DNA repair genes). Therefore, our D.Mirabelli11,12,B.Pasini3,13,C.Magnani4,12,G.Matullo3,2,12,13, observation likely reﬂects a general phenomenon of I.Dianzani1,12 carcinogenesis. According to the concept of BRCAness, patients with germline mutations in homologous recombi- 1Department of Health Sciences, Novara, Italy, 2Italian nation repair genes may respond to drugs that induce Institute for Genomic medicine (IIGM), Turin, Italy, synthetic lethality. Grants: AIRC 2015-IG17464(GM), 3Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, IIGM(GM), ISS2013-14(CM). Italy, 4CPO-Piemonte and Unit of Medical Statistics and M.Betti:None.E.Casalone:None.D.Ferrante:None. Epidemiology, Department of Translational Medicine, A. Aspesi: None. G. Morleo: None. A. Biasi: None. M. University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy, 5Department Sculco:None.G.Mancuso:None.S.Guarrera:None.L. of Health Sciences, Section of Pathological Anatomy, Righi: None. F. Grosso: None. R. Libener: None. M. University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy, 6Department Pavesi: None. N. Mariani: None. C. Casadio: None. D. of Oncology, University of Turin at San Luigi Hospital, Mirabelli: None. B. Pasini: None. C. Magnani: None. G. Orbassano, Turin, Italy, 7Division of Medical Oncology, SS. Matullo: None. I. Dianzani: None. Antonio e Biagio General Hospital, Alessandria, Italy, 8Pathology Unit, SS. Antonio e Biagio General Hospital, P12.053A Alessandria, Italy, 9Pathological Anatomy Unit, Santo Spirito DetectionofoncogeneshotspotmutationsinfemaleNSCLC Hospital, Casale Monferrato, Alessandria, Italy, 10Thoracic tumor DNA and cell-free DNA Surgery Unit, AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Italy, 11UnitofCancerEpidemiology,CPO-PiemonteandUniversity412 J.delPicchia I.Drejeriene1,2,A. Krasauskas1,3,J.Kasnauskiene1,2, Introduction: Pathogenic variants in CHEK2 which D.Stanciute3,A. Laurinavicius1,4, V.Sapoka1,5,S. Cicenas1,3 encodes a cell-cycle-checkpoint kinase are associated with moderate risk of developing breast cancer (BC). We col- 1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Klaipeda University lected and analysed data on clinical characteristics, family Hospital, Klaipeda, Lithuania, 3National Cancer Institute, historyandmutationspectruminSloveneCHEK2mutation Vilnius, Lithuania, 4National Center of Pathology, Afﬁliate of carriers with BC. Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Materials and Methods: 25 BC patients from 21 Lithuania, 5Vilnius University Life Science Center, Vilnius, different families who developed 29 tumours and were Lithuania veriﬁed or obligatory CHEK2 mutation carriers were included in our analysis. Clinical information was obtained Objectives: The aim of this study was to assess non-small from their medical records and family pedigrees. cell lung cancer (NSCLC) female patients’ hotspot muta- Results: We detected four recurrent CHEK2 pathogenic tions in oncogenes and compare it between formalin-ﬁxed, variants in our families: c.444+1G>A (23.8%), c.349A>G parafﬁn-embedded (FFPE) tumor DNA and plasma cfDNA (23.8%), c.1100delC (18.2%) and deletion of exons 9-10 samples. (13.6%).62.5% ofourpatients hada ﬁrst orsecond degree Materials and Methods: 46 female patients with relative with BC and 87.5% had a ﬁrst or second degree NSCLC were included in the study. 15 (33%) patients relative with any cancer. A male patient developed were heavy smokers. The dominant morphology was oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive, progesterone receptor adenocarcinoma - 33 (72%). Hotspot mutations in 22 (PR)-positiveandhumanepidermoidgrowthfactorreceptor oncogenes (KRAS, EGFR, BRAF, PIK3CA, AKT1, ERBB2, (HER2)-positiveinvasiveductalcarcinoma(IDC)attheage PTEN, NRAS, STK11, MAP2K1, ALK, DDR2, CTNNB1, of 49. Of the 24 female patients, four developed bilateral MET, TP53, SMAD4, FBX7, FGFR3, NOTCH1, ERBB4, BC. Median age of onset for female BC patients was 42.5 EGFR1, FGFR2) were detected using NGS (Ion Torrent™ (range21-64).22.7%oftheircancershadlobularhistology, PGM) Ion AmpliSeq colon and lung cancer research panel the rest being IDCs. 91.1% were ER-positive, 81.8% were (ThermoFisher).NGSwasperformedfromFFPEDNAand PR-positive,22.7%wereHER2-positiveand9%weretriple plasmacfDNAforeverypatient.Samplesweretakenbefore negative. treatment. Conclusions: CHEK2 mutations seem to be associated Results: Mutations in EGFR, KRAS, TP53, ALK and with ER- and PR-positive disease, family history of cancer METgeneswereidentiﬁedmostfrequently.Mutationswere and early age of disease onset in Slovene BC patients. observed in 5 (11%) females tumor and plasma samples. Although our analysis is severely limited by small sample For 2 females mutations were detected only in plasma size and ascertainment bias, our ﬁndings are compatible sample and for 27 (59%) females only in tumor samples. with what is currently known about CHEK2-positive BC Theremaining12(26%)femaleshadnomutationsdetected patients. inbothtypesofsamples.Deletion,insertionandduplication A. Blatnik: None. K. Strojnik: None. V. Stegel: None. in EGFR and ERBB2 genes were detected in 11 tumor V. etrajčič Drago: None. G. Klančar: None. S. Nova- samples, however, only one deletion in EGFR gene was ković: None. M. Krajc: None. detected in plasma sample. Conclusion: The mutations were detected in 32 (70%) P12.056D tumorsamplesandin7(15%)plasmasamples.Detectionof Co-existence of multiple subclones in ETV6/RUNX1 at mutations using plasma cfDNA samples could be only an diagnosis of B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia additional assay in a routine clinical work. I. Drejeriene: None. A. Krasauskas: None. J. Kas- V. Caner1,N.SenTurk2,G.Çetin1,B.Albuz1, Y.Ay3 nauskiene: None. D. Stanciute: None. A. Laurinavicius: None. V. Sapoka: None. S. Cicenas: None. 1Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Denizli, Turkey, 2Pamukkale University P12.055C SchoolofMedicineDepartmentofMedicalPathology,Denizli, Breast cancer in Slovene CHEK2 mutation carriers Turkey, 3Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Pediatric Hematology, Denizli, Turkey A.Blatnik,K.Strojnik,V.Stegel,V.etrajčičDrago,G.Klančar, S. Novaković,M.Krajc Introduction: The chromosomal translocation t(12;21) (p13;q22) which results in the formation of the ETV6/ Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia RUNX1fusiongeneisthemostcommonstructural genetic aberration in childhood B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (B-Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 413 ALL). Co-existence of multiple subclones in ETV6/ refractory clones. In order to assess the timing of somatic RUNX1 is rare with limited clinical information available. acquisitionofclonaloriginofTP53mutation,weperformed Herein is described a case of B-ALL with multiple sub- a longitudinal deep next generation sequencing (NGS) in a clones in ETV6/RUNX1. patientwithfamilialCLL.Acloneandthesubclonebearing Clinical Report: The patient, 9-year-old-boy, was deletion 11q and 13q switched from 80% and 45% at admitted to the Department of Pediatric Haematology at diagnosis to undetectable after chemotherapy (started Pamukkale University Hospital in November 2017 with 31 months after a therapy-free period), and TP53-mutated inappetence,progressivefatigueandneutropenia.Thebone subclonewithdeletiononthe13qshiftedfromundetectable marrow biopsy was performed for evaluation of blood at the diagnosis to 80% after chemotherapy. A TP53 cytopenias.Cytogeneticanalysiswasperformed atthetime pathogenic mutation (c.548C>G;p.Ser183*) was detected ofdiagnosisonbonemarrowculturebytrypsin-G-banding. with a load of 93.8% in post-chemotherapy sample. Inter- FISH panel testing for ALL which includes eight different estingly, the same mutation was present in a blood sample FISH probes (MYC rearrangement, CDKN2A, E2A collected16monthsbeforeclinicalmanifestationofdisease rearrangement, MLL rearrangement, ETV6/RUNX1 trans- with a mutational load of 15%. Risk stratiﬁcation based on location, BCR/ABL1 translocation, IGH rearrangement, genetic prognostic markers is highly recommended at andhyperdiploidyprobesconsistingofCHIC2,D10Z1,and diagnosis to determine the most appropriate strategy for D17Z1) (Cytocell, Cambridge, UK) was performed on the clinical management. Analysis of copy number variations, bone marrow cytogenetic pellet. The analysis was done in IGHV and TP53 mutations can predict the aggressive 200 interphase nuclei. The patient was diagnosed with B- clinical courseofdisease.Giventhepositive family history ALL. There was no bone marrow metaphase spreads for CLL,pre-clinical stage NGS TP53 analysis wouldhave available for conventional cytogenetic analysis, however ranked the patient as a high-risk, low-responder individual, FISH examination revealed 3-6 copies of ETV6/RUNX1 leading to opt for the last generation targeted therapies fusionsignalstogetherwithETV6deletionin54%ofcells. available. Given the low TP53 mutational load, NGS test The classical ETV6/RUNX1 translocation was found in should be included in current clinical practice toensure the 15% of cells. best clinical management being the optimal technique to Conclusion: Report of rare numerical and structural detect low mosaic mutations. genetic aberrations contributes to our understanding of the F.T. Papa: None. A.M. Pinto: None. F.C. Lorenzetti: disease classiﬁcation, prognosis and clinical management. None.E.Frullanti:None.I.Meloni:None.R.Tita:None. However, a long-term follow-up is required to verify the R.Caselli:None.C.Fallerini:None.D.Lopergolo:None. possible prognostic effect of the ETV6/RUNX1 fusions M.A. Mencarelli: None. M. Bocchia: None. A. Gozzetti: ampliﬁcation. None. A. Renieri: None. F. Mari: None. V. Caner: None. N. Sen Turk: None. G. Çetin: None. B. Albuz: None. Y. Ay: None. P12.058B TheeffectsofthetherapeuticagentsPonatinibandVS-5584 P12.057A on Chronic Myeloid Leukemia leukemogenesis LowlevelofTP53mutationcanbedetectedbyNGSyears before CLL clinical/laboratory diagnosis C.Kayabasi1,B.OzmenYelken1,A.Asik1,T.BalciOkcanoglu2, F. Sogutlu1,R. Gasimli1,S. YilmazSusluer1,C.Biray Avci1, F. T.Papa1, A.M. Pinto1,2, F.C. Lorenzetti1,E. Frullanti1, C. Gunduz1 I.Meloni1,R. Tita2,R. Caselli2, C.Fallerini1,D.Lopergolo1,2, M.A. Mencarelli2,M.Bocchia3, A.Gozzetti3,A. Renieri1,2, 1Ege University, Department of Medical Biology, IZMIR, F. Mari1,2 Turkey, 2Near East University, Vocational School of Health Sciences, Nicosia, Cyprus 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Azienda OspedalieraUniversitariaSenese,Siena,Italy,3Departmentof Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is characterized by cells Medicine and Immunological Sciences, Hematology Unit, withBCR-ABL.Leukemiastemcells(LSCs)aremalignant Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese and University of derivatives of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and cause Siena, Siena, Italy resistance to chemotherapy. Ponatinib is ATP-competitive tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) capable of inhibiting all TP53mutationsarepresentin10%ofChronicLymphocytic BCR-ABL autophosphorylation, including T315I-mutant. Leukemia (CLL) patients at the time of diagnosis, and are VS-5584isselectivePI3K-mTORdual-inhibitor,preferably associatedwithimpairedsurvivalandpoortherapyresponse killing cancer stem cells. We aim to investigate changes in due to a selection of TP53-mutated chemotherapy- apoptosis, cell cycle, oncogenic Akt pathway414 J.delPicchia phosphorylation, and transcription factor (TF) activity by the highest level of their expression in the initial stage of targeting K562 and LSC with VS-5584 and/or ponatinib. ccRCC was revealed. Signiﬁcant reducing in expression CytotoxiceffectsofVS-5584and/orponatiniboncell-lines levels of the genes at low degree of differentiation in rela- were measured with WST-8. Combination indices were tion tohigh degree wasfound forallthree genes byU-test. evaluated by isobologram analysis. Apoptotic effects were TheassociationstudywascarryingoutusingROCanalysis evaluated with AnnexinV and Caspase3 assays, effects on andtheexactFishertest.Anassociationofthestudiedgene cellcyclewereassessedusingPIassaywithﬂow-cytometry expression levels with the degree of tumor cell differentia- andbycyclinD1,p27antibodieswithwesternblot.Changes tionwassigniﬁcantbybothtests:intheROCanalysis(p= inTFactivitiesandphosphorylatedproteinsweremeasured 0.0015 - 0.035) and in Fisher test (p = 0.008 - 0.015). The with dual-luciferase quantitation after transfection of con- application of the FDR correction to the multiplicity of structs and PathScan Antibody-Array, respectively. It was comparisons retains the signiﬁcance of association for all determined that combinations were synergistic. In addition three genes. Thereby, a decrease of the expression level of to ponatinib-induced apoptosis, VS-5584 was shown to the genes ANGPTL4, BHLHE41, IGFBP3 in tumors of cause marked G0/G1 arrest. Ponatinib in combination with ccRCCisassociatedwithadecreaseinthedegreeoftumor VS-5584 was able to suppress Akt pathway through inhi- cell differentiation, which becomes more malignant. bitingthephosphorylationofseveralproteinsincludingS6, N.V. Apanovich: None. M.V. Peters: None. P.V. S6K, BAD. In leukemic cells, suppression of SRE/Elk-1, Apanovich: None. B.S. Kamolov: None. V.B. Matveev: AP-1,NFkB,CREB,myc/max,E2F/DP-1andactivationof None. A.V. Karpukhin: None. C/EBP, FOXO, p53 TFs were more intense with VS-5584 treatment, compared to ponatinib treatment. HSCs were P12.062B leastaffected.VS-5584mediatedsuppressionofBCR-ABL The effect of solanine and dendrosomal nano solanine on independent oncogenic pathways known to be active in expression of H19 lincRNA in CML cells CML,promiseshopefortheeliminationofLSCsthatcan’t be targeted with traditional TKI therapy. G.Asgari,M. Sadeghizadeh C. Kayabasi: None. B. Ozmen Yelken: None. A. Asik: None. T. Balci Okcanoglu: None. F. Sogutlu: None. R. TMU, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Gasimli: None. S. Yilmaz Susluer: None. C. Biray Avci: None. C. Gunduz: None. Introduction: Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a hematologicaldisorderoriginatedfromasingleoncoprotein P12.059C encoded by BCR-ABL fused gene. Recently, the leukemia The expression of some HIF-1a regulated genes is incidence has been grown meanwhile drug resistance and connected with the differentiation of clear-cell renal cell cancer recurrence have been occurred. Aberrant expression carcinoma cells of some lncRNAs and consequently their association with tumorigenesis has been demonstrated in numerous cancers N.V. Apanovich1,M. V.Peters2, P.V. Apanovich1,B.S. containingleukemia.Furthermore,recentstudiesintroduced Kamolov2,V. B.Matveev2, A.V. Karpukhin1 themasanoticeabletargetfortherapy.Thelargeintergenic non-coding RNA, H19, is abundantly expressed in CML 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian cells and plays a meaningful role in leukemogenesis. Federation, 2NN Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Centre, MentionedoncogeniclincRNAistightlyregulatedbyBCR- Moscow, Russian Federation ABL transcript. Solanine is a natural glycoalkaloid with anti-proliferativeeffectshasreportedindiversecancers.To Clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most com- investigate if solanine and DNS (dendrosomal nano sola- mon (70-80%) and aggressive among malignant neoplasms nine)haveanyconsiderableeffectonH19expressionlevel, of the kidney. The mechanisms of its development are not we designed further study. fullyknown.Itisimportanttoobtainadditionalinformation MaterialsandMethods:BCR-ABLexpressingcellline, on the molecular genetics mechanisms of ccRCC progres- K562, was cultured and treated with semi-cytotoxic sion. In this study, the expression levels of 21 genes in the concentration of solanine and DNS and incubated for 48 sampleof65pairedtumor/normalrenaltissuefrompatients h.RNAextractionandcDNAsynthesiswasperformed.The with ccRCC were investigated by RT-qPCR. When ana- expression level of H19 was evaluated by real-time RT- lyzingthefunctionalprocessesassociatedwiththegeneson PCR. Gene Ontology, three genes involved in the cell differ- Results:ANOVA analysis revealed thedown-expression entiation process (ANGPTL4, BHLHE41, IGFBP3) has of H19 in K562 cell line in only DNS treated group (P< been identiﬁed. These genes are activated by HIF-1α andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 415 0.028). Down-expression was 1.8 times less in treated somaticmutationaffectingtheactivesiteoftheexonuclease group in comparison to control group. domain of POLD1. In addition, three cases presented with Conclusion: Suspending solanine in dendrosomal parti- potentially pathogenic mutations in genes involved in the cles makes it more impressive in order to down-regulate extracellular matrix. H19 expression in k562 CML cells. Likewise DNS can be Sequencing of tumour and paired germline samples and proposedasaneffectivealternativefortargetedtherapyifit selective screening for de novo mutations provides a brings about the same result in in vivo as well as powerful strategy to investigate known and novel genes in vitro model. that predispose to early onset CRC. Our ﬁndings indicate G. Asgari: None. M. Sadeghizadeh: None. that a genetic predisposition is frequent and heterogeneous in these patients. P12.063C M.C.J. Jongmans: None. J. Zhang: None. A.R. Germline cancer susceptibility in adolescents and young Mensenkamp: None. R.D.A. Weren: None. L. Spruijt: adults with colorectal cancer None.C.M.Kets: None.W.A.vanZelst-Stam:None.M. I. Schouten: None. M.J.W. Olderode-Berends: None. J. M.C.J.Jongmans1,2,3,J.Zhang4,A.R.Mensenkamp1,R.D.A. C. Oosterwijk: None. M.M. Hitzert: None. M.G.E. Weren1,L. Spruijt1, C.M.Kets1,W. A.vanZelst-Stam1,M. I. Ausems:None.E.J.Kamping:None.F.N.vanLeeuwen: Schouten1,M.J.W.Olderode-Berends5,J.C.Oosterwijk5,M.M. None.L.Yuniati:None.H.K.Schackert:None.R.S.van Hitzert5,M.G.E.Ausems3,E.J.Kamping1,F.N.vanLeeuwen1, der Post: None. M.R. Teixeira: None. H. Liu: None. J. L. Yuniati1,H.K. Schackert6,R. S. vander Post1, M.R. Wang: None. R.P. Kuiper: None. A. Geurts van Kessel: Teixeira7,H.Liu4,J. Wang4,R.P. Kuiper1,2,A. Geurts van None. N. Hoogerbrugge: None. M.J.L. Ligtenberg: Kessel1,N.Hoogerbrugge1,M.J.L.Ligtenberg1,R.M.deVoer1 None. R.M. de Voer: None. 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Princess Maxima P12.064D Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Netherlands, EvidenceforGALNT12asamoderatepenetrancegenefor 3University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, colorectal cancer 4Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China, 5University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, D.R. Evans 6Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 7Portuguese Oncology Institute of Porto (IPO-Porto), Porto, MemorialUniversityofNewfoundland,St.Johns,NL,Canada Portugal Abstract Colorectal cancer (CRC) at young age (≤25 years) is a rare Characterizing moderate penetrance susceptibility genes condition.TwoCRCsyndromescausingsuchanearlyonset isanemergingfrontierincolorectalcancer(CRC)research. are familial adenomatous polyposis and constitutional GALNT12 is a strong candidate CRC-susceptibility gene mismatch-repair deﬁciency (CMMRD). However, the given previous linkage and association studies, and majority of CRCs ≤25 years are microsatellite-stable, are inactivating somatic and germline alleles in CRC patients. not associated with polyposis and show an increased We previously found rare segregating germline GALNT12 mucinous histology compared to adult-onset CRC. These variants in a clinic-based cohort (N=118) with predisposi- differencessuggestthatCRC≤25yearsrepresentsadistinct tion for CRC. Here, we screened a new population-based clinical CRC entity. cohortofincidentCRCcases(N=479)forrare(MAF<1%) We performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) on deleterious germline GALNT12 variants. GALNT12 screen- germline DNA from patients with CRC ≤25 years (n=40; ing revealed 8 rare variants. Two variants were previously for 15 cases trio-based sequencing was performed) and described(p.D303N,p.R297W),andadditionally,wefound paired tumour samples (n=19) to unravel the underlying 6 other rare variants: ﬁve missense (p.H101Q, p.I142T, p. genetics of CRC at young age. E239Q, p.T286M, p.V290F) and one putative splice- Six cases carried a pathogenic mutation in a known altering variant (c.732-8 G>T). Sequencing of population- cancer predisposing gene: BRCA2, NF1, POLD1, PALB2 matched controls (N=400) revealed an over-representation (n=1 each), and TP53 (n=2). One case carried a de novo ofthesevariantsinCRCcasescomparedtohealthycontrols mutationintheRAS-MAPKgeneSOS2.Invitroexpression (P=0.04).Wethen functionallycharacterizedtheimpactof ofthismutantrevealedanincreaseinERKphosphorylation, these substitutions on GALNT12 enzyme activity using suggesting a gain-of-function effect. The mutation in in vitro-derived peptide substrates. Three of the newly POLD1 resulted in a frameshift and this patient presented identiﬁed GALNT12 missense variants (p.H101Q, p.I142T, with a hypermutated cancer resulting from an in trans p.V290F) demonstrated a marked loss (>2-fold reduction)416 J.delPicchia ofenzymaticactivitycomparedtowild-type(P≤0.05),while family and genus levels. Taxa differences among MSI vs p.E239Q exhibited a ~2-fold reduction in activity MSS tumors were infamilies Veilloneacea (p=0.028) and (P=0.077). These ﬁndings provide strong, independent Verrucomicrobiae and genus Akkermansia (p=0.04). evidence for the association of GALNT12 defects with Conclusions: Differences on the colon microbiota CRC-susceptibility; underscoring implications for glycosy- composition associated to MSI/MSS tumor molecular lation pathway defects in CRC. phenotype were observed. Further studies are needed for a D.R. Evans: None. better understanding of these ﬁndings. Funding: Supported by Conselleria d’Educació General- P12.065A itat Valenciana, Spain (GV/2016/175). Colorectal cancer bacteria microenvironment in different M. Parra-Grande: None. V. Sánchez-Hellín: None. L. tumor genetic contexts Martínez:None.E.Larriba:None.V.Barbera:None.G. D'Auria: None. M. Castillejo: None. B. Lumbreras: M.Parra-Grande1, V.Sánchez-Hellín1,L. Martínez2, None. J. Soto: None. E. Larriba3, V.Barbera4, G.D'Auria2,M.Castillejo5, B. Lumbreras6,J.Soto4 P12.066B Identiﬁcation of mismatch repair-deﬁcient colorectal 1MicrobiologyDepartment,HospitalGeneralUniversitariode cancers using a molecular inversion probe based Elche, Elche, Spain, 2Sequencing and Bioinformatics Service, sequencing assay of short mononucleotide repeats Foundation for the Promotion of Health and Biomedical Research of Valencia Region (FISABIO), Valencia, Spain, H.Sheth1, R.Gallon1,C. Hayes1,L. Redford1,G.Alhilal1, 3Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB) - CSIC, Madrid, A.MiguelAlonso2,S.MorenoLaguna3,M.Arends4,A.Oniscu4, Spain, 4Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Hospital General O.O'Brien2, S.Needham5,M.S. Jackson1,M.Santibanez- Universitario de Elche, Alicante Institute for Health and Koref1,J. Burn1 Biomedical Research (ISABIAL - FISABIO Foundation), Alicante, Spain, 5Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Hospital 1NewcastleUniversity,NewcastleuponTyne,UnitedKingdom, General Universitario de Elche, Elche, Spain, 6Department of 2Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Public Health, History of Science and Gynecology, Miguel Kingdom, 3Servicio de Genetica Medica, Pamplona, Spain, Hernández University, Alicante, Spain 4Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5Royal Victoria Inﬁrmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Introduction: Cancer is a heterogeneous and complex set Kingdom of multifactorial diseases that have in common an (epi) geneticorigin.Colorectalcancers(CRC)withmicrosatellite Introduction: UK’s NICE guidelines recommend mis- instability (MSI) are a subset of hypermutated tumors matchrepair(MMR)deﬁciencytestingofcolorectalcancers generatedbyDNAmismatchrepairdeﬁciency.MSItumors (CRCs) to identify Lynch syndrome, a hereditary predis- havespeciﬁcpathologicalandclinicalcharacteristics.There position for CRC. Uptake of MMR deﬁciency testing has is a growing interest in knowing the putative role of the been poor due to the unsuitability of current assays - microbiota in the colorectal oncogenesis. We aimed to immunohistochemistry and fragment analysis - to high explore potential differences in microbiota in CRC patients throughputtesting,includingmanualworkﬂowsandresults with and without MSI. interpretation. We aimed to develop a next generation Materials and Methods: Ninety-six DNAs from frozen sequencing-based assay of short mononucleotide repeats to tissues (tumor and normalmucosa) of 48 CRC patients (24 assessmicrosatelliteinstability(MSI),abiomarkerofMMR MSI and 24 microsatellite-stable-tumors (MSS)) were used deﬁciency,usingsinglemolecule-molecularinversionprobe to performed metagenomic 16S analysis (V3 and V4 (smMIP) technology, with a view to improving the clinical region). Sequencing was conducted using a paired-end uptake of MMR deﬁciency testing. Methods: 24 short 2×300bpcyclerunonIlluminaMiSeq.RDPClassiﬁerwas mononucleotide repeats, together with clinically-actionable used for taxonomical assignment. Groups of data were markers in BRAF and KRAS, were ampliﬁed in multiplex compared using a paired and unpaired t test for normal vs using smMIPs. Amplicons were sequenced using the Illu- tumor and MSI vs MSS, respectively. mina MiSeq platform, aligned to reference genome hg19 Results: Globally, lower bacteria diversity (Shannon and using BWA, and analysed using custom R scripts. An MSI Simpsonindexes)wasobservedintumorvsnormaltissues. classiﬁer was trained on short mononucleotide repeat Diversity of MSI tumors vs their normal counterparts sequences from 98 CRCs collected in pathology labora- showed signiﬁcant differences at genus level. Similarly, tories in Edinburgh and Spain, and validated in 98 CRCs diversityofMSStumorsvstheirnormalswerealsolowerat collected at Newcastle.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 417 Results:TheMSIclassiﬁershowed100%sensitivityand patientswithMSIdemonstratedsigniﬁcantlylowerassocia- speciﬁcity,relativetofragment analysis,using eithera6or tion with distant metastasis (P<0.0001). a 24 marker panel. Frequencies of BRAF and KRAS Conclusions: Thus, in Ukrainian population the fre- mutations concurred with previous observations. Cost quency of MSI CRC is 14.7% and, as in other studies MSI estimate for sample analysis using the proposed assay is was associated with male sex, younger age, right-sided £4.28/sample in contrast to £11.65/sample with fragment location of tumor and high grade. analysis. T. Shapochka: None. D. Shapochka: None. O. Conclusions: Our novel MSI assay could streamline Selezniov: None. A. Turkina: None. O. Sulaieva: None. CRC molecular diagnostics by providing cheap and high throughput detection of MMR deﬁciency, acting as a P12.069A companion diagnostic for immunotherapy and improving Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of 33 complex the identiﬁcation of Lynch syndrome patients. variant Ph translocations diagnosed in patients with H. Sheth: None. R. Gallon: None. C. Hayes: None. L. chronic myeloid and acute lymphoblastic leukemia Redford: None. G. Alhilal: None. A. Miguel Alonso: None. S. Moreno Laguna: None. M. Arends: None. A. D.Costa1,M.López1,A. Arias1, C.Gómez1, B.Espinet2, Oniscu:None.O.O'Brien:None.S.Needham:None.M. J.Grau3,M.Nomdedeu1,F.Cervantes1,F.Cobo4,D.Colomer1 S. Jackson: None. M. Santibanez-Koref: None. J. Burn: None. 1HospitalClinic,Barcelona,Spain,2HospitalMar,Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, P12.067C 4Hospital Nostra Senyora de Meritxell, Escaldes Engordany, Clinicopathological characteristics of patients with Andorra colorectal cancer in regards with microsatellite instability status in Ukrainian population: the pilot study Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disease. The hallmark of the disease is the presence of a T. Shapochka,D.Shapochka, O.Selezniov, A. Turkina, Philadelphia (Ph1) chromosome produced by a reciprocal O.Sulaieva translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11). In 5-10% of the cases, the Ph1 chromosome is generated by variant rearrangements, Laboratory of Pathology CSD Health Care, Kiev, Ukraine involving 9q34, 22q11, and one or more genomic regions. We report 33 cases of complex variant Ph1 translocations Introduction: Identiﬁcation of colorectal cancer (CRC) diagnosedin32patientsaffectedwithCMLandonepatient subtypes, especially microsatellite instability (MSI), is of affected with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Cyto- great clinical importance because of its role in prognosis genetic and FISH studies were carried out in bone marrow andpredictioinofsensitivitytotherapy.Thelackofdataon samples.Thethirdchromosomeinvolvedinthe33complex the prevalence of MSI in Ukrainian population, as well as variant translocations was the chromosome 1 (n=7), 5 (n- its relationship with the clinical and morphological char- =5),12(n=4),3,11(n=3),2,6,15(n=2),and7,13,17, acteristics of patients makes actual to perform this study. 19,20,21(n=1).Thetotalnumberofbreakpointswere34 Materials and Methods: 177 patients with CRC who (oneofthetranslocationsinvolved4chromosomes),and26 underwent MSI (26), or MMR (151 patients) testing were were different. The q arm chromosome was the most fre- enrolled in the study. Demographic and clinical data were quently involved in the translocations (62%). The break- assessed in patients with MSI and MSS. points were located in 81% of the cases in the G-light Results: The overall incidence of MSI among observed bands. Seven out of the 22 karyotypes showed one or 2 patients was 14.7%, while the incidence among men additional chromosomal abnormalities. FISH studies using (25.35%) was signiﬁcantly higher (p=0.0369) than in the LSI BCR/ABL (VYSIS) probe were carried out in 24 women (10%). There were signiﬁcant differences in age of out of the 33 cases allowing the detection of the fusion patients with MSI (46.9 years) and MSS (57.1 years) genes BCR/ABL on chromosome Ph1 in all the cases. After (P=0,0020). Strong relation was found between MSI and FISH studies using LSI, CEP and WCP probes the kar- tumor location in the proximal part of large intestine yotype was modiﬁed in3 cases. Most of thebreakpoints in (p<0.0001), regardless of sex. MSI was more often our series are in the G-light bands. The combination of associated with medullary (100%) and mucinous (15.4%) conventional cytogenetics and FISH studies allow us to histologicaltypes(P=0.0008),andthesesubtypesin88.9% identify these complex variant translocations. weredetectedinmen.ThestrongrelationofMSIwithhigh D. Costa: None. M. López: None. A. Arias: None. C. grade was found - about 50% of patients with MSI had Gómez: None. B. Espinet: None. J. Grau: None. M. Grade 3 carcinomas independently of sex. However,418 J.delPicchia Nomdedeu: None. F. Cervantes: None. F. Cobo: None. J.Kuruvilla:None.M.Crump:None.M.Jain:None.L. D. Colomer: None. Shepherd: None. D. Scott: None. R. Morin: None. P12.070B P12.071C TheuseofcirculatingtumorDNAtostudythegeneticbasis Comprehensive, integrated, and phased whole-genome of treatment failure in rrDLBCL analysis of the primary ENCODE cell line K562 C. Rushton1,M. Alcaide1, J.Davidson1, M.Cheung1, Z. Bo1,S.Ho1,X.Zhu1,X. Zhang1, N.Spies1,S. Byeon2, J.G. K. Bushell1,S.Yu1,J.Kuruvilla2,M. Crump2,M.Jain2, Arthur1,R. Pattni1,N.Ben-Efraim1,M. S.Haney1,R.R. L. Shepherd3, D.Scott4,R. Morin1,4 Haraksingh1,G.Song2,D.Perrin3,W. H.Wong1, A.Abyzov4, A. E.Urban1 1Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, 2Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Queens 1Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 2Pusan University, Kingston, ON, Canada, 4BC Cancer Agency, National University, Busan, Korea, Democratic People's Vancouver, BC, Canada Republic of, 3Queensland University of Technology,Brisbane, Australia, 4Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States Introduction: Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) is the 9th mostcommoncancerinEurope,with93,000newcasesand ThechronicmyelogenousleukemiacelllineK562isoneof 38,000 deaths in 2012 alone. Diffuse Large B-Cell Lym- the most widely used in biomedical research. It is one of phoma(DLBCL)isthemostcommonsubtypeofNHL,and three tier-one cell lines of ENCODE, and one of the cell forDLBCLpatientswhofailprimarytreatment(rrDLBCL), lines most commonly used for large-scale CRISPR/Cas9 prognosis is extremely poor, with a 5-year survival rate of gene-editing screens. Although the functional genomic and around 10%. Thus, the genetic mechanism which lead to epigenomiccharacteristicsofK562areextensivelystudied, treatment failure must be identiﬁed to aid in the develop- its genome sequence has never been comprehensively ment of new molecular-based treatments. analyzed and higher-order structural features of its genome Materials and methods: We have analyzed temporal beyond its karyotype were only cursorily known. The high samples obtained from 35 patients enrolled in two ongoing degree of aneuploidy in K562 renders traditional genome clinical trials. For each patient enrolled, a tumour biopsy variant analysis methods challenging and partially ineffec- sampleisobtainedpriortoinvestigationaltreatment,aswell tive. Correct and complete interpretation of the extensive asseveralbloodsamplesastreatmentprogresses.Througha functional genomics data from K562 requires an under- combination of whole exome and targeted sequencing of standing of the cell line's genome sequence and genome biopsy samples and circulating tumor DNA, the genetic structure. We performed deep whole-genome sequencing, landscape of rrDLBCL, and how it evolves in response to mate-pair sequencing and linked-read sequencing to iden- treatment, can be characterized. tify a wide spectrum of genome characteristics in K562: Results: Prior to investigational treatment, we observed copy numbers of chromosomalsegments, SNVs and Indels recurrentmutations inwell-describedlymphoma-associated (bothcorrectedforcopy-number),phasedhaplotypeblocks, genes (KMT2D, EP300, EZH2, EP300) as well as several structural variants (SVs) including complex genomic rear- genes associated withtreatmentfailure(CYP2A6,ABCA12, rangements, and novel mobile element insertions. A large AHNAK2) and metastasis (NFBP1) in other cancers. number of SVs were phased, sequence assembled and Following investigational therapy, mutations in several experimentally validated. Several chromosomes show genes(S1PR2andFOXO1)wereenrichedoverall,andsub- strikinglossofheterozygosity.Were-analyzedK562RNA- clonal populations containing these mutations expanded in Seq and whole-genome bisulﬁte sequencing data for allele- several patients who failed treatment. speciﬁcexpressionandphasedDNAmethylation.Weshow Conclusions: Mutations in lymphoma-associated genes examples where deeper insights into genomic regulatory may either directly contribute to salvage treatment failure, complexity could be gained by taking knowledge of geno- or act as a possible biomarker. Analysis of additional mic structural contexts into account. Furthermore, we used samples as they become available may identify other the haplotype information to produce an allele-speciﬁc mutations. CRISPRtargetingmap.Thiscomprehensivewhole-genome Grants: Terry Fox New Frontiers Program Project analysis serves as a resource for future studies that Grant #1061 utilize K562. C. Rushton: None. M. Alcaide: None. J. Davidson: Z. Bo: None. S. Ho: None. X. Zhu: None. X. Zhang: None.M.Cheung:None.K.Bushell:None.S.Yu:None. None. N. Spies: None. S. Byeon: None. J.G. Arthur: None. R. Pattni: None. N. Ben-Efraim: None. M.S.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 419 Haney: None. R.R. Haraksingh: None. G. Song: None. P12.075C D. Perrin: None. W.H. Wong: None. A. Abyzov: None. ExosomalmiRNAproﬁlesinserum,plasmaandplateletsin A.E. Urban: None. healthy donors P12.073A M.Shiao1,T. Thammasorn1, T.Pisitkun2, N.Jinawath1 Whole transcriptome sequencing > Kazakhstani patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 1Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Chulalongkorn University Systems Biology Center, S. Rakhimova1,A. Molkenov1,U.Kairov1,Y. Zhukov2, Bangkok, Thailand M.Omarov2, A.Akilzhanova1 Introduction: Repository of human clinical specimen 1National Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev University, Astana, (biobanking) is the key to study genetic diseases. Among Kazakhstan, 2Oncology center, Astana, Kazakhstan those, blood samples are the best resource of discovering serum/plasma biomarkers for liquid biopsies. Increasing Introduction: Esophageal cancer is the eighth most com- evidence shows that exosomes, which can be found in all mon cancer in the world. The incidence rate in Kazakhstan bioﬂuids, play important roles in various kinds of diseases is 10.1: 100 000. The aim of the project is to identify and are therefore good biomarkers. Besides, recent studies genetic basis of ESCC by performing whole transcriptome showed that platelets are able to intake and transport exo- sequencing in Kazakhstani patients. somes associated with several diseases, such as cancer. Materials and Methods: 54 patients with ESCC under- Hence, we aim to identify large-scale miRNA proﬁles of went surgery at Oncology center (Astana) between 2013 exosomes in serum, plasma, as well as those released by and2016.Freshfrozencancertissueanditsadjacentnormal activated platelets. tissue specimen were obtained from each patient. Whole Material and Methods: Serum, plasma, and activated transcriptome sequencing was performed on Illumina platelets from 12 healthy donors are collected and used in platform using TruSeq RNA protocol. STAR software and this study. Exosomal miRNAs were isolated with ExoR- DESeq package have been used for mapping and deﬁning Neasy kit (Qiagen) and quantiﬁed using Human miRNA differentially expressed genes. MSigDB and KEGG data- panel v3 on Nanostring nCounter system. bases were processed for analysis of signaling networks. Results: A total of ~250 exosomal miRNAs are detected Results:AccordingtothehistologicaltypeofESCCwas from all three resources: serum, plasma and activated prevalent moderately differentiated squamous cell carci- platelets. Three groups of miRNAs are identiﬁed: higher nomawithinﬁltrativegrowthandwithoutkeratinization.In expression in serum and plasma, higher expression in ourpatientsthethirdstageofthedisease(51.8%)wasmore platelet, higher expression in serum and platelets. Overall, oftendetected.Pairedanalysisofcancerandnormaltissues platelets have a distinct expression pattern comparing to identiﬁed 287 down-regulated and 192 up-regulated genes. serum and plasma. Interestingly, platelets show more Among up-regulated genes PPAR signaling pathway (p- overlapped genes with serum comparing to plasma, likely value=0.01), cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction (p- due to coagulation process in serum collection. value=0.05) andmetabolism oflipids andlipoproteins (p- Conclusions: Our results suggest that serum possesses value=0.03) have been identiﬁed. Whereas the most extra information of exosomal miRNAs from platelets, and signiﬁcant pathways among down-regulated genes are therefore may be a better resource while applying metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450 (p-value- repositories for studying diseases related to platelet =1.31E-4), retinol metabolism P450 (p-value=0.01), O- functions.This study is supported by Research University Glycan biosynthesis (p-value=0.02). Network on precision medicine in Thailand (MURA2017/ Conclusion: Using whole transcriptome sequencing we 747) could identify molecular pathways involved in esophageal M. Shiao: None. T. Thammasorn: None. T. Pisitkun: tumorigenesis to understanding pathogenesis of ESCC and None. N. Jinawath: None. develop new diagnostic markers. This work was supported by grants of the Ministry of education and science P12.076D #AP05134722 and # AP05135430 Inherited BRCA1 epimutation as a novel cause of breast S. Rakhimova: None. A. Molkenov: None. U. Kairov: and ovarian cancer None. Y. Zhukov: None. M. Omarov: None. A. Akilzhanova: None. D.G.R.Evans1,2,3,4, E.M. vanVeen1,5,H. J.Byers1,5,A.J. Wallace5, J.M.Ellingford1,5,G.Beaman1,5,J. Santoyo-Lopez6,420 J.delPicchia T.J.Aitman6,D.M.Eccles7,F.I.Lalloo5,M.J.Smith1,5,W.G. 5’UTR variant in two independent families. We propose Newman1,5 that methylation analyses are indicated in all families affected by early onset breast/ovarian cancer without a 1Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of BRCA1/2 pathogenic variant. BiologicalSciences,FacultyofBiology,MedicineandHealth, Funded by Prevent Breast Cancer (GA 12-006, GA 15- University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health 002) and the Manchester NIHR Biomedical Research Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Prevention Centre (IS-BRC-1215-20007). Breast Cancer Centre and Nightingale Breast Screening D.G.R. Evans: None. E.M. van Veen: None. H.J. Centre,UniversityHospitalofSouthManchester,Manchester, Byers:None.A.J.Wallace:None.J.M.Ellingford:None. United Kingdom, 3The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, G. Beaman: None. J. Santoyo-Lopez: None. T.J. Ait- Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Manchester Breast Centre, man: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, Manchester Cancer Research Centre, University of symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Illumina. D.M. Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Manchester Eccles:None.F.I.Lalloo:None.M.J.Smith:None.W.G. Centre for Genomic Medicine, St. Mary’s Hospital, Newman: None. Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United P12.077A Kingdom, 6Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, Reduced familial fertility in carriers of mutations in the and Edinburgh Genomics, University of Edinburgh, BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes Edinburgh,UnitedKingdom,7CancerSciencesAcademicUnit and Southampton Clinical Trials Unit, Faculty of Medicine, H.Akopyan1,2,N.Kitsera2,A. Siekierzynska3,T. Nguyen- University of Southampton and University Hospital Dumont4,F.Hammet4,H.Tsimiklis4,D.J.Park4,5,B.J.Pope5,6, Southampton Foundation Trust, Southampton, United M.C. Southey4, D.Blonioarz1,A. Myszka1 Kingdom 1InstituteofExperimentalandClinicalMedicine,Universityof Introduction:PathogenicvariantsinBRCA1orBRCA2are Rzeszow, Rzeszow, Poland, 2Institute of Hereditary Pathology identiﬁed in ~20% of families with multiple individuals of National Academy of Medical Sciences, Lviv, Ukraine, with early-onset breast/ovarian cancer. Extensive searches 3Department of Biotechnology and Plant Physiology, for additional highly penetrant genes or alternative muta- University of Rzeszow, Rzeszow, Poland, 4Genetic tionalmechanismsalteringBRCA1/2havenotexplainedthe Epidemiology Laboratory, Department of Pathology, The missing heritability. For the ﬁrst time, we report transge- UniversityofMelbourne,Melbourne,Australia,5VictorianLife nerational epigenetic silencing of BRCA1 due to promoter Sciences Computation Initiative, Melbourne, Victoria, hypermethylation in two families with breast/ovarian Australia, 6Department of Computing and Information cancer. Systems, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia Methods: BRCA1 promoter methylation of ten CpG dinucleotides in breast/ovarian cancer families without The frequency of founder mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants was assessed by genes inﬂuences the genetic testing strategy for breast and/ pyrosequencing and clonal bisulﬁte sequencing. RNA and or ovarian cancer susceptibility in many populations. The DNA sequencing of BRCA1 from lymphocytes was under- aim of this study was assess clinical data associated with taken to establish allelic expression and the presence of BRCA1andBRCA2mutation-associatedfamilialbreastand/ germline variants. orovariancancerintheWestUkrainepopulation.Previous Results: BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was identi- genetictestinginagroupof125womenwithfamilialbreast ﬁed in two of 49 families with multiple women affected and/or ovarian cancer identiﬁed 25 and 9 pathogenic withgrade3breast/highgradeserousovariancancer.Soma- mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes respectively. Clin- wide BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was conﬁrmed in ical parameters were compared between groups of carriers blood, buccal mucosa and hair follicles. Methylation levels and non-carriers of pathogenic mutations (34 and 91, were ~50%, consistent with the silencing of one allele and respectively).Thirtythree(97%)ofthemutationcarriershad conﬁrmed by clonal bisulﬁte sequencing. RNA sequencing at least one family members with the same gynecological revealed allelic loss of BRCA1 expression in both families cancer. In contrast, 24 (26%) of the non-carrier cases were and this segregated with a novel heterozygous variant c.- the ﬁrst breast and or ovarian cancer case in a family 107A>T in the BRCA1 5’UTR. (χ2=7,09, p<0,01; OR=11.82 [95% CI: 1.53-91,22]). In Conclusion: Our results indicate a novel mechanism for families with BRCA1/2 mutation carriers there were familial breast/ovarian cancer, caused by epigenetic silen- numerous incidences of familial infertility and infertility of cing of the BRCA1 promoter, segregating with an in cis mutation carrier’s children (p<0,05). This study alsoAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 421 revealed a signiﬁcantly higher incidence of medical abor- screening recommendations and the availability of pre- tionandspontaneousmiscarriage(OR=7.84[95%CI:1.71- dictive genetic testing. 35.91]) that may be an independent risk factor for gyne- Conclusion: Our data demonstrates how FFPE testing in cologicalcancerinthegroupofnon-carriers.Inconclusion, deceased relatives is an accurate, informative and valuable theoccurrenceofthesamegynecologicalcancerinrelatives tool in the clinical management of patients seen in the and reduced familial fertility may signiﬁcantly increase the genetics clinic. probability of carrying mutations in BRCA1/2 genes in S. Bennett: None. E. Alexander: None. H. Fraser: patients from West Ukraine. None.A.J.Wallace:None.S.Huang:None.H.Schlecht: H. Akopyan: None. N. Kitsera: None. A. Siekier- None.A.Quinn:None.G.Evans:None.F.Lalloo:None. zynska: None. T. Nguyen-Dumont: None. F. Hammet: E. Woodward: None. N. Bowers: None. None. H. Tsimiklis: None. D.J. Park: None. B.J. Pope: None. M.C. Southey: None. D. Blonioarz: None. A. P12.079C Myszka: None. Familial Intestinal Gastric Cancer: a polygenic or a monogenic disease? P12.078B FFPEtestingindeceasedfamilymembers:implicationsfor C. SãoJosé1,2, J.Carvalho1,2,H.Pinheiro1,2,P. Oliveira1,2, clinical management of patients seen in the genetics clinic J.Senz3, S.Hansford3,A. S.Valente1,2,D.Lemos1,2, F. Roviello4, D.Huntsman3,5,6,C. Oliveira1,2,7 S. Bennett,E.Alexander, H.Fraser, A.J. Wallace,S.Huang, H.Schlecht,A. Quinn, G.Evans,F.Lalloo, E. Woodward, 1i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Porto, N.Bowers Portugal, 2IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British ManchesterCentreforGenomicMedicine,StMary'sHospital, Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Department of General Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, Surgery and Surgical Oncology, University of Siena, Siena, United Kingdom Italy, 5Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, University of British Columbia and Vancouver General, Vancouver, BC, Introduction:Archivedpathologytissuecanbeasourceof Canada, 6Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics germline DNA for genomic analysis in families with no (CTAG), BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada, living affected individuals where the determination of 7Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, mutation status can assist in the clinical management of Portugal living relatives. Method: The Manchester Genomic Diagnostics Labora- Introduction: Familial Intestinal Gastric Cancer (FIGC) tory has developed and validated Next Generation Sequen- remains genetically unexplained; despite has its autosomal cing(NGS)basedgenepanelsoptimisedforthedetectionof dominant inheritance pattern. However, FIGC pedigrees point and small insertion/deletion mutations in formalin often display generations without affected individuals, and ﬁxed parafﬁn embedded (FFPE) tissue DNA. At present, late onset intestinal gastric cancer, indicating the presence the laboratory has analysed 80 FFPE samples from of low or moderate risk alleles that may increase cancer deceased breast and/or ovarian cancer index cases for susceptibility in FIGC. variants in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes and 23 FFPE We aimed at identifying the germline cause of FIGC and samples from deceased colorectal cancer index patients for at characterizing the 2nd hits in potentially causative genes variants in a panel of 13 genes implicated in inherited and other somatic events in FIGC tumours. colorectal cancer. Materialsandmethods:NormalandtumourDNAfrom Results: Successful analysis was achieved in 80% of 52FIGCprobandswerescreenedusingamultiplexcustom- casesandbothpathogenicvariantsandvariantsofunknown panel of 67 cancer-associated genes. Somatic 2nd mutation clinical signiﬁcance in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, and promoter methylation were searched by PCR-Sanger- mismatch repair genes and the APC gene were identiﬁed. sequencing. FFPE samples from as far back as 1988 have been Results:Twenty-fouroutof52FIGC families harboured successfullyanalysed.Intotal,ofthe71successfulanalyses germline variants. From these, 36 germline variants were with clinical data available, 55% of the results (17 found, affecting 17 genes, being MSH6, SDHD, MAP3K6 pathogenic variants and 22 negative results) directly andATMthemostfrequentlyaltered.Ofnotice,42%ofthe impacted the clinical management of relatives seen in the families carried co-occurrence of germline variants. In fact, genetics clinic. This included changes to risk assessments, four families display germline and somatic variants with common features between different signaling pathways.422 J.delPicchia Further, two families displayed a 2nd mutation that gallstones. Increased telomere length was observed in potentiallyinactivatesMSH6andFAT4genesatthesomatic gallstone (inﬂamed) tissues in comparison to both adjacent level. The somatic landscape revealed 115 variants, non-tumor and tumor tissues. Signiﬁcant down-regulation affecting 23 genes, found in 36 families. TP53, MSH3, of TERF1, POT1 and TINF2 genes was observed in ARID1A and FAT4 were mutated more frequently. inﬂamed tissues as compared to non-tumor and tumor Conclusion:Inconclusion,thisworkpinpointedFIGCas tissues.Further,POT1wasfoundsigniﬁcantlyup-regulated a likely polygenic rather than a monogenic disease in 42% in tumor tissues and speciﬁcally in tumor tissues with gall of FIGC families. Co-occurrence of low or moderate risk stones, compared to inﬂamed tissues. alleles may interact with family history and other non- Conclusion: Thus, our study suggests that telomere genetic factors, increasing the risk of cancer. length remains unaffected in inﬂamed tissues, however, Funding: 1)FEDER/COMPETE,FCT/MEC/FEDER/ decreased expression of some shelterin genes may lead to PT2020,"PEst-C/SAU/LA0003/2013”;2) improper telomere capping, paving the way for tumorigen- ON.2–ONovoNorte/FEDER/QREN:NORTE-07-0162- esis.Also,POT1expressioningallstonespatientscouldact FEDER-000118,NORTE-07-0162-FEDER-000067);3)No as a diagnostic marker for GBC after further validations in Stomach for Cancer Foundation future. C. São José: None. J. Carvalho: None. H. Pinheiro: S.S.Poojary:None.G.Mishra:None.S.Gupta:None. None. P. Oliveira: None. J. Senz: None. S. Hansford: B.R. Shrivastav: None. P.K. Tiwari: None. None. A.S. Valente: None. D. Lemos: None. F. Roviello: None. D. Huntsman: None. C. Oliveira: None. P12.081A Point mutation in exon 1B of APC in Czech families with P12.080D GAPPS Differential expression of shelterin genes and telomere length variation in gallstone and gallbladder cancer E. Machackova,M.Navratilova, E. StahlovaHrabincova, patients of North Central India P. Vasickova, J.Hazova, M.Svoboda,L. Foretova S.S.Poojary1,2,G.Mishra1,3,S.Gupta4,B.R.Shrivastav5,P.K. Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic Tiwari1 Gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the 1Centre for Genomics, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, India, stomach (GAPPS) is an autosomal-dominant cancer-pre- 2Amity Institute of Molecular Medicine and Stem Cell disposition syndrome with a signiﬁcant risk of gastric Research, Amity University, Noida, India, 3ICMR-National adenocarcinoma. Li et al., 2016 described a few point Institute of Pathology, New Delhi, India, 4Department of mutations in the YY1 binding site of the APC gene 1B Pathology, Cancer Hospital and Research Institute, Gwalior, promoterassociatedwithGAPPSsyndrome.Weperformed India, 5Department of Surgical Oncology, Cancer Hospital SangerSequencingofAPCpromoter1B(byLietal.,2016) and Research Institute, Gwalior, India in 35 Czech families with previously unsolved cases of hereditary predisposition to familiar polyposis, gastric Introduction: Gallbladder cancer (GBC) has a very high polyposis or gastric adenocarcinoma. The only pathogenic prevalence in North Central India with an equally high variant we detected in 1B promoter was APC mortality rate due to poor prognosis and lack of screening NM_001127511: c.-191T>C mutation associated with markers. Presence of gallstone/s is viewed as an important GAPPS. Nine severely affected individuals from 7 unre- risk factor for GBC. A functional telomere, bound with latedfamiliesallofthemcarpetingofmorethan100fundic shelterinproteincomplex,iscentraltomaintaininggenomic gland polyps and 4 of them already died of adenocarci- stability,failingwhich,mayresultincarcinogenesis.Inthis noma. We have performed predictive testing on asympto- studyweanalyzedtheroleoftelomerelengthvariationand maticfamilymembersanddetectedother5carriersofAPC shelterin complex gene expression in GBC pathogenesis. c.-191T>Cmutation.Threeofthesecarrierswerediagnosed Materials and methods: Monochrome multiplex qPCR with more than 100 asymptomatic fundic gland polyps was performed to analyze telomere length and RT-qPCR (born at 1988, 1983, 1968) and were recommended for was performed for expression analysis of shelterin genes prophylactic gastrectomy. Prophylactic gastrectomy was (TERF1, TERF2, POT1, TERF2IP and TINF2) in 15 GBC doneinacarrierborn1988andgastricadenocarcinomawas and 10 gallstone patients. Statistical analysis was done already present. No polyps were currently detected in one using SigmaPlot v.11 software. carrier woman born at 1987. Carrier mother (born at 1967) Results: Telomere length was found to be signiﬁcantly of the patient who died of generalized tubular adenocarci- reduced in tumor tissues, irrespective of the presence of noma at 28 years of age was ordered to gastroscopy. WeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 423 conﬁrmed the presence of APC c.-191T>C mutation in miRNAsarederegulatedandmayinﬂuencetheearlystages several Czech high risk patients with gastric adenocarci- ofgastriccarcinogenesis,suggestinganewalteredpathway noma and/orproximalpolyposisofthestomach. Supported in gastric cancer. Financing: FAPESP, CNPq by Czech Ministry of Health: MH CZ - DRO (MMCI, A.F.T. Rossi: None. J.C. Contiero: None. G.C. 00209805) Moraes: None. F.E. Severino: None. A.E. Silva: None. E. Machackova: None. M. Navratilova: None. E. Stahlova Hrabincova: None. P. Vasickova: None. J. P12.085A Hazova: None. M. Svoboda: None. L. Foretova: None. Mutations in different genes that regulate gastric chlorhydria explains from gastric neuroendocrine tumors P12.084D to autoimmune thyrogastric pathologies Deregulation of TNF-a signaling pathway in gastric carcinogenesis mediated by miRNAs O.Calvete1,H.Valdés-Socin2,J.Reyes3, J.Benitez1 A.F.T.Rossi1,J.C.Contiero1,G.C.Moraes1,F.E.Severino2, 1Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncologicas (CNIO), A. E.Silva1 Madrid, Spain, 2Service d' Endocrinologie. CHU de Liège., Liège, Belgium, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital 1SãoPauloStateUniversity-UNESP,SãoJosédoRioPreto, INCA., Majorca, Spain SP, Brazil, 2São Paulo State University - UNESP, Botucatu, SP, Brazil Gastric neuroendocrine tumors (gNET) arise from enter- ochromafﬁn cell hyperplasia, which classically occurs in Introduction: Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, a proin- patients with autoimmune atrophic gastritis. Tumor pro- ﬂammatory cytokine, can induce cell survival or apoptosis gression entails gastric achlorhydria due to the destruction due to binding to TNFR1 or TNFR2 receptors. Both of parietal cells, which acidiﬁes the stomach through the receptorsmayleadtocellsurvival,butonlyTNFR1results ATP4Aprotonpump.However,wehaverecentlyidentiﬁed in apoptosis, so deregulation in this pathway can promotes a mutation in the ATP4A gene that explained achlorhydria malignant progression. Thus, we investigated the mRNA in a studied familial gNET. The knockin mouse model and miRNAs expression involved in the TNF-α signaling conﬁrmed achlorhydria as the main effector of the tumor pathway in gastric carcinogenesis and mRNA:miRNA development. A second studied familial gNET case that interaction networks. segregated with two autoimmune diseases (Hashimoto MaterialsandMethods:Relativequantiﬁcation(RQ)of hypothyroidism and rheumatoid arthritis) allowed us to gene expression (TNFA, TNFR1, TNFR2, TRADD, TRAF2, describe a second mutated gene. The three individuals CFLIP, CASP8, CASP3, NFKB1, NFKB2) and miRNAs affectedwithgNET had two heterozygous mutations inthe (miR-19a, miR-34a, miR-103a, miR-130a, miR-181c) was ATP4A and PTH1R genes (digenic model). The PTH1R assessed by the 2(-ΔΔCt) method after RT-qPCR (TaqMan® gene, which directly regulates the gastric cells homeostasis assays) in 31 gastric cancer (GC) and 30 intestinal and gastric chlorhydria, was also found involved in the metaplasia (IM) tissue samples using normal mucosa pool regulation of Ca2+ by thyrotrophin (TSH) in the thyroid ascalibrator.ACTB/GAPDHandRNU6B/RNU48normal- gland regulation pathway. We found that the cumulative ized the mRNA and miRNA expression, respectively. effect of both mutations explained the gNET but also Interation network were obtained by Cytoscape v3.1.1. allowedustolinkthegastricdiseasewithbothautoimmune Results:IMshoweddownregulationofvariousmRNAas pathologies (hypothyroidism and arthritis) with a common TNFR1, TNFR2, NFKB1, NFKB2 and miR-19a, miR-103a genetic origin. In order to deeper investigate this relation- and miR-130a. Contrary, GC showed upregulation most of ship, we have studied by WES ﬁve families with thyr- theTNFAsignalingpathwaygenesinvolvedincellsurvival ogastric disease (chronic atrophic gastritis and as TNFA, TNFR2, TRAF2, TRADD, CFLIP, NFKB2 and hypothyroidism). In all families, we have found germinal miR-34a, except TNFR1 and CASP3 that were down- deleterious mutations in new genes expressed in parietal regulated. Correlation analyzes and interaction network cells that are involved in the regulation of gastric chlorhy- showed various relationship between miRNAs:mRNA dria and Ca2+ homeostasis. This data has allowed us to highlighting the miR-103a that target various TNF-α composeacomprehensivegeneticlandscapeofthebiology pathway genes. of the gastric achlorhydria in thyrogastric disease. Conclusion: TNF-α participates in the gastric carcino- O. Calvete: None. H. Valdés-Socin: None. J. Reyes: genesis, favoring cell survival through the TNF-α/TNFR2/ None. J. Benitez: None. NF-κB pathway and blocking of TNFR1-mediated apopto- sis, with predominance of anti-apoptotic mediators.424 J.delPicchia P12.086B Gliomas are the most prevalent intracranial tumors and Spectrum of KIT gene mutations in Korean patients with glioblastoma (GBM) is the most malign type among these gastrointestinal stromal tumors tumorsduetoaverageshortpatientsurvival(12-15months) and patients’ limited response to the treatments. Therefore, S. Jung1,K.Lee2 effortstobetterunderstandthebiologyofGBMrequirethe development of effective therapies and prognostic markers 1Seegene medical foundation, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, that provide patient survival. One of these efforts is the 2Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea, Republic discoveryofthepresenceofcancerstemcells(CSC)which of is correlated with the malignity of GBM. CD24, one of the moststudiedGBMstemcellmarkers,hasbeenfoundtobe Background: The aim of this study is to dertermine the prominently elevated in GBM tumors, indicating its invol- frequencyandtypeofKITgenemutationinKoreanpatients vement in tumor propogation. However, the molecular with gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs). mechanisms underlying the tumor promotion in CD24+ Methods: Fourty four cases of GISTs were examined. GBM cells is still unclear. To understand one of these DNA samples were extracted from hematoxylin/eosin- molecular mechanisms, we forced to overexpress CD24 in stainedsectionsofrepresentativeparafﬁn-embeddedblocks U87GBMlikecellsinwhichCD133andCD24expression using a QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (QUIAGEN, Hilden, are low and then we performed CSC array by quantitative Germany). Bidirectional sequencing was performed using real-time PCR in CD24+ and CD24- U87 cells. We found the BigDye Terminator v1.1 kit (Applied Biosystems, that mRNAs of epidermal growth factor (EGF), integrin Foster city, CA, USA). Exons 9, 11, 13 and 17 of the KIT alpha-2 (ITGA2) or CD49b and mucin 1 (MUC1) were gene were ampliﬁed by PCR and sequenced. increased 2folds, while DNA-binding protein inhibitor ID- Results: We detected mutations in 38 (86.4%) of the 44 1, jagged 1 (JAG1) and snail 1(SNAIL1) were increased 4 patients with GISTs by direct sequencing. KIT exon 11 folds compared to those expressed in CD24- cells. These mutations were detected in 31 (70.5%) of 44 GISTs (19 results suggest that CD24 induces activation of the EGFR, deletions, 10 missense mutations, and 2 duplications); NOTCH signaling pathways and Epithelial Mesenchymal followed by KIT exon 9 mutations (5 duplications); and Transition. This research has been supported by The Sci- KIT exon 13 and exon 17 mutations in 1 each (2 missense entiﬁc and Technological Research Council of Turkey mutations). Most of mutations consisted of the in-frame (No:114S189). deletion from 3 to 51 bp in heterozygous fashion. Frame A. Sunguroglu: None. D.A. Yildiz: None. Y. Hekmat- deletions and point mutations were most frequently shoar: None. T. Ozkan: None. Y. Dilek: None. H.C. observed at codons 550-580, but duplications were most Ugur: None. concentrated at codons 502-503. Doublemutation (exons 9 and17)inmetastaticGISTpatientwasdetectedin1(2.3%) P12.088D of 44. KIT mutations were slightly more frequent in Gene expression with association of estrogen receptor metastatic than in nonmetastatic GISTs (100% vs. 83.8%). status and tumor stage in breast cancer Conclusions: In most cases, the mutations were found at KIT exon 11, and in-frame deletions were the most K. Grishina1,T. Muzaffarova1,N.Pospekhova1,U.Krumin2, common type. V. Khaylenko2, A.Karpukhin1 S. Jung: None. K. Lee: None. 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian P12.087C Federation, 2Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Centre, CD24 gene overexpression induces EGFR and NOTCH Moscow, Russian Federation signaling pathways and EMT in Glioblastoma cells The choice of optimal therapy for breast cancer (BC) can A. Sunguroglu1, D.A.Yildiz2,Y. Hekmatshoar1,T. Ozkan1, dependontumorfeatures.Inthisconnection,thelevelof74 Y. Dilek1,H.C. Ugur3 genes quantitative expression, selected bioinformationally as the most signiﬁcant for the BC development, was per- 1Ankara University, School of Medicine, Department of formed intumorinrelationtothenormalbreasttissue. The Medical Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Biology, sample of BC consists of inﬁltrative ductal BC on I-II Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Mehmet Akif Ersoy University,, stages. All patients of the sample were not subject to Burdur, Turkey, 3Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of radiation, neither to chemotherapy. The gene differential Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey expressiononIIstagesinrelationtostageIwasrevealedfor eightgenes:BIRC5,CD151,mTOR,uPAR,ZEB1,FOXO1,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 425 KLF8, PDGFR(p=0.008-0.04).Thegeneexpression was Methods:The3248individualsanalysedforTAinsertion studied in groups with estrogen-positive and estrogen- in UGT1A1 promotor were divided into three groups: 1) negative tumors. An increased expression of the CSF1R group of patients with different types of carcinomas geneinthegroupwithestrogen-positiveBC(OR=17.3,p classiﬁed in subgroups, 2) control group and 3) group of = 0.01) was revealed. The CSF1R is a key pro- individualsolderthan60yearswithoutpersonalandfamily inﬂammatory cytokine that is involved in the recruitment history of cancer. Genotypic differences in these groups and activation of tissue macrophages. Tumor-associated were statistically evaluated by chi square test. macrophageshavebeenidentiﬁedasregulatorsthatenhance Results: In all cancer subgroups and in group of angiogenic, invasive and metastatic programming of neo- individuals older than 60 years without carcinomas were plastictissue.Ourdatasuggesttheincreasedrecruitmentof found different frequencies of TA genotypes compared to macrophages in estrogen-positive in comparison with the control group. estrogen-negative BC tumors. Conclusion: Herein we discuss the protective effect of K. Grishina: None. T. Muzaffarova: None. N. Pospe- bilirubin and UGT1A1 activity against the development of khova:None.U.Krumin:None.V.Khaylenko:None.A. different types of cancers. The variances found in the Karpukhin: None. genotypes of cancer subgroups are explained by their different etiology, as well as by genetic background of the P12.089A organism, the inﬂuence of environment and lifestyle of the Gilbert syndrome and cancers individuals. A. Boday: None. S. Tavandzis: None. M. Skrovina: A. Boday1,S. Tavandzis1,M.Skrovina2, J.Syrovatka3, None. J. Syrovatka: None. J. Kollarova: None. E. Pal: J.Kollarova4,E. Pal5,J.Roubec6,G.Ondrejka7,R. Vrtel8, None. J. Roubec: None. G. Ondrejka: None. R. Vrtel: O.Urban9 None. O. Urban: None. 1AGEL Laboratories, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Novy P12.090B Jicin,CzechRepublic,2ComprehensiveCancerCenter,AGEL, Carney-Stratakis syndrome in two patients with SDHB/ Department of Surgery, Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, SDHC genes mutations and Gastrointestinal Stromal 3Comprehensive Cancer Center, AGEL, Department of ORL, Tumor (GIST) Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 4Komarno Hospital, Department ofInternalMedicine,Komarno,Slovakia,5UniversityHospital M.Rinelli1,G.Milano2,R. De Vito2,I. Russo2, F.Locatelli2, L. Pasteur, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kosice, A. Novelli1,E.Agolini1 Slovakia, 6Vitkovice Hospital, AGEL, Department of Pneumology, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 7Comprehensive 1UOC Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Children's Hospital Cancer Center, AGEL, Department of Pneumology, Novy Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Pediatric Jicin, Czech Republic, 8Institute of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital Bambino Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 9Vitkovice Hospital, Gesù, Rome, Italy AGEL, Department of Gastroenterology, Ostrava, Czech Republic Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Introduction: UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A isoform 1 KIT and PDGFRA mutations account for 85-90% of GIST isphaseIIxenobioticbiotransformationenzyme.Mutations carcinogenesis. However, the remaining 10-15% of GISTs in UGT1A1 gene can cause insufﬁcient glucuronidation of presentlossoffunctionmutationsingenesencodingforthe various endogenous (e.g. bilirubin) and exogenous sub- subunits of the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) complex: stances (carcinogens and xenobiotics). Bilirubin is one of SDHA,SDHB,SDHCandSDHD.TheoccurrenceofSDH- the strongest antioxidant in the body. Gilbert syndrome deﬁcient GISTs is restricted to stomach, and they typically (GS) is one of the genetic disorders of bilirubin catabolism occur inchildrenand young adultsrepresenting a spectrum which is characterized by a moderate increase of total of clinical behavior from indolent to progressive. SDH- bilirubin. GS frequency is high (8-15%) in Caucasian, deﬁcient GISTs can be due to either genetic or epigenetic African and Afro-American populations due to the occur- changes. We report on two patients who were diagnosed rence of TA dinucleotide insertion in UGT1A1 gene pro- withagastricGISTat14yearsofage.Bothtumorswerec- motor. The aim of this study was to determine whether kit-negative based on immunohistochemical staining. Next people with GS with higher levels of total bilirubin are generationsequencing analysison the tumor DNA samples better protected against carcinomas than others. revealedtwohomozygousmutations,amaternallyinherited splicing variant and a de novo 1-bp frameshift deletion,426 J.delPicchia respectively in the SDHB and SDHC genes. The same the changes in the MMMI, suggesting a potential role for mutations were conﬁrmed in heterozygous state in the thesemoleculesinthepathogenesisofGB.FISP114/01669 constitutional DNA from peripheral blood leukocytes. and PROMETEO II/2015/009 GermlinemutationsinSDHB,SDHC,andSDHDwereseen L. Muñoz Hidalgo: None. C. Lòpez Ginés: None. A. in patients with the Carney-Stratakis syndrome (CSS), a Carratalá: None. R. Gil Benso: None. J. Megías: None. very rare condition inherited in an autosomal dominant T. San Miguel: None. M. Cerdá Nicolás: None. mannerwithincompletepenetrance,whoarepredisposedto developing paraganglioma and GIST. Here we report on P12.093A two new cases of the CSS, with a gastric GIST, expanding Genetic alterations of gliomas the clinical and molecular spectrum of the disease. M. Rinelli: None. G. Milano: None. R. De Vito: None. I.A. Pessôa1,2,M.A. K. Othman1,C. K.N.Amorim2,W.A.S. I. Russo: None. F. Locatelli: None. A. Novelli: None. E. Ferreira2,R. J.R. N.Brito3,T. Liehr1,E. H.C. deOliveira2 Agolini: None. 1JenaUniversityHospital,Jena,Germany,2TissueCultureand P12.091C Cytogenetics Laboratory, Evandro Chagas Institute, Belém, Impact of miRNA-138 in inﬁltrative and migratory ability Pará, Brazil., Brazil, 3Ophir Loyola Hospital, Belém, Pará, and MMMI proﬁles of primary glioblastoma Brazil., Brazil L. MuñozHidalgo1,C. Lòpez Ginés2,A. Carratalá1,R. Gil Background: Understanding the genetic alterations that Benso2,J. Megías2,T. San Miguel2,M.Cerdá Nicolás2 drive glioma formation and progression may help improve patient’s prognosis and treatment. Here, we investigated 1Foundation for research HCU-INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain, gliomas samples from Northern Brazil to identify recurrent 2Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of oncogenic copy number alterations (CNAs) and gene Valencia, Valencia, Spain mutations. Methods: In the present study, thirty-seven samples of Introduction: Glioblastoma (GB) isthe most common and gliomas were retrospectively analyzed in detail by mole- aggressive entity from the primary tumors of the central cular approaches, i.e. array-comparative genomic hybridi- nervous system shows a high inﬁltrative capacity. In pre- zation (aCGH), polymerase chain reaction-single-strand viousstudies,wehaveidentiﬁedinprimaryGB,signiﬁcant conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) followed by alterations in the expression of several miRNAs related to DNA sequencing and ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization the different models of EGFR ampliﬁcation and with (FISH). MMMI changes and angiogenesis processes. In the present Results:CNAsweredetectedin28/37gliomas.Themost work we show the downregulation of miRNA-138 expres- frequent CNAs were loss of #9, #10, 13q, 22q and gain of sion which, through its HIF-1 modulating action, acts as a #4,#7,#19and#20.Ofspecialinterestamongthedetected transcriptionfactoractivatedinhypoxiasituations,withthe CNAs are the following ﬁndings: gain of BRAF and ability of modulating behavior of neoplastic cells playing a ampliﬁcation of EGFR genes (8.1% and 16.2%, respec- role in tumorgenesis. tively) and loss of TP53, PTEN and deletion of CDKN2A MaterialandMethods:Weproposethedevelopmentan genes (8.1%, 16.2% and 24.3%, respectively). In addition, invitromodelofstudybasedonGBcellcultures,Allowing we found occurrence of mutations in hotspot regions of comparative analyses in cell lines and primary cultures of TP53 in 12.2% of the gliomas, while no mutation was primaryGB,withdifferentlevelsofEGFRampliﬁcation:(i) identiﬁed in PTEN. in situations of miRNA-138 overexpression and silencing, Conclusion: High resolution molecular approaches (ii)insituationsofEGFRandHIFmRNAinhibition(iii)in combined in a cost-efﬁcient way are an important tool to different situations of hypoxia. help in grading and understanding in future associations Results: The miR-138 expression levels were stable betweengeneticalterationingliomasandprognosis.Higher under hypoxia conditions but decresed in normoxia rates of CNAs in highly malignant compared to low grade conditions. miR-138 overexpression, an increase in the gliomas were identiﬁed. In addition, the TP53 pathway is miR-138valuesandadecreaseofVEGFandHIF1amRNA impaired, either by mutation or chromosomal loss, while in both normal and hypoxic conditions were observed. allelic loss of PTEN could represent an alternative Conclusion: Our ﬁndings indicate that miR-138 is mechanism for its protein inactivation in gliomas deregulated in GB and changed their expression levels development. within the different grades of GB. We reafﬁrm the This work partial supported from DAAD and CNPq possibility of miR-138 being able to act by modulatingAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 427 I.A. Pessôa: None. M.A.K. Othman: None. C.K.N. SEEBMO. J. Bruges-Armas: A. Employment (full or Amorim: None. W.A.S. Ferreira: None. R.J.R.N. Brito: part-time); Signiﬁcant; HSEIT / SEEBMO. None. T. Liehr: None. E.H.C. de Oliveira: None. P12.096D P12.095C Fromthebenchtotheclinic.IdentiﬁcationofaCDH1large Genetics of breast cancer in the Azores islands - BRCA rearrangement and management of the affected family genes k.A. segers,V. Bours, A. Bynens,P. Leclercq M.R. Santos, A.R. Couto, F. Rocha,B.Parreira, P. Sousa, J.Bruges-Armas chu de liège, liège, Belgium HSEIT/SEEBMO, Angra do Heroismo, Portugal Germline mutations in CDH1, encoding E-cadherin, account for around 30% of cases of Hereditary Diffuse Introduction: Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer Gastric Cancer (HDGC). Individuals carrying a pathogenic amongwomen.PathogenicvariantsinBRCAgenesarethe mutation in CDH1 have a high lifetime risk of developing main cause of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syn- diffusegastriccancer,estimatedtobe70%inmenand56% drome(HBOC);7%ofallbreastcancers(BC)and11-15% in woman. Female carriers also present an elevated risk to of ovarian cancers (OC) are associated with inherited pre- develop lobular breast cancer. disposition, with a 40-80% lifetime risk of developing BC, Identiﬁcationofcausalmutationallowspredictive testing and11-50%ofdevelopingOC.Theidentiﬁcationofcarriers offamilymembersandpreventivecareofcarriers.Herewe can signiﬁcantly impact their and at-risk family members describe the identiﬁcation of a large unpublished genomic medical management. rearrangement in CDH1 gene. Materials and Methods: The mutational proﬁle and Molecular testing of the index patient by sequencing and prevalence of BRCA variants were evaluated among 139 MLPAmethodsrevealedadeletionencompassingexons10 Azorean probands (cases) fulﬁlling the NCCN HBOC and 11, leading to an expected frameshift and premature testing criteria. VariantswereﬁrstscannedusingHRM and stop codon. RNA study was performed to exclude false the polymorphic fragments were Sanger sequenced. The positive result of the MLPA method and to conﬁrm the clinical signiﬁcance of the detected variants was assessed pathogenicity ofthe mutation. The presenceof a premature usingClinVardatabase.VariantsnotfoundinClinVarwere stopcodonwasconﬁrmedandthemutationwasconsidered assessed in Ensembl, dbSNP, LOVD and BRCA Share as likely pathogenic. Familial screening was therefore databases. proposed in this large family. Results: Seventy-four variants were detected in the Duringthisfamilialscreening,themutationwasidentiﬁed samples analyzed: 33 in BRCA1 gene and 41 in BRCA2 in several “old” healthy patients. This unexpected result gene. Three were pathogenic (BRCA1 c.2717delA and leads us to the hypothesis that the mutation may show BRCA2 c.1138delA, c.2808_2811delAAAC), six were of variable penetrance which complicate the follow-up and uncertainsigniﬁcance,twohadconﬂictinginterpretationsof prophylactic recommendations to give to the family. pathogenicity and one, intronic with no signiﬁcant splicing Aftermultiplediscussionswithgeneticists,CDH1experts motif alteration, was not found in consulted databases and gastro-enterologists, prophylactic gastrectomy was (c.441+51T>C). The remaining 61 were classiﬁed as proposed to mutation carriers of the family. At this time, benign or likely benign. severalcarriers undergo surgeryand pre-tumoralcells were Conclusion: The low percentage (2,2%) of pathogenic identiﬁed in at least two of the carriers. variantsdetected,inagroupfulﬁllingNCCNHBOCtesting K.A. segers: None. V. Bours: None. A. Bynens: None. criteria, suggests a strong contribution of genes other than P. Leclercq: None. BRCAs.Toachieveamoreefﬁcientdetectionabroadpanel of genes implicated should be applied. P12.097A M.R. Santos: A. Employment (full or part-time); A mutational chip to detect TP53, CDKN2A and FAT1 Signiﬁcant; HSEIT / SEEBMO. A.R. Couto: A. Employ- mutations in circulating cell free-DNA of head and neck ment (fullor part-time); Signiﬁcant; HSEIT /SEEBMO. F. squamous cell carcinoma patients:a pilot study Rocha: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; HSEIT / SEEBMO. B. Parreira: A. Employment (full or F.Ganci1,F.Spinella2,G.Cottone2,E.Cotroneo2,A.Nuccitelli2, part-time); Signiﬁcant; HSEIT / SEEBMO. P. Sousa: A. A. Biroccio1, A.Sacconi1,V.Manciocco3,M.Pallocca3, Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; HSEIT / F. Rollo4,R. Covello4,M.Benevolo4,G.Spriano3, F. Fiorentino2,G.Blandino1428 J.delPicchia 1Oncogenomic and Epigenetic Unit, Italian National Cancer Technology Research and Application Center, Selcuklu, Institute“ReginaElena”,Rome,Italy,2GenomaGroup,Rome, Konya, Turkey Italy, 3Otolaryngology Department, Italian National Cancer Institute“ReginaElena”,Rome,Italy,4PathologyDepartment, Introduction:Endothelialcellsconstituteanimportantpart ItalianNationalCancerInstitute“ReginaElena”,Rome,Italy of the tumor microenvironment (TME). However, the underlying mechanisms of their functions within the Introduction: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma microenvironment of head and neck squamous cell carci- (HNSCC) is characterized by a high incidence of relapse, noma (HNSCC) remain poorly understood. Here we per- which is the common cause of death in HNSCC patients. formed an in vitro non-contact co-cultivation system to The identiﬁcation of biomarkers supporting the manage- analyze the inﬂuence of microenvironment in both tumor ment of HNSCC disease is still an unmet need in clinical (laryngeal cancer cell line HEp-2) and healthy cells (endo- oncology. thelial cell line HUVEC cells). Meterials and Methods: To this end, we designed a Materials and Methods: We prepared conditioned mutational chip for next generation sequencing (NGS) medium (CM) from cell cultures for migration assay. CM analysis to detect mutations in tumor tissues and matched hascomponentssecretedbycellssuchasspeciﬁccytokines, plasma of HNSCC patients. The analysis of the HNSCC chemokines, growth factors. CM provides a co-culture TCGA cohort revealed that TP53 (72%), CDKN2A (22%) microenvironments for the cells. We have used in vitro and FAT1 (24%) are the most frequently mutated genes in strachassaytoexaminecellmigrationandcellinteractions. HNSCCs. Notably TP53 mutations associate with poor Photosweretakenatintervalsof0,3,6,9,12and24h.To outcome.Acohortof250freshfrozentissuesfromHNSCC assess the exact speed of cell migration, ImageJ software patients has been collected. Speciﬁcally, for each patient was used to measure the change in the cell-covered area three biopsies representing non-tumoral (resection margin), overtime,whichisthecharacteristicparameterinmigration peritumor(histologicallytumor-freetissueat≥1cmfromthe assays. tumor) and tumor tissues were collected. Results: The wound healing assay showed that HEp-2 Results: This cohort has been challenged with a cells grown in CM from HUVEC have less capacity for customized mutational chip for NGS analysis of mutations migration and mobility compared with HEp-2 cells grown that includes the entire CDS of the TP53, CDKN2A and in the culture medium alone. HUVEC cells grown in CM FAT1 genes. We found that the TP53 (743%) and from HEp-2 have less capacity for migration and mobility CDKN2A (243%) mutation frequency in tumors of our compared with HUVEC cells grown in the culture cohortwassimilartothatofTGCA.Whilethefrequencyof medium alone. FAT1 (38,6%) mutations was higher in our dataset. Many Conclusions: In vitro co-culture cell system for investi- of the identiﬁed FAT1 mutations have not been annotated gation of interaction between tumor cells and the tumor yet. Since we have also collected matched plasma at the microenvironmentwasused.Webelievethatthisstudywill surgery and during follow-up, our analysis is progressing contributetoourunderstandingoftumormicroenvironment toward the identiﬁcation of mutations in ccf-DNA from effect in head and neck carcinoma. patients. Z.B. Sari: None. E. Yavuz: None. T. Cora: None. Conclusions: This analysis is ongoing and the related data will be presented. P12.099C F. Ganci: None. F. Spinella: None. G. Cottone: None. Pathologies of helicases and premature ageing: study by E. Cotroneo: None. A. Nuccitelli: None. A. Biroccio: derivation of induced pluripotent stem cells None. A. Sacconi: None. V. Manciocco: None. M. Pallocca: None. F. Rollo: None. R. Covello: None. M. V. Gatinois1, R.Desprat2, C.Corsini3,J.Puechberty4, J.B. Benevolo: None. G. Spriano: None. F. Fiorentino: None. Gaillard1,A.Schneider1,C. Lemattre1,T. Guignard1,J. M. G. Blandino: None. Lemaitre2,F. Pellestor1 P12.098B 1Unitédegénétiquechromosomique-HôpitalA.deVilleneuve, Impact of cross-talk between laryngeal cancer cells and Montpellier, France, 2Plateforme SAFE-iPS - Hôpital St Eloi, endothelial cells on cell migration and interactions Montpellier,France,3Serviced'Oncogénétique-HôpitalA.de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 4Service de génétique Z. B.Sari1,E. Yavuz2,T. Cora1 médicale - Hôpital A. de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France 1Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Medical Helicases process the double-stranded DNA dissociation. Faculty,Selcuklu,konya,Turkey,2SelcukUniversityAdvanced They are involved in replication, DNA repair andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 429 maintenance of telomeres. In human, 3 helicases display therapy. Next generation sequencing (NGS) of the tran- mutations responsible for clinical syndromes: WRN for the scriptome facilitates a more comprehensive expression Werner syndrome, BLM for the Bloom syndrome and proﬁle of both host and viral genes including viral-host RECQL4 for the Rothmund-Thomson syndrome. All these chimeric transcripts. In this study, deep sequencing of the diseases cause premature ageing and high risk of cancer. transcriptome of HCC patients revealed that differentially Molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in these dis- expressed host transcripts are enriched in the cell-cycle, eases are not well deﬁned. Particularly, little is known DNA damage response, cell-survival and apoptosis signal- concerningthelinkbetweengenomicinstabilityandageing. ling and several of these were signiﬁcantly associated with During this project, we used blood samples and skin various clinical characteristics. An average of ~230 tumor- biopsies of affected patients to generate models by speciﬁc mutations were identiﬁed for each patients with reprogramming cells to induced pluripotent stem cells most of these mutations being missense mutations within (iPSCs). These cells have the advantage of self-renewing coding regions. Majority of the tumor-speciﬁc mutations andtheoreticallycouldbedifferentiatedinallcelltypes.At wereuniquewithonly~5%beingfoundinmorethanaone the same time, an iPSC senescence control was performed patient. Genes harbouring somatic mutatio ns are primarily from cells of a Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome in cancer pathways affecting phosphatidyl inositol signal- patient. ling and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. HBV-human chi- iPSCs were characterized for pluripotency. In the aim of meric transcripts were also observed in these HCC patients recapitulate these pathologies in vitro, we identiﬁed sets of with majority of the HBV transcripts mapping to either the cellular and molecular phenotypes. We also engaged Pre-S or X gene. Interestingly fewer chimeric transcripts differentiation of iPSCs in cell pathways closed to the were observed in the tumor compared to the non-tumorous affected tissues in vivo. Finally, we studied the genomic tissues. Majority of the HBV-human chimeric transcripts stability of iPSCs and derived cells. We observed that were primarily fusion of the HBx gene and introns or Bloom cells are susceptible to frequent recombinations and intergenicregionsofhumangenessuggestingthatfavoured arecharacterizedbyagenomeinstabilitythroughallstudied sitesofintegrationwithinHBVremainsattheC-terminalof cell types. Werner cells showed an instability of telomeres the HBx gene. Acknowledgement: National Medical length. Finally, all premature ageing diseases displayed Research Council (NMRC) (CBRG14nov034 and NMRC/ mitochondrial defects. CBRG/0095/2015). This work was supported by an internal public hospital C.G. Lee: None. W. Lee: None. J. Yu: None. S. Toh: fellowship “AOI Jeunes chercheurs, CHU de Montpellier”. None. C. Tennakoon: None. H. Toh: None. P. Chow: V. Gatinois: None. R. Desprat: None. C. Corsini: None. A. Chung: None. L.L.P.J. Ooi: None. S.S. Chong: None. J. Puechberty: None. J.B. Gaillard: None. A. None. K. Sung: None. Schneider: None. C. Lemattre: None. T. Guignard: None. J.M. Lemaitre: None. F. Pellestor: None. P12.102B Multi-gene testing of a high-risk group of Greek breast P12.100D cancer patients reveals known and novel gene associations Comprehensive molecular characterization of the transcriptome of HCC patients F. FOSTIRA, I.Konstantopoulou,M. S.Papamentzelopoulou, P. Apostolou, D.Kalfakakou, A.Delimitsou, A. Vagena,I.S. C. G.Lee1,W.Lee2, J.Yu3,S. Toh2,C. Tennakoon4,H.Toh3, Vlachos, D.Yannoukakos P. Chow3, A.Chung5,L.L.P.J.Ooi5,S.S. Chong2, K.Sung2 NSCR DEMOKRITOS, ATHENS, Greece 1National Cancer Centre and National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University of Introduction: Although BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3National Cancer Centre, dominate among breast cancer (BrCa) patients, additional Singapore, Singapore, 4Genome Institute of Singapore, genes are associated with BrCa susceptibility, which are Singapore, Singapore, 5Singapore General Hospital, nowadays analyzed simultaneously in multigene panels. Singapore, Singapore The limitation in the implementation of such panels in the clinicalsettingistheuncertainclinicalimplicationsrequired Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the deadliest in the case of mutations detected in genes other than cancer of the liver mainly due to late detection and limited BRCA1/2. Therefore, we sought to investigate the con- interventional options. There is thus a need to better tribution and association of predisposing alleles in highly understand HCC to facilitate the development of better selected cohort of Greek BrCa patients. biomarkers and identiﬁcation of potential targets for430 J.delPicchia Materials and methods: The sequences of 94 cancer San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 9Laboratorio de Oncología genes were targeted by applying Trusight cancer panel in a Molecular, Instituto Universitario de Oncología del high-risk group of 1382 BrCa Greek patients, diagnosed at Principado de Asturias, Hospital Universitario Central de very young age (<35years) and/or having strong family Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 10Familial Cancer Unit, Department history (at least three breast, ovarian or pancreatic cancer ofMedicalOncology,InstitutoUniversitariodeOncologíadel cases). Case-control analysis was performed comparing the Principado de Asturias, Hospital Universitario Central de frequency of loss-of-function (LoF) mutations to Exome Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 11Molecular Biology Laboratory, 12 Aggregation Consortium controls. de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 12Instituto de Results: In total, 31.6% of patients tested carried LoF BiologíayGenéticaMolecular,IBGM-UVA-CSIC,Valladolid, mutationsin26genes;6.7%carriedLoFallelesinthepost- Spain, 13Unit of Biomarkers and Susceptibility, Catalan BRCAgenes,ofwhich4.5%involvedinCHEK2,ATMand InstituteofOncology,IDIBELLandCIBERESP,Hospitaletde PALB2 mutations. Case-control analysis showed estab- Llobregat,Spain,14DepartmentofExperimentalTherapeutics, lished associations of TP53, PALB2, ATM and CHEK2 The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, truncating mutations (odds ratios 3.4-8.0), as well as novel Houston, TX, United States associations of RAD51C and missense CHEK2 mutations (odds ratios 6.19 & 3.79, respectively) to BrCa The identiﬁcation of genes associated with hereditary col- predisposition. orectalcancer(CRC)facilitatesthemanagementoffamilies Conclusions: Among a high-risk group of Greek BrCa and individuals carrying pathogenic mutations, having a patients, where there are strong founder effects, the direct impact in the processes of genetic testing and coun- mutational spectrum is heterogeneous, giving rise to useful seling.However,muchofthegeneticpredispositiontoCRC associations on known and candidate genes. Through such remains unexplained. We performed whole-exome approaches, clinical actionability of genes, frequently sequencing in 3 CRC-affected relatives of an Amsterdam includedinpanels,willbedetermined.<!--EndFragment--> ICRC family. Variants located in38genes were shared by F. Fostira: None. I. Konstantopoulou: None. M.S. all affected relatives. A splice-site mutation in BRF1 (sub- Papamentzelopoulou: None. P. Apostolou: None. D. unit of RNA polymerase III transcription initiation factor), Kalfakakou: None. A. Delimitsou: None. A. Vagena: stood up as potential causal mutation. BRF1 mutational None. I.S. Vlachos: None. D. Yannoukakos: None. screening was performed in 547 additional familial CRC cases using pooled DNA and targeted next generation P12.103C sequencing.Tennovelorrare(populationMAF<1%)BRF1 BRF1, a new gene associated with hereditary colorectal variants were identiﬁed in 11 independent CRC families. cancer The deleterious nature of the identiﬁed BRF1 mutations were demonstrated for seven of them (1 detected in two P. Mur1, N.Sowada2,F. Bellido3,C. Lázaro1,T. Pons4, families): BRF1 c.1459+2T>C and 6 missense variants, p. R. Valdés-Mas5,M.Pineda1, G.Aiza1,S. Iglesias1,J.Soto6, T12M, p.V75M, p.S81T, p.C140S, p.P405R and p.R572G, M.Urioste7,T. Caldés8,M.Balbín9,P. Blay10,D.Rueda11, whichledtothealterationofproteinfunctionand/orprotein M.Durán12,A. Valencia4,V. Moreno13,J. Brunet1,I.Blanco3, expression in functional studies carried out in yeast and/or M.Navarro1, G.A.Calin14, G.Borck2, X.S. Puente5, human CRC cell lines. The frequency of mutations in G.Capellá1,L. Valle1 familial CRC cases was signiﬁcantly higher to the fre- quency observed in control population. Germline hetero- 1Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL and CIBERONC, zygousmutationsinBRF1maycontributeforatleast1.4% Barcelona, Spain, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of ofunexplainedfamilialcolorectal cancercases.Ifvalidated Ulm,Ulm,Germany,3CatalanInstituteofOncology,IDIBELL, inindependentseries,BRF1mutationcarrierfamiliescould Barcelona, Spain, 4Structural Biology and Biocomputing beneﬁt in the future from a clinical management based on Program, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), carrier status and personalized risk assessment. Madrid, Spain, 5Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología P. Mur: None. N. Sowada: None. F. Bellido: None. C. Molecular, Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Lázaro: None. T. Pons: None. R. Valdés-Mas: None. M. Principado de Asturias, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Pineda: None. G. Aiza: None. S. Iglesias: None. J. Soto: Spain, 6Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Elche University None. M. Urioste: None. T. Caldés: None. M. Balbín: Hospital,Elche,Spain,7FamilialCancerClinicalUnit,Human None. P. Blay: None. D. Rueda: None. M. Durán: None. CancerGeneticsProgram,SpanishNationalCancerResearch A.Valencia:None.V.Moreno:None.J.Brunet:None.I. Centre (CNIO) and Center for Biomedical Network Research Blanco: None. M. Navarro: None. G.A. Calin: None. G. on Rare Diseases, Madrid, Spain, 8Laboratorio de Oncología Borck: None. X.S. Puente: None. G. Capellá: None. L. Molecular, Servicio de Oncología Médica, Hospital Clínico Valle: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 431 P12.104D None. &. Çiçin: None. H.C. Karlıkaya: None. Y.A. Screeningforgermlinevariationsofcancerrelatedgenesin Karamustafaoğlu: None. patients with the diagnosis of different cancers and hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes P12.105A Detection of a variety of mutations in cancer predisposing S. Demir1, H.Tozkır1, H.Gürkan1, E.Atlı1, D.Eker1, H. A. genes in familial & early-onset colorectal cancer patients Tezel2,Y. A. Sezer3, &.Çiçin4,H.C. Karlıkaya5, Y.A. using targeted multigene panels Karamustafaoğlu1 F. MOUFID1,2,M. Dieng3,I.EL bouchikhi1,2, M.Iraqui 1TrakyaUniversityFacultyofMedicineDepartmentofMedical Houssaini4, L.Bouguenouch1,E. Benjelloun5,K. Ouldim1, Genetics, Edirne, Turkey, 2Trakya University Faculty of Y. Idaghdour3 Medicine Department of Gastroenterology, Edirne, Turkey, 3TrakyaUniversityFacultyofMedicineDepartmentofGeneral 1Medical genetics and Oncogenetics Department, Hassan II Surgery, Edirne, Turkey, 4Trakya University Faculty of University Hospital of Fez, Morocco, Fez, Morocco, Medicine Department of Medical Oncology, Edirne, Turkey, 2MicrobialBiotechnologyLaboratory,FacultyofSciencesand 5Trakya University Faculty of Medicine Department of Chest Technologies, Sidi Mohamed Benabdellah University, Fez, Diseases, Edirne, Turkey Morocco, 3Biology Program, Division of Science and Mathematics, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, Introduction: Cancer genetics is a developing area of United Arab Emirates, 4Microbial Biotechnology Laboratory, cancer researches. Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) is a Faculty of Sciences and Technologies, Sidi Mohamed powerfull technology, becoming an important tool offering Benabdellah University,., Fez, Morocco, 5Visceral Suregery opportunitiestosolvethecomplexityandmultigenicnature Department, Hassan II University Hospital, Fez, Morocco of cancers and hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes (HCPS).Inthisstudyweaimedtosummarisetheresultsof Abstract genetic analysis performed in a population of patients with Introduction: Early onset and family history of cancer hereditary colorectal (n=6), hereditary breast/ovarian are the strongest predictors of hereditary colorectal cancer cancers (n=7), neuroﬁbromatosis type I/II (n=9), para- (CRC) risk. Mendelian CRC predisposition syndromes ganglioma (n=2), pheochromocytoma (n=1), tubero- underlieabout 5%of allcases. Despite thisknowledge, the sclerosis (n=1) and malign mesothelioma (n=1). remaining CRC heritability is still unexplained and may be Materials and Methods: After genomic DNA isolation caused by rare or population-speciﬁc variants in known from peripheral blood, Trusight Rapid Capture Kit candidategenesorothercancer-relatedgenes.Hereweaim (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA) has been used for the to identify known or novel colorectal cancer predisposing Sequencing reactions according to manufacturer’s instruc- gene variants in early-onset and familial CRC cases. tions. MiSeq Reporter (v2.5.1; Illumina Inc.) was used for Materials and Methods: Forty-eight CRC patients with fastq generation and Genomize Seq Platform was used for family history or early age of onset were enrolled in this variant calling and ﬁltering. ClinVar and HGMD databases study. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples, were considered for known variant interpretation, Varsome libraryconstructionandtargetedcaptureof94cancergenes was used for in silico analysis and ACMG 2015 guidelines were performed using the Illumina Trusight cancer panel were followed for the interpretation of novel variants. followed by sequencing at approximately 80x coverage on Results: In total, 16 (9 novel) pathogenic and 3 likely an Illumina MiSeq instrument. pathogenicvariationshavebeendeterminedin18outof28 Results: In total, 65 variants in 30 genes were identiﬁed. patients (64.2%). Segregation analysis of the the variants Seventeen patients (35,4%) had a pathogenic mutation in classiﬁedasunknownsigniﬁcanceisongoinginthepatients one of the known CRC predisposing genes including: who have available family members. MLH1 (3 cases), MSH2 (4 cases, with two novel variants), Conclusion: We suggest that multi-gene panels with MSH6 (2 cases), MUTYH (3 cases, biallelic) and APC (4 NGSisapowerfulltoolfordetermininggeneticbackground cases, with one novel variant). In addition, rare and novel of cancers and cancer-related syndromes. Besides some pathogenic variants were detected in 25 genes known to disadvantagesliketheprobabilityoffalsepositivity,NGSis play a role in different cancer pathways. holding a great advantage in terms of time and cost Conclusions: Our ﬁndings demonstrate the power of effectiveness according to conventional methods. using targeted sequencing of a broad panel of genes in S.Demir:None.H.Tozkır:None.H.Gürkan:None.E. clinical diagnosis of hereditary CRC and highlight the Atlı:None.D.Eker:None.H.A.Tezel:None.Y.A.Sezer: potentialroleofothercancer-relatedgenesinthediseaseas432 J.delPicchia well as the potential pleiotropic effects in promoting 1Princess Máxima Center for Paediatric Oncology, Utrecht, germline predisposition to CRC. Netherlands,2UniversityMedicalCenterUtrecht/Wilhelmina F. Mouﬁd: None. M. Dieng: None. I. EL bouchikhi: Children's Hospital, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Radboud None. M. Iraqui Houssaini: None. L. Bouguenouch: University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, None. E. Benjelloun: None. K. Ouldim: None. Y. 4University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands Idaghdour: None. Introduction: Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell P12.106B cancer (HLRCC) is a rare, autosomal dominant syndrome Speciﬁc issues in genetic counseling of hereditary caused by pathogenic germline mutations in the fumarate leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) hydratase (FH) gene. It is characterized by cutaneous and uterine leiomyomas and an increased risk of developing M.Gerykova Bujalkova, F. Laccone renal cell carcinoma. Currently, there is no consensus on what age to start surveillance for renal tumours in FH Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, mutationcarriers,andwhetherthepresenceofrenalcystsis Vienna, Austria an indication for more intensive surveillance or resection. Materials&Methods:Wereporttwopaediatricpatients Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) with HLRCC-associated renal cell carcinoma and/or renal is an autosomal dominant inherited tumor syndrome pre- cysts and reviewed the available literature for HLRCC- disposing to the development of multiple cutaneous pilo- associated renal tumours occurring in patients <20 years. leiomyomas, early onset uterine leiomyomas (myomatous Results: Localized HLRCC-associated papillary type II uterus) and also to a clinically aggressive form of type 2 renalcellcarcinomawassuccessfullyresectedina15-year- papillaryrenalcellcancerinapproximately15%ofaffected old female patient with a family history of leiomyomas. In individuals. HLRCC is caused by heterozygous germline an unrelated 14-year-old female with a conﬁrmed FH mutations in the fumarate hydratase (FH) gene. At present mutation (c.1210G>T(p.(Glu404*)), complex renal cysts more than 300 families with HLRCC have been described. were detected upon ﬁrst screening and carefully monitored We report three independent families that underwent by regular MRI's. Nine previously described cases of genetic testing and counseling for HLRCC at our institute. HLRCC-associated renal cell carcinoma were identiﬁed in The renal cell cancer occurred in two families, one family patients aged 10-18 years: four papillary type II, one presented with cutaneous and uterine leiomyomas only. collecting duct tumour, four unspeciﬁed. Five were Each family harbored a different mutation in the FH gene. metastatic at diagnosis. Atypical cells have been reported Two mutations (out of frame deletion in the lining of resected renal cysts in adult FH mutation c.912_918delTTTTGTC and splice site mutation c.905- carriers, suggesting a potential preneoplastic lesion. 1G>A) were deﬁnitely pathogenic. One missense mutation Conclusions: HLRCC-associated renal cell carcinoma (c.977G>A; p.Gly326Glu) was novel, very likely patho- can occur at early age and uniform recommendations are genic and a further segregation analysis has been warranted for genetic testing and surveillance of young FH recommended. mutation carriers. The presence of complex renal cysts Basedontheexamplesofourfamilieswediscussvarious seems to require careful monitoring, and resection when counseling issues and more general aspects of this rare solid components appear. tumor syndrome. These include clinical criteria, predictive J.A.Hol:None.M.C.J.Jongmans:None.M.E.M.Van genetic testing of children, renal cancer surveillance, der Perk: None. A.S. Littooij: None. R.R. De Krijger: possible underdiagnosis of HLRCC in the general popula- None. J.J.T. Van Harssel: None. A.R. Mensenkamp: tion and prospects of immunohistochemical screening of None. M.M. Van den Heuvel-Eibrink: None. M. Van HLRCC-associated tumors. Grotel: None. M. Gerykova Bujalkova: None. F. Laccone: None. P12.108D P12.107C Cell-free, long non-coding RNA as novel biomarker in the HLRCC-associated renal cell carcinoma and renal cysts in diagnosis of ovarian cancer paediatric patients: two case reports and review of the literature B. Soltesz1,J. Lukács2,E. Szilágyi1,R. Póka2,B. Nagy1 J.A.Hol1,M.C.J.Jongmans2,3,M.E.M.VanderPerk1,A.S. 1Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Littooij2,R. R. DeKrijger1,J.J. T.Van Harssel4,A.R. University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Institute of Mensenkamp3,M.M.VandenHeuvel-Eibrink1,M.VanGrotel1Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 433 ObstetricsandGynecology,FacultyofMedicine,Universityof Only two patients have hitherto been described with Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary somewhat different phenotypes. Methods: We performed exome sequencing on two Background: Ovarian cancer is the ﬁfth leading cause of Polish siblings who presented with immunoglobulin cancer-associatedmortalityamongwomen.Areliable,non- deﬁciency, telangiectasia, cellular radiosensitivity and invasive diagnostic method may contribute to the early increased alpha-fetoprotein levels. We investigated the detection of this malignancy. The long non-coding RNAs levels of RNF168, ATM and ATM target phosphorylation (lncRNAs) have a signiﬁcant role in the oncogenesis, usingWesternblotting,andwemonitoredtheDNAdamage metastasis and chemoresistance. The upregulation of Hox response after 6 Gy irradiation using immunocytochemical transcript antisense intergenic RNA (HOTAIR) was deter- analyses of 53BP1 and pSer139-H2AX. minedinthedevelopmentofovariancancercells,however, Results: Exome sequencing identiﬁed homozygosity for thecell-freeHOTAIRexpressionwasnotdetectedfromthe a novel frameshift mutation, c.295delG, in the RNF168 plasma until now. gene for both siblings. The younger sibling with a more Materials and Methods: Twenty previously untreated pronouncedneurologicalandmorphologicalphenotypealso ovarian cancer patients (60.60±10.84y; FIGO stages III or carried an ATM gene mutation in the heterozygous state. IV)and20healthycontrols(56.70±14.51y)wereinvolved Immunoblot analyses showed absence of RNF168 protein, in the study. EDTA blood was drawn; RNA was isolated; whereas ATM levels and function were proﬁcient in LCLs cDNA was synthesised and the HOTAIR lncRNA expres- from both patients. 53BP1 recruitment to DNA double- sionweredeterminedbyusingExiLERATELNA™qPCR, strand breaksafter irradiationwasundetectableincell lines for mRNA and long non-coding RNA (Exiqon, USA). from either of the two patients. pSer139-H2AX foci ACTB was used as reference gene. Student t-test was accumulatednormallybuttheydisappearedwithsigniﬁcant applied for the statistical calculations. delay, indicating a severe defect in DNA double-strand Results: Higher expression of HOTAIR was detected in break repair. the samples of patients with ovarian cancer (1.89±2.39) Conclusions: These ﬁndings together with the two thaninhealthycontrols(1.39±1.48)butthedifferencewas previously identiﬁed cases deﬁne immunoglobulin deﬁ- no signiﬁcant (p=0.432). ciency,cellularradiosensitivityandincreasedAFPlevelsas Conclusion: Wedeterminedtheconcentration ofthecell the hallmarks of RNF168 deﬁciency. The failure of 53BP1 free HOTAIR lncRNA from the plasma of ovarian cancer recruitmentafterirradiationmayserveasausefulmarkerto patients and healthy controls. There was no signiﬁcant screen for further patients. difference in the expression of the analysed lncRNA; but B. Pietrucha: None. E. Heropolitańska-Pliszka: None. this is the ﬁrst study to analyse the cell-free HOTAIR R.Geffers:None.J.Enßen:None.B.Wieland:None.N. expression among Hungarian ovarian cancer patients. We Bogdanova: None. T. Dörk: None. wouldliketoextendourstudyonhighernumberofcasesas this lncRNA seem to be novel biomarker for the diagnosis P12.110B of ovarian cancer. miR-15a, miR-15b and checkpoint gene expression among B. Soltesz: None. J. Lukács: None. E. Szilágyi: None. bladder cancer cell lines as a model of tumour R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None. heterogeneity P12.109A P. Dobosz1,2,3,P. A.Stempor4,5,A. Layani1,T. Meninghier1, Clinical and biologicalmanifestation ofRNF168 deﬁciency D.Avni1,Y. Sidi1,2,R. Leibowitz-Amit1,2 in two Polish siblings 1Cancer Research Centre, Oncology Department, Sheba B. Pietrucha1,E. Heropolitańska-Pliszka1,R. Geffers2, Medical Centre Hospital, Tel Hashomer, 52621 Ramat Gan, J.Enßen3,B. Wieland3, N.Bogdanova3,T. Dörk3 Israel, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Oncology Department, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 6997801 Tel Aviv, 1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, Israel, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3School of Clinical Medicine, 2Helmholtz Institute for Infection Research, Braunschweig, University of Cambridge, The Old Schools, Trinity Ln, Germany, 3Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany CambridgeCB21TN,UK,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom,4The Wellcome Trust/CRUK Gurdon Institute, University of Introduction: Germline mutations in the RING ﬁnger Cambridge, Tennis Court Rd, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK, protein gene RNF168 have been identiﬁed in a combined Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Department of Genetics, immunodeﬁciency disorder called RIDDLE syndrome. University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EH, UK, Cambridge, United Kingdom434 J.delPicchia Introduction: The complex immunological synapse same gene. Such data are not avalaible for Romanian between T lymphocytes and cancer cells contains check- patients. The present study reports a case of coexistence of point proteins, which modulate the signal transmitted to T two different somatic mutations in exon 2 (codons 12 and lymphocytes. The role of miRNAs from the miR-15/16 13) of KRAS gene, in a 68 years old Caucasian woman family in bladder cancer remains unknown, although some suffering from mixt adenoma (tubulo-papillary).Genomic research suggests its downregulation. Only a small fraction DNA was isolated from FFPE primary tumor, from the of bladder cancer patients respond to immunotherapy. The sameselectedarea,with58%tumorcellscontent,andtested present study is aimed at the evaluation of the correlation for KRAS exon 2 mutations by PCR-RFLP method fol- between the expression of these miRNAs and the expres- lowed by capillary sequencing. sion of checkpoint mRNAs in bladder cancer. From 2013 we have performed the screening of KRAS Materials & Methods: Three cell lines: MGHU4, 5637 exon 2 for 550 patients suffering from advanced CRC. To andSW1710(lowtohighlevelofgenomeinstability),were ourknowledge,thisistheﬁrstRomaniancasereportedwith used as a model of bladder cancer. The expression was coexistence of two different somatic mutations, in an early analysed using RT-PCR, statistical and graphical analyses stage of colorectal carcinoma. One mutation was detected (Spearman Rho correlation, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR) and conﬁrmed in codon 12 as c.34G>T (p.Gly12Cys). The were performed using R tools and XLstat. other mutation was detected in codon 13 but could not be Results: The expression of most checkpoint genes is conﬁrmed by capillary sequencing, being probably under positivelycorrelatedtotheexpressionofanyotheranalysed LOD, which is 20% in our laboratory. Based on checkpoint gene. The expression level of miRNAs is epidemiological data, KRAS mutations in adenoma stage negatively correlated with several checkpoint genes, show- representsaveryrareeventcomparedwithadenocarcinoma inghighlevelofheterogeneitybetweencelllines.Thereisa stage. Our results suggest the need for KRAS exon negative correlation between genome instability within the 2 screening even in early stages of colorectal cancer, cell line and expression of mir-15b. contributing in this way to effective selection of CRC Conclusions: Many checkpoint genes are co-expressed patients prior to personalising treatment decision. together and the expression of mir-15a and miR-15b is P. Apostol: None. S. Dinu: None. P. Gurban: None. F. negatively correlated with them. This suggests that these Iordache: None. D. Blendea: None. G. Cardos: None. miRNA negatively regulate the expression of checkpoint genes at the synapse, at the post-transcriptional level. The P12.114B expression level of checkpoint genes together with their Pathogenic alterations in advanced HPV-negative cell interconnections might be crucial for successful immu- squamous laryngeal carcinoma revealed by Next notherapy. Revealing such novel interconnections may aid Generation Sequencing in the development of new diagnostic tools, outcome predictors or immunotherapeutic drugs or combinations S. Giragosyan1,T. Popov2,V. Petkova1, G.Stancheva1, thereof. D.Kachakova1,K.Mihova1,J. Rangachev2,V. Mitev1, P. Dobosz: None. P.A. Stempor: None. A. Layani: D.Popova2,R. Kaneva1 None. T. Meninghier: None. D. Avni: None. Y. Sidi: None. R. Leibowitz-Amit: None. 1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical ChemistryandBiochemistry,MedicalUniversity–Soﬁa,Soﬁa, P12.112D Bulgaria, 2Clinic of ENT, Department of ENT, UMHAT A rare case of colorectal cancer with coexistance of two “Tsaritsa Yoanna-ISUL”, Medical University – Soﬁa, Soﬁa, different KRAS mutations Bulgaria P. Apostol1, S.Dinu1, P.Gurban1,F. Iordache1,D.Blendea2, Introduction: There is still no enough data on the genetic G.Cardos1 alterations in laryngeal squamous cell cancer (LSCC), detected by NGS. The aim of our study was to explore the 1Personal Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Targu-Jiu County somatic status of patients, diagnosed with advanced lar- Hospital, Targu-Jiu, Romania yngeal carcinoma by NGS techniques and its clinical impact. Driving mutations in the RAS genes represent a negative Methods: In the current study were included 38 HPV- predictor for personalized treatment decision in patients negative patients with advanced LSCC. The isolated DNA with colorectal cancer (CRC). Although mutations in these was used for Next Generation Sequencing of 48 tumour- genes are mutually exclusive, few cases (2%) have been associated genes (TSACP) by MiSeq (Illumina). The data describedwithcoexistenceoftwodifferentmutationsinthe was analyzed by VarSeq Software (v.1.4.6).Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 435 Results: The results showed 60 pathogenic mutations in been shown that they are through the effect of thymoqui- 23 tumour associated genes. The most commonly mutated none. Introducing the apoptotic activity of thymoquinone genewasTP53,with28(46.67%)variantswithpathogenic on laryngeal cancer provides basis to investigate the ther- prediction. We found 7 new pathogenic variants in TP53 apeutic efﬁcacy of this ingredient. gene in 7 patients. The second most mutated genes were Materials and Methods: The apoptotic effect of PIK3CAand FBWX7 with4pathogenic variants each. We thymoquinone on the laryngeal cancer cell line was found all together 27 (45%) non published variants with determined by MTT and Sulphurodamine B cytotoxicity pathogenic predictions in CDH1, CDKN2A, ERBB4, tests. Its effect on the mutant KRAS gene transfected cells FBXW7, NOTCH1, PIK3CA, SMARCB1, TP53, FGFR2, wasobservedthroughMTTandintracellularATPanalysis. FLT3, GNAQ, GNAS, KRD, NRAS, SMAD4, STK11, Results: Thymoquinone has cytotoxic effect on the VHL genes. One benign and known pathogenic variants, laryngeal cancer cells and cell death was decreased in the relevanttocancertreatment,werefoundinKRAS,PIK3CA cells carryingmutation in thecoding region of KRAS gene. and TP53. However, cell death increase was observed in cells having Conclusion: In conclusion, molecular proﬁling of mutation in the coding and non-coding region of laryngeal cancer with NGS could reveal the genetic KRAS gene. architecture of LSCC and offer opportunities for prediction Conclusions: It was observed that thymoquinone inter- of response to existing target therapies and ﬁnding new acts with KRAS oncogene. therapeutictargets,whichisastepforwardinindividualized V.B.Yenigun:None.H.Acar:None.T.Cora:None.A. medicine. Yenigun: None. A. Kocyigit: None. Acknowledgements:ThisworkwassupportedbyGrants 550/21.01.2016/Contract №30/2016/MU-Soﬁa; DUNK01/ P12.116D 2/2009/NSF. Expression of LINC01330,long intergenic non-protein S. Giragosyan: None. T. Popov: None. V. Petkova: coding RNA 1330, in serous ovarian carcinoma None. G. Stancheva: None. D. Kachakova: None. K. Mihova: None. J. Rangachev: None. V. Mitev: None. D. S. ValehSheida1,S. Mowla1,S.Azizmohamadi2 Popova: None. R. Kaneva: None. 1TMU, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Hajar Hospital, P12.115C Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Investigation of thymoquinone effect on laryngeal cancer cells with KRAS mutant Introduction: Among common cancers in women, ovarian cancer has the lowest incidence; however, mortality rates V. B.Yenigun1,2,H.Acar3, T.Cora2,A. Yenigun4,A. Kocyigit1 aremorethanothergynecologicalcancersduetothelackof speciﬁc symptoms during early stages and absence of 1BezmialemVakifUniversity,FacultyofMedicine,Department diagnostic markers. Comparative genomic hybridization ofMedical Biochemistry, Istanbul,Turkey, 2Selcuk University, (CGH) demonstrated high frequency of 3q25-26 copy FacultyofMedicine,DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Konya, number gains (CNGs) in ovarian carcinomas. Serous Turkey, 3Diagen Biotechnology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Bezmialem papillarycarcinomaasacommontypeofepithelialovarian Vakif University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of cancer shows singular copy number variations (CNV) of Otorhinolaryngology, Istanbul, Turkey thisregion.Thischromosomalregioncontainsmanyprotein coding genes and some of them have an oncogenic role, Introduction: Larynx cancer constitutes about 2% of all including PIK3CA, Sox2, and HTERC. LINC01330 cancersand25%ofheadandneckcancers.KRASoncogene (LRRC77P) which is a Pseudogene, located in this con- is a member of the RAS gene family. When KRAS is troversialregionandledustomake moreextensivestudies mutated, the gene functions as "open" as a result. KRAS of its expression alteration in serous ovarian cancer. mutationhasbeenshowntobeeffectiveinthedevelopment According to following study, LINC01330 has shown a ofheadandneckcancer.Phyto-therapypracticesaresubject remarkable change. to rapid cancer research in the world. Since active ingre- Materials and Methods: In this study, expression of dientsofmanydrugsareplantoriginal,theinteresttoplants LINC01330 was evaluated in fresh frozen tissues. Total increases. Many plants used in the early conventional RNAwasisolatedfromthetissuesandcDNAsynthesiswas treatments have become the subject of numerous important performed. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR technique was used molecular research studies. Thymoquinone is one of the andthevalidityofPCRproductswasdeterminedbySanger activeingredientsofNigellasativaknownalsoastheblack sequencing. The expression level of LINC01330 was cumin. Many of the biological effects of these seeds have evaluated by real-time PCR. Result: Our ﬁnding revealed436 J.delPicchia the down-expression of LINC01330 in tumor tissues orpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics.M.Ioannides:A. (P<0.01). Down-expression was 2.5 times less in tumor Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. group in comparison to control group. A. Achilleos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- Conclusion:Lackofspeciﬁcmarkersinovariancanceris cant; NIPD Genetics. P. Mina: A. Employment (full or the vital barrier against early detection and ﬁnding part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. K. Tsangaras: A. molecular markers with speciﬁc expression alteration will Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. help us for better diagnosis. Therefore LINC01330 can be E. Kypri: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; proposed as an effective and sensitive biomarker. NIPD Genetics. G. Koumbaris: A. Employment (full or S. Valeh Sheida: None. S. Mowla: None. S. part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. P.C. Patsalis: A. Azizmohamadi: None. Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. P12.117A P12.118B Development of a noninvasive method for assessing MonitoringtheEGFRT790Mmutationinliquidbiopsyin circulating tumour DNA in patients with solid tumours patients with lung cancer A. Eliades,C. Loizides,M. Ioannides, A.Achilleos, P. Mina, G.Cardos1,R. Motoc1,D.G.N.Leonte1,2,G.Simion1,3, K. Tsangaras,E.Kypri, G.Koumbaris, P. C.Patsalis P. Gurban1, F.Iordache1,4, P.Iorga3,P. P.Apostol1 NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus 1Personal Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2National Pneumology Institute "M.Nasta", Bucharest, Romania, Introduction: It is estimated that more than 14 million 3Emergency University Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, people are diagnosed with cancer each year. In 2012, over 4Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "Nicolae 583,000 deaths were caused by lung, colorectal, breast, SImionescu", Bucharest, Romania prostate,andovariancanceraccountingforover45%ofall cancer-relateddeathsinEurope.Currentdiagnosticmethods MolecularEGFRanalysisfromliquidbiopsyisincreasingly rely on molecular and histopathology results derived from being used to monitor response to tyrosine kinase inhibitor invasive tissue biopsy, which has several inherent draw- (TKIs) therapy in lung cancer patients. backs;itistime-intensive,costlyandnotalwaysaccessible. Our ongoing study aimed to monitor the EGFR T790M Furthermore, it is associated with risks to the patient while mutation status in patients with non-small cell lung cancer localised sampling misses cancer heterogeneity. However, (NSCLC), which is the most common mechanism of circulating tumour DNA(ctDNA)inplasma mayprovidea resistance to TKIs. novel non-invasive means for early cancer detection, diag- The molecular EGFR analysis was performed by real- nosis, and monitoring not otherwise possible with conven- timePCRonplasmaDNAcollectedfrom34patients(aged tional testing. 33-81 years) with advanced NSCLC, who received EGFR- Materials and Methods: We developed an assay based TKIs therapy based on EGFR activating mutation detected on a proprietary form of targeted in-solution hybridisation at diagnosis (by the same method, applied on DNA for the detection of somatic mutations in the patient’s extracted from FFPE tissues between 2012-2017). Blood plasma. A total of 523 driver and clinically actionable samples were collected from patients at the time of disease mutations across 49 genes are targeted. Reference material progression(3-58months,medianof13.5months)afterthe was used for the proof of concept study and plasma and initial EGFR analysis (exon 19 deletion (19del) in 27 matched-tissue samples from non-metastatic breast cancer patients, L858R mutation in 7 patients and S768I mutation patients were used for pre-clinical validation. in 1 patient). Additionally, the initial EGFR activating Results: Our proof of concept study exhibited LOD mutationwas also detectedinliquidbiopsy in28(82.35%) between 0.1-1% MAF. Preliminary experiments with patients(21with 19del, 6 with L858R mutation and1 with clinical samples from patients with breast cancer showed S768I mutation). concordance of the mutational proﬁle of the tissue and Our results suggested that the EGFR T790M mutation matched plasma. occurs more frequently in NSCLC patients with EGFR Conclusions:WeaimtousecirculatingcellfreeDNAas 19del than in patients with L858R, possibly due to the fact abiomarkercoupledwithourtargetedNGS-basedapproach that EGFR 19del mutants of NSCLC have a distinct to develop a liquid biopsy assay that provides safe and biological phenotype that would favor the acquisition of highly accurate non-invasive testing for solid cancers. T790M mutation, as other literature studies have A. Eliades: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- hypothesized. niﬁcant;NIPDGenetics.C.Loizides:A.Employment(fullAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 437 Ourresultsarepotentiallyimportantforclinicaldecision- supported by the "Biomedical Center Martin (BioMed making in NSCLC patients with EGFR mutation. Study on Martin)" ITMS code 26220220187 project which is co- larger group of NSCLC patients is ongoing to establish a ﬁnanced from EU sources and by the Slovak Research and certain statistical signiﬁcance. Development Agency under the contracts no.APVV-16- G. Cardos: None. R. Motoc: None. D.G.N. Leonte: 0066 and no. APVV-14-0273. None. G. Simion: None. P. Gurban: None. F. Iordache: T. Burjanivova: None. B. Malicherova: None. M. None. P. Iorga: None. P.P. Apostol: None. Grendar: None. E. Minarikova: None. M. Bobrovska: None.B.Vanova:None.I.Kasubova:None.E.Jezkova: P12.119C None. I. Homola: None. T. Pecova: None. Z. Lasabova: DetectionofBRAFV600EmutationbydropletdigitalPCR None. L. Plank: None. in plasma of patients with malignant melanoma P12.121A T.Burjanivova1,B.Malicherova1,M.Grendar2,E.Minarikova3, Identiﬁcation of tumor suppressor microRNAs by M.Bobrovska4, B.Vanova1,I.Kasubova1, E.Jezkova5, integrative miRNA and mRNA sequencing of matched I.Homola6, T.Pecova3,Z. Lasabova1,L. Plank7 tumor normal pairs in lung adenocarcinoma 1Biomedical Center Martin JFM CU, Division of Oncology n. yu1, s.yong1,y.jung1,y. lee1,j. seo1,j.kim1, j.kim2,s.lee1 JFM CU, Martin, Slovakia, 2Biomedical Center Martin JFM CU,Bioinformatic unit, Martin, Slovakia, 3Clinic of 1Ewha Woman's University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, Dermatovenerology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine and 2Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, University Hospital in Martin, Martin, Slovakia, 4Department Republic of of Pathological Anatomy, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine and UniversityHospitalinMartin,,Martin,Slovakia,5Department RolesofmicroRNAs(miRNAs)havenotyetbeenexplored of Histology and Embryology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, systematically at the genome scale in lung cancer biology Comenius University in Bratislava, Martin, Slovakia, despitetheirimportantregulatoryfunctions.Here,wereport 6DepartmentofPlasticSurgery,JesseniusFacultyofMedicine an integrative analysis of microRNA and mRNA sequen- and University Hospital in Martin, Martin, Slovakia, cing data for the matched tumor and normal samples from 7Department of Pathological Anatomy, Jessenius Faculty of 110 Korean female patients with non-small-cell lung ade- Medicine and University Hospital in Martin,Division of nocarcinoma.WeproducedmiRNA-SeqandRNA-Seqdata Oncology JFM CU, Martin, Slovakia for 49 patients and RNA-Seq data only for additional 61 patients. Differential expression analysis with stringent Introduction:Melanomaisthemostaggresiveformofskin criteria yielded 44 miRNAs and 2,322 genes. Integrative cancer. About 50% of melanomas have BRAF V600Emu- gene set analysis of differentially expressed miRNAs and tation. This mutation is an attractive therapeutic target. genes using miRNA-target information yielded several Detection of BRAF V600E mutation is a potential prog- processes related to cell cycle regulation that were targeted nostic factor in malignant melanoma. Here, we studied by tumor suppressor miRNAs. We performed the colony BRAF V600E mutations in circulating cell-free DNA in formationassayinA549andNCI-H460celllinestotestthe plasma (,,liquid biopsy“) by droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). tumor suppressive activity of down-regulated miRNAs in Materials and Methods:We analyzed100patients with cancer and identiﬁed 7 novel tumor suppressor miRNAs malignant melanoma. Circulating DNA from plasma was (miR-144-5p, miR-218-1-3p, miR-223-3p, miR-27a-5p, isolated by using QIAamp DSP Virus Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, miR-30a-3p,miR-30c-2-3p,miR-338-5p).TwomiRNAsof Germany). DNA quantiﬁcation was performed in a Qubit miR-30a-3pandmiR-30c-2-3pshoweddifferentialsurvival 2.0ﬂuorometer.ddPCRwasperformedwithQX200system characteristics in the TCGA LUAD patient cohort, sug- (BIO-RAD®, Hercules, USA). All samples were tested in gesting their prognostic value. Our study not only provides duplicate. a massive dataset of miRNA and mRNA sequencing from Results: The Limit of Detection was determined by the the matched tumor-normal samples but also reports several method of Tzonev. The LOD was found to be 5 events per novel tumor suppressor miRNAs that could be further well. The BRAF V600E mutation was detected in 37/ developed into prognostic biomarkers or RNA therapeutic 100 samples. targets. Conclusion: ddPCR is a highly sensitive method and N. yu: None. S. yong: None. Y. jung: None. Y. lee: could be use for routine laboratory detection of BRAF None. J. seo: None. J. kim: None. J. kim: None. S. V600Emutationaswellasfollow-uptotreatmentresponse lee: None. in patients with malignant melanomas. This work was438 J.delPicchia P12.122B S. BOONVISUT1,T. Suriyo2,S. Chotirat2, N.Triphutidet3 Germline mutations in young non-smoking women with lung adenocarcinoma 1Chulabhorn Graduate Institute, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Chulabhorn Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand, I.Donner1,R. Katainen1,L. J.Sipilä1,M.Aavikko1, 3Chulabhon Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand E. Pukkala2,3,L. A.Aaltonen1 Introduction: Several risk factors of lung cancer were 1Department of medical and clinical genetics, Medicum, and known, for example; air pollutions, smoking and genetic Genome-scale biology research program, Research programs variations. However, the information about environmental- unit, Faculty of medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, gene interaction associated with lung cancer in Thai popu- Finland, 2Finnish cancer registry, Institute for statistical and lationislimited.Recentgenomewideassociationstudiesin epidemiological cancer research, Helsinki, Finland, 3Faculty Europeans identiﬁed a few regions related to lung cancer of social sciences, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland susceptibility including 15q25.1 region, containing nico- tinic acetylcholine receptor genes. This study aimed to Objectives: Although the primary cause of lung cancer is investigate the association between genetic variations, smoking, a considerable proportion of all lung cancers exposure to environmental risk factor and lung cancer occur in never smokers. Gender inﬂuences the risk and occurredinThailand,andforfurtherstudyofsomeclinical characteristics of lung cancer and women are over- signiﬁcance, the onset of disease evaluation in heavy represented among never smokers with the disease. Young smokers, and the prognosis in lung cancer. age at onset and lack of established environmental risk Materials and Methods: Participants were recruited factors suggest genetic predisposition. In this study, we from healthy volunteers, heavy smokers and lung cancer used whole population-based sampling of the youngest patients who attended hospitals in Bangkok from 2012- patients in Finland to discover candidate predisposition 2016.Allsampleswereexaminedserumheavymetallevels variantsforlungadenocarcinomainnever-smokingwomen. and genotyped for CHRNA3, CHRNA5, and CHRNB4 Materials and Methods: We employed archival tissue polymorphisms such as rs1051730, rs6495309, material from 21 never-smoker women who had been rs16969968, and rs17486278 using TaqMan Genotyping diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma before the age of 45, Assay Systems. The association between each minor allele and exome sequenced their germline DNA. frequencies and lung cancer and heavy metal levels were Results and Conclusion: Potentiallypathogenic variants assessed by logistic regression analysis. Age, sex, and were found in eight Cancer Gene Census germline genes: smoking consumption were included as covariates. Haplo- BRCA1, BRCA2, ERCC4, EXT1, HNF1A, PTCH1, typefrequencieswerecalculatedandLDblocksweredrawn SMARCB1 and TP53. A nonsense variant in TP53, and by Haploview software. missensevariantsinBRCA1andBRCA2,arelikelytohave Results and Conclusions: CHRNA5 polymorphism contributed to the early onset lung cancer in the respective showed association with both nicotinic consumption and patients.Thissupportsthenotionthatlungadenocarcinoma riskforlungcancerdevelopmentaswellinThaipopulation. can be a component of certain cancer predisposition Heavy metal levels was different between groups of syndromes. Fifteen genes displayed potentially pathogenic patients,howevertheassociationbetweennicotinicreceptor mutations in at least two patients: ABCC10, ATP7B, polymorphisms and heavy metal metabolism should be CACNA1S, CFTR, CLIP4, COL6A1, COL6A6, GCN1, exploredwithlargerstudies.ThestructureofLDblockwill GJB6, RYR1, SCN7A, SEC24A, SP100, TTN and USH2A. be shown in the poster. Four patients showed a mutation in COL6A1, three in S. Boonvisut: None. T. Suriyo: None. S. Chotirat: CLIP4 and two in the rest of the genes. Some of these None. N. Triphutidet: None. candidate genes may explain a subset of female lung adenocarcinoma predisposition. P12.124D I.Donner:None.R.Katainen:None.L.J.Sipilä:None. Analysisofsomaticmutationsinlungcancerwithtargeted M. Aavikko: None. E. Pukkala: None. L.A. next generation sequencing Aaltonen: None. V. Y.Petkova1,A. Mitkova1,D.Kachakova1,G.Stancheva1, P12.123C K. Mihova1, D.Marinova2,3,Y. Slavova-Marinova2,4,V. Mitev1, CHRNA3, CHRNA5 and CHRNB4 Polymorphisms R. Kaneva1 MappingandCorrelationwithLungCancerSusceptibility in Thai Population 1MolecularMedicineCenter,DepartmentofMedicalChemistry and Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2ClinicalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 439 Center for Lung Diseases, Medical Faculty, Medical S. Bonﬁglio1,D.Cittaro1,I. Vanni2,D.Lazarevic1,M. Mora3, University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Department of V. Rossella4,C. Genova2,A. Truini2,M.G.DalBello2, Bronchology,UniversityHospitalforPulmonaryDiseases“St. E. Rijavec2,F. Grossi2,S. Coco2 Soﬁa", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathomorphology, UniversityHospitalforPulmonaryDiseases“St.Soﬁa",Soﬁa, 1Centre for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, Bulgaria IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Lung Cancer Unit, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Introduction: Small cell lung cancer(SCLC), adenocarci- Genoa, Italy, 3Department of Pathology, IRCCS Ospedale noma(ADC)andsquamouscelllungcarcinoma(SCC)could Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy, 4Swiss Stem Cell be discriminated at molecular level by speciﬁc “driver Biotech, Vacallo, Switzerland mutations”inmanytumour-associatedgenes.Targetednext generation sequencing(NGS) allows simultaneous analysis Introduction: About 10% of women with breast cancer of many genes and more complete characterization of the (BC) develop a second unrelated tumor including lung somatic mutations in tumours. cancer (LC). The risk increases in radiotherapy-treated Materials and Methods: In the current study DNA patientsandinsmokers.Sincethecurrentradiotherapydoes isolatedfromfresh-frozentumourtissuesof12patientswith not fully justify this risk, we hypothesize that genetic pre- ADC, 12 with SCC and 13 SCLC were included. Hotspot disposition could enhance LC development and performed somaticmutationsinapanelof48tumour-associatedgenes whole exome sequencing to unravel it. (TSACP)wereanalysedbyNGSplatformMiSeq(Illumina). Materials and Methods: At Ospedale Policlinico San Results: The performed analysis showed 23 pathogenic Martino, Genova, 28 women with LC after BC (Study variantsinADCsamples.Themostfrequentlymutatedgene Population, SP) and 32 women with BC only (Control was TP53 with 12 pathogenic mutations(52,17%).Eight Population, CP) were enrolled. Genomic DNA was activating mutations(34,78%) were found in KRAS. Other extracted from FFPE tumor and normal samples. Libraries pathogenic variants were observed in APC,RB1,BRAF with were prepared with Agilent SureSelect All Exon and frequency of 4,35% each.In SCC samples 21 pathogenic sequenced on Illumina HiSeq 2500. Variant calling was variants were detected:12 variants in TP53(57,14%),5 performed with FreeBayes. Somatic signatures were activating mutations in KRAS(23.82%) and mutations in calculated on all nucleotidic substitutions and burden tests the genes GNAS,PIK3CA,SMO,STK11 with frequency of were computed using WSS and C-α statistics. 4,76%each.InSCLC23pathogenicvariantswereobserved. Results: Two mutational signatures were extracted: S1, The most frequently mutated gene was TP53 with 12 similar to COSMIC-S30 (unknown etiology), included all pathogenicvariants(52,17%),followedbyRb1(30,76%)and SP-BCand16/28LC; S2, enriched in12/28 LC,positively BRAF, EGFR,FGFR2,NOTCH1,PIC3CA,PTPN1, correlated with smoking and matched with COSMIC-S4, SMARCB1 with one mutation each-(4,35%). Around 50% linked to tobacco use. These signatures may reﬂect two of all analysed samples harboured more than 1 pathogenic distinct mutagenic processes underlying LC development: mutation. smokingcouldhaveplayedamajorroleinS2-LCsubgroup Conclusion:OurresultssuggestthattheNGSanalysisof while genetic predisposition could enhance LC develop- lungcancerusingapaneloftumour-associatedgenesisable ment in S1-LC patients. Therefore, we performed a gene- to detect somatic mutations that are currently used as based burden test over rare germline variants in S1-LC predictive biomarkers for targeted therapies.In addition it versus CP and we identiﬁed 249 candidate genes reveals the spectra of speciﬁc “driver” mutations and (FDR<0.05). provides opportunities for the discovery of new therapeutic Conclusions:Ourresultsshowtwomutationalsignatures targets and personalized treatment. Acknowledgements: underlying LC development. Germline data validation step This work was supported by Grants 508/21.01.2016/ is ongoing to conﬁrm them in an independent cohort. Contract №24/2016/MU-Soﬁa;DUNK01/2/2009/NSF. ItalianMinistryofHealthsupportedthiswork(GR-2011- V.Y. Petkova: None. A. Mitkova: None. D. Kacha- 02350922). kova: None. G. Stancheva: None. K. Mihova: None. D. S. Bonﬁglio: None. D. Cittaro: None. I. Vanni: None. Marinova:None.Y.Slavova-Marinova:None.V.Mitev: D. Lazarevic: None. M. Mora: None. V. Rossella: None. None. R. Kaneva: None. C. Genova: None. A. Truini: None. M.G. Dal Bello: None.E.Rijavec:None.F.Grossi:None.S.Coco:None. P12.125A Whole exome sequencing to discover lung tumor P12.126B predisposition in women with previous breast cancer Birth order affects risk of multiple lymphoid cancers and allergies in lymphoid cancer families440 J.delPicchia S. J.Jones1,2,O.S.Uvarov3,D.Salema1, J.M.Connors4, 1Our Lady's Children's Hospital Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland, A. Brooks-Wilson1,3 2National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland, 3Cork University Hospital, Cork, Ireland 1BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Pathogenic variants in mismatch repair genes MLH1, 3Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada, 4British MSH2,MSH6,PMS2andmorerarelyEPCAMcauseLynch Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada syndrome (LS), conferring variable risks of endometrial, colorectal, upper gastro-intestinal, urinary and biliary tract Introduction:Lymphoidcancersareaheterogeneousgroup cancers, depending on gene and type of variant. Evidence of neoplasms that arise from immune cells. Familial clus- for associations between LS and Breast Cancer is conﬂict- tering of lymphomas support a genetic contribution to ing1,witharecentreportsuggestingtheriskmaybelimited cancer predisposition; however, infectious diseases and the to pathogenic variants in MSH6 or PMS22. We report a immune system have also been implicated. The hygiene female patient with multi-focal breast cancer associated hypothesis proposes that a lower infectious burden during with a germline variant in MSH2. A 37-year old female, early life inhibits the immune system from maturing opti- presented with multifocal, ER-positive, invasive ductal mally. Consequently,suchindividualsaremore susceptible breastcancer.Herfather(deceased)developedcoloncancer to atopic disorders, including allergies and autoimmune at 37 years of age. Analysis of his tumour identiﬁed disease, and some lymphoid cancers. microsatellite instability, and immunohistochemical (IHC) Methods: We characterized atopic conditions in lym- analysis identiﬁed absent staining for MSH2 and MSH6 phoid affected sibships of 182 families with a history of proteins. IHC of our patient’s breast tumour conﬁrmed lymphoid cancers. Early life data was collected from mismatch repair deﬁciency, and subsequent germline test- telephone interviews and questionnaires from multiple ingidentiﬁedalikely pathogenicsplice-site variant (c.2210 family members. +1G>C) in MSH2. We have objectively demonstrated a Results:314sibshipshad405lymphoidaffectedand927 clear causal relationship between an MSH2 variant and unaffected siblings. An inverse relationship between birth breast cancer in one individual. Considering the frequency order and risk of cancer was observed for all lymphoid of breast cancer, it is unsurprising that a proportion of cancerscollectively(p<0.0001),andseparatelyformultiple families with LS include members affected by the condi- myeloma (p=0.0015), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (p<- tion. We plan to analyse pedigrees of other Irish families 0.0001) and individual B-cell subtypes, including chronic with LS to further elucidate the frequency of breast cancer lymphocytic leukemia (p=0.0124), follicular (p=0.0217) in this cohort. The penetrance of such variants for breast and marginal zone lymphoma (p=0.0169). We also cancerisunclear,andadditionalsurveillanceforthiscancer observed an inverse relationship between birth order and in this population may not be cost-effective. 1. Win et al., risk of allergies (p=0.0284), for both environmental BreastCancerResearch,2013,2.Robertsetal.,Geneticsin allergies (p=0.0465) and multiple allergies (p=0.0114) in Medicine, 2018 lymphoid affected individuals. M. Duff: None. N. Cody: None. T.P. McVeigh: None. Conclusions:Childhoodexposurestoinfectiousdiseases C. Clabby: None. S. O'Reilly: None. A.J. Green: None. may play a role in immune dysregulation and subsequent risk of multiple types of lymphoid cancers, and allergies. P12.128D The familial nature of the cancers implies shared genetic Comprehensive genotypic and phenotypic characterization and/or environmental factors. There is a need for further of heterozygous versus homozygous MMR gene mutation evaluation of lifestyle factors that may protect against carriers in an Indian cohort lymphoid cancers even in the familial context. S.J. Jones: None. O.S. Uvarov: None. D. Salema: A. Lipsa1,2, R.R. Kunduru3,R. Sarin1,2 None. J.M. Connors: None. A. Brooks-Wilson: None. 1Sarin Lab, Advanced Centre for Treatment Research and P12.127C Education in Cancer (ACTREC), Tata Memorial Centre Breast cancer in Irish patients with Lynch syndrome (TMC), Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, India, 2Homi Bhabha National Intitute (HBNI), Mumbai, India, 3Cancer Genetics M.Duff1,N.Cody1,T. P. McVeigh2,C. Clabby1,S.O'Reilly3, Clinic, Tata Memorial Hospital, TMC, Parel, India A. J.Green1 Introduction: MMR gene mutations when heterozygous cause adult onset autosomal dominant Lynch Syndrome (LS), in homozygous state they cause autosomal recessiveAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 441 Constitutional MisMatch Repair Deﬁciency (CMMRD) somatic changes remain obscure. This study deﬁnes DNA syndrome characterized by a variety of childhood cancers methylation changes at different stages of LS-associated andcafé-au-laitspots.TheMMRgenemutationphenotype, CRC, and somatic mutations in adenomas. which is strikingly different depending on its zygosity, has Colorectalbiopsiesincludingnormalmucosae,adenomas not been described in any Asian population. and carcinomas were prospectively collected from 104 LS Method:Basedonpersonalandfamilyhistoryofcancer, patients,supplementedwithretrospectivetumorspecimens. phenotyping and tumour IHC, 50 LS and 10 CMMRD DNA methylation was analysed using methylation-speciﬁc familieswereidentiﬁed.OneormoreMMRgenes(MLH1, multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation test (MS- MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2) were sequenced followed by MLPA) for selected tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), for large genomic rearrangements (LGR) analysis. To avoid CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)-associated mar- pseudogene ampliﬁcation, long range PCR was done for kers, and LINE-1. Immunohistochemistry was used to PMS2.Ifnomutation/LGRwasidentiﬁedinthese4genes, detect MMR protein expression in tumors. As an ongoing extended gene panel test was done which included MLH3. study,mutationstatusesofadenomasareinvestigatedusing Result: In the 50 families with suspected LS, hetero- the Ion AmpliSeqTM Colon and Lung Cancer Panel. zygous pathogenic mutations (including 6 LGRs) were The MMR protein expression decreases along with detectedin46(92%)families(31-MLH1,14-MSH2and1- dysplasia but occurs relatively late in tumor progression, MSH6) and a homozygous MLH3 mutation in a 30 yr old suggesting other somatic events to drive tumorigenesis. femalewithendometrialcancer andfamilyhistoryofcolon MethylationofTSGsandfrequencyofCIMPincreasesand cancer. In the 10 CMMRD suspected families, biallelic LINE-1 methylation decreases in tumors along with germline PMS2 mutations were identiﬁed in 4 families dysplasia. In MMR-proﬁcient (MMR-P) and MMR- (novel homozygous frameshift mutations in 3, compound deﬁcient (MMR-D) adenomas, LINE-1 methylation heterozygous mutation in 1). decreases along the loss of MMR protein expression, and Conclusion: While phenotypic manifestations of hetero- interestingly, higher methylation of SFRP1 is observed in zygous MMR mutations are in concordance with previous MMR-P adenomas. Furthermore, certain CRC-associated reports, we expand the CMMRD spectrum with the ﬁrst somaticmutations(e.g.KRAS)appearprevalentinMMR-P report of an adult onset endometrial caner in a biallelic adenomas. MLH3 carrier.This largest singlecentrestudy ofCMMRD Concluding, similarly to sporadic CRC, early appearance suspected families identiﬁes a high prevalence of biallelic of epigenetic changes and somatic mutations are important PMS2 mutations. in LS-associated tumorigenesis. A.Lipsa:None.R.R.Kunduru:None.R.Sarin:None. Grant support: Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation, Academy of Finland, the Finnish Cancer Organizations, P12.129A the Sigrid Jusélius Foundation, and HiLIFE. DNA methylation changes and somatic mutations as early S. Mäki-Nevala: None. S. Valo: None. A. Ristimäki: events in Lynch syndrome-associated colorectal cancer None. V.K. Sarhadi: None. S. Knuutila: None. M. Nyström:None.L.Renkonen-Sinisalo:None.A.Lepistö: S. Mäki-Nevala1,S. Valo1, A.Ristimäki2,3,V. K. Sarhadi2, None. J. Mecklin: None. P. Peltomäki: None. S. Knuutila2,M.Nyström4,L. Renkonen-Sinisalo5, A.Lepistö5, J.Mecklin6,P. Peltomäki1 P12.130B High cancer risk in two cases of constitutional MLH1 1Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of epimutation Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Pathology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3HUSLAB, Helsinki M.T. Ricci1,D.Furlan2,A. M.Chiaravalli2,V. Pensotti3,4, University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of S. Volorio3,4,S. Signoroni1,M.Vitellaro1,M.G.Tibiletti2 Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Surgery, Helsinki University Hospital, 1HereditaryDigestiveTractTumoursUnit,FondazioneIRCCS Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Surgery, Central Finland Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy, 2Unit of CentralHospitalandUniversityofEasternFinland,Jyväskylä, Pathology,OspedalediCircoloASSTSettelaghi,Varese,Italy, Finland 3Cogentech Cancer Genetics Test Laboratory, Milano, Italy, 4IFOM, Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare, Lynch syndrome (LS) is caused by germline mutations in Milano, Italy DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes resulting in increased cancerrisk,includingcolorectalcancer(CRC).Earlyevents Introduction: Constitutional epigenetic inactivation of the of multistep tumorigenesis accelerated by germline and MLH1 gene represents a minor cause of Lynch syndrome442 J.delPicchia (LS), but the identiﬁcation of this condition is relevant for IRCCS, Padua, Italy, 11Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale cancer risk assessment and clinical management of the Tumori(INT),Milan,Italy,12CancerResearchandPrevention patients. We describe two cases of constitutional MLH1 Institute (ISPO), Florence, Italy, 13The FIRC (Italian hypermethylation without any apparent linked variants in Foundation for Cancer Research) Institute of Molecular the MLH1 promoter. Oncology, Milan, Italy Casedescriptions:A30-year-oldwomanwithcolorectal cancers (CRC) and a man with multiple cancers (urothelial Introduction: Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare disease, cancer at age 48, two CRCs at ages 59 and 69, sebaceous whose etiology appears to be associated with genetic fac- adenomas at age 61) referred to genetic counselling as tors. Inherited mutations in BRCA1/2 genes account for suspected for LS. The family history in both cases was about 10-15% of all cases. Biallelic germ-line mutations in negative for Amsterdam criteria. the DNA repair gene MUTYH cause MUTYH-associated All cancers but urothelial one of both patients showed polyposis(MAP)syndrome,whereasmonoallelicmutations high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) and loss of immu- are reported in families with both colorectal and breast nohistochemical MLH1/PMS2 protein expressions. No cancer. We aimed to test if MUTYH germ-line mutations germline MLH1 and PMS2 pathogenic variants were may contribute to MBC susceptibility. diagnosed using both NGS and MLPA technical Materials and Methods: We screened the entire coding approaches. regionofMUTYHin560MBCcasesbyamulti-genepanel Epigenetic somatic analyses were performed by bisulﬁte analysis. The presence of all variants detected was also pyrosequencing and MS-MLPA on all cancers and dense analyzed in 1540 male controls using a TaqMan approach. biallelic MLH1 methylation pattern was observed in all Results: Biallelic MUTYH pathogenic variants MSI-H neoplasms. Hemy-allelic methylation was detected (c.536A>G and c.721C>T) were identiﬁed in one case in peripheral blood samples of both patients and no with phenotypic manifestation of adenomatous polyposis. constitutional MLH1 methylation was observed in the Monoallelic pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in 14 parents of one patient. (2.5%) MBC cases, in particular: c.536A>G in 7 cases, Conclusions: The LS ﬂow-chart including somatic c.1187G>A in 5 cases, c.734G>A and c.933+3A>C in 1 genetic and epigenetic analyses is crucial for diagnosis of case, respectively. Increased MBC risk in association with this subset of Lynch-Like patients. The identiﬁcation of c.536A>Gemerged(OR=4.60;95%CI:1.19–17.81; p= constitutionalprimaryepimutationhasanimportantclinical 0.027). impact for carriers showing a high risk of developing LS- Conclusion:OurresultssuggestthatMUTYHpathogenic related cancers. On the contrary, their relatives, as it is not variants may have a role in MBC, in particular MUTYH an inherited condition, have a general population’s c.536A>G variant may be a low/moderate penetrance risk cancer risk. allele for MBC. Moreover, our results suggest that MBC M.T. Ricci: None. D. Furlan: None. A.M. Chiaravalli: may be part of the tumor spectrum associated with MAP None.V.Pensotti: None.S.Volorio:None.S.Signoroni: syndrome, with implications in the clinical management of None. M. Vitellaro: None. M.G. Tibiletti: None. the patients and their relatives. Study supported by AIRC (IG 16933) to L.O. P12.131C P. Rizzolo: None. V. Silvestri: None. A. Bucalo: None. Contribution of MUTYH variants to male breast cancer V. Zelli: None. V. Valentini: None. A. Spinelli: None. S. risk: results from a multicenter study in Italy Tommasi: None. M. Tibiletti: None. A. Russo: None. L. Varesco: None. G. Giannini: None. D. Calistri: None. L. P. Rizzolo1,V. Silvestri1,A. Bucalo1,V. Zelli1,V. Valentini1, Cortesi: None. A. Viel: None. M. Montagna: None. P. A. Spinelli2,S. Tommasi3, M.Tibiletti4,A. Russo5,L. Varesco6, Radice: None. D. Palli: None. P. Peterlongo: None. L. G.Giannini1,D.Calistri7,L.Cortesi8,A.Viel9,M.Montagna10, Ottini: None. P. Radice11,D.Palli12,P. Peterlongo13, L.Ottini1 P12.132D 1Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 2IRCCS, Burlo Garofolo, GERMLINE INVESTIGATION IN DNA REPAIR Trieste, Italy, 3Istituto Tumori, Bari, Italy, 4Ospedale di GENES OF MALE BREAST CANCER BY NEXT- Circolo, Varese, Italy, 5University, Palermo, Italy, 6IRCCS GENERATION SEQUENCING AOU San Martino, Genoa, Italy, 7Istituto Scientiﬁco RomagnoloperloStudioelaCuradeiTumori(IRST),Meldola M.A.Caligo1,R.Scarpitta1,G.Gambino1,P.Aretini2,B.Mei1, (FC), Italy, 8University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, K. Zavaglia1,E.Falaschi1, F.Bonci3, F.Bonci3, E.Landucci3, Modena, Italy, 9CRO Aviano, National Cancer Institute,, S.Gana4,C.Congregati4,M.Ghilli5,E.Rossetti5,G.Allegrini6, Aviano (PN), Italy, 10Veneto Institute of Oncology IOV - G.Arrighi6,I.Zanna7, M.Roncella5,A. Naccato8, D.Palli7Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 443 1SectionofMolecularGenetics,Pisa,Italy,2Lab.ofGenomics, 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy PisaScienceFoundation,Pisa,Italy,3MedicalOncology,Dep. of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.N. Blokhin ofOncology,Pisa,Italy,4Lab.ofMedicalGenetics,Pisa,Italy, Medical Research Center of Oncology, Moscow, Russian 5Dep. of Senology, Pisa, Italy, 6Dep. Of Oncology, ATNO, Federation Pontedera, Italy, 7Molecular and Nutritional Epidemiology Unit, Cancer Research and Prevention Institute (ISPO), Tumors continuously evolve to maintain their growth; sec- Firenze, Italy, 8Dep. of Pathology, Pisa, Italy ondary mutations increase the proliferation, resulting in high heterogeneity of tumor cells. To study the clonal Male breast cancer (MBC) isarare disease, itsincidenceis architecture of melanoma samples the whole-exome 1/105 year and it represents less than 1% of all breast can- sequencing of three patient’s primary tumors and meta- cers. MBC tends to occur between 60-70 years old and to chronous metastases was performed using NextSeq express oestrogen and progesterone receptors frequently. 500 system. Somatic mutations were annotated and clus- Subsequently, luminal subtype is the most common phe- tered based on their frequency. The clusters were ordered notypewithoccasionallyepidermalgrowthfactorreceptor2 regarding to their cellular prevalence to reconstruct the ampliﬁcation. The rarity of MBC has precluded the large tumor clonal evolution. One patient carried BRAF V600E clinical trials, thus genetic predisposition remains not well mutationinprimarytumorandinametastasisaftertargeted understood. In order to better deﬁne genetic risk factors in therapy with vemurafenib. Additional mutated genes in men,agermlineinvestigationinMBCcaseswasperformed metastatic cells were PMS2 (16%) and CYP21A2 (19%). throughthescreeningof24genesinvolvedinbreastcancer ThesecondpatienthadBRAFV600E(27%),PMS2c.706- predisposition, genome stability maintenance and DNA 4delT (23%), CTNNB1 c.95A>G (15%) both in tumor and repair mechanisms by Next Generation Sequencing. Clin- metastasis, but TERT c.835G>A was presented in 64% of ical pathological data and family history of 81 MBC cases primary tumor cells and only in 15% of metastasis. The werecollected.Theaverageageofonsetwas61.3yearsand third case was presented by tumor (M0) and three metas- 35menshowedbreastcancerfamilyhistory.Ourresultslet tasesdifferedbylocalizationandtimefrominitialdiagnosis us to attribute a genetic cause to breast cancer in 23% of (M1, M2,M3).BRAFV600Ewasidentiﬁedinall samples cases. In total, 19 patients carried a pathogenic mutation in except М1. However, in M1 the mutated MICAL1 gene 4genes:BRCA2,BRIP1, MUTYH andPMS2.Asexpected, waspresentedalmostinallcellscomparingwith4%inM0. a positive family history is a strong predictor of germline The MICAL1 gene is known to control cell growth and BRCA2 mutations. Moreover, 14 variants of unknown survival of V600E melanoma cells. The last in time M3 clinical signiﬁcance (VUS) in 9 genes (BARD1, BRCA1, carried additional somatic mutations in ANK3, DCDC1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CHEK2, ERCC1, NBN, PALB2, PMS1) STAB2, FLT1, ZNF638, ACVR1C, SNAP91 genes. Thus, were predicted as potentially pathogenic by in-silico ana- reconstruction of tumor clonal evolution is important for lysis leading to 40% the mutation detection rate. Under- understandingfurthertumorprogressionandmechanismsof standing the potential pathogenicity of VUS represents an resistancetoanticancertherapy.Theworkwassupportedby extremely urgent question for the implementation of breast the Russian Science Foundation (grant # 14−35-00107). cancer risk management in MBC cases and their own T. Nasedkina: None. I. Abramov: None. G. Krasnov: families. None. M. Emelyanova: None. O. Ryabaya: None. K. M.A. Caligo: None. R. Scarpitta: None. G. Gambino: Orlova: None. L. Demidov: None. None.P.Aretini:None.B.Mei:None.K.Zavaglia:None. E. Falaschi: None. F. Bonci: None. F. Bonci: None. E. P12.134B Landucci: None. S. Gana: None. C. Congregati: None. Newfamilialmelanomasusceptibilitylocusat11qidentiﬁed M. Ghilli: None. E. Rossetti: None. G. Allegrini: None. by genome-wide linkage analysis in Spanish melanoma- G.Arrighi:None.I.Zanna:None.M.Roncella:None.A. prone families Naccato: None. D. Palli: None. C.Badenas1,2,M.Potrony2,3,J.Puig-Butille1,2,J.M.Farnham4, P12.133A P. Gimenez-Xavier3,2,G.Tell-Marti2,3,P. Aguilera3,2, Intratumoral heterogeneity of melanoma as revealed by C. Carrera3,2, J.Malvehy3,2,C. C. Teerlink4,S.Puig3,2 whole-exome sequencing 1Servei de Bioquimica i Genetica Molecular. Hospital Clinic T. Nasedkina1,I. Abramov1,G.Krasnov1,M.Emelyanova1, de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion O.Ryabaya2,K. Orlova2,L. Demidov2 Biomedica en Red en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona,Spain,3DermatologyDepartment.MelanomaUnit. Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Universitat de444 J.delPicchia Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Division of Genetic MicroRNAs are short, non coding RNAs. Aberrant Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, University of Utah expression of miRs is observed in numerous cancers, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, United States leading to tumor development, growth and progression. With use of the next-generation sequencing we discovered, Melanomaetiologyiscomplexandinvolvesenvironmental, a putative non-coding RNA (miR-TG) encoded within the phenotypic and genetic factors. Approximately 10% of sequence of thyroglobulin (TG). In silico and in vitro ana- melanoma cases occur in a familial context, but the main lysis conﬁrmed that putative miR-TG is microRNA. Next, genetic factors for familial melanoma remain unknown in thedownregulation ofmiR-TGand TGinpapillary thyroid morethan 75%offamilies. CDKN2Aismutated inaround carcinoma (PTC) was conﬁrmed. The expression of the 20% of melanoma-prone families, while other high-risk novel miR-TG and TG was decreased to 44% (p=0.04) melanoma susceptibility genes explain less than 3% of and to 48% (p=0.001) in PTC compared with unaffected families studied to date.We performed the ﬁrst genome- tissue.UsinginsilicotoolsweidentiﬁedMAP4K4astarget wide linkage analysis in CDKN2A-negative Spanish geneformiR-TG.Toconﬁrmdirectinteractionbetweenthe melanoma-prone families to identify novel melanoma sus- miR-TG and 3’UTR MAP4K4 the Dual Luciferase System ceptibilityloci.Weincluded68individualsfrom2,3and6 was used. Analysis of transcriptome by RNA-seq proved families with 2, 3 and at least 4 melanoma cases. Subjects that overexpression of miR-TG in PTC-derived cell line were genotyped on either the HumanOmni2.5 (Illumina) downregulates several genes, including MAP4K4 (fold array versions v1.0 (81% of subjects) or v1.1 (19% of change 0.82; p=0.036). We conﬁrmed this result by SQ- subjects).We detected a locus with signiﬁcant linkage evi- PCR. The level of MAP4K4 was lowered to 0.71 (p= dence at 11q14.1-q14.3, with a maximum het-TLOD of 0.004). PTC-derived cell line transfected with miR-TG 3.449 (rs12285365:A>G), using evidence from multiple reveals increased proliferation.We propose that miR-TG pedigrees. The genes contained by the subregion with the playsaﬁne-tunningroleinproperfunctionofthyroidgland strongest linkage evidence were: DLG2, PRSS23, FZD4 and its downregulation potentially can lead to activation of and TMEM135. We also detected several regions with MAPK kinases, underlying initiation and progression of suggestive linkage evidence (TLOD>1.9) (1q, 6p, 7p, 11q, thyroid carcinogenesis. This work was supported: Pre- 12p, 13q) including the region previously detected in ludiumDEC-2012/07/N/NZ3/02033(toM.K.);OpusDEC- melanoma-pronefamiliesfromSwedenat3q29.Thefamily 2013/11/B/NZ3/00193 (to K.J.); LIDER/017/299/L-5/13/ speciﬁcanalysisrevealedthreelociwithsuggestivelinkage NCBR/2014) (to A.W.) evidence for family #1: 1q31.1-q32.1 (max. TLOD 2.447), M. Kolanowska: None. A. Wójcicka: None. A. 6p24.3-p22.3 (max. TLOD 2.409) and 11q13.3-q21 (max. Kubiak:None.M.Świerniak:None.M.Kotlarek:None. TLOD2.654).Futurenextgenerationsequencingstudiesof M. Maciąg: None. P. Gaj: None. &. Koperski: None. B. theseregionsmayallowtheidentiﬁcationofnewmelanoma Górnicka: None. K. Jażdżewski: None. susceptibility genetic factors.Acknowledgments: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (15/00716,15/00483), AGAUR 2017 P12.137A SGR1134, “CERCA Programme / Generalitat de Catalu- Association of microRNA expression with metastases in nya”, NCI of the US NIH (CA83115). gastric cancer C. Badenas: None. M. Potrony: None. J. Puig-Butille: None. J.M. Farnham: None. P. Gimenez-Xavier: None. F. Kipkeeva1,T. Muzaffarova1,P. Apanovich1,M.Nikulin2, G. Tell-Marti: None. P. Aguilera: None. C. Carrera: S. Nered2,M.Narimanov2,O.Malekhova2,I.Stilidi2, None. J. Malvehy: None. C.C. Teerlink: None. S. A. Karpukhin1 Puig: None. 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian P12.136D Federation, 2NN Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Centre, Novel, thyroglobulin-embedded microRNA gene Moskow, Russian Federation deregulated in papillary thyroid carcinoma TheassociationofmicroRNAexpressionwithmetastasisin M.Kolanowska1,A. Wójcicka1,A. Kubiak1,M. Świerniak1, gastric cancer (GC) was studied. Two approaches were M.Kotlarek2,M.Maciąg1,P.Gaj2,&.Koperski1,B.Górnicka1, used: a hybridization of separate from tissue microRNA on K. Jażdżewski1 NanoStringchipcontainingmorethan800microRNAs,and expression investigation by quantitative real time PCR of 1Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Centre of bioinformationally selected a set of microRNAs important New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland for tumor development. The sixty paired tumor / normal samples from patients with early-stage GC and metastaticAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 445 GC were analyzed. The decreased expression of mir34a, Results: We identiﬁed MSI in 7% of all examined mir146aandmir335wasassociatedwithdistantmetastases malignancies (present in 7 tumour types; table 1). MSI among gastric cancer patients. These microRNAs act as phenotype was frequently observed in EC (20.2%) and tumor suppressors and a decline of their expression level STAD (16.7%). Most notably, MSI was detected in ALL can affect the tumor progression. Expression of miRNA (5%), LIHC (4.9%), KIRC (3.5%) and MESO (2.6%) in amongpatientswith thesametumorsize(T4)withvarying whichMSIhasnotyetbeenwelldescribed.MSI-highGBM degrees of regional lymph node involvement in metastasis had the highest mutational load among all MSI-positive (from0to15)wasinvestigatedusingtheNanoStringCSO/ samples (mean, 16,432 ± standard deviation, 16,301; Human v3 miRNA chip, which allows selection without p<0.001) suggesting that such tumours will better respond preliminaryampliﬁcationofthestudiedmicroRNAs.Itwas to checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. We also discov- found that mir146a expression was signiﬁcantly reduced eredthatMSI-HALLandECharboursigniﬁcantnumberof (by more than 10 times) in tumors of patients with a high somatic fremeshift mutations in DNA repair genes. degree of regional lymph node involvement (10-15) in Conclusion: Our ﬁndings reveal the landscape of MSI comparison with tumors without metastases. In summary, across different malignancies and underscore the need for reduced expression level of mir34a, mir146a and mir335 is further studies of this tumour phenotype. associated with distant metastases. The decreased expres- sion level of mir146a is also associated with early metas- PrevalenceofMSIacross14cancertypes tasis of the GC tumor that can suggest its possible CancerType №of MSI- MSI- %MSI involvement in starting of metastasis process. A participa- samples H L tion of microRNA in distant metastasis may not be obli- gatory connected with early-stage metastasis. 1)Endometrialcarcinoma(EC) 89 14 4 20.22 F. Kipkeeva: None. T. Muzaffarova: None. P. Apano- 2)Stomachadenocarcinoma(STAD) 78 9 4 16.67 vich: None. M. Nikulin: None. S. Nered: None. M. 3)Glioblastomamultiforme(GBM) 57 4 1 8.77 Narimanov:None.O.Malekhova:None.I.Stilidi:None. 4)Pediatricacutelymphoblastic 39 2 0 5.13 A. Karpukhin: None. leukaemia(ALL) 5)Liverhepatocellular 41 1 1 4.88 carcinoma(LIHC) P12.138B Frequency and molecular ﬁngerprints of microsatellite 6)Kidneyrenalclearcell 29 1 0 3.45 carcinoma(KIRC) instability across multiple cancer types 7)Mesothelioma(MESO) 38 1 0 2.63 V. Khammad1,A. Arkhipov1,I.Nikitin1,I.Abramov2, 8)Breastinvasivecarcinoma(BRCA) 54 0 0 0.00 E. Khammad1,M.Filimonov3,N.Zhuchenko3 9)Ovarianserous 45 0 0 0.00 cystadenocarcinoma(OV) 10)Prostateadenocarcinoma(PRAD) 32 0 0 0.00 1MedicalRehabilitationCenterundertheMinistryofHealthof 11)Headandnecksquamouscell 29 0 0 0.00 Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, carcinoma(HNSC) 2Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian 12)Lungadenocarcinoma(LUAD) 28 0 0 0.00 Federation, 3I.M. Sechenov First State Moscow Medical 13)Skincutaneous 20 0 0 0.00 University, Moscow, Russian Federation melanoma(SKCM) 14)Thyroidcarcinoma(THCA) 17 0 0 0.00 Introduction: Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a hyper- mutable phenotype caused by defective DNA mismatch repair system. Although MSI has been well described in V. Khammad: None. A. Arkhipov: None. I. Nikitin: colorectal adenocarcinoma, less is known about the pre- None. I. Abramov: None. E. Khammad: None. M. valenceanddistinctmolecularfeaturesofMSIamongother Filimonov: None. N. Zhuchenko: None. types of cancer. Materials and Methods: We examined MSI across 14 P12.139C cancer types (n= 596) by employing the Promega MSI Circulating plasma miRNAs expression alterations as Analysis System which used 5 mononucleotide markers promising marker in discrimination of EGFR mutation (BAT-25, BAT-26, NR-21, NR-24 and MONO-27) to status in NSCLC patients identifyMSIinatumourandnormaltissueDNA.Withina subset of samples with detected MSI we assessed mutation M.Florczuk1, A.Szpechcinski1,K.Duk1,M.Komorowski1, burden and distinct molecular signatures associated with W.Kupis1,P. Rudzinski1,M. Bryl2,T. Orlowski1, this tumour phenotype. J.Chorostowska-Wynimko1446 J.delPicchia 1National Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases, Urology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul Medeniyet University, Warsaw, Poland, 2E.J. Zeyland Wielkopolska Center of Faculty of Medicine,Phase IV, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul Pulmonology and Thoracic Surgery, Poznan, Poland Medeniyet University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Istanbul Medeniyet University, Presently, the only predictive biomarker of response to Faculty of Medicine,Phase III, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Istanbul EGFR-TKItherapyinnon-small celllungcancer(NSCLC) Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of patients is the EGFR mutation status. The aberrant expres- Biostatistics, Istanbul, Turkey sion of miRNAs play a key role in lung carcinogenesis. Herein, we evaluated the potential diagnostic usefulness of Introduction: The progress of prostate cancer comprises several circulating plasma miRNAs expression under dif- complex contemporaneous tumor developmental events in ferent normalization approaches that might have dis- diverse stages are still yet to be clariﬁed. miRNAs might criminative value for EGFRm+ and EGFRm- NSCLC accompany to balance between regulatory (FOXP3+) and patients. Total RNA was extracted from 100μL of plasma; cytotoxicTcellsintumors. Here,we investigatedmiRNAs material with hemolysis was excluded. Expression of miR- and FOXP3 expressions in patients with prostate cancer 504, miR-122, miR-195, miR-10b, miR-21, and UniSP6 spectrum. (extraction efﬁcacy control) in plasma of 60 non-squamous Material and Method:38 prostate cancer patients enrolled NSCLCpatients(31patientsEGFR+inpairedtumortissue within two groups as having Gleason Score up to 7; 8 or and plasma specimen) was investigated using RT-qPCR. moreand19benignprostatehyperplasia(BPH)controls.12 SimilarprocedurewasappliedforinvitroNSCLCcelllines miRNAsexpressionswereanalyzedbyrealtimePCRfrom (HCC4006, PC-9, H1975, and H2347). Next, association parafﬁn embedded prostate tissue samples. Correlation betweencirculatingmiRNAexpressionandEGFRmutation analyses were made between serum PSA levels, immuno- status was analyzed according to different data normal- histochemical staining of CD3, CD4, FOXP3 and miRNA ization approaches (miR-16 and miR-191 as normalizers). expressions. Only plasma miR-504 expression was signiﬁcantly asso- Results: We found, hsa-let7c-3p signiﬁcantly 1,52 (p=- ciated with EGFR mutation status in NSCLC patients 0,018)and1,84(p=0,0095)folddown-regulatedwhereas, regardless the normalizer used (p=0.0158 and p=0.002; miR-141-3p was signiﬁcantly 2,36 (p=0,0006) and 2,24 for adenocarcinoma patients p=0.0004 and p=0.001; for (p=0,001) fold upregulated in the prostate cancer patients miR-16 and miR-191 normalization, respectively). The compared to BPH in group 1 and group 2, respectively. highest discriminatory power of circulating miR-504 was Only CD4 (p=0,004) and PSA (p<0,001) have statisti- shown for patients with exon 19 deletions versus wild-type cally signiﬁcant differences among groups when compared EGFR normalized to miR-191 (AUC=0.807 p<0.0001). to BPH. The Treg marker FOXP3 expressions were Aforementionedrelationswerenotobservedforinvitrocell signiﬁcantly correlated with miR-143-p, miR-221-3p, hsa- lines. Our study demonstrated the feasibility and potential let7c-3pandmiR-17-3pexpressions.Nosigniﬁcantcorrela- diagnostic value of miR-504 expression analysis in plasma tions were found between CD3, CD4 and miRNA for discrimination between EGFRm+ and EGFRm- expressions or between PSA and FOXP3 expressions. NSCLC patients. However, the normalization strategy is of Conclusions: We for the ﬁrst time reported signiﬁcantly key importance, strongly impacting circulating miRNA altered expressions of miRNAs (miR-let7c, miR221, miR- analysis outcome. 146a,miR-141,miR-143,miR17)andcorrelationsbetween M. Florczuk: None. A. Szpechcinski: None. K. Duk: Treg marker FOXP3 in the prostate cancer patients None. M. Komorowski: None. W. Kupis: None. P. suggesting that prostate cancer progression might be under Rudzinski: None. M. Bryl: None. T. Orlowski: None. J. the regulation of both Tregs and miRNAs. Chorostowska-Wynimko: None. References:Song, C.J et al. J Cell Biochem. 2018. 119 (3):2763-2786 P12.140D I. Akalin: None. B. Erol: None. E. Aslan: None. S.S. Aggressiveprostatecancerdevelopmentmightbeunderthe Ozkanli: None. O. Eﬁloglu: None. S. Yildirim: None. H. regulation of both Tregs and miRNAs Güclü: None. T. Caskurlu: None. M.I. Karaman: None. I.Akalin1,B. Erol2, E.Aslan3,S. S.Ozkanli4, O. Eﬁloglu2, P12.141A S. Yildirim5,H.Güclü6, T. Caskurlu2,M.I.Karaman2 Mitochondrial DNA mutation analysis in molecular subtypes of breast cancer 1Istanbul Medeniyet University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul C.J.Pérez-Amado1,H.Tovar2,V.Bautista-Piña3,L.A.Alfáro- Medeniyet University Faculty of Medicine Department of Rauíz2,A. Hidalgo-Miranda2,S. Jiménez-Morales2Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 447 1Biochemistry Sciences Program, Universidad Nacional Introduction: Breast cancer is the commonest female AutónomadeMéxico,MexicoCity,Mexico,2InstitutoNacional cancer, globally, as well as in Sri Lanka. Several mtDNA de Medicina Genómica, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Instituto de mutations are reported to be associated with breast cancer, EnfermedadesdelaMamayFundacióndelCáncerdeMama, but there are no data for Sri Lanka. Mexico City, Mexico Methods: Thirty patients with sporadic primary breast cancer and their age, BMI and menopausal status matched Introduction. Breast cancer (BC) is the is the commonest controls were studied. Macro-haplogroups M and N were cancer type in women worldwide. Many studies have sug- determined using coding region SNP based PCR-RFLP. A gested that variants in mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) are 900 bp region covering the hypervariable region I of risk factors to develop BC, are associated with severity, mtDNA was PCR-ampliﬁed, sequenced and analysed. relapseortreatmentresponse.Toknowthelandscapeofthe Results: 18 patients and 17 controls belonged to the M mtDNAmutations in BC tumors from Mexican women we macro-haplogroup and the remainder to the N macro- analyzedmtDNAfrompairedperipheralblood(PB)-tumor. haplogroup. In total 72 and 45 mutations were identiﬁed in Materials and methods. We included 39 tumor matched in the patients and controls respectively, with 38 and 15 of PB samples from Mexican women with BC. Tumors were them occurring exclusively in each group. Prevalence of classiﬁed immunohistochemically and molecularly mutations previously reported to be associated with breast (PAM50). The entire DNAmt was sequenced through the cancer, namely T16189C, T16519C, T16311C and MiSeq platform (Illumina) and using two overlapping pri- C16207T were not signiﬁcantly different between patients mer sets. Results. 38.5% of the tumors were luminal A and controls. Exclusive mutations seen in 23 patients were (LA), 25.6% luminal B (LB), 10.3% HER2, 10.5% basal distributed as follows: 05 (N=3), 04 (N=2), 03 (N=3), 02 (B) and 15.4% normal-like (NL). A total of 349 and 364 (N=7)and01mutation(N=8).Somepatientshadmorethan variants were identiﬁed in SP and tumor, respectively, of oneexclusivemutationwiththehighestnumberco-existing which, 225 variants were shared among both tissue. being ﬁve. 139somaticmutacioneswereidentiﬁedintumors,beingthe Conclusion: Mitochondrial DNA D-loop mutations single base substitutions the most common (94%) and the previously unreported to be associated with breast cancer remaindervariantswereinsertions(3%)anddeletions(3%). observed in the present study require further analysis The CYB gene showed the highest number of somatic especially since several such mutations co-exist in some mutations (18.7%) in comparison with other mitochondrial patients. Prevalence of HVI mutations reported to be genes. Stratiﬁcation analysis by molecular subtype showed associated with breast cancer or M and N macro- thatHERsubtypedisplaysthehighestnumberofmutations haplogroup status did not signiﬁcantly differ between (average: 11 ± 8.2) than the other tumor subtypes. Con- patients and controls in present study. clusions. mtDNA from HER subtype showed the highest Supported by National Science Foundation, Sri-Lanka mutation number suggesting that there is an association (NSF/SCH/2016/04) between the rate of DNAmt mutations with the molecular J.T. Kotelawala: None. K.H. Tennekoon: None. R. subtype of BC and with the prognosis of the disease. Ranasinghe: None. H.A.C.I. K. Rodrigo: None. G.K.S. Acknowledgments: CONACyT FOSISS 2016-272618 De Silva: None. C.J. Pérez-Amado: None. H. Tovar: None. V. Bau- tista-Piña: None. L.A. Alfáro-Rauíz: None. A. Hidalgo- P12.144D Miranda: None. S. Jiménez-Morales: None. RET Genotype & MEN2 Phenotype correlation in a large Indian Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma (MTC) cohort & P12.142B inﬂuence ofSNPsin3 genetic pathwayson MTCbehavior Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplogroups and hypervariable region I (HVI) mutations in a cohort of Sri V.Mishra1,2,P.Kowtal1,2,R.Reddy1,2,N.Mahida1,2,R.Sarin1,2 Lankan sporadic breast cancer patients - A preliminary analysis 1Advanced Centre for Treatment Research & Education in Cancer (ACTREC), Tata Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai, J.T.Kotelawala1,K.H.Tennekoon1,R.Ranasinghe1,H.A.C.I. India,2HomiBhabhaNationalIntitute(HBNI),Mumbai,India K. Rodrigo1, G.K.S. DeSilva2 Introduction: MTC is an aggressive cancer of Thyroid 1Institute of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and parafollicular cells. Around 25% MTC cases occur as Biotechnology, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka, Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type2 (MEN2) syndrome 2National Cancer Institute, Maharagama, Sri Lanka due to germline mutation in RET protooncogene. However phenotypic heterogeneity inindividuals harboring thesame448 J.delPicchia RETmutationsuggeststheroleofadditionalgeneticevents (MM)intoextramedullarydiseaseandshortoverallsurvival inMTC.Theaimistoidentifynovelandrecurrentgermline (OS=23months).I-FISHinvestigationrevealedpresenceof RETmutationsinacohortof400IndianMTCcasesandto gain 1q21 and hyperdiploidy (+5,+9,+15) in 82% and study the role of 13 different SNPs in genes of distinct 86%, respectively, while IgH rearrangements, del(17)(p13) pathways on MTC behavior. and del(13)(q14) were evaluated as negative. Whole- Materials and Methods: Germline RET mutation genome proﬁling using array-CGH showed complex analysis was performed on genomic DNA by Sanger/Next genomic changes including hyperdiploidy (+3,+5,+9, Generation Sequencing. For SNP genotyping RFLP +11, +15,+19), monosomy X, structural gains (1q21- approach was used followed by correlation of SNP 1q23.1,1q32-1q44,16p13.13-16p11.2)andlosses(1q23.1- genotype with different clinico pathological parameters of 1q32.1; 8p23.3-8p11.21) of genetic material and chromo- patients. thripsis in chromosome 18 with 6 breakpoint areas. Next- Results: Pathogenic germline RET mutations were generation sequencing showed a total of 338 variants with identiﬁed in 62 families (120 mutation carriers). Double 1.8% (6/338) of pathological mutations in NRAS mutationinRETwasseenin3families&novelmutationin (c.181C>A; p.Gln61Lys) or variants of unknown signiﬁ- 1 family. In 3 cases with classical MEN2B phenotype cance in TP53, CUX1 and POU4F1. Sanger Sequencing could not identify RET mutation. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings suggest that presence of Whole Exome NGS analysis identiﬁed M918T mutation chromothripsis should be considered as another important in RET indicating allele dropout on Sanger Sequencing. genetic hallmark of poor prognosis in MM patients and Three of the 13 SNPs studied (Cyp1A1m1, CDKN2A, utilization of genome-wide screening techniques such as NAT2)showedsigniﬁcantprotectiveassociationwithlesser array-CGH and NGS improves the clinical diagnostics of metastatic spread and calcitonin levels. the disease. This project was supported by MUNI/A/0824/ Discussion: This is the ﬁrst large report on genotype- 2017. phenotype association in Indian MTC cohort revealing J.Smetana:None.J.Oppelt:None.M.Štork:None.L. several distinct associations with double or novel RET Pour: None. P. Kuglik: None. mutation and modiﬁer effect of few SNPs on MTC clinical outcome.Thenotsoinfrequentoccurrenceofalleledropout P12.148D is highlighted in this study. HighprevalenceofpathogenicPTENgermlinemutationsin Grant & Fellowship: ICMR for funding, DST-Inspire population data for Fellowship V.Mishra:None.P.Kowtal:None.R.Reddy:None.N. J.R. Vos1,R. M.deVoer1,C. M.Kets1, A.R. Mensenkamp1, Mahida: None. R. Sarin: None. M.J. L.Ligtenberg1,2,N.Hoogerbrugge1 P12.146B 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical Chromothripsis18inmultiplemyelomapatientwithrapid center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, extramedullary relapse Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands J.Smetana1,J. Oppelt2,M.Štork3,L. Pour3,P. Kuglik1 Introduction: PTEN Hamartoma Tumour Syndrome (PHTS) is a severe inherited cancer risk syndrome 1Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Institute of –including malignant and benign neoplasms, overgrowth ExperimentalBiology,FacultyofScience,MasarykUniversity, and autism– caused by germline mutations in PTEN. The Brno,CzechRepublic,2CEITEC-CentralEuropeanInstituteof prevalence of pathogenic germline PTEN mutations is Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, unclear,andestimatedat~1/200,000.Theaimofthisstudy 3DepartmentofInternalMedicine-Hematooncology,University was to assess the population prevalence of pathogenic Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic PTEN mutations. Methods:TheprevalenceofpathogenicPTENmutations Background: Catastrophic chromosomal event known as was assessed using the genome Aggregation Database chromothripsis was proven to be a signiﬁcant hallmark of (gnomAD) and Exome Aggregation Collaboration (ExAC) poor prognosis in several cancer diseases. While this phe- database, including 138,632 and 60,706 individuals, nomenon is very rare in among multiple myeloma (MM) respectively. patients, its presence in karyotype is associated with very Mutations were classiﬁed as pathogenic (i.e. multiple poor prognosis. times reported as pathogenic in ClinVar and/or truncating Case presentation: In our case, we report a 62 year variants) or predicted pathogenic (i.e. CADD score >25). female patient with rapid progression of multiple myelomaAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 449 For each group, the combined allele frequency (AF) was Mexican children we performed a case control-study. We determined. included311(152casesand159controls)individualsaged Results: In gnomAD, 13 pathogenic (10 variants, <17 years old. Cases were newly diagnosed and risk clas- AF=2.62e-5) and 14 predicted pathogenic (12 variants, siﬁedbaseonNationalCancerInstitute(NCI)criteria.DNA AF=2.69e-5) PTEN mutations were detected. In ExAC, 5 was extracted from peripheral blood and saliva and geno- pathogenic (5 variants, AF=4.12e-5) and 6 predicted typing was performed using Taqman probes. No statistical pathogenic (5 variants, AF=4.94e-5) mutations were differences were detected tors1799930SNPbetweencases identiﬁed. WheninExAC cancer patients(i.e. TCGAdata) and controls, but rs1801280 (OR 2.2, CI 1.6-4.8, p= 4.4- were excluded to minimize selection bias, 2 pathogenic (2 07),rs1789929(OR3.53,CI2.58-4.84,P=9.9-16),rs1208 variants, AF=1.88e-5) and 5 predicted pathogenic (5 (OR0 5.18, CI 3.77-7.10, P= 8.23-26) and rs1799931G variants, AF=4.72e-5) mutations were identiﬁed. This (OR=2.48, CI 1.72-3.57, P= 6.08-7) were associated with suggests a mutation prevalence of 8-36/200,000. ALL. In addition the rs1041983 showed the TT genotype Conclusion: The prevalence of pathogenic germline (OR2.048,CI1.047-4.0,P=0.03)increasedtherisktothis PTEN mutations is 8-16 times higher than expected based malignancy. Our results suggest that SNPs in NAT2 confer on current estimates. When including predicted pathogenic susceptibility to develop ALL in children from Mexico. mutations, this was 21-36 times higher. E. Hurtado-Córdova: None. D.A. Bárcenas-López: This data substantiates that many PHTS patients are still None. J.C. Núñez-Enríquez: None. A. Medina-Sanzón: unrecognized, which might be related to varying disease None. J.M. Mejía-Aranguré: None. E. Jiménez-Hernán- penetrance.Withtheincreasinguseofgenepanels,thisdata dez: None. J. Flores-Lujano: None. J.G. Peñaloza- provides relevant expected detection rates in unselected González: None. L.E. Merino-Pasaye: None. K.A. patients. Solis-Labastida: None. J.R. Torres-Nava: None. M.L. J.R.Vos:None.R.M.deVoer:None.C.M.Kets:None. Pérez-Saldívar: None. A. Hidalgo-Miranda: None. S. A.R. Mensenkamp: None. M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. N. Jiménez-Morales: None. Hoogerbrugge: None. P12.150B P12.149A Coexistance of APC and NF1 pathogenic mutations in the NAT2 polymorphisms are risk factor to acute same patient lymphoblastic leukemia in children from Mexico P. Vázquez1,2,3,E. BuenoMartínez1,2,N.Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, E. Hurtado-Córdova1,D.A. Bárcenas-López1,2,J.C. Núñez- J.Perez-Garcia1,2,3,M.ZafraCobo4,R.González-Sarmiento1,2,5 Enríquez3, A.Medina-Sanzón4,J.M. Mejía-Aranguré3, E. Jiménez-Hernández3, J.Flores-Lujano3,J.G.Peñaloza- 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of González5, L.E. Merino-Pasaye6,K.A. Solis-Labastida3,J.R. Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Torres-Nava7,M.L. Pérez-Saldívar3,A.Hidalgo-Miranda2, Spain, 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer S. Jiménez-Morales2 (IBMCC). University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, 4Dermatology Unit, Hospital Virgen de la Concha, Zamora, 1Programa de Maestría en Ciencias Biológicas UNAM, Spain,5InstituteofMolecularandCellularBiologyofCancer. Mexico, Mexico, 2Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Univeristy of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain Mexico, Mexico, 3Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, IMSS, Mexico,Mexico,4HospitalInfantildeMéxico,Mexico,Mexico, Introduction: Type I Neuroﬁbromatosis is a rare genetic 5Hospital Juárez de México, Mexico, Mexico, 6Centro Médico diseasethatcausesbenignnervetumors,andcutaneousand Nacional20deNoviembre,ISSSTE,Mexico,Mexico,7Hospital skeletal manifestations. Mutations in the NF1 gene have Pediátrico de Moctezuma, Mexico, Mexico been found to cause the disease. Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is an uncommon hereditary disease char- Acutelymphoblasticleukemia(ALL)istheleadingcauseof acterized by the appearance of more than a hundred ade- pediatric cancer worldwide that display a disparity inci- nomatous polyps. Mutations in the gene APC greatly dence among ethnic groups. Mexican is one of the most increase the risk of suffering FAP. Mutations in either of affected population, which also has a high childhood mor- these genes is uncommon, much more so the simultaneous tality rate due to ALL. Evidences suggest that single mutation of both genes in the same patient nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in the The case of a 20-year-old patient with rose-colored metabolism of xenobiotics, such as N-acetyltransferase 2 polypoid lesions in the dorso-lumbar region associated to a (NAT2) gene, could contribute to the ALL risk. To know possible type I neuroﬁbromatosis is presented. Her clinical wether SNPs in NAT2 gene are associated with ALL in history stood out because of a total colectomy to prevent450 J.delPicchia FAP (several cases of polyposis colorectal cancer were Conclusions: We found a different spectrum of NF2 described in her maternal line), several surgeries to remove somatic mutations in the schwannomatosis-associated trichilemmal and epidermic cysts in different locations and schwannomas compared to the germinal mutations found an abdominal laparotomy to remove a desmoid tumor. in NF2 patients, as already demonstrated in sporadic Material and Methods: DNA extracted from peripheral schwannomas. The preponderance of indels as somatic bloodandfromeachtypeoftumorunderwentheteroduplex mutations and of single mucleotide substitutions as germ- analysis line ones, suggest the existence of distinct mechanisms of Results: In NF1, a pathogenic alteration mutagenesis during mitosis and meiosis. This work was (c.5418_5422delGGGC/ p.Q1806QfsX), which generates funded by grants from Ministero della Salute and Istituto atruncatedproteinandcausesneuroﬁbromatosis,wasfound Toscano Tumori. in DNA extracted from the neuroﬁbroma but not from I. Paganini: None. G.L. Capone: None. A. Putignano: peripheral blood. In APC, a pathogenic mutation None. R. Sestini: None. F. Gensini: None. B. Porﬁrio: (c.3783_3785delTT/p.T1261TfsX),whichgeneratesa trun- None. A. Marozza: None. L. Papi: None. cated protein that increases the risk of FAP, was found. Neither of these mutations had been previously described P12.153A Conclusion: The patient presented two rare pathogenic Fifty ﬁrst tests and beyond: a real world experience of mutations in genes responsible for diseases with unrelated cancergenetictestinginahighriskcancergeneticclinicof phenotypes a university based urban hospital in Thailand, an upper This project was funded by FIS PI 10/00219 middle income country P. Vázquez: None. E. Bueno Martínez: None. N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. J. Perez-Garcia: None. M. Zafra P. Phowthongkum,W.Kamolvisit Cobo: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. Faculty of Medicine, Bangkok, Thailand P12.151C Schwannomatosis associated schwannomas show a Introduction: Cancer genetic testing (CGT) in low- to- different NF2 mutational spectrum compared to middle-income countries is less accessible and has mostly Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 patients been done in the research. We reported here the real-world situation in a high risk cancer genetics clinic (CGC) at a I.Paganini1, G.L.Capone1,A. Putignano1,R. Sestini1, tertiary-center in Thailand. F. Gensini1,B. Porﬁrio1,A. Marozza2,L. Papi1 Methods:Wereviewedcasesatthehigh-riskCGCatthe Chulalongkorn Hospital in 2017. 1University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 2A.O.U.Careggi, Results: Of 69 cases, ﬁfty cases (50/69=72.5%) under- Firenze, Italy wentCGC.Theindicationsforpatientstestedwerepersonal history of cancer (47/50=94%). Only three unaffected Introduction: Two genetically distinct entities, Neuroﬁ- probands with family history of cancers (3/50=6%) were bromatosis type 2 (NF2) and schwannomatosis, predispose tested. Breast (20/50=40%) and ovarian (6/50=12%) to development of multiple schwannomas. Thus far, two cancers were the indication for the majority of tested genes are involved in schwannomatosis predisposition: patients. We identiﬁed ﬁfteen pathogenic variants (PV) or SMARCB1 and LZTR1, both located on the long arm of likely PV in BRCA1(5),BRCA2(3),APC(2),MLH1(1), chromosome 22. NF2 gene, responsible for NF2, is soma- FANCA(1),PTEN(1),NF1(1), and monoallelic PV in tically involved in the four hits/three steps mechanism MUTYH(1) in 14 patients (14/50=28%: one patient described in schwannomatosis-associated schwannomas. harbored 2 PV in BRCA1 and NF1). We identiﬁed eleven However, the mutational spectrum of NF2 gene in variants of unknown signiﬁcance in eleven patients (11/ schwannomatosis tumors is not well deﬁned. 50=22%).4 patients underwent prophylactic surgery after Materials and Methods: We analysed NF2 gene in testing. Nineteen cases refused(8) or were not offered 116 schwannomas from 46 schwannomatosis patients with receiving (clinical diagnoses (2), or in the low risk group or without LZTR1 or SMARCB1 germline mutation, (9)) the CGT. The reasons of refusal were ﬁnancial comparing this mutational spectrum with the one of 117 concerns and the perception of no beneﬁt to themselves. NF2patientsand25mosaicNF2.Inschwannomaswealso Themedianagewas40yearsoldcomparedto47yearsold assessed LOH. in the tested patients. 36.8% (7/19) of patients were Results: We demonstrated a statistically signiﬁcant unaffected. increase of indel mutations in schwannomatosis-associated Discussion:Wepresented theCGTinthehighriskCGC tumors versus the germinal ones. intherealworldsettingsincethemoreaffordableCGThasAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 451 been offered in the last few years. Patients refused or not- P12.155C offeredtobetestedwereyoungerandweremoreunaffected NIPBL pathogenic variant in a Cornelia de Lange cases than the tested group. Syndrome patient with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia P. Phowthongkum: None. W. Kamolvisit: None. V. Massa1,G.Fazio2,A. Grioni2,3, V.Bystry3,S. Rigamonti1,2, P12.154B C. Saitta2,C. Rizzari2,C. Consarino4,A. Biondi2,A. Selicorni5, Pathogenicvariants(PVs)detectionina19-genecorepanel G.Cazzaniga2 andyieldofopportunisticscreeninginBRCA1/2andMMR genes in a cohort of 1121 hereditary cancer patients 1Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 2Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 3Masaryk C.Lazaro1,L.Feliubadaló1,A.Stradella1,O.Díez2,G.Capellá1, University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Presidio Ospedaliero S.Gutiérrez2,J.delValle1,J.Brunet1,J.Balmaña2,Hereditary Ciaccio-De Lellis, Catanzaro, Italy, 5ASST Lariana, Como, Cancer ProgramCatalanCancer Network Italy 1Hereditary Cancer Program, ICO-IDIBELL-CIBERONC, Background:CorneliadeLangesyndrome(CdLS)isarare Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Hospital Vall d'Hebron- geneticdisordercharacterizedbypre-andpost-natalgrowth VHIO, Barcelona, Spain retardation, mental retardation, facial dysmorphism and upper limb abnormalities. The main causes of the disease Background:Multigenepanelsprovideapowerfultoolfor are mutations in the NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3, HDAC8 and analyzing several genes simultaneously and identifying RAD21 genes, which encode proteins of cohesin complex. cancer susceptibility beyond the suspected clinical pheno- Mutationsinthecohesingeneshaverecentlybeenidentiﬁed type. We evaluated the PVs frequency in customized pre- in AML, CML and myelodysplastic syndromes. deﬁned panels according to phenotype and extended the Objectives: Here, we report the description of the ﬁrst analysistoour19-generesearchpanel.Wealsoinvestigated case of a CdLS pediatric patient who developed precursors the yield of opportunistic screening in the BRCA1/2 and B Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (BCP-ALL). Further- MMR genes in all patients. more, we investigated the presence of cohesin genes Patients: Overall, 1121 unrelated probands underwent variants in pediatric ALL patients not affected by CdLS. multigene testing with customized pre-deﬁned panels Results and Conclusions: At disease onset, patient did according to their phenotype in addition to BRCA1/2 and notpresentanyprognosticallyrelevantcytogeneticabnorm- MMR genes, and a 19-gene research. alityandwasenrolledtohighrisktreatmentgroupforMRD Results: Overall, 1015 female and 106 male were analysis. Through NGS Trusight Pan-Cancer analysis, we studied, mean age at cancer diagnosis was 47 years old, identiﬁedvariantsincohesingenes,inparticularinexon46 579 had breast cancer (BC), 258 ovarian cancer (OC), 124 ofNIPBL,inheterozygosity.Thisvariantisanewmutation colorectal cancer, and 27 were unaffected. A BC, OC, or that causes frameshift and a premature stop codon. This BC/OCpanelwasrequestedin66%andaHNPCCpanelin anomalywasconﬁrmedonthepatient'sbonemarrowDNA 12%. One hundred and ﬁfty-one (13%) probands carried at both at diagnosis and in remission of leukemia and in a least one PV with the customized diagnostic panel. All buccalsmearsample.Bothparentsandbrotherarenegative, BRCA1/2carriersfulﬁlledBC,OCorBC/OCcriteria,while phenotypically normal and not affected by hematological among the MMR carriers, 50 (89%) PV were identiﬁed in diseases. We further analyzed 86 pediatric BCP-ALL cases the HNPCC panel and 6 (11%) were opportunistic, all 6 in considering NIPBL, RAD21, SMC1A, SMC3, STAG2. We MSH6. The 19-gene research panel provided 22 (2%) detected36variants,identifyingrecurrentknownvariantsin additionalPVbeyondthecustomizedpanelaccordingtothe addition to 10 novel variants in cohesin genes, mainly clinical phenotype: 5 BARD1, 4 NBN, 3 BRIP1, 3 ATM, 2 affectingNIPBL,whichseemspeculiarofALL,sinceithas CHEK2, 2 RAD51C, 2 RAD51D, 1 CDH1. never been reported as altered in AML. Conclusions: The yield of PV detection in different V. Massa: None. G. Fazio: None. A. Grioni: None. V. actionablegenesidentiﬁedbymultiplextesting isclinically Bystry: None. S. Rigamonti: None. C. Saitta: None. C. relevant. Eleven percent of MMR mutation carriers (all Rizzari: None. C. Consarino: None. A. Biondi: None. A. carrying MSH6 PVs) were identiﬁed through opportunistic Selicorni: None. G. Cazzaniga: None. screening. C. Lazaro: None. L. Feliubadaló: None. A. Stradella: P12.156D None. O. Díez: None. G. Capellá: None. S. Gutiérrez: The allelic frequency for S and Z mutations in the None. J. del Valle: None. J. Brunet: None. J. SERPINA1 gene in NSCLC patients from Poland Balmaña: None.452 J.delPicchia A. Szpechcinski,K. Duk,A. Zdral,M.Florczuk, P. Rudzinski, Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States W.Kupis, J.Zaleska, R. Langfort,T. Orlowski, K.Roszkowski- Sliz,J.Chorostowska-Wynimko The growing use of liquid biopsy for early detection and monitoringofdiseasenecessitatesaccuratevariantdetection NationalInstituteofTuberculosisandLungDiseases,Warsaw, at<1%allelefrequenciesduetoalowpopulationofdisease Poland DNA within circulating, cell-free DNA (cfDNA). Reliable, low-frequency variant detection by next-generation Background:Alpha-1antitrypsin(AAT)isencodedbythe sequencing (NGS) is challenging due to background noise highly polymorphic SERPINA1 gene. Mutations in this from PCR and sequencing errors. We employed molecular gene can lead to AAT deﬁciency (AATD) which is a risk identiﬁers (MIDs) to uniquely label individual DNA factor for number of chronic lung disorders. The causative molecules prior to ampliﬁcation, facilitating the distinction link between AATD and non-small cell lung cancer of true variants from PCR and sequencing errors. We (NSCLC) is controversial due to insufﬁcient research data. incorporatedMIDsinbothourAccel-Ampliconlibraryprep WeevaluatedthefrequencyofmajorpathogenicSERPINA1 that uses multiplex PCR for targeted NGS and our Accel- alleles among Polish NSCLC patients. NGS 2S whole genome library prep followed by targeting Methods: blood samples were collected from 468 with hybridization capture using an 800kb pan-cancer NSCLC patients. The serum AAT concentration was panel.Weperformedlowfrequencyspike-inexperimentsat measuredbynephelometryandthephenotypewasanalyzed <1% allele frequencies. We prepared MID libraries from by isoelectric focusing. The SERPINA1 variants were amplicon panels including a 17 amplicon EGFR pathway identiﬁed by DNA sequencing. The frequency of SER- panel and a 104 amplicon SNP panel. Deep sequencing to PINA1 alleles was estimated by means of Hardy-Weinberg >30,000x was done to maximize MID family size (number equilibrium. of PCR duplicates) and optimize generation of a consensus Results: 446 out of 468 (95.2%) NSCLC patients sequence. This analysis identiﬁed all known variants pre- presented normal Pi*MM phenotype. AATD alleles were sent at 1%, 0.5%, and 0.25% allele frequencies. Next, the found in 22 patients. 10 (2.1%) carried Pi*S allele, 10 targeted 2S libraries were prepared with low-frequency (2.1%) - Pi*Z allele, and 3 (0.6%) - Pi*F allele. spike-in samples, sequenced to >8000x, and all known Accordingly, the frequency of major AATD alleles was: variantsat1%and0.5%allelefrequenciesweremaintained Pi*S 10.7/1000 (95%CI:4.1-17.3) and Pi*Z 10.7/1000 in the consensus data. In both cases, the number of false (95%CI:4.1-17.3). The mean serum AAT concentration in positives was reduced, resulting in improved speciﬁcity. NSCLCpatientswas180mg/dLinPi*MMindividualsand This study highlights the ability of MID technology to 148 mg/dL in AATD allele carriers. enable low frequency variant detection, critical to track Conclusions: The frequency of Pi*S and Pi*Z alleles in known variants and identify novel pathogenic mutations in NSCLC patients differ noticeably from the actual data of cfDNA samples. general Polish population study (Pi*Z 13.7/1000 and Pi*S A.Wood:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; 7.6/1000):thefrequencyofPi*Zalleleislowerwhereasthe SwiftBiosciences.S.Sandhu:A.Employment(fullorpart- frequency of Pi*S is higher than normal reference values. time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. M. Pezeshkian: A. TheNSCLCpatientswhocarryAATDalleledonotpresent Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Bios- reduced AAT concentration in blood as compared to the ciences. V. Kelchner: A. Employment (full or part-time); reference values from population studies. Signiﬁcant;Swift Biosciences. J.RoseFigura:A.Employ- A.Szpechcinski:None.K.Duk:None.A.Zdral:None. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. J. M. Florczuk: None. P. Rudzinski: None. W. Kupis: Lenhart: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; None.J.Zaleska:None.R.Langfort:None.T.Orlowski: Swift Biosciences. L. Kurihara: A. Employment (full or None. K. Roszkowski-Sliz: None. J. Chorostowska- part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. V. Makarov: A. Wynimko: None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. P12.157A Use of molecular identiﬁers in targeted NGS to detect P12.158B mutations below one percent allele frequencies in Investigation of the effect of MET gene expression circulating cell-free DNA alteration on oral cavity tumors A. Wood,S. Sandhu,M.Pezeshkian, V. Kelchner, N.P.ÖzateşAy, K.Öztürk, &.Kaya,B. Sezgin,N.Akyıldız,Ü. J.RoseFigura, J.Lenhart,L. Kurihara,V. Makarov Uluöz, A. Veral,C. ÇalışkanKurt, B. GökerBağca,Ç. Biray AvcıAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 453 EGE ÜNİVERSİTESİ, İZMİR, Turkey might effectively identify patients eligible for PARP inhi- bitor therapy and serve as a pre-selection for germline Head and neck cancers, which constitute 2-5% of all BRCA1/2 testing. malignancies worldwide and in our society, can be diag- Materials and Methods: Newly diagnosed OCs patients nosed early by increasing the use of endoscopy and have a form 8 hospitals were included by pathologists. Tumour high survival rate with appropriate treatment. There is no DNA BRCA1/2 testing was performed in formalin ﬁxed, deﬁnitivetumormarkerusedinthediagnosisandfollow-up parafﬁn embedded (FFPE) samples using single molecule of head and neck cancer. Genetic factors involved in the Molecular Inversion Probe-based targeted next generation formation of head and neck cancers have not been identi- sequencing and BRCA1 Multiplex Ligation-dependent ﬁed. The MET gene encodes the proto-oncogen MET, a Probe Ampliﬁcation. Gynaecologists advised patients with member of the protein receptor tyrosine kinase family. a tumour BRCA1/2 mutation to have genetic counselling Mutationsinthesegenehavebeenassociatedwithpapillary and germline BRCA1/2 testing. renal cell carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, andvarious Results:Of301consecutiveOCpatients,53(18%)hada head and neck cancers. In this study, we aimed to investi- tumourDNABRCAmutationofwhich56%wasdiagnosed gate the expression changes of MET gene in oral cavity with a germline BRCA1/2 mutation. More than half (58%) cancers which are thought to be effective in many cancers. of the families with a germline BRCA1/2 mutation did not RNA isolation was performed from tumoral and normal complywithcriteriaforgermlineBRCA1/2testingbasedon tissue specimens stored in parafﬁn blocks of 30 patients family history prior to the OC diagnosis. 81% of all newly under the age of 40 years, with a mean age of 32-41 and diagnosedOCpatientswereincludedbythepathologistsfor who did not smoke and whose oral cavity tumors were tumour DNA BRCA testing. Median turnaround time of presentbetweenJanuary2016andAugust2016.METgene tumourDNABRCAtestingwas14days.Theworkﬂowwas expression levels were analyzed by real-time quantitative positively reviewed by all patients and 83% of the reverse transcription in comparison with normal tissues. gynaecologists. Postoperative pathology of all patients was squamous cell Discussion: Tumour DNA BRCA1/2 testing in all newly carcinoma. According to the results, when compared to diagnosed OC patients as pre-selection for PARP inhibitor normal tissues, the expression levels of MET genes were therapyandgermlinetestingisfeasibleandeffective.More increased by 8.47 fold in tumor tissue. The obtained data thanhalfofthepatientswithagermlineBRCA1/2mutation will guide the molecular recognition and mechanism of the would not have been identiﬁed by family history. disease and provide prognostically valuable information by N. Hoogerbrugge: B. Research Grant (principal inves- associating it with recurrence / survival. tigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as N.P. Özateş Ay: None. K. Öztürk: None. &. Kaya: wellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;AstraZeneca.I. None. B. Sezgin: None. N. Akyıldız: None. Ü. Uluöz: E. Fakkert: None. I.D. Nagtegaal: None. E.M. Leter: None.A.Veral:None.C.ÇalışkanKurt:None.B.Göker None. A.R. Mensenkamp: None. G. Woldringh: None. Bağca: None. Ç. Biray Avcı: None. M. Simons: None. C.M. Kets: None. H. Bulten: None. J. A. de Hullu: None. M.J. Ligtenberg: B. Research Grant P12.159C (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and TumourDNABRCA1/2testinginnewlydiagnosedovarian pending grants as well as grants already received); cancer as pre-selection for PARP inhibitor therapy and Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca. germline testing is feasible and effective P12.160D N.Hoogerbrugge1,I.E.Fakkert1,I.D.Nagtegaal1,E.M.Leter2, BRCA1 AND BRCA2 GENES MUTATIONAL A. R.Mensenkamp1,G.Woldringh1, M.Simons1,C.M. Kets1, SCREENING IN FFPE OVARIAN CANCER TISSUES H.Bulten1, J.A.deHullu1,M.J. Ligtenberg1 G.Gambino1,R. Scarpitta1, M.Farnocchia1, K.Zavaglia1, 1Radboud university Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, M.Guerrieri2, E.Falaschi1,M. Tancredi1,F. Bonci3, 2Maastricht university Medical Center, Maastricht, C. Congregati4,S.Gana4,S. Pistolesi5,F. Carbone5, Netherlands G.Naccarato5,A. Gadducci2,M.Caligo1 Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) patients with either 1Section of Molecular Genetics, Department of Laboratory somatic or germline BRCA1/2 mutations may beneﬁt from Medicine,UniversityHospitalofPisa,Pisa,Italy,2Department PARP inhibitor therapy. Tumour DNA BRCA1/2 testing of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Division of initiatedbythepathologistinnewlydiagnosedOCpatients Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy,454 J.delPicchia 3UO Medical Oncology, Department of Oncology, University Introduction: Ovarian cancer is the ﬁfth most common HospitalofPisa,Pisa,Italy,4LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics, form of cancer death among women. Developing a fast, A.O.U. Pisana, Ospedale S. Chiara, Pisa, Italy, 5Dep. of reliable blood test would facilitate the early detection of Pathology, University Hosp. of Pisa, Pisa, Italy ovarian cancer, which would also contribute to the improvement of survival chances. Screening circulating Ovarian cancer patients with germline or somatic patho- miRNAs proved to be reliable biomarkers in various can- genic variants in BRCA genes beneﬁt from treatment with cers. The dysregulation of miRNAs is also known in polyADPribosepolymeraseinhibitors(iPARP1).Toselect ovarian cancer, however, only a few publications focus on patientswhomaybeneﬁtfromthesetreatments,assessment their diagnostic role. ofthemutationstatusofBRCA1andBRCA2inthetumoris Materials and Methods: We screened several miRNAs required. Tumor BRCA1/2 testing is more challenging than (miR200a, miR200b, miR200c, miR205, miR483, let7f) in germline testing as the majority of samples are formalin- the plasma samples of healthy (n=30), previously ﬁxed parafﬁn embedded (FFPE), the tumor genome is untreated serous epithelial ovarian carcinoma patients complex, and the allelic fraction of somatic variants can be (n=17, FIGO stages III or IV) and patients with benign low. There is the need for efﬁcient and timely methods to masses (n=14). The relative amount of miRNAs was detect both somatic and germline mutations using FFPE detected by qRT-PCR. tissues and commercially available technology. We used Results:TheexpressionlevelsofmiR200a,miR200band commercial kits to explore all exons and 50bp exon-intron miR200cwereelevatedinthecarcinomasamplescompared junctions of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in next-generation to the healthy donors (p<0.00001). The level of miR200a sequencing (NGS) on DNA from 40 FFPE ovarian serous was also higher in cancerous than in benign samples carcinoma tissues. In total, 10/40 patients (25%) carried 11 (p<0.01). However, no signiﬁcant difference was detected mutations (9 in BRCA1 and 2 in BRCA2). Pathogenic var- in the case of miR205, miR483 and let7f. Diagnostic iantswereconﬁrmedbySangersequencingintumorDNA. accuracy was the highest in the case of miR200a: 87.23% One novel frameshift BRCA1 mutations was found. The with the power area under the curve (AUC) of 0.91 (95% germlineorsomaticstatusofthemutationswillbeassessed CI=0.79-1).Thediagnosticaccuracywasalsopromisingin in DNA from blood sample or from FFPE non neoplastic the case of miR200b and miR200c: 80.85% and 74.47% tissues. This study evaluates the relevance of standardiza- with AUC 0.82 (95% CI=0.67-0.97) and 0.8 (95% tionintumorBRCAtestingparticularlywhenthetestresults CI=0.64-0.96) respectively. The correlation was relatively dictate clinical decisions regarding life extending therapies high between the test results of miR200b and miR200c. of patients. Conclusions: MiR200a, miR200b and miR200c are G. Gambino: None. R. Scarpitta: None. M. Farnoc- applicable biomarkers in ovarian cancer. chia: None. K. Zavaglia: None. M. Guerrieri: None. E. M. Szilágyi-Bónizs: None. É. Márton: None. J. Falaschi: None. M. Tancredi: None. F. Bonci: None. C. Lukács: None. B. Soltész: None. E. Janka: None. R. Congregati: None. S. Gana: None. S. Pistolesi: None. F. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None. Carbone: None. G. Naccarato: None. A. Gadducci: None. M. Caligo: None. P12.163C PALB2 c.2257 C&gtT mutation is a Greek founder and is P12.162B associated with early breast cancer diagnosis Mir200a, miR200b and miR200c as candidate biomarkers in the diagnosis of ovarian cancer A. Vagena,M.Papamentzelopoulou, D.Kalfakakou, D.Yannoukakos,I.Konstantopoulou, F.Fostira M.Szilágyi-Bónizs1,É. Márton1,J.Lukács2, B.Soltész1, E. Janka3,R.Póka2, B.Nagy1 NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece 1University of Debrecen, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Introduction: Germline mutations in PALB2 (Partner And Human Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary, 2University of LocalizerofBRCA2)arerare,attributingforapproximately Debrecen, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and 1–2%offamilialbreastcancer(BrCa)cases;theirfrequency Gynecology, Debrecen, Hungary, 3University of Debrecen, can be possibly inﬂuenced by founder effects. Deleterious Faculty of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Debrecen, PALB2 variants are clinically important, predisposing for Hungary breast, pancreatic and possibly, ovarian cancer. Ten, apparently unrelated, Greek families carried the PALB2 c.2257C>T (p.Arg753*) mutation; we therefore sought toAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 455 clarify its possible founder effect and to investigate asso- Treatment response was evaluated via computer tomogra- ciations with cancer diagnoses. phy before and 3 months after therapy. Methods: Genotyping for the mutation was pursued Results: Technically, all 63 samples were sequenced either by multi-gene panel testing, Sanger sequencing or successfullywithbothlibrarykits.NGSresultedinaverage Real-Time PCR, followed by haplotype analysis of 3.65 Mio passed ﬁlter reads for TST15 and 1.07 Mio for mutation carriers. Genotyping was performed on 2791 Ampliseq with mean amplicon coverages of 21718 and breast (median age 47.8 years±11.23), and 436 ovarian 4368, respectively. The ctDNA mutation frequencies were cancer(medianage52years, ±13)patients.Approximately between1.2%and21.7%.8/21patientsshowedKRASand/ one third of patients tested had family history (at least one or TP53 driver mutations. Concerning correlation with relative diagnosed with breast, ovarian or pancreatic therapy responsiveness, computer tomography and cfDNA cancer). analysis revealed concordant results in 17/21 patients. Results: The mutation prevalence was 0.36% (10/2791) Conclusions:ThisstudydemonstratesthatctDNAtesting and0.23%(1/436)inbreastandovariancases,respectively. is technically feasible for high throughput sequencing and Targeted testing on family members revealed ﬁve more therefore has great potential as a noninvasive monitoring carriers.Allelevenfamilieshadstrongfamilyhistory,while tool for PDAC patients. Nevertheless, reﬁnement of the pancreatic cancer diagnosis among close relatives was cancergenelistisnecessarysinceseveralcasesrevealedno reported in two families. Median age at breast cancer mutation in the 51 analyzed genes. The discordance of diagnosis among carriers was 41.8 years (range 33 – 58), genetic and clinical data in some patients suggests that a suggesting association with earlier breast cancer diagnosis deeper biological understanding of this tumor entity is (p= 0.02). Haplotype analysis revealed a common required. haplotype spanning 0.7Mb. S. Balendran-Braun: None. M. Kieler: None. S. Discussion: Herein, the PALB2 c.2257 C>T mutation is Liebmann-Reindl: None. G.W. Prager: None. B. shown to be a Greek founder mutation, statistically Streubel: None. signiﬁcantlyassociatedwithearlierbreastcancerdiagnosis, while families had strong family history of cancer, P12.165A speciﬁcally enriched for pancreatic cancer incidence. Polymorphic pre-miR-146a and synergistic action of all of A. Vagena: None. M. Papamentzelopoulou: None. D. its products on NTRK2 gene in Papillary Thyroid Kalfakakou: None. D. Yannoukakos: None. I. Konstan- Carcinoma topoulou: None. F. Fostira: None. A. Kubiak1,2,A. Wójcicka1,2,W.Wiechno3,G.Niewiński4, P12.164D K. Jażdżewski1,2 Cell-free circulating tumor DNA monitoring in pancreatic cancer patients 1Genomic Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, S. Balendran-Braun,M.Kieler, S.Liebmann-Reindl, G.W. Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of General and Thoracic Prager,B. Streubel Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 42nd Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Therapy, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland Introduction:Pancreaticductaladenocarcinoma(PDAC)is Numerous studies conﬁrm the deregulation of microRNAs a leading cause of cancer death worldwide. 80-85% of in various human cancers, including Papillary Thyroid patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage since clinical Carcinoma(PTC).TheG/Cheterozygosityinrs2910164in presentationoftenoccursverylateinthediseaseprocess.In miR-146a-3p predisposes to PTC and occurs as a somatic this study, we evaluated cell-free circulating tumor DNA mutation in thyroid tumors. Deleterious function of (ctDNA) of 21 PDAC patients before treatment and under rs2910164 results from the fact that the SNP is located in chemotherapy in serial plasma samples. the seed region of miR-146a-3p, thus heterozygous carriers MaterialandMethods:Threeserialplasmasamplesper of the SNP produce 3 mature miRs: miR-146a-5p, miR- patient were obtained. Library preparation of 63 liquid 146a-3p(G)and146a-3p(C).Interestingly,thereisonlyone biopsies was conducted using Illumina TruSight Tumor 15 gene (NTRK2 - involved in control of differentiation and (TST15) and the brand-new AmpliSeq for Illumina Cancer programmed cell death), identiﬁed in silico as concertedly HotSpot Panel, which covers 50 cancer-related genes. targetedbythethreeisoforms.Theaimofthisstudywasto analyze the interaction between all the miR-146a isoforms456 J.delPicchia and NTRK2. The analysis conducted in 60 pairs of PTC carriers (out of 27) of exclusively BRCA1 c.4035delA tumor and adjacent control tissue showed that the expres- mutation(22.2%; 95%CI 10.26 -41.10), acommon Baltic sionofNTRK2issigniﬁcantlydecreasedinPTC,witheven foundermutation.ThedifferencebetweenSTICdetectedin higher reduction in patients heterozygous for rs2910164 c.4035delA (6/27) and other mutations carriers (1/44) was (61% decrease in 84% of tumors, p=6.25-4). The analysis statistically signiﬁcant (P=0.0105). of miR:NTRK2 interaction in luciferase assay conﬁrmed Conclusion: Detection rate of precursor-only lesions that all the polymorphic miR-146a products interact with (STIC) in our study (9.85%) was slightly higher than target gene and this effect is additive, giving a 26%(p= previously reported (5-8%). We found statistically signiﬁ- 3.49-11) reduction of luciferase activity by the synergistic cant enrichment of BRCA1 c.4035delA mutation carriers in binding of all isomiRs compared with 21%(p=1.96-6) for STIC group, which may indicate that c.4035delA mutation the main miR-146a-5p isoform.This is the ﬁrst functional carriers may have an increased tumorigenesis rate in study of the synergistic effect exerted by polymorphic fallopian tubes. miRNAsproducedfromasingleprecursor.Theresultsmay V. Rudaitis: None. G. Januška: None. R. give a strong basis for better understanding of the role of Janavicius: None. miR-146a and NTRK2 gene in development of PTC. This work was supported by the Polish National Science Centre P12.167C Grant DEC-2012/07/N/NZ2/01333 Clinical validation of a gene panel reﬁnes diagnostics and A. Kubiak: None. A. Wójcicka: None. W. Wiechno: tailors personalised treatment in pediatric cancer patients None. G. Niewiński: None. K. Jażdżewski: None. D.A. Garcia-Dios,C. Perez-Garcia, M.Gonzalez-Acera, P12.166B M.Garcia-Ruiz, P. Marin-Garcia, C.Ruiz, C. deTorres, The incidence of occult ovarian neoplasia and cancer in J.Garcia-Planells BRCA1/2mutationcarriersafterthebilateralprophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy(PBSO):asinglecenterprospective Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna study (Valencia), Spain V. Rudaitis1,G.Januka1,R.Janavicius2,3 Introduction: Despite the remarkable improvement in survival, cancer remains the leading cause of mortality in 1Vilnius University Hospital Santara Klinikos, Gynecology childhood. In this work, we introduce the development and department, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius University Hospital clinical validation of a pediatric solid tumour gene panel, Santara Klinikos, Hematology, oncology and transfusion based on NGS. This gene panel allows the characterisation medicine center, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3State Reasearch Institute of somatic and germline mutations in solid tumours in Innovative Medicine Center, Vilnius, Lithuania primary or relapsing malignancies. The aim of the study is to provide clinically relevant information in diagnostics, Objective: to evaluate the incidence of occult neoplasia in prognostics and personalised therapy. specimen collected during PBSO and to determine the Methods:AnNGSmultigenepanelof254full-sequence signiﬁcanceofthisoperationinBRCA1/2mutationcarriers. genes is presented in this work. Tumour and blood paired Methods: Between January 2010 and October 2016 a samples were sequenced on a NextSeq 500 System total of 564 new germline BRCA1/2 mutation positive (Illumina) according to the manufacturer's instructions women were identiﬁed in VULSK. Laparoscopic PBSO (Agilent, SureSelect QXT protocol). FASTQ ﬁles were was performed for 71 eligible women, who opted for this analysed by means of a self-developed pipeline for the procedureandwereincludedinthisperspectivestudy.Fifty detection of somatic variants, indels and CNVs. nine women (83,1%) were BRCA1 and 12 (16,9%) were Results and Conclusions: A set of 40 samples were BRCA2 mutation carriers; study patients harboured 22 analysed in this study. First, we worked with fresh-frozen different BRCA1/2 germline mutations. samples, belonging to a retrospective cohort of 16 primary Results: STIC was diagnosed in seven (9.85%; 95% CI tumours including the ten most-frequent pediatric tumour 4.58 - 19.26) women and occult ovarian cancer (OC) was subtypes. In a second stage, we included 24 patient cases found in four (5.6%; 95% CI 1.80 - 14.03) women. The which directly beneﬁted from an accurate diagnostic and median age of women that were diagnosed with STIC or personalised treatment based on the present genetic OC at the time PBSO was 45,9 years (±6,68; P=0.7314), ﬁndings. Finally, we screened matching formalin-ﬁxed the youngest patient being 42 and the oldest 64 years. All parafﬁn-embedded (FFPE) tissue when this was available. 11 women who were diagnosed with STIC or OC had Here, we were able to validate and ﬁne-tune the BRCA1 mutations. Interestingly, STIC was detected in 6 performance of our gene panel in low-quality fragmentedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 457 DNA. Future studies include the testing in tissue obtained including STK11. Neither of the parents carried this fromminimallyinvasivetestssuchasliquidbiopsy.Thisis alteration. of special interest in those pediatric patients with unresect- Conclusions: We present an additional case of 19p13.3 able cancers or otherwise challenging to biopsy. deletion encompassing STK11 gene and forming a dis- D.A. Garcia-Dios: A. Employment (full or part-time); tinctive phenotype. Muscular symptoms, beside hypotonia, Signiﬁcant;Imegen.C.Perez-Garcia:A.Employment(full are not described before in 19p13.3 deletion patients. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Imegen. M. Gonzalez-Acera: A. Therefore,itisnotprecisely knownwhichgenein19p13.3 Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Imegen. M. region is responsible for muscular phenotype. Finding the Garcia-Ruiz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- most efﬁcient diagnostic algorithm for each patient is cant; Imegen. P. Marin-Garcia: None. C. Ruiz: A. challenged by large clinical and molecular variability of Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Imegen. C. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. deTorres:None.J.Garcia-Planells:A.Employment(full L. Roht: None. S.Pajusalu: None.T. Kahre: None.O. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; imegen. ilina: None. K. Õunap: None. P12.168D P12.169A Peutz-Jeghers syndrome caused by a de novo 19p13.3 Exome sequencing in a case of pheochromocytoma/ deletion containing STK11 gene detected by exome paraganglioma-polycythemia syndrome sequencing A. Tranchina1, E.Bonora1,F.Isidori1, C.Gurioli2,C. L. Roht1,S.Pajusalu1,2,T. Kahre1,2,O.ilina1,3,K. Õunap1,2 Ceccarelli3,D.Santini3,V.Vicennati4,E.Cosentino5,F.Minni2, D.Turchetti1 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Clinical 1Medical Genetics Unit, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, University ofBologna, Bologna, Italy, 2General Surgery Unit, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Biotechnology, Institute of S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University ofBologna, Bologna, Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Italy,3PathologyUnit,S.Orsola-MalpighiHospital,University Estonia of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Endocrinology Unit, S. Orsola- Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, Introduction: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is an autosomal 5InternalMedicineUnit,UniversityofBologna,Bologna,Italy dominant disease associated with gastrointestinal polyposis and mucocutaneous pigmentation. It usually results from Introduction: Germline mutations in PHD1, PHD2 genes germlinepointmutationsinSTK11gene,largedeletionsare and either germline and somatic mutations in EPAS1 have rare. Patients with 19p13.3 deletions encompassing STK11 been detected in some patients diagnosed with the rare gene have been reported to constitute a distinctive pheno- pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma with polycythemia type of intellectual disability, hypotonia and dysmorphic syndrome. features. MaterialsandMethods:Amandevelopedsymptomatic MaterialsandMethods:Wearepresentinga12-yearold arterial hypertension at age 29 and was subsequently girl with mild intellectual disability, tremor in hands, diagnosed with unilateral pheochromocytoma and multi- clumsy gait with muscle weakness and hypotonia, positive focal paragangliomas. Polycythemia had been reported as Gowers’ sign, dysmorphic facial features and mucocuta- an incidental ﬁnding at age 13 and conﬁrmed afterwards. neouspigmentation.AtﬁrstNGSgenepanel(~4800genes) JAK2 gene sequencing found no mutations. Family history was sequenced, which showed no alterations associated was irrelevant; polycythemia was excluded in the patient’s with her phenotype. Due to muscular phenotype muscle parents and younger brother. Whole Exome Sequencing biopsy was done, which showed lipid accumulation. In (WES)wasperformedonconstitutionalDNAofthepatient suspicion of inherited myopathy trio exome analysis was and his parents and on DNA from fresh-frozen paragan- performed and unexpectedly copy number algorithm glioma tissue collected at surgery, using the MedExome CoNIFER identiﬁed a deletion of chromosomal region library enrichment method (Roche) and the Illumina 19p13.3,whichwasconﬁrmedbychromosomalmicroarray Next500 platform. Data were aligned and ﬁltered using analysis (CMA). our internal pipeline. Variants were annotated using Results: The deletion of 19p13.3 (1,152,656-2,120,154) ANNOVAR and validated by Sanger sequencing. seen on exome analysis and later conﬁrmed by CMA was Results:WESfailedtodetectmutationsinEPAS1,PHD1 ~1 Mb long and comprised eight disease associated genes and PHD2, or in genes associated to hereditary pheochromocytoma-paraganglioma (VHL, SDHA, SDHB,458 J.delPicchia SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, TMEM127, MAX, KIF1B, Results: Mutations in BRCA1/2 genes in tumors were TCEB1). Compound heterozygosity for two very rare more common in patients with EP_CTC compared to variants (p.W342X and p.R571H) in OVGP1 (encoding patients without EP-CTC in peripheral blood (23.5% vs. forOviductalGlycoprotein1,expressedinovarybutalsoin 0%, p = 0.02), while there were no mutation in speciﬁc male gonads and in some cancers) were found in patient's gene associated with CTC_EMT. Further, 90 genes and 7 constitutionalDNA,inheritedfromtheparents,whileinthe miRs were expressed at signiﬁcantly different levels in tumorasomaticframeshiftvariantinCHST15(encodingfor EP_CTCs tumors and 199 genes and 13 miRs in carbohydrate sulfotransferase 15) was detected. CTC_EMT tumors when compared to tumors without Conclusions:Clinicalmanifestationsinthispatientseem detectable CTCs. Moreover 39 overlapping genes and 7 unrelatedtoknowngenes;studiesareongoingtoassessthe miRs were found to be expressed at signiﬁcantly different potential role of the variants detected. levels in tumors with EP_CTCs and/or CTC_EMT A. Tranchina: None. E. Bonora: None. F. Isidori: compared to tumors without detectable CTCs. None. C. Gurioli: None. C. Ceccarelli: None. D. Santini: Conclusions: We identiﬁed for the ﬁrst time various None.V.Vicennati:None.E.Cosentino:None.F.Minni: genomicalterationsintumortissueassociatedwithdifferent None. D. Turchetti: None. CTCs subpopulation in PBC patients. We suppose, that these genomic alterations could play a role in tumor P12.170B dissemination and might lead to identiﬁcation of new Complex analysis of genomic and transcriptomic therapeutic targets. alterations in tumor tissue associated with presence of Acknowledgements:ThisworkwassupportedbySlovak various subpopulations of circulating tumor cells in Research and Development Agency by grants APVV-14- primary breast cancer 0327 and APVV-16-0010. G.Repiska:None.G.Minarik:None.T.Tokar:None. G.Repiska1,G.Minarik2,T.Tokar3,M.Hajduk4,M.Karaba5,J. M.Hajduk:None.M.Karaba:None.J.Benca:None.L. Benca5,6, L.Krasnicanova2,J. Macuch5,G.Sieberova5,J. Krasnicanova: None. J. Macuch: None. G. Sieberova: Pindak5,7,M. Cristofanilli8,J.Reuben9,I.Jurisica7,J. None. J. Pindak: None. M. Cristofanilli: None. J. Mardiak1,5, M.Mego1,5 Reuben: None. I. Jurisica: None. J. Mardiak: None. M. Mego: None. 1Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Comenius University in Bratislava P12.171C Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3University The in-vitro evaluation of anticancer effect of DMU-212, a Health Network and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, novel resveratrol analog, on prostate cancer cells Canada,4InstituteofMolecularBiologyofSlovakAcademyof Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5National Cancer Institute, B.OzmenYelken1,C.Kayabaşi1,A.Aşik1,T.BalciOkcanoğlu2, Bratislava, Slovakia, 6St. Elizabeth University Department of F.Soğutlu1,R.Gasimli1,S.YilmazSusluer1,C.BirayAvci1,C. Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 7Slovak Medical University, Gunduz1 Bratislava, Slovakia, 8Division of Hematology-Oncology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 1Ege University Medical School, Department of Medical Chicago,IL,UnitedStates,9UniversityofTexasMDAnderson Biology, İzmir, Turkey, 2Near East University, Vocational Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States School of Health Sciences, Nicosia, Cyprus Background:CTCsplaymajorroleintumordissemination Prostatecancer (PCa) isthe second leading cause of cancer and progression and are one of the key components of among men in developed countries. It is known that Epi- metastatic cascade. The aim of this study was to identify thelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) plays a crucial role signaling pathways associated with presence of CTCs in in the progression and metastasis of PCa. It has been primary breast cancer (PBC) patients using comprehensive reported that DMU-212, which is one of the resveratrol genomics approach. analogs, induces G /M arrest. In our study, we focused on 2 Methods: This study included 78 patients with PBC. the effect of DMU-212 on the cell cycle, apoptosis, CTCsweredetectedbeforesurgerybyquantitativeRT-PCR migration, and invasion of prostate cancer cells. The cyto- assays for expression of epithelial (EP) or epithelial- toxicity effect of DMU-212 on LNCaP and PC-3 cells was mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes. Total RNA was determined by WST-8 test. While the apoptotic effect of used for expression proﬁling by microarray approach and determined IC dosages of DMU-212 was tested by 50 total DNA for breast cancer related gene panel Annexin V, PI analysis and ﬂow cytometry were used to resequencing. evaluateitseffectoncellcycle.TheinvasionandmigrationAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 459 ofPCa cellswere analyzedby“Cell BiolabsCytoSelect 96 to have pathogenic mutations: BRCA2(6), CHEK2(2), wellCellInvasionAssayKit”and“WoundHealingAssay”, PMS2(1), BRCA1(1), and TP53(1). respectively. PCR Arrays were assessed 84 EMT-related Conclusions: Genetic predisposition to prostate cancer gene.E-cadherinandvimentinlevelchangeswereassessed riskwasconﬁrmedin23.2%(16/69)ofpatientsseenaspart by immunoﬂuorescence. Additionally, the protein expres- of the PCGC service. This provides an opportunity to sionsofcyclinB1,E-cadherin,andβ-cateninweretestedby advocate for the clinical importance of germline genetic westernblot.ItwasobservedthattheIC dosageofDMU- testing in men with metastatic prostate cancer, not only for 50 212inducedapoptosis,reducedtheinvasionandmigration, their personal oncologic treatment, but also for the andinducedpredominantly G /MarrestinLNCaP andPC- identiﬁcation of at-risk family members. 2 3 cells. It was shown that DMU-212 inhibited the EMT by L.V.Naylor:None.M.Y.Laurino:None.B.A.Sjoding: suppressingtheWNTsignalingpathway,especially,onPC- None. H.H. Cheng: None. 3 cells. In conclusion, compatible with the hypothesis of thattheinhibitionofEMTmaypreventmetastasisinPCa;it P12.173A is believed that the DMU-212 has a potential role in the Genomeeditingtomaptheroleof7p14.3locusinprostate treatment of cancer. cancer B. Ozmen Yelken: None. C. Kayabaşi: None. A. Aşik: None. T. Balci Okcanoğlu: None. F. Soğutlu: None. R. B.Stringa,S.Garritano,A.Romanel,P.Gasperini,G.Petris,A. Gasimli: None. S. Yilmaz Susluer: None. C. Biray Avci: Cereseto, F. Demichelis None. C. Gunduz: None. University of Trento, Trento, Italy P12.172D Prostate cancer genetics clinic: First 16-month report of Prostate cancer (PCa), the second most common cancer establishing a multidisciplinary service amongmen,isahighlyheritablemolecularlyandclinically heterogeneousdisease.Inthisworkwefocusedonthestudy L. V.Naylor1, M.Y. Laurino1,B. A. Sjoding1, H.H.Cheng1,2,3 of germline variants as putative responsible for early somatic events in PCa. In silico analysis by our group 1Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, WA, United States, identiﬁed a non-coding polymorphic regulatory element at 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Fred the 7p14.3 locus that is associated with DNA repair and Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United hormone regulated transcript levels and with a prostate States cancer speciﬁc subclass with high genomic instability. In vitro studies conﬁrmed the enhancer activity of the locus Introduction: Recent studies show that over 10% of men and the binding afﬁnity for two transcription factors (TFs); with metastatic prostate cancer harbor a pathogenic germ- androgen receptor (AR) and CCAAT/Enhancer Binding linemutation.Toaddressthispatientpopulation,theSeattle Protein (C/EBP) beta (CEBPB). To ﬁrst proof a functional Cancer Care Alliance established the prostate cancer roleofthe7p14.3locusIdeleted731bpofthegenomicarea geneticsclinic(PCGC)inorderto(1)helpidentifypatients of interest in PC-3 cells by using CRISPR-Cas9. RNA-seq who meet criteria for clinical genetic testing, (2) ensure analyses performed upon AR overexpression and/or appropriate oncologic follow up for patients who carry a CEBPB silencing revealed signiﬁcant deregulation of the pathogenic mutation, (3) support cascade testing of at-risk transcriptome in edited versus non-edited cells (control family members and (4) inform and connect patients with cells). To well-characterize TFs binding motifs ﬂaking the research and clinical trial opportunities. locus, I am performing the disruption of AR and CEBPB Materials and Methods: From October 2016 to January motifsviaCRISPR-Cas9inprostatecelllines.Moreover,to 2018,60.9%(42/69)ofpatientsseeninPCGChadgermline betterstudytheroleofminoralleleofthepolymorphismon genetic testing ordered at the time of their clinic visit. genomic instability, I am currently working on the estab- Another 23.2% (16/69) of patients presented to the clinic lishment of isogenic PC-3 cells via CRISPR-Cas9. Once with germline genetic testing already complete. cloneswiththethreepossiblegenotypesareselected,Iplan Results: A total of 5 (11.9%; 5/42) germline mutations ontestingDNAdamageresponseunderrelevantconditions. that were presumed to be pathogenic were detected in This work is a proof of concept of germline predisposition BRCA2(2),HOXB13(1),MSH6(1),andATM(1).Analysis to molecularly distinct cancer subclasses and has the also showed 9 variants of uncertain signiﬁcance, and two potential to nominate new mechanisms of cancer patients were found to have an incidental ﬁnding (i.e. development. heterozygous for a pathogenic MUTYH mutation). For those previously tested, 11/16 (68.8%) patients were found460 J.delPicchia B. Stringa: None. S. Garritano: None. A. Romanel: Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Geneton s.r.o., None. P. Gasperini: None. G. Petris: None. A. Cereseto: Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Slovak Center of Scientiﬁc and None. F. Demichelis: None. Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia P12.174B HER2 gene ampliﬁcation in patients with prostate cancer: Introduction:Accordingtostatisticaldata,cancerisamong Evaluating a CISH-based method the main causes of morbidity and mortality in the Slovak Republic. Since genomic instability plays a crucial role in N.Shariﬁ themalignantprogressionofprostatecancer,itmaybeused as a potential biomarker. In current clinical practice in Department of Medical Genetics, Cancer Institute of Iran, Slovakia, histological examination of tumor tissue is used Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Teh, Tehran, Iran, for diagnosis and staging of cancer. This approach is far Islamic Republic of from a perfect solution because it requires invasive proce- dure. In addition, the obtained information is not always Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the most widespread sufﬁciently representative. On the other hand, genomic malignanciesintheworld.Theroleofthehumanepidermal instability plays a crucial role in the malignant progression growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) in the pathogenesis and of prostate cancer, so it may be used as a potential bio- progression of human PCa remains poorly understood. In marker. A non-invasive method based on liquid biopsy for contradiction with breast cancer, studies on HER2 over- detection of genomic instability represented by copy num- expression and gene ampliﬁcation in PCa have produced bervariations,mayleadtomoreprecisediagnosisandmay varying results, although the HER2 oncogene has been replace traditional, painful procedures on patients. implicated in the biology of numerous tumor types, and Materials and Methods: We performed whole genome serves as a prognostic marker and therapeutic target in sequencing analysis of cfDNA from set of patients with breastcancer.Technicalchallengesareconsideredthemain positive PSA screening result (10) and healthy individuals reasons for data discrepancies. Ampliﬁcation of the HER2 (10). We compared sequencing proﬁles of these groups to gene has previously been reported in PCa, in which it was identify cancer speciﬁc copy number aberrations. associatedwithtumorprogression.Thepresentstudyaimed Results: Identiﬁed differences between prostate cancer toevaluatetheprevalenceandclinicalsigniﬁcanceofHER2 patients and healthy individuals were summarized and ampliﬁcationinPCa.Atotalof32biopsysamplesobtained further analyzed to trace recurrent patterns. from human prostate adenocarcinomas were evaluated by Conclusions: Our results suggest that prostate cancer chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) to determine the speciﬁc copy number aberrations can be used as potential frequencyofpatientswithHER2geneampliﬁcations.High non-invasive biomarker. Introduction of this approach to copy numbers of HER2 were detected in 19 of the prostate routineclinicalpracticewouldbeatremendouscontribution tumorsanalyzed.Theresultsofthepresentstudysuggested to preventing or monitoring of cancer and personalizing that, in patients without ampliﬁcationofHER2, high levels anticancer therapy. of prostate-speciﬁc antigen or a high Gleason score were O. Pös: None. J. Budiš: A. Employment (full or part- not signiﬁcantly correlated with a high pathologic stage. time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton s.r.o., Bratislava, Slovakia. J. Furthermore, ampliﬁcation levels of the HER2 gene were Radvansky:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; directly associated with pathologic stage in patients with Geneton s.r.o., Bratislava, Slovakia. M. Haraniová: A. PCa. Therefore, the potential use of HER2 as a prognostic Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton s.r.o., factor or therapeutic target for PCa warrants further study. Bratislava,Slovakia.L.Strieková:A.Employment(fullor N. Shariﬁ: None. part-time); Modest; Geneton s.r.o., Bratislava, Slovakia. F. Ďuri: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton P12.175C s.r.o., Bratislava,Slovakia.M. Böhmer: None.J.Gazdar- Liquid biopsy for detection of genomic instability in ica: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; prostate cancer Genetons.r.o.,Bratislava,Slovakia.I.Gazdaricová:None. J. Turňa: None. T. Szemes: A. Employment (full or part- O.Pös1,J.Budiš2,3,J. Radvansky1,3,M. Haršaniová1,3,L. time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton s.r.o., Bratislava, Slovakia. Striešková1,3,F. Ďuri4,3, M.Böhmer1,J. Gazdarica1,3,I. Gazdaricová1, J.Turňa4,1, T.Szemes1,5,3 P12.176D Diagnostic competence of mir-375 and mir-93-5p serum 1FacultyofNaturalSciences,ComeniusUniversity,Bratislava, levels in malignant and non-malignant prostate diseases Slovakia, 2Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 461 Y. Dulgeroglu1, O.Eroglu2,3 P12.177A Genetic, pre and post-test ﬁndings in a survey of PTEN 1Kulu State Hospital, Medical Biochemistry Laboratory, mutation carriers Konya, Turkey, 2Bilecik Şeyh Edebali University, Faculty of Science and Letters, Department of Molecular Biology and S.Ekram1,2,V.Cusin1,3,4,C.Colas1,5,S.TezenasduMontcel6,F. Genetics, Bilecik, Turkey, 3Bilecik Sehy Edebali University, Caux7,M. Warcoin1, E.Guillerm1,M.Eyries1,F. Coulet1,F. Biotechnology Research and Application Center, Bilecik, Soubrier1 Turkey 1Département de Génétique, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, Introduction: The study purpose is to examine the diag- France, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Umm Al-Qura nosticcompetenceofmiR-375andmiR-93-5pserumlevels University faculty of medicine, Makkah, SA, Saudi Arabia, in prostate cancer differential diagnosis. It is also aimed to 3Hôpital Privé d'Antony, Antony, France, 4Hôpital Privé des examine whether there is an interfering situation in the Peupliers,Paris,France,5InstitutCurie,ServicedeGénétique, differentiation of chronic prostatitis, benign prostatic Paris,France,6DépartementdeBiostatistique,SantéPublique hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer, considering the et Information Médicale (BIOSPIM) GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, oncogenic and tumor suppressor properties of miRNAs Paris, France, 7Service de Dermatologie, CHU Paris Seine- together with the proinﬂammatory characteristics. Saint-Denis - Hôpital Avicenne, Bobigny, France Materials and Methods: 25 Patients with BPH, 10 patients with chronic prostatitis and 33 patients with Introduction: Germline heterozygous mutations of PTEN prostate cancer were included in the study. RNA isolation, areresponsibleforhamartomatumoursyndrome(PHTS),a cDNA synthesis and qRT-PCR steps were performed with wide spectrum of phenotypes characterised by high tumour Qiagen branded kits based on SYBR Green method, using risk in diverse tissues. PTEN loss of function also leads to the protocol of the commercial company. For statistical macrocephaly, risk of autism, psychomotor delay (PD) and analysis, -ΔCt values, obtained from the use of ce-miR-39 vascular anomalies. Ctvaluesinnormalization,wereused.Differencesbetween Methods,PatientsandResults:Weanalysedacohortof groups were tested by independent sample t test and index cases referred to our laboratory for PTEN gene varianceanalysis.ROCanalysiswasperformedtocalculate mutation testing (SNV, indel and CNV analysis) : among thediagnosticcompetence."Foldchange"calculationswere 151 children referred, 30 were found to have a PTEN performedonlineonQiagenwebpage.Inallanalyzes,alpha mutation, and 47 % were estimated de novo. All positive error level was accepted as 0.05. casespresentedwithmacrocephalyand91%hadaPD.The Results: The results are summarized in Table-1. positive predictive value (PPV) for macrocephaly is 24% Conclusions: It was observed that miR-375 and miR-93- (CI28-48) and 23% (CI16-31) for PD/autism. 5p differ in signiﬁcantly between malignant and non- Adults were referred for Cowden syndrome suspicion malignant disease groups. It was assessed that the sensitivity (n=122) and presented with diverse clinical ﬁndings of miR-375 to differentiate non-malignant diseases from considered as criteria for the syndrome. The PPV were malignant diseases was higher than prostate speciﬁc antigen important for Lhermitte-Duclos syndrome (89%, CI 52- (PSA)andchronicprostatitismaybeaninterferingcondition 100%), cutaneous manifestations (55%, CI: 36-74), macro- in BPH and cancer differential diagnosis. cephaly(38%:CI28-48),andintestinal polyps (42%, CI:23- 61). Although poorly speciﬁc, benign breast lesions (58%, Results CI: 32-86) and benign thyroid lesions (46%, CI:31-69) ComparedGroups miRNA Pvalue FoldChange AUC Speciﬁcity Sensitivity show high PPV. Malignant-Non- miR-375 <0.001 -4.48 0.781 91% 46% malignant Among 46 adult mutation carriers, post-test examination Malignant-Non- miR-93- 0.045 -1.79 0.662 91% 23% identiﬁed a Lhermitte-Duclos in 3 cases and vascular malignant 5p anomalies were identiﬁed in 6 more patients. Two breast BPH-Chronicprostatitis miR-375 0.324 – – – – BPH-Chronicprostatitis miR-93- 0.338 – – – – and 2 thyroid cancers were also detected within a two-year 5p follow-up.Vascular anomalieswerealso found in children. BPH-Cancer miR-375 <0.001 -5.60 0.829 91% 56% BPH-Cancer miR-93- 0.392 – – – – Conclusions: These results conﬁrm the frequency of de 5p novo mutations found in children and emphasize the Chronicprostatitis- miR-375 0.169 – – – – importance of a systematic search for all features of PTEN cancer Chronicprostatitis- miR-93- 0.046 -2.78 0.744 91% 50% syndrome in mutation carriers enabling an appropriate cancer 5p management. S. Ekram: None. V. Cusin: None. C. Colas: None. S. Y. Dulgeroglu: None. O. Eroglu: None. TezenasduMontcel:None.F.Caux:None.M.Warcoin:462 J.delPicchia None. E. Guillerm: None. M. Eyries: None. F. Coulet: 1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, INRaSTES, National None. F. Soubrier: None. Center for Scientiﬁc Research "Demokritos", Athens, Greece, 2Protein Chemistry Laboratory, INRaSTES, National Center P12.178B for Scientiﬁc Research "Demokritos", Athens, Greece, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome due to a new PTEN 3DepartmentofGenetics&Biotechnology,FacultyofBiology, gene mutation National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 4Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, INRaSTES, J.Zima1,Á.Till1,R.Ripszám1,A.Szabó1,Z.Bánfai1,Z.Laufer2, National Center for Scientiﬁc Research, Athens, Greece K. Hadzsiev1 Introduction:RAD51DisamemberoftheRAD51protein 1Department of Medical Genetics & Szentagothai Research family and its protein product is known to be involved in Center, University of Pécs, Clinical Center, Medical School, theDNA repair mechanismby homologousrecombination. Pécs,Hungary,2DepartmentofChildNeurology,Universityof RAD51D germline mutations have been associated with Pécs, Clinical Center, Medical School, Pécs, Hungary ovarian (OC) and breast cancer (BC) predisposition. Although the association to OC is established, BC risk Introduction:Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcabasyndromeispart conferred by RAD51D mutations is still questionable. Our ofPTENHamartomaTumorSyndromealongwithCowden aimwastoassessthefrequencyofRAD51Dmutationsina syndrome, PTEN-related Proteus syndrome and Proteus- large cohort of Greek patients. like syndrome. It is characterized by macrocephaly, multi- Materials and Methods: We screened 609 patients ple noncancerous tumors, and tumor-like growths. 60% of diagnosedwithOC,unselectedforageorfamilyhistoryand cases are associated with PTEN gene mutations. 569BCpatientsdiagnosedunderage55witharelativewith Materials and Methods: We present the case of a 15 BC or OC, for RAD51D germline mutations. All patients year old girl we have been investigated since she was 2 screened by NGS, were previously tested negative for yearsoldformacrosomia.Shehadaspinabiﬁda,rightsided BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. facial nerve palsy, and developed deep vein thrombosis. Results: We identiﬁed four pathogenic mutations in four Meantime she undervent a subtotal thyroidectomy for unrelatedindividuals withfamilyhistoryofBCand/or OC. unilateral thyroid adenoma, she had a right sided ovarial ThreeofthecarriershaddevelopedBCwhiletheotherone cyst resection, and an endovascular correction of a right was an OC patient, thus accounting for a mutation sided arterio-venous ﬁstula at the transition of sinus frequency of 0.16% in the OC cohort, and 0.53% in the transversus and sigmoideus. Kariotyping, Sotos syndrome BC cohort. One of the detected mutations is novel (c.738 FISH testing and PTEN gene Sanger sequencing were +1G>A), while the rest had been detected previously (p. performed. Gln151Ter, p.Arg186Ter, p.Arg300Ter). It is noteworthy Results: She had normal kariotype, Sotos syndrome thatamongfamilymembersofthefourcarriers,thirteenBC FISH testing turned out negative. A new heterozygous cases were reported and only four OC cases, suggesting a missense mutation c.2104G>T (p.Val249Gly) was detected BC association to RAD51D mutations. in the PTEN gene. In silico analyses predicted it to be Conclusions: RAD51D should be implemented into the deleterious. multigenepaneltestingofferedforgenetic screeningofBC Conclusions: PTEN mutations disrupt the mTOR cell or OC families, since RAD51D carriers may beneﬁt from signalling pathway, thus leading to a longer cell survival the administration of PARP inhibitors. and proliferation. Treatment with mTOR inhibitors should I. Konstanta: None. F. Fostira: None. P. Apostolou: be tested for this cathegory of patients. None. E. Stratikos: None. D. Kalfakakou: None. P. J. Zima: None. Á. Till: None. R. Ripszám: None. A. Kollia: None. I. Konstantopoulou: None. D. Szabó: None. Z. Bánfai: None. Z. Laufer: None. K. Yannoukakos: None. Hadzsiev: None. P12.182B P12.179C A challenging clinical case. Patient with multiple primary ContributionofRAD51Dgermlinemutationsinbreastand neoplasias and no family history of cancer: Richter ovarian cancer in Greece syndrome versus Familial Melanoma plus Li-Fraumeni syndrome I.Konstanta1, F.Fostira1,P. Apostolou1, E.Stratikos2, D. Kalfakakou1,P.Kollia3,I.Konstantopoulou1,D.Yannoukakos4 A. Castillejo1,2,M.I.Castillejo1,2, A.B. Sánchez-Heras3,N. Garrigós4,G.Capellá5,C. Lázaro5, E.Serra6,J. L.Soto1,7Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 463 1Molecular Genetics Unit. Elche University Hospital, Elche, P12.183C Spain, 2Foundation for the Promotion of Biomedical and DNAbaseexcisionrepairinRubinstein-Taybi(RSTS)cells: Sanitary Research (FISABIO), Valencia, Spain, 3Genetic insights to cancer predisposition of RSTS patients Counseling in Cancer Unit. Elche University Hospital, Elche, Spain, 4Alicante Immunology Center, San Juan, Spain, E. Prosperi1, C.Gervasini2,C.Scalera1, I.Dutto1,M.Thillon1, 5Hereditary Cancer Program, Joint Program on Hereditary G.Ticli1, O.Cazzalini3,M.Savio1,L. Larizza4 Cancer, Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL campus, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 6Hereditary Cancer Group, 1Istituto di Genetica Molecolare del CNR, Pavia, Italy, Program on Predictive and Personalized Medicine of Cancer 2Medical Genetics, Dept. Health sciences, Università degli (PMPPC), Germans Trias i Pujol Research Institute (IGTP), Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Medicina Can Ruti Campus, Badalona, Spain, 7Alicante Institute for Molecolare ; Unità di Immunologia e Patologia generale; Health and Biomedical Research (ISABIAL - FISABIO Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 4Laboratory of Medical Foundation), Alicante, Spain Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy Common risk factors for multiple primary neoplasias are inheritedpredispositiontocancer;cancer-promotingaspects Introduction:TheRubinstein–Taybisyndrome(RSTS)isa of lifestyle; hormonal and environmental factors; treatment rare genetic disease characterized by growth defects, intel- ofthepreviousprimarycancerandincreasedsurveillanceof lectual disability, and an increased tumor formation. RSTS cancer survivors. patients carry heterozygous mutation/deletion of the A case with multiple primary neoplasias and no relevant CREBBP or EP300 gene encoding CBP or p300 lysine family history of cancer was tested to search for a putative acetyltransferases, essential proteins playing a key role in genetic etiology of her neoplasias. transcription and in epigenetic regulation through histone The patient under study was diagnosed of endometrial acetylation. In addition, both proteins acetylate p53 and cancer, melanoma, breast cancer and chronic lymphatic DNA repair factors involved in nucleotide (NER) and base leukemia(CLL)atage58,60,76and79years,respectively. excision repair (BER). BloodDNAwasanalyzedwithaNGScustompanelof135 Methods: In order to investigate whether a possible hereditary cancer genes (I2HCPv2.2). SureCall-Cartagenia- alteredDNAdamageresponse(DDR)mayconcurtoRSTS Agilent tools were used for the bioinformatic analysis. pathogenesis we have analyzed DNA repair efﬁciency in AMG criteria were used for variant classiﬁcation. Patho- RSTSlymphoblastoidcells(LCLs).Tothisend,RSTScells genic variants were conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. were treated with potassium bromate, a chemical inducing We found two pathogenic mutations: CDKN2A: oxidative DNA damage, and their viability assessed. c.152dupT;p.V51fs (not previously reported) and TP53: Results: RSTS cells were more sensitive than normal c.637C>T;p.R213* (recurrently reported as somatic muta- LCLs to oxidative DNA damage, but also to agents tion).Thefactthatthemutantallelefrequencyofthesetwo inducing replication stress such as the Topoisomerase I pathogenic variants was around 0.20, suggests the possibi- inhibitor camptothecin. In addition, we have analyzed the lityofbeingsomaticmutationsasaconsequenceofanearly acetylation levels of factors participating in DNA base Richter syndrome not clinically evidenced. This is a CLL excisionrepair(BER),suchasOGG1,andfoundthatthese form with a highly aggressive phenotype. In this situation, levels were decreased in RSTS cells. nogeneticcausecouldjustifythepersonalhistoryofcancer. Conclusions:WefoundBERdefectsinRSTScellsusing An alternative possibility is that the patient carries two the Comet and DNA incision assays. Finally, EP300 mosaic alleles in genes responsible for Familial Melanoma mutated cells were transfected with p300-plasmid to and Li-Fraumeni syndromes, respectively. Although this complement the diminished protein levels. In the comple- scenario is very unlikely, it would explain the previous mented cells the sensitivity to potassium bromate was neoplasias as caused by genetic predisposition. restored to levels approaching those observed in normal In some special circumstances, differential genetic LCLs,indicatingthatDNArepairdefectsinRSTScellsare diagnosis might be highly difﬁcult. Further studies are associated to p300 or CBP protein haploinsufﬁciency. needed to clarify this dilema. E. Prosperi: None. C. Gervasini: None. C. Scalera: A. Castillejo: None. M.I. Castillejo: None. A.B. None. I. Dutto: None. M. Thillon: None. G. Ticli: None. Sánchez-Heras: None. N. Garrigós: None. G. Capellá: O. Cazzalini: None. M. Savio: None. L. Larizza: None. None.C.Lázaro:None.E.Serra:None.J.L.Soto:None. P12.184D Fluorescenceinsituhybridizationasatoolinthediagnosis of soft tissue sarcomas464 J.delPicchia J.molíkova, I.Urbanovska,M. Uvírová, S.Pitronová, R. 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,UniversityHospitalofNorth Skalikova, J.imová,P. Heranova, R. Mech, D.iak, J. Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Dvořáčková, D.Konvalinka,M.Smolikova Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital Trust, Skien, Norway, CGB,a.s., ostrava, Czech Republic 4Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Department of Medical Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are rare solid cancers of Genetics, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway mesenchymal cell origin accounting for <1 % of adult cancers and they represent histologically and molecularly Introduction: Schwannomatosis (OMIM# 615670) is a heterogeneous group of tumors.The diagnostics of STS is tumor predisposition syndrome characterized by benign difﬁcult because of heterogeneity and low incidence, but it intracranial and spinal nerve root tumors as well as per- is necessary to diagnose the highly malignant sarcomas ipheral nerve sheath tumors that rarely undergo malignant early and accurately. Speciﬁc genetic ﬁndings as translo- transformation. Mosaic neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2 - cations of SS18, COL1A/PDGFB, EWSR1, DDIT3 genes OMIM# 101000) and schwannomatosis may have similar havebeenfoundin30%STS,andtheycanbedetectedby clinical manifestations. Treatment, follow-up and genetic ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).Between January counseling are dependent upon correct diagnosis. Case 2014 and January 2017, in our laboratory, 17 formalin- report: This 61-year-old man presented with a spinal ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded (FFPE) tissues were examined by schwannoma at age 51 years and was diagnosed with a FISH using probes:Kreatech ON SYT (18q11) Break, ON unilateral vestibular schwannoma at age 60. Additional EWSR1 (22q12) Break, ON CHOP (12q13) Break, Zyto- ﬁndings include four café-au-lait spots and multiple non- Vysion SPEC COL1A1/PDGFB Dual color.A total of 17 tender subcutaneous tumors, one veriﬁed as a lipoma. His cases were evaluated, namely a Ewing sarcoma (7 cases), father has non-tender subcutaneous tumors on both fore- Synovial sarcoma (8 cases), Liposarcoma (1) and Derma- arms that have not been biopsied, family history is other- toﬁbrosarcoma (1).Rearrangements of investigated genes wise non-contributory. were identiﬁed in 11 samples (64,7 %): rearrangement of Methods/Results: Genetic analyses were performed on SS18 in 3 cases of synovial sarcoma, rearrangement of DNA extracted from blood and tumor tissue. In blood, EWSR1 in 4 cases of Ewing sarcoma, rearrangement of MLPAandSangersequencingofDNAandcDNAforNF1 genes COL1A1/PDGFB in one case of dermatoﬁ- and NF2 was normal and an exome-based panel for brosarcoma and rearrangement of gene DDIT3 in one case schwannomatosis revealed a novel heterozygous variant in of liposarcoma.In 2 cases of suspect Ewing sarcoma with LZTR1(NM_006767.3)c.2463dupp.(Asp822Argfs*29).In rearrangement of EWSR1 the ﬁnal histopathological diag- DNA extracted from a single tumor, MLPA identiﬁed a nosis were olfactory neuroblastoma and extraskeletal heterozygous deletion of chromosome 22q11q12 which myxoid chondrosarcoma.6 FISH negative cases (35,3 %) included LZTR1, SMARCB1 and NF2, and Sanger sequen- were reported as stromal endometrial carcinoma, malignant cingdetectedahemizygousvariantinNF2(NM_000268.3) peripheral nerve sheath tumor, leiomyosarcoma, adeno- c.222del p.(Trp74Cysfs*49) as well as the constitutional carcinoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma.Rearrangements of LZTR1 variant in the hemizygous state. Parental analyses investigated genes have been identiﬁed by FISH in 64,7 % are pending. cases, the ﬁndings were corresponding with the ﬁnal diag- Conclusions: Results of tumor and germline analyses in nosis and with literature. thisindividualsupportthe4-hit/3-stepmodeloftumorigen- J. molíkova:None. I. Urbanovska: None. M. Uvírová: esisinLZTR1-associatedschwannomatosis.Comprehensive None. S. Pitronová: None. R. Skalikova: None. J. tumor and germline testing may facilitate differentiation of Šimová: None. P. Heranova: None. R. Mech: None. D. mosaic NF2 and schwannomatosis. iak: None. J. Dvořáčková: None. D. Konvalinka: None. S. Briskemyr: None. C. Jonsrud: None. C.F. Rustad: M. Smolikova: None. None.T.E.Prescott:None.G.Evans:None.M.J.Smith: None. M. Nystad: None. H. Hjellnes: None. A.S. Bø: P12.185A None. Ø.L. Holla: None. C. Schmidt: None. R. Østern: Furthersupportforthe4-hit/3-stepmodeloftumorigenesis None. G.Å.M. Hansen: None. in LZTR1- associated schwannomatosis P12.186B S. Briskemyr1,C. Jonsrud1,C. F. Rustad2,T. E.Prescott3,G. Expanded sequencing capacity for increased depth and Evans4,M.J.Smith4,M.Nystad1,H.Hjellnes1,A.S.Bø3,Ø.L. plexy using the Ion Torrent S5 platform to analyze Holla3,C. Schmidt5,R.Østern5,G.Å.M. Hansen1 oncogenic markersAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 465 J.Gioia, J.Veitch, E. Lagier, C.Parikh,K. Atehortua-Khalsa Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Center for Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, South San Francisco, CA, United Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University of Bonn, Bonn, States Germany Introduction: Use of Next Generation Sequencing tech- Background: Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS) is a nology for analysis of genetic markers related to speciﬁc poorly deﬁned colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome cancer types is now a common laboratory technique. The characterized by the occurrence of multiple and/or large sequencing capacity per instrument use is a limiting factor serrated lesions throughout the colon. To date, only few in the application of sequencing for oncogenic analysis. molecular signatures have been described and the etiology Here we report system improvements to the Ion S5 Gen- ofthesyndromehasnotbeenidentiﬁedinthevastmajority eStudio platform that double the capacity of the number of of patients. samples analyzed per sequencing run. Methods: To uncover causative germline mutations, MaterialsandMethods:TheOncomineComprehensive exomes of 31 SPS patients have been sequenced (Illumina Assay v3 (OCAv3) is an assay that targets 161 genes HiSeq)usingleukocyteDNA.Thevariantswereﬁlteredfor relevanttosolidtumorsandiscompatiblewithFFPEDNA rare (MAF: biallelic ≤ 1%, heterozygous ≤0.1% according and RNA. We used this panel as a test case for the newly to dbSNP, EVS, and ExAC), truncating, and missense releasedIon550chip,whichhasdoublethecapacityofthe variants (pathogenic in ≥ 2/3 prediction tools). For data 540 chip. analysis and ﬁltering, the GATK software and the Results: The 550 chip allowed for simultaneous analysis Cartagenia Bench Lab NGS Software were applied; of32samples(16DNA+16RNA)inonesequencingrun. functional scores were used to prioritize the variants. Greater than 99% concordance was observed between the Results: After stringent ﬁltering steps, potentially bialle- 550 chip and the 540 chip with respect to recognition of lic variants were found in 60 genes, with seven genes variants in commercially available controls and tissue functioning in known cancer-associated pathways such as samples of known truth. We also used a set of control DNA-repair and AKT1-signaling. Heterozygous variants in samples to optimize variant calling parameters for this at least two patients were found in 334 genes. These panel,reducingthefrequencyoffalsepositivevariantcalls. encompass four regulators of the oncogene induced Conclusions: Use of the Ion 550 chip for oncogenic senescence pathway, three genes involved in DNA repair analysis by DNA sequencing supports double the capacity and two genes known to be causal for other polyposis of the 540 chip with no decrease in accuracy or quality. syndromes. The most interesting ﬁnding was a hetero- Furthermore, the greater sequencing capacity achieved can zygous RNF43 splice-site mutation identiﬁed in an index also be applied to increasing the throughput or detection patient and his affected daughter. limit of other assays, such as liquid biopsies. Conclusions: The data indicate that exome sequencing J. Gioia: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; mightidentifycausativevariantsforSPS.Thecurrentwork- Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. J. Veitch: A. Employment (full upincludes testing ofrelativestodeterminethezygosityof or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. E. assumed biallelic variants, analyzing the segregation with Lagier: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; the phenotype, and functional analyses of the most Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. C. Parikh: A. Employment (full interesting variants. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. K. S.Peters:None.C.Trueck:None.J.Altmueller:None. Atehortua-Khalsa: A. Employment (full or part-time); K.Kayser:None.E.Mangold:None.R.Adam:None.H. Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Thiele: None. I. Spier: None. S. Aretz: None. P12.187C P12.188D Exome sequencing identiﬁed potential candidate genes for Diagnostic value of SHB expression in human prostate serrated polyposis syndrome cancer tissue and in benign prostatic hyperplasia S.Peters1,C.Trueck1,J.Altmueller2,3,K.Kayser1,E.Mangold1, M.Schmidt1,E.Svobodova2,V.Semanekova2,M.Klabanova3,J. R. Adam4, H.Thiele2,I.Spier1,5,S. Aretz1,5 Mares2 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, 1Urology Clinic, 2nd Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech Germany, 2Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Diana Lucina, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Center for Prague, Czech Republic466 J.delPicchia The general diagnosis for metastatic CaP remains poor and assay. The ready-to-use plates are preloaded with primers locally advanced disease is difﬁcult to treat successfully. foralltheeightfrequentlystudiedhotspotregionsofKRAS Except the PSA, no speciﬁc diagnostic test for CaP is andNRASgenesthusonlythePCRmixandtemplatesneed currently available. SHB protein takes part in regulation to be added. Minimized hands-on time, extra convenience system of apoptosis, angiogenesis and cell cycle. Reduced and ﬂexibility gained by using the SeqStudio Genetic tumour growth in vivo and increased c-Abl activity in PC3 Analyzerwhichutilizesanall-in-onecartridgeandprovides prostate cancer cells overexpressing SHB was described in simple plate setup with easy-to-use touch-screen interface mice. In this ﬁrst-ever study evaluating SHB expression in and real-time/remote data monitoring. human prostate, transcription levels of SHB in prostate Results: The performance of the assay on the SeqStudio cancer and benign prostate hyperplasia was compared. instrument was tested in the laboratory of Dr. Quagliata Isolation of total RNA from prostate tissue in 127 patients (University of Basel, Switzerland) on twenty-two FFPE with histologically proved prostate cancer and 55 patients DNAsamplesderivedfromcoloncancerbiopsies.Variants with benign prostate hyperplasia was performed. After (ranging from 5.25% to 91.1%) were successfully detected qRT-PCR, comparisons of transcriptional levels in prostate even from research samples where less than 1 ng of input cancerandBPHandinprostatecancergroupsclassiﬁedby DNA per reaction was used. Only limited amount of staging, Gleason score, age and PSA were evaluated. microdissectedFFPEsections wereavailable for 6research Underexpression of SHB in prostate cancer tissue compar- sampleswhereDNAconcentrationswerebelow1ng(down ingtobenignprostatehyperplasia(p<0.001)anddecreased to 0.094 ng). expression in locally advanced disease (T2 v.s. T3-4) Conclusions: RAS mutations down to 5% level can be (p= 0.0066)weredetected.Therewerenodifferencesin detected even from less than 1 ng FFPE DNA with comparisonofthegroupsdistributedbyGleasonscore,age simpliﬁed workﬂow, fast turnaround time and low cost per andPSA.SHBwasunderexpressedinprostatecancertissue sample. compared to BPH and its expression was lower in locally A. Gerstner: None. E. Schreiber: None. S.`. Higdon: advanced tumours. This data may be used to make the None. S. Jackson: None. H. Leong: None. H. Sangha: diagnosis of prostate cancer more precise. Research was None. S. Schneider: None. K. Varma: None. supported by Diana Lucina, GAUK 200 090 and IG 00064203. P12.190B M. Schmidt: None. E. Svobodova: None. V. Semane- A novel method for detection of somatic L1HS kova: None. M. Klabanova: None. J. Mares: None. retropositional events in tumor cells P12.189A M.V. Saliutina1,2, A.Y. Komkov1,G.A. Nugmanov1,Y.B. Improved performance and workﬂow using Sanger Lebedev1,I.Z. Mamedov1 sequencing for low-level somatic mutation detection from low amount of formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded (FFPE) 1Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of DNA Russian Academy of Science, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian A.Gerstner,E.Schreiber,S.`.Higdon,S.Jackson,H.Leong,H. Federation Sangha,S. Schneider,K. Varma Introduction:Retroelementactivityisoneoftheimportant Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, South San Francisco, CA, United causesofthehumangenomeinstability.Inpreviousstudies States thesomaticinsertionsofL1HSretroelementswererevealed in neurons and in different types of tumors. Modern Introduction:Sangersequencingisoftenusedinoncology approaches for somatic L1HS detection are based on ana- research applications for molecular proﬁling of cancers. lysis of whole genome sequences or target massive Applied Biosystems™ Minor Variant Finder (MVF) Soft- sequencing of fragments adjusted to retroelement’s inser- ware now enables low-level variant detection in Sanger tions. However, it is still hard to distinguish true somatic sequencing traces. RAS mutational testing is frequently retroelement’s insertions and various artifacts. Here we performed by clinical researchers due to the strong corre- describe an advanced artifact-resistant method for the lation between RAS mutational proﬁles of colorectal can- detection of somatic L1HS insertions. cersandtheiranti-epidermalgrowthfactorreceptor(EGFR) Materials and Methods: UMI-containing adapters were response. ligated to restriction digested DNA from 5000 seminoma Materials and Methods: We have improved and cells and 5000 normal cells of testicle tissues. Tumor and simpliﬁed the workﬂow for the extended RAS research control libraries were prepared by multiplex PCR withAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 467 biotinylated L1HS-speciﬁc primers covering 3'- and 5'- ACMG and ENIGMA criteria, our results support the re- ﬂanksoffull-sizedandtruncatedL1HSinsertions.Obtained classiﬁcation of 12 variants from VUS to pathogenic (c.67 amplicons were extracted by streptavidin magnetic beads +1G>T, c.67+3A>G, c.426-12del5, c.441A>G, capture. The ﬁltration of possible artifacts was based on c.451G>A, c.475+3A>T, c.516+4delAA, c.517-1G>A, statistical models built on known ﬁxed L1HS insertions. c.517G>T, c.631+1G>A, c.632+3A>G and c.632-3G>C) Results: The use of restriction endonuclease instead of and3fromVUStolikelypathogenic(c.97G>A,c.100G>A, random fragmentation enables to distinguish true ﬂanks c.476-3C>A). from chimeras. Sequencing of captured ampliﬁed copies of The reproducibility of this technique was supported by L1HS insertions allows to use template DNA for further previous studies based on minigenes or/and patient RNA. insertion validation. UMI provide accurate count of cells MGBR2_2-9 is a robust tool which provides RNA data for bearing particular somatic insertions. Sequencing of both the clinical interpretation of splicing variants. ﬂanks enables to identify target site duplications - Acknowledgements: Projects FIS PI13/01749 and PI17/ characteristic features of transpositional events. 00227 (ISCIII, Spanish Ministry of Economy and Compe- Conclusions: The developed method is highly sensitive, titivity), BIO/VA34/15 (Junta Castilla-León); EF-B is resistant to various artifacts and is able to detect somatic supported by a predoctoral fellowship (University of retroelement insertions in bulk DNA as well as in single Valladolid/Banco Santander). cells. Funds: RSF grant #18-14-00244, RFBR #17-04- E. Fraile-Bethencourt: None. A. Valenzuela-Palomo: 01280, #16-04-00779. None. B. Díez-Gómez: None. A. Acedo: None. E. M.V. Saliutina: None. A.Y. Komkov: None. G.A. Velasco: None. Nugmanov: None. Y.B. Lebedev: None. I.Z. Mamedov: None. P12.193A NovelregionswithLOHinsporadicrenalangiomyolipoma P12.191C Classiﬁcationof15newBRCA2exons2-9splicingvariants K. Anoshkin1,2,K. Mosyakova3,Y. Shpot3,D.Zaletaev3,A. by hybrid minigenes Vinarov3,K. Karandasheva1,V. Strelnikov1,2 E. Fraile-Bethencourt1,A. Valenzuela-Palomo1,B.Díez- 1Reasearch Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Gómez1,A. Acedo2,E. Velasco1 Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University,Moscow,RussianFederation,3I.M.SechenovFirst 1Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (CSIC/UVa), Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Valladolid, Spain, 2AC-GEN Reading Life SL, Valladolid, Federation Spain NovelregionswithLOHinsporadicrenalangiomyolipoma The clinical classiﬁcation of BRCA2 variants of uncertain Introduction: Sporadic renal angiomyolipoma (RA) is a signiﬁcance (VUS) poses a challenge in human genetics. common benign neoplasm, which occurs in 13 from 10000 Historically,variantshavebeencataloguedfromtheprotein people, predominantly in women. Recent researches show outlook, however, upstream gene-expression mechanisms, contradictory results of mutational proﬁling of sporadic suchassplicing,couldbeimpairedbychangesintheDNA RAs. According to COSMIC database, 45% RAs have sequence. Disrupted splicing variants could alter the ORF mutations in TSC2, which is involved in PI3k/akt/mTOR provokingtheBRCA2truncationandbeinvolvedincancer pathway.HerewedemonstratetwonovelregionswithLOH development.Here,wehaveevaluatedthesplicingeffectof in15q14-q15.1and16q21-q22.1,apart from sixcases with 83 BRCA2 exons 2-9 variants by functional assays using LOH in 16p13.3 in sporadic RAs (table). the minigene MGBR2_2-9. Materials and Methods: 409 tumor related genes were The MGBR2_2-9 was built based on the splicing vector sequenced by NGS in 20 samples of sporadic angiomyo- pSAD (Patent-P201231427, CSIC). In silico selected lipoma tissues from 19 women and one man. For two BRCA2 variants, from BIC and UMD databases, were samples(#6and#7)micro-arrayanalysiswasperformedto introduced into MGBR2_2-9 and assayed in MCF-7 cells. validate NGS ﬁndings. Transcripts were analyzed by capillary electrophoresis and Results: We have identiﬁed in total eight LOH regions, sequenced. were six were localized in 16p13.3 encompassing TSC2 After the bioinformatic analysis of 302 BRCA2 variants, gene, and two were novel, one in 15q14-q15.1 and one in 83werefunctionallytested.Resultsshowedthat53variants 16q21-q22.1. In samples #6 and #7 micro-array analysis impairedsplicing(26intronicand27exonic).Amongthem, revealed uniparental disomy (UPD) and deletion 36 provoked ≥2/3 of aberrant transcripts. According to the respectively.468 J.delPicchia Conclusions: Apart from six LOH regions in 16p13.3, control’s molecules. Using this pipeline, whose runtime is for the ﬁrst time we demonstrate two novel regions with onlyafewhours,wecanefﬁcientlyfocusonseveraldozen LOH in sporadic cases of renal angiomyolipoma (15q14- signiﬁcant SV candidates. q15.1; 16q21-q21.1). In these two cases, no mutations in We have applied Bionano’s DLS labeling chemistry to TSC2 or TSC1 were found, as well as in other 407 tumor multiple samples originating from solid and hematologic related genes that were analyzed. tumors.Bionanomappingisabletoassemblegenomeswith Table. Regions with LOH in sporadic renal angiomyoli- unprecedented contiguity and accuracy for simple under- poma identiﬁed in this study. standing of somatic structural variation. We compared variants from a human breast mammary duct cell line Sample# CoordinatesofLOHregions(ISCN2016) against a matched lymphoblastoid cell line. We identiﬁed 4 seq[CRch37/hg19]hmz(15)(q14-q15.1) 45 translocations events, impacting genes such as RUNX1. chr15:g.39884882_40494960hmz Wediscoveredknownrearrangementssuchasthet(9;22)in 6 arr[CRch37/hg19]hmz(16)(p13.3) chronicmyeloidleukemia(CML).Moreover,weuncovered chr16:g.(1800000_2700000)x2hmz novel mutations ranging in size from a small 4.2 kbp 7 arr[CRch37/hg19]hmz(16)(p13.3) insertiondisruptinganacutelymphoblasticleukemia(ALL) chr16:g.1925000_2120000del gene CNOT3 to a large 9.6 Mbp deletion at 17q25. In 9 seq[CRch37/hg19]hmz(16)(p13.3-p13.11) conclusion, Bionano mapping is a cost effective method to chr16:g.2129637_15820863hmz detect a broad range of structural variations in leukemias 11 seq[CRch37/hg19]hmz(16)(p13.3) chr16:g.2110608_23646191hmz and solid tumors. 12 seq[CRch37/hg19]hmz(16)(p13.3) A.Pang:None.J.Lee:None.A.Hastie:None.E.Lam: chr16:g.2105335_2138422hmz None. G. Papoutsoglou: None. H. Cao: None. M. 19 seq[CRch37/hg19]hmz(16)(p13.3) Borodkin: None. S. Bocklandt: None. chr16:g.2136360_3779115hmz 20 seq[CRch37/hg19]hmz(16)(q21-q22.1) P12.195C chr16:g.65025718_68857441hmz Variants in genes related to oncogenesis in supercentenarians K. Anoshkin: None. K. Mosyakova: None. Y. Shpot: D.Serbezov1,L. Balabanski1,D.Nikolova1,M. Mihaylova1, V. None. D. Zaletaev: None. A. Vinarov: None. K. Damyanova1,Z. Hammoudeh1,D.Nesheva1,S.Karachanak- Karandasheva: None. V. Strelnikov: None. Yankova1,R.Staneva1,O.Antonova1, R.Vazharova2,S. Hadjidekova1,D.Toncheva1 P12.194B Simple, automated somatic structural variation detection 1MedicalUniversityofSoﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,2SoﬁaUniversity, and annotation using Bionano Genome Mapping Soﬁa, Bulgaria A.Pang,J.Lee,A.Hastie,E.Lam,G.Papoutsoglou,H.Cao,M. Introduction: Supercentenarians are individuals aged 110 Borodkin, S. Bocklandt or more, and their worldwide number is estimated at no morethanafewhundredindividuals.Itcanbeassumedthat Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States their genome is free of pathogenic variants related to oncogenesis and/or contains protective variants. Discovery Structural variation (SV) detection is fundamental to of such variants will be of great signiﬁcance to elucidating understanding cancer. While karyotyping and conventional the pathohenetic mechnisms of the diseases of the elderly. approaches are robust, they can be manually intensive, and Wetestedthishypothesisbyanalyzingthegenomicdataof biased towards targeted loci. supercentenarians and a control group. Bionano Genomics’ Saphyr System generates genome Materials and Methods: We analyze the publicly maps and detects large SVs. Bionano’s variant annotation available whole-genome sequence database from 17 super- workﬂow can uncover rare and sample-speciﬁc mutations. centenarians and 34 controls. We ﬁltered the dataset for To determine variant frequency in a tumor-normal experi- nonsynonymousvariantsingenesassociatedwithoncogen- mentaldesign,itcomparesthecancersample’scallsagainst esis.Wethencomparedthefrequencyinvariantsdeﬁnedas >600,000 SVs from >150 humans with no reported pathogenic, protective and variants of unclear clinical diseases. To identify somatic mutations, the workﬂow signiﬁcance in a freely accessible, public archive of reports compares against a control sample, and examines whether of the relationships among human variations and pheno- the cancer mutations are present in low fraction among the types ClinVar.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 469 Results: Surprisingly, we found pathological variants in Results:Whenwecomparedthethreegroups,difference the genomes of supercentenarian as we did in the control in telomerase activity was detected between colorectal group. Generally, there was no statistically signiﬁcant cancer,ulcerativecolitisandnormaltissuegroups.Inbinary difference in the amount of surveyed variants between the comparisons of ulcerative colitis patients, there was no two groups. The genotype frequencies of the variants signiﬁcant difference in telomerase activity between the examined are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, indicating diseasedandnormaltissues(p=0.113).However,therewas absence of natural selection aginst these genetic variants. a statistically signiﬁcant difference between normal and Discussion:Theresultsofouranalysisisinconcordance diseased tissues of colorectal cancer patients(p=0.044). with other recent studies that ﬁnd similar composition of Conclusions: There was no association between ulcera- pathologic variants between the genomes of long-lived tive colitis and telomerase activity and we showed that individuals and controls. We discuss possible explanations telomerase activity could not be a malignancy marker for of the observed variant frequencies, and we emphasize the precancerous lesions of colon. Our data suggest that need for further studies to clarify the role of variants of telomerase activity detection in colorectal cancer patients unknown clinical signiﬁcance. may serve as a diagnostic or prognostic marker for D.Serbezov:None.L.Balabanski:None.D.Nikolova: malignancy. Further studies are warranted to conﬁrm the None. M. Mihaylova: None. V. Damyanova: None. Z. diagnostic signiﬁcance of telomerase activity by quantita- Hammoudeh: None. D. Nesheva: None. S. Karachanak- tive TRAP-eze assay in colorectal cancer. Yankova: None. R. Staneva: None. O. Antonova: None. T. Akin Duman: None. M.S. Yildirim: None. M. R. Vazharova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D. Cakir: None. H. Ataseven: None. A.G. Zamani: None. Toncheva: None. P12.199C P12.196D Molecular proﬁles in medullary thyroid carcinomas Investigationoftelomeraseactivityinulcerativecolitisand colorectal cancer patients G.C. COZARU,M.Aschie, A. F. Mitroi,C. Brinzan, G.I. Baltatescu, A. Nicolau, M.Enciu T.AkinDuman1,M.S.Yildirim2,M.Cakir3,H.Ataseven4,A.G. Zamani2 CEDMOG - “Ovidius” University of Constanta, “Sf Apostol Andrei” Emergency Clinical County Hospital of Constanta, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Haseki Research and CONSTANTA, Romania Training Hospital, Health Sciences University, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Introduction:Determinationofthespeciﬁctypeofthyroid Faculty,Necmettin Erbakan University, Konya, Turkey, canceriscrucialfortheprognosisandselectionoftreatment 3Department of General Surgery, Meram Medical Faculty, of this malignancy. Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is NecmettinErbakanUniversity,Konya,Turkey,4Departmentof a histopathological type derived from parafollicular "C" Gastroenterology,MeramMedicalFaculty,NecmettinErbakan cells of the thyroid, which synthesizes calcitonin. MTC is University, Konya, Turkey more aggressive than papillary or folliculary type, com- prises 3-5% of thyroid cancers. Introduction: Telomerase, a RNA-dependent DNA poly- Methods: 12 postoperative tissue collected during merase which adds telomeric DNA at the 3' ends of thyroidectomy and stored as formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn- eukaryotic chromosomes.Its activity appear elevated in embedded material was used in the study. Immunohisto- >80% of human cancers. Colorectal cancer is one of the chemicalexaminationitwasalsoessential.RASandBRAF leading cause of cancer-related mortality in most of the mutations were characterized by an enhanced polymerase world. In the present study, we evaluated telomerase chain reaction followed by restriction fragment length activity in colorectal cancer, ulserative colitis patients and polymorphism analysis (PCR-RFLP). aimed to investigate whether telomerase activity can be Results:Inallcases,byimmunohistochemicaldiagnostic used as a malignant marker in premalign lesions such as methodswerepositive reactions tocalcitonin,CEAantigen ulcerative colitis. Normal tissues adjacent to the lesions of andthyroglobulin.ChromograninAandBweremoderately the same patients were used as the control group. positive,neuronalspeciﬁcenolaseandsynaptophisinewere Materials and Methods: Tissue samples were obtained positive in 15-20% of the tumor cells. Note that both p53 from 28 colorectal cancer and 27 ulserative colitis patients and Ki67, immunohistochemical markers of nuclear during colonoscopy and surgery.Telomerase activity was proliferation were weak positive. The KRAS mutation measured by quantitative telomeric repeat ampliﬁcation was more frequently found than the HRAS mutation, protocol(TRAP)-eze assay. comprising 19.7 % of the RAS mutations, and the V600E470 J.delPicchia mutation of BRAF was found in 65.2% MTC samples purely in blood-derived DNA but not in the tumor of the tested. patient seeking advice may have severe implications for Conclusions: In conclusion, our results, together with genetic counselling. Our ﬁndings may help to avoid false- previous genetic studies on thyroid neoplasms, are con- positive genetic diagnoses of LFS1. sistentwiththeconceptthathistopathologicalpatternscould Funding: Astra Zeneca Germany; Federal Institute of be supported by molecular biomarkers to conﬁrm the Drugs and Medical Devices (V-16698/68502/2016-2020) prognostic and to improve understanding of thyroid K. Weber-Lassalle: B. Research Grant (principal tumorigenesis. investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants The research was made possible following completion of as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Federal the project POS CCE 2.21., ID 1844, SMIS 48750, Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices. P. Harter: F. CEDMOG. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca, Ger- G.C. Cozaru: None. M. Aschie: None. A.F. Mitroi: many. J. Hauke: None. B. Ataseven: None. J.C. Stingl: None. C. Brinzan: None. G.I. Baltatescu: None. A. None. R.K. Schmutzler: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Nicolau: None. M. Enciu: None. Modest; Astra Zeneca, Germany. E. Hahnen: F. Con- sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca, Germany. P12.200D Diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni Syndrome: Differentiating TP53 P12.201A germline mutations from clonal hematopoiesis - Results of The role of Trp53 in chemical-induced lung the observational AGO-TR1 trial adenocarcinoma K. Weber-Lassalle1,P. Harter2,J.Hauke1, B.Ataseven2,J.C. M.Oplopoiou1, D.Kati1,G.Ntaliarda1,V. Papaleonidopoulos1, Stingl3, R.K. Schmutzler1,E. Hahnen1 I.Giopanou1,I.Lilis1, G.T.Stathopoulos1,2 1Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Cologne, 1Laboratory for Molecular Respiratory Carcinogenesis, Germany, 2Department of Gynecology & Gynecologic Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oncology, Kliniken Essen-Mitte, Essen, Germany, 3Federal Patras, Rion, Greece, 2Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Institute for Drugs & Medical Devices, Bonn, Germany Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany Introduction: The Li-Fraumeni cancer predisposition syn- drome(LFS1)presentswithavarietyoftumortypesandthe Introduction: Lung adenocarcinoma (LADC), the prime TP53 gene is therefore covered by most diagnostic cancer cancer killer worldwide, features frequent loss-of-function gene panels. While inherited, heterozygous germline var- of tumor protein 53 (TP53) that portends disease dis- iantsusuallyshowavariantfraction(VF)ofapproximately semination and poor survival. However, the exact timing 50%, TP53 variants with a VF below 50% were described, and functional role of TP53 loss in LADC progression is suggesting de novo somatic mosaic variants. unknown. Methods: Using blood-derived DNA, we screened 523 Objectives: To time and functionally characterize Trp53 unselectedpatientswithovariancancer(OC)fordeleterious mutations in murine LADC induced by chemical constitu- variants in cancer predisposition genes, including TP53, by ents of tobacco smoke. hybridization capture-based next-generation sequencing. MaterialsandMethods:Trp53was deleted inthelungs Results: Potentially deleterious TP53 missense variants of Trp53-conditional mice (Trp53f/f) via intratracheal were identiﬁed in blood-derived DNA of 6 patients with adenovirus (Ad)-CRE or intercrosses with lung lineage- OC. The VFs of 3 TP53 mutations detected in 3 patients restricted CRE-drivers. Autochthonous LADC were trig- were 50%, 49% and 55%, respectively, compatible with gered by intraperitoneal urethane and were examined after VFs usually observed for germline variants. These TP53 six months. LADC cell lines were derived from LADC of mutations were also present in the corresponding tumor Wt and Trp53-conditional mice and were recombined by samples. In the remaining 3 patients, 4 TP53 variants with Ad-CRE in vitro. lower VFs of 34%, 26%, 17% and 7%, respectively, were Results: 5/62 LADC (8%) and 6/9 LADC cell lines observed. None of these mutations were detected in the (67%) displayed Trp53 loss. Trp53 deletion in airway cells corresponding tumor samples. had no effect on primary tumor development and growth, Conclusions: Deleterious TP53 variants identiﬁed in but selectively functioned as a tumor promoter in LYZ2+ blood-derived DNA of patients with OC were not causally alveolartypeIIcells.Trp53deletioninLADCcellsinvitro related to the patients´ cancer in 3/6 TP53-positive cases. induced marked changes in gene expression, abnormalities The evidence for deleterious TP53 mutations identiﬁed in cell cycling, and, astonishingly, marked epithelial-to-Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 471 mesenchymal transition (EMT) increasing the metastatic silencing induced a signiﬁcant accumulation of monopolar potential of LADC cells. spindlesinHeLa,humanFibroblastsandingliomaU87MG Conclusions:Trp53lossinLADCfunctionsinalineage- cells. Time-lapse live-cell imaging, western blot, and restrictedfashiontoperturbcellularproliferation,butalsoto cytoﬂuorimetric analysis conﬁrmed that TRIM8-silencing promote EMT and metastasis. Our murine data explain the caused a slow-down of the mitosis progression showing dismal role of TP53 loss in human LADC. cells that stall in G2/M phases taking up to 113 minutes to Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the enter telophase, compared to 38 minutes taken by control European Research Council. cells. Additional studies revealed that TRIM8 affects M. Oplopoiou: None. D. Kati: None. G. Ntaliarda: chromosomal stability, with a signiﬁcant increase of None. V. Papaleonidopoulos: None. I. Giopanou: None. micronucleiandaneuploidy(near-haploidcells)inTRIM8- I. Lilis: None. G.T. Stathopoulos: None. silencend cells. OurdataconﬁrmedthatTRIM8playsacrucialroleinthe P12.203C mitotic process and may contribute to the glioma develop- TRIM8 participates to the mitotic spindle organization: ment and neurological disease onset, through a not yet implication in human diseases and cancer identiﬁed mechanism that can control KIF11 and KIFC1 activity and/or protein level. S. Venuto1,2,L. Monteonofrio3,F. Cozzolino4,M.Monti4, I. S. Venuto: None. L. Monteonofrio: None. F. Cozzo- Appolloni5,T.Mazza6,D.Canetti4,C.Fusco1,G.M.Squeo1,A. lino: None. M. Monti: None. I. Appolloni: None. T. I.Croce1,V.Giambra7,P.Panelli7,P.Pucci4,P.Malatesta5,8,S. Mazza: None. D. Canetti: None. C. Fusco: None. G.M. Soddu3,G.Merla1,L. Micale1 Squeo: None. A.I. Croce: None. V. Giambra: None. P. Panelli: None. P. Pucci: None. P. Malatesta: None. S. 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Soddu: None. G. Merla: None. L. Micale: None. Rotondo, Foggia, Italy, 2PhD Program, Experimental and Regenerative Medicine, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy, P12.204D 3Unit of Cellular Networks and Molecular Therapeutic Genetic Susceptibility to Triple-Negative Breast Cancer in Targets, Regina Elena National Cancer Institute - IRCCS, Cyprus; an NGS panel-testing approach Rome, Italy, 4CEINGE Advanced Biotechnology and Department of Chemical Sciences Federico II University, M.Zanti1,2,3,M.A. Loizidou2,K. Michailidou2,1, P.Pirpa2,C. Naples, Italy, 5U.O. Medicina Rigenerativa, Ospedale Machattou2,Y.Marcou4,F.Kyriakou4,E.Kakouri4,I.Zouvani5, Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy, 6Bioinformatics Unit, K. Kyriacou2,1,A. Hadjisavvas2,1 IRCCSCasaSollievodellaSofferenza,MendelInstitute,Rome, Italy, 7Institute of Stem Cells Biology, Regenerative Medicine 1The Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus and Innovative Therapies (ISBReMIT), IRCCS Casa Sollievo Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, 2Department of Electron Microscopy/Molecular Pathology, Italy, 8Department of Experimental Medicine (DiMES), The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, University of Genova, Genoa, Italy Cyprus, 3Bioinformatics Group, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Departments of TRIM8 is a Ring-E3 ubiquitin ligase with a role in cancer Medical and Radiation Oncology, Bank of Cyprus Oncology pathogenesis and central nervous system-human diseases. Center, Nicosia, Cyprus, 5Department of Histopathology, WerecentlydemonstratedtheroleofTRIM8incontrolling Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus cell growth in glioma. Perturbing TRIM8 expression in Neural Stem Cells (NSC) we explored TRIM8-interactome Introduction: Triple Negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a by immunoprecipitation and LC-MS/MS. A number of very aggressive form of breast cancer (BC), characterized identiﬁed TRIM8 potential interactors, 11/50 (22%), are by lack of expression of the estrogen and progesterone related to mitotic spindle formation and cytoskeleton receptors (ER/PR), as well as the human epidermal growth organization.Wevalidatedfourmembersofthekinesin-like factor receptor 2 (HER2). The aim of this study was to proteinfamilybyco-immunoprecipitationassays,including assess the distribution of germline mutations in cancer KIF11 and KIFC1, both involved in mitosis and, if aber- susceptibility genes in Cypriot TNBC patients that tested rantly expressed, in monopolar spindle organization. negative for the BRCA1/2 genes. Immunoﬂuorescence assays in HeLa cells showed that MaterialsandMethods:GenomicDNAfrom84TNBC TRIM8 co-localizes with centrosomes and midbodies, patients was sequenced using the TruSight Cancer panel. conﬁrming a possible role of TRIM8 in the mitotic spindle We followed GATK guidelines and all variants were machineryfunctions.WefurtherdemonstratedthatTRIM8- veriﬁed by Sanger Sequencing. Rare variants of uncertain472 J.delPicchia signiﬁcance (VUS) were evaluated by seven pathogenicity also located after the core promoter and upstream of the prediction algorithms, and those predicted as pathogenic EGFP gene. from at least ﬁve tools, were selected for further Materials and Methods: For construction of the TSTA- investigation. minicircle, two expression cassettes including hTERT/ Results: Six pathogenic mutations were identiﬁed in GAL4/VP16 and G5/EGFP were prepared using PCR and three BC susceptibility genes; PALB2 (4), TP53 (1) and restrictioncloning.Theywereclonedintoaproperparental FANCL (1). Presumed pathogenic germline variants were plasmid, which was transformed into ZYCY10P3S2T E. identiﬁed in PRF1 and ERCC2 genes; 2 truncating PRF1 colistraintogenerateTSTA-minicircle.Resultedminicircle mutationsand1missenseERCC2mutation.Additionally,a was transfected to MDA-MB-231 and SKBR31 as human novel frameshift mutation was found in ERCC5 gene, a breast cancer cell lines, as well as MCF10A1 as a normal promising BC candidate. Predicted damaging VUS were mammary cell line. At last, the expression of EGFP was identiﬁed in several genes including ATM (2), BRIP1 (2), assessed using qPCR and ﬂow cytometry. PALB2 (2), CDH1 (1), STK11 (1) and TP53 (1) BC Results:TheTSTA-minicirclewiththelengthof2934bp susceptibility genes. was successfully constructed. The vector showed a robust Conclusions: These results suggest that pathogenic and and persistent EGFP expression in MDA-MB-231 and presumed pathogenic variants in cancer predisposition SKBR3 cells compared to normal mammary genes can be detected by large scale panel testing. A larger MCF10A cells. sample size and functional studies, and/or co-segregation Conclusions:Ourresultsshowedthatcombinationofthe analysis are needed for further conclusions. minicircleasasafevectorwithTSTAelementresultsinan Grant: EU H2020; 669026; Establishment of the ideal vector for more safe and robust expression of the Bioinformatics ERA Chair at the CING (BIORISE) transgene speciﬁcally in cancer cells. M.Zanti:None.M.A.Loizidou:None.K.Michailidou: P. Chanani: None. N. Sanei Ata-abadi: None. K. None. P. Pirpa: None. C. Machattou: None. Y. Marcou: Dormiani: None. N. Rezaei: None. M.H. Nasr- None.F.Kyriakou:None.E.Kakouri:None.I.Zouvani: Esfahani: None. None. K. Kyriacou: None. A. Hadjisavvas: None. P12.206B P12.205A Geneticsandexpressionproﬁleoftubulingenesuperfamily PreparationofTSTA.tumorspeciﬁcminicircleDNAvector in breast cancer for targeted expression in cancer cells B. Nami,Z. Wang P. Chanani1,2, N.Sanei Ata-abadi3,4, K.Dormiani3,N.Rezaei2, M.H.Nasr-Esfahani2 Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada 1ACECR Institute of Higher Education (Isfahan Branch), Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Cell Science Research Introduction: Taxanes are a class of chemotherapeutic Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, agentsthatinhibitcelldivisionbydisruptingmitoticspindle Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Cell Science Research Center, through the stabilization of microtubule. Most of breast Royan Institute for Biotechnology, Isfahan province, Iran, cancers (BC) tumors show resistance against taxanes par- IslamicRepublicof,4DepartmentofGenetics,FacultyofBasic tiallyduetoalterationsintubulingenes.Inthisstudy,using Sciences, Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic genomics databases, we analyze genetic alteration, mRNA Republic of expressionandtheactivityofthecis-regulatoryelementsof 28 tubulin genes in BC subtypes and taxane-resistant BCs. Introduction: Preparation of an ideal vector for efﬁcient, Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing, and safeandtargetedexpressionoftransgeneisaperfectgoalin expressionarrayproﬁleswereobtainedfromcBioPortaland cancergenetherapy.Oneofthebestapproachesfortargeted Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases. Cistrome expressionintumorcellsisusingtumorspeciﬁcpromoters, Dataset Browser was used to analyze H3K4me1 and although the weakness of these promoters limits their suc- H3K4me3 mark enrichment. Data from 529 breast tumors, cess. Two-step transcriptional activation system (TSTA) 8normalbreastbiopsiesand5BCcelllineswereanalyzed. systemcanaugmentthetransgeneexpressionusingastrong Results: Comparative expression levels of tubulin genes trans-activation factor such as VP16. In this study a tumor were determined in: BC versus normal breast biopsies, speciﬁc minicircle, named TSTA-minicircle was prepared PAM50 luminal A, B, HER2-enriched and basal-like BC that contained hTERT as a tumor speciﬁc promoter. VP16 tumors and cell lines, taxane-resistant versus taxane- coding sequence and GAL4 DNA binding domain were sensitive BC tumors and cell line, and the tumors withAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 473 pathologic complete response (pCR) to taxane treatment was adjusted to the elevated risk for other primary compared to non-pCR. We found that mRNA down- malignancies both for the patient and her siblings. regulation and gene ampliﬁcation were the most frequent A. Semyanikhina: None. M. Fillipova: None. O. alteration in the tubulin genes. Frequency of mutations in Arkhipova: None. L. Lyubchenko: None. each tubulin gene was analyzed in the four BC subtypes. Enrichment of H3K4me1 and H3K4me3 marks were P12.209A studied for the all tubulin genes in different BC cell lines. VISIon: Von Hippel-Lindau Information Technology- Conclusions: Different genetic and expression proﬁle of Sharing International Consortium tubulingeneswerefoundinthefoursubtypesofBCsandin the taxane-sensitive and the -resistant BC. This study was S.Albanyan1,G.Bullivant1,L.Krimus2,K.Gomez-Hernandez3, supported by Women and Children’s Health Research M.Sukhai3,Z.Lau3,H.Druker1,J.Wasserman1,K.Clark4,D. Institute (WCHRI). Azzariti5,M. Grifﬁth4,H.Rehm5,A. Finelli2,T. Stockley2,M. B. Nami: None. Z. Wang: None. Jewett2,R. Giles6, R.Kim1,M.Szybowska7 P12.208D 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, A rare case of hereditary uveal melanoma as part of Li- 2University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada, Fraumeni-like syndrome 3University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United States, 5ClinGen, Bethesda, A. Semyanikhina,M.Fillipova, O.Arkhipova,L. Lyubchenko MD, United States, 6University Medical Centre, Utrecht, Netherlands, 7University Health network, Toronto, ON, FSBI "NN Blokhin National Medical Research Centre of Canada oncology", Moscow, Russian Federation Introduction: Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is an Introduction: Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common inherited cancer predisposition condition with diverse primary malignant tumour of the uveal tract with distinct clinical manifestations spanning multiple organ systems. molecular-genetic features that allow to distinguish UM Germline variants in the VHL gene identify most VHL from other subtypes of melanoma. Somatic mutations in families. Certain VHL variants have been shown to pre- UM affect some genes - BAP1, GNA11, GNAQ et al., that disposeindividualstodistinctmanifestations.Tocollatethe determine the biology and behaviour of a tumour and genetic impact of variants in VHL, we initiated an inter- appear to be the predictors of disease. In about 2-5% of national data-sharing consortium to develop a standardized cases the manifestation of UM is associated with a heredi- genomic and phenotypic data capturing protocol. taryconditionandcouldbearesultofgermlinemutationsin Methods: Our initial data set comprises 2251 cases from the genes responsible for some syndromes. Currently sev- existing cohorts in the Netherlands and Canada, as well as eral syndromes have been described such as BAP1-asso- published literature and publicly-accessible databases. We ciated, FAMMM, Li-Fraumeni and others. have developed a standardized data collection protocol that Materials and Methods: We present here the case of a captures all aspects of the VHL phenotype to collect 62-year-oldwomanwithLi-Fraumeni-likesyndrome(LFL) genotypicand phenotypic data from thecollaborating sites. whohadlateUMofthelefteye.Pedigreeanalysisidentiﬁed We have worked closely with the National Institutes of 5 ﬁrst-degree and second-degree relatives with different Health Clinical Genome Resource to deﬁne a platform to tumours including a 73-year-old sister who had been share our data. We will store the data in CIVic (Clinical previously treated from melanoma of horioidea and a 52- Interpretation of Variants in Cancer), an open source year-old brother suffered from renal cancer. Given the database for genotype-phenotype correlations, and then extensive family history of late-onset malignancies, the contributethisdatatotheNIH’sClinVar,afreely-available sample of peripheral blood lymphocytes of the patient was public datasharing resource that facilitates collaboration assessed for BRCA2 and CHEK2 mutation using Real-time with scientists in VHL. PCR followed by Sanger sequencing. Conclusions: By collating VHL patients and mutations, Results: The analysis revealed a germline heterozygotic we plan to create the most comprehensive VHL data- CHEK2 mutation (с.470Т/С, р.Ile157Thr, rs17879961). sharing mechanism to best understand VHL. We hope to Thepatient'ssisterunderwentgeneticscreeningaswelland deﬁne new patterns of phenotypic expressions of known was found to carry the same mutation. mutations. We invite collaborators with VHL databases or Conclusions: We suggest LFL for the family with late- cohorts to contribute cases to improve the characterization onset cancerandlow penetrance. The surveillanceprogram of genotype-phenotype relationships in this complex disorder, and will make the data collection tools freely474 J.delPicchia available to interested investigators. Source of Funding: demonstrate the potential of MIP-based assay towards the VHL Alliance. identiﬁcation and mapping of important CNAs and LOH S. Albanyan: None. G. Bullivant: None. L. Krimus: involved in WT for its prognostication. None.K.Gomez-Hernandez:None.M.Sukhai:None.Z. L.Toh:None.M.Tan:None.H.Yon:None.W.Seow: Lau: None. H. Druker: None. J. Wasserman: None. K. None.C.Kuick:None.H.Chen:None.K.Chang:None. Clark: None. D. Azzariti: None. M. Grifﬁth: None. H. M. Yong: None. Rehm: None. A. Finelli: None. T. Stockley: None. M. Jewett: None. R. Giles: None. R. Kim: None. M. P12.212D Szybowska: None. Using archived FFPE samples for retrospective miRNA expression proﬁling of blastemal Wilms’ tumors by qRT- P12.211C PCR Detection of copy number aberrations and loss of heterozygosity in wilms tumour DNA samples from G.Buglyó1,Z. Magyar2,É. Görbe2,M.Csóka2,P. Varga2,R. formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded tissue using molecular Bánusz2, T.Micsik2, Z.Berki1,B. Nagy1 inversion probe-based array 1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Semmelweis L.Toh,M.Tan,H.Yon,W.Seow,C.Kuick,H.Chen,K.Chang, University, Budapest, Hungary M.Yong Introduction: Wilms’ tumor is the most frequent geni- KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore tourinary malignancyinyoungchildren.Ahigh percentage of blastema after pre-operative chemotherapy (according to Introduction: Wilms tumour (WT) is the most common the SIOP protocol) is a sign of poor prognosis. Differences renal tumourin children. Loss of heterozygosity(LOH) for between miRNA signatures of blastemal and regressive chromosomes1pand16qisanadverseprognosticfactorin tumor subtypes may hold relevant information on genetic WT. The aim of this study is to characterize WTs using factors underlying chemo-responsiveness. Molecular Inversion Probe-based (MIP) Array to identify MaterialsandMethods:WeextractedmiRNAfromtwo copy number aberrations (CNAs) and LOH. FFPEsamplesperpatient:atumorsampleandatumor-free Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA were extracted region of the same kidney to be used as control. A PCR from 8 formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded (FFPE) sections array was used to reveal miRNAs of interest in the ﬁrst of WTs using Promega Maxwell RSC Instrument and patientandtheexpressionofselectedmiRNAswasstudied puriﬁed as input into Affymetrix OncoScan FFPE Assay in seven other patients by individual qRT-PCR primers. Kit. Data was analysed with Chromosome Analysis Suite Results: MiRNA expression patterns obtained from software version 3.2.0.1252. FFPE samples showed a close resemblance to the results Results: We saw gains of chromosomes 1q and 7q; of previous proﬁling reports using fresh-frozen tissue. segmental gains of 1q21.1-q32.1, 2p24.3, 4q31.3, 11p14.3, Relevant differences include miR-184 found to be more 14q11.2, 15q21.3, 16q22.2, 17q24.1, 17p11.2-q25.3, underexpressed than expected, and miR-203a, which we 19p13.11, 22q13.33 and Xp22.33; losses of 1p, 7p, 10p, report to be downregulated in Wilms’ tumor for the ﬁrst 11 and 14; and segmental losses of 3p25.2, 4q12-q13.1, time to our knowledge. 4q13.3-q35.2, 8q24.3, 10p11.23, 11p15.4, 16p13.3, Conclusions: Despite favorable reviews in the literature 16q22.2, 19q13.2, 19p13.2, 19p13.3, 22q12.3-13.33, with respect to various diseases, miRNA expression 22q11.23-q12.1 and Xq11.1-q11.2. The most common analyses from FFPE samples are still rarely reported. We aberrations were gains of chromosomes 12(5/8), 13(4/8), hereby demonstrate the usefulness of pathological archives 7(3/8), 7q(2/8) and 8(3/8); and loss of 7p(2/8). Frequent inWilms’tumorproﬁling.Puttingourresultsinperspective LOH seen were 1p36.11-p35.3(2/8), 1p31.1(2/8), 1p33- withliteraturedata,miR-184seemstobeunderexpressedin p32.3(3/8), 1q21.2-q21.3(3/8), 3p21.31-p21.31(6/8), a subset of blastemal and possibly other Wilms’ tumors. 3p12.2p12.1(3/8), 6p22.1(2/8), 7q11.1-q11.21(3/8), DownregulationofmiR-203amayormaynotbespeciﬁcto 10q11.21-q11.23(2/8), 11p(3/8), 12q21.3-q21.33(3/8), blastemal tissue, but it could explain the overexpression of 17p11.2-p11.1(5/8) and 17q23.1-q24.1(2/8). E2F3 thought to be important in the pathogenesis of the Conclusions: Of 8 WTs, we identiﬁed LOH at 11p in 3 disease. cases, a frequency consistent with reported literature, and G. Buglyó: None. Z. Magyar: None. É. Görbe: None. found LOH in 1p and 16q(1/8). Our data also supports M. Csóka: None. P. Varga: None. R. Bánusz: None. T. publishedreportsthattrisomies6,7,8,12,13and18arethe Micsik: None. Z. Berki: None. B. Nagy: None. most common aneuploidies in WT. Our ﬁndingsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 475 P12.213A 1Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent, Global binding pattern of mutant WT1(R394W) to the Belgium, 2Cancer Research Institute Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, genome in leukemic cells 3Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent, Belgium T. Ullmark,G.Montano, U.Gullberg CRISPR/Cas9 and TALEN mediated genome editing cre- ates unique and unmatched opportunities for modeling Laboratory Medicine, Lund, Sweden human disease in non-mammalian model organisms. The amphibian Xenopus tropicalis is extremely well positioned Introduction: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most forthisapproach.Itshareswithzebraﬁshtheaquatichabitat common form of acute leukemia in adults. Mutations in and easy manipulations associated with its external devel- Wilms' tumor gene 1 (WT1) are present in 10-15% of opment. However, it manifests unique features making it a cytogenetically normal AML and are reported as indepen- powerfulorganismformodelinghumangeneticdisease.(1) dent negative prognostic factors. The recurrent WT1 unlike zebraﬁsh, Xenopus tropicalis has a true diploid (R394W) mutation changes the basic arginine to an genome,precludingredundancy.(2)Itsgenomeshowshigh uncharged tryptophane. Since Arg394 contacts DNA, the synteny with humans, greatly facilitating identiﬁcation of binding of WT1(R394W) may be adversely affected. The disease orthologs. (3) Gene manipulations can be restricted aimofthisprojectwastocharacterizethebindingpatternof to speciﬁc tissues and organs via targeted blastomere WT1(R394W) as compared to the binding of the wild type injection. We have recently generated the ﬁrst genetic WT1-KTS and WT1+KTS isoforms. cancer models in Xenopus tropicalis. Via mosaic targeting Material and Methods: From leukemic K562 cells ofthetumorsuppressorgeneapcwegeneratedtadpolesthat expressing BIO-tagged WT1(R394W), we performed rapidly (< 1.5 months) and efﬁciently (>90%) developed a chromatin precipitation by streptavidin capture, followed range of neoplasia characteristic for Familial Adenomatous by deep sequencing. Polyposis (Van Nieuwenhuysen et al., Oncoscience 2015). Results: Three independent experiments yielded 470 Similarly, we found that rb1/rbl1 double mosaic mutant overlappingpeaks.WefoundthattheR394Wmutationina tadpoles rapidly develop retinoblastoma (Naert et al. Sci. WT1-KTS background deprived WT1-KTS of its binding Rep. 2016). More recent work also indicates the possibility close to transcription start sites of target genes. WT1 of modeling Li-Fraumeni, T-cell acute lymphoblastic leu- (R394W) shows a reduced binding afﬁnity and, similar to kemia and pancreatic neuroendocrine cancer. The rapid WT1+KTS, binds mainly within the gene bodies of target kineticsoftumordevelopmentinXenopuspavethewayfor genes. Upon transient overexpression in HEK293 cells, their use as pre-clinical model, providing unique possibi- only WT1-KTS showed evidence of transcriptional activa- litiesforfastidentiﬁcationofmodiﬁergenesandnoveldrug tionoftargetgenescommontoWT1(R394W)andthewild targets. We present our ﬁrst promising results with multi- type -KTS and +KTS isoforms. While overexpression of plexed gene targeting in desmoid tumors. We believe that WT1-KTSinK562cellsconferredresistancetothetyrosine these models offer a unique experimental platform to con- kinase inhibitor Imatinib, overexpression of WT1R394W tribute to the ﬁeld of human cancer and medical genetics. conferred only partial resistance. D. Dimitrakopoulou: None. T. Naert: None. D. Conclusions: Taken together, our results support the Tulkens: None. R. Noelanders: None. T. Van Nieuwen- notionofWT1(R394W)asalossoffunctionmutation.The huyse: None. P. Van Vlierberghe: None. K. functionalconsequencesoftheacquisitionofbindingtothe Vleminckx: None. gene bodywithintargetgenes, inamannersimilarto WT1 +KTS, remain to be clariﬁed. P12.215C T. Ullmark: None. G. Montano: None. U. Young breast cancer: Predisposed to aggression? Gullberg: None. S. RandallArmel1, A.Volenik1,R. Demsky1, S.Neil2,R.H. P12.214B Kim1, J.McCuaig1 Modeling human hereditary cancer syndromes using CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome editing in Xenopus 1Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada, tropicalis 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada D.Dimitrakopoulou1,2,T. Naert1,2,D.Tulkens1,2, R. Introduction: 2% of breast cancers occur in women ≤35 Noelanders1,T. VanNieuwenhuyse1,P. Van Vlierberghe2,3,K. years of age. Limited data suggests that up to 15% may be Vleminckx1,2,3 hereditary,ahighproportionareaggressive(triple-negative, TN or HER2+), and frequently diagnosed at an advanced476 J.delPicchia stage. Canadian-speciﬁc data of this population is lacking beenreported.Severalstudiesshowedthatalterationsinthe and would serve to improve risk assessment and genetic type I versus type II mRNA ratio of nf1 gene can be counselling. associated with the presence of malignancies including Methods: A retrospective chart review examined the coloncancer,neuroectodermaltumorsandovariancancerin characteristics of women diagnosed with breast cancer ≤35 patients not affected by NF1. years and who received treatment/genetic counselling at Materials and Methods: The study was conducted on a Princess Margaret Cancer Centre (PM) in Toronto, Canada cohortof144NF1patients,age1-57years,and144ageand after 2000. sex matched controls. The patients were divided into three Results:Of226womenidentiﬁed,207receivedtestingat groups(mild,moderateandseverephenotype).ThemRNA PM. Overall rate of pathogenic variants was 19% for levelsofisoform1and2ofthenf1geneinperipheralblood BRCA1/2and7%forothergenes.Mostwomenhadstage2 leukocytesofNF1patientsandofcontrolswasassessedby disease (42% overall); however, 33% of carriers compared real-time PCR. Statistical analysis was performed using t- to 24% of non-carriers were ≥ stage 3. Most tumors were test. ER+/PR+/HER2-(45%overall);however,61%ofcarriers Results: Molecular analysis showed a wide distribution presented with aggressive disease (45% TN, 16% HER2+) of each mutation along the NF1 gene. Expression levels of as compared to only 46% of non-carriers (21% TN, 25% isoform 1 were lower in patients than in controls (0,00066 HER2+). Of note, 86% of BRCA1 were TN, 75% of vs 0,0012, p = 0,0000055), and the patients with severe BRCA2 were ER+/PR+, and 60% of TP53 were HER2+. phenotype showed levels lower than mild patients (0,0005 Additionally, 22% of carriers reported no family history of vs0,00074,p=0,02).Expressionlevelsofisoform2were breast/ovarian cancer. lower in patients than in controls (0,0024 vs 0,01, p = Conclusions: This study demonstrates that early-onset 0,0004). breastcancerhasdistinctfeaturesthatvarybasedongenetic Conclusions: The identiﬁcation of an association status. Overall, carriers tend to present with later stage and between speciﬁc NF1 expression pattern and severity of moreaggressivediseaseascomparedtonon-carriers.Given phenotype might help to establish a speciﬁc prognosis and the high mutation rate, and that many carriers report no consequently to start a speciﬁc follow-up program and family history, it is important that all women with this eventually a speciﬁc therapeutic approach in NF1 patients. diagnosis be offered genetic testing. A. Assunto: None. U.P. Ferrara: None. C. Pivonello: S. Randall Armel: None. A. Volenik: None. R. None. L. Lombardo: None. A.P. Piscitelli: None. C. Demsky: None. S. Neil: None. R.H. Kim: None. J. Tortora: None. M. Chicone: None. V. Pinna: None. A. McCuaig: None. De Luca: None. R. Pivonello: None. A. Colao: None. V. Donofrio: None. G. Cinalli: None. F. Schonauer: None. P12.216D F.D. Andrea: None. P. Strisciuglio: None. D. Neuroﬁbromatosis and Related Tumors: molecular Melis: None. markers associated to high risk for tumor-development A.Assunto1,U.P.Ferrara1,C.Pivonello2,L.Lombardo1,A.P. P13 Basic mechanisms in molecular and cytogenetics Piscitelli1,C.Tortora1,M.Chicone3,V.Pinna4,A.DeLuca4,R. Pivonello2,A.Colao2,V.Donofrio3,G.Cinalli5,F.Schonauer6, P13.01A F. D.Andrea6,P. Strisciuglio1,D.Melis1 Comparison between functional predictors and in vitro effect of alpha-1 antitrypsin missense variants 1Department of Traslational Medical Sciences, Naples, Italy, 2Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, Naples, Italy, N.Matamala, G.Gomez-Mariano, S. Martínez,A. Damián, S. 3Hospital Company of National Importance Santobono, Ramos,V.Aquino,I.Gonzalo,A.Navarro,B.Martínez-Delgado Naples,Italy,4IRCCSCasaSollievodellaSofferenzaHospital, Naples, Italy, 5S.C. Pediatric Neurosurgery, Hospital Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain Company of National Importance Santobono, Naples, Italy, 6Department of Public Healthy, Section of Aesthetic Plastic Introduction: The alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) coding gene SurgeryandReconstructive,UniversityofNaples,Naples,Italy SERPINA1 is highly polymorphic with more than one hundred variants described in databases. Although the Introduction: Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an auto- functional implications of the most common mutations S somal dominant disorder, caused by inactivating mutations and Z have been well characterized, the effect of many ofneuroﬁbromingene(17q11.2).Nf1geneencodesforﬁve newly identiﬁed variants has not been empirically different isoform. Few cases of genotype-phenotype haveAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 477 demonstrated, and it is unclear whether bionformatic soft- Familial apparently balanced translocations (ABTs) segre- wares are able to correctly predict their pathogenicity. gating with discordant phenotypes are extremely challen- Materials and Methods: We have analyzed the coding ging for interpretation and counseling. We report four sequence of SERPINA1 gene in patients with AAT families, each including individuals with identical ABTs deﬁciency (AATD) and have identiﬁed 12 previously and discordant phenotypes. All mechanisms underlying undescribed missense variants. Different algorithms were differential phenotypes were thoroughly investigated using usedtopredicttheeffectsofthesesubstitutions.Inaddition, FISH, array-CGH, and whole-genome mate-pair sequen- mutant proteins were expressed in vitro and functional cing; however, no associations were determined, therefore assays were performed to empirically determine the whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed. pathogenicity of the variants (western blot analysis, PAS Inthisstudy,thesamefamilieswererevisitedusingWES. staining, elastase inhibitory assay, pulse-chase Disease-candidate variants were validated with Sanger experiments). sequencing and their pathogenic impact was assessed with Results: Most of the variants had a functional impact in silico tools. when overexpressed in a cellular model: intracellular In family 1, WES revealed a novel, patient-speciﬁc polymerization, impaired secretion, intracellular stabiliza- heterozygous splice donor variant in STXBP1 tion and/or reduced anti-elastase activity. Only in one case (NM_003165.3: c.1110+2T>G), which is essential for nopathogeniceffectwasidentiﬁed.Formostofthevariants neurotransmitter release through syntaxin regulation. Simi- the functional assay was consistent with the bioinformatic lar patients with epilepsy and intellectual disability have prediction, although in some cases discrepancies between been reported carrying heterozygous STXBP1 disruptions. algorithmswereobservedandforonevariantthepredictors The variant identiﬁed is predicted to disrupt normal failed to identify the pathogenic effect of the amino acid STXBP1 splicing. In family 2, WES identiﬁed a novel, substitution. patient-speciﬁc heterozygous missense variant in TUBA1A Conclusions: Functional studies are essential to unravel (NM_006009.3: c.875C>T), one of the main microtubule the molecular mechanisms affected by newly identiﬁed components with important roles in neuronal migration. genetic variants. Although helpful, functional prediction Similar patients with intellectual disability, microcephaly, algorithms are not always correct in their predictions. andlissencephalyhavebeenreportedcarryingheterozygous N. Matamala: None. G. Gomez-Mariano: None. S. TUBA1A variants. In families 3 and 4, a novel, patient- Martínez: None. A. Damián: None. S. Ramos: None. V. speciﬁc heterozygous missense variant in SCN1A, and a Aquino: None. I. Gonzalo: None. A. Navarro: None. B. compoundheterozygousvariantinC5orf42wereidentiﬁed, Martínez-Delgado: None. respectively; however, further investigation is required to determine pathogenicity. P13.02B Inconclusionthisstudysupportsourpreviouspublication Patient-speciﬁc variants identiﬁed by whole-exome demonstrating that in the majority of familial ABTs with sequencing underlie discordant phenotypes in familial discordant phenotypes, translocations are coincidental to apparently balanced translocations phenotype, unlike de novo ABTs. Instead, patient-speciﬁc variants identiﬁed by WES seem to underlie phenotype C. Aristidou1,2,A. Theodosiou1,A. Alexandrou1,I. associations in these families. Papaevripidou1, P.Evangelidou1,Z. Kosmaidou-Aravidou3,F. C. Aristidou: None. A. Theodosiou: None. A. Alexan- Behjati4,G.A. Tanteles5,V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou6,C. drou: None. I. Papaevripidou: None. P. Evangelidou: Sismani1,2 None. Z. Kosmaidou-Aravidou: None. F. Behjati: None. G.A. Tanteles: None. V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou: 1CytogeneticsandGenomicsDepartment,TheCyprusInstitute None. C. Sismani: None. of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of P13.03C Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of Inﬂuence of human X chromosome structural variations Genetics, Alexandra Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Cytogenetics and aberrations on X chromosome inactivation Unit,UniversityofSocialWelfareandRehabilitationSciences, Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, J.Bokajeva1,M.Männistu1,M.Nõukas1,O.Tšuiko1,2,R.Mägi3, 5Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology A. Salumets2, A.Kurg1 and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics and Archbishop 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, Makarios III Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus 2Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia478 J.delPicchia X chromosome inactivation (XCI) balances the expression Turin, Italy, 7Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, of X-linked genes between females and males. Early in turin, Italy female development, cells transcriptionally silence one randomly chosen X chromosome. This leads to a general Background: Ataxia-Telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare auto- ratio of 50:50 cells, where half the cells inactivate the somal recessive disease affecting cerebellum, immune sys- maternal and half the paternal X chromosome. The ratio tem, lungs, liver and characterised by an enhanced tumor varies among women, although signiﬁcant deviations from risk.Despitethecerebellardegeneration,themajorcauseof it are relatively rare among phenotypically normal women mortality in A-T is due to respiratory failure caused by and are known as skewed XCI. Skewing is more common recurrent bacterial infections of the upper-respiratory tract among older women or women with certain X-linked dis- and oral tissues .Since inﬂammation is emerging as an eases or X chromosome aberrations. The latter is often important hallmark in A-T, we hypothesized that A-T markedbyinactivationofthedefectiveXchromosome.Our patientscouldexhibitimpairedinnateimmuneresponsedue study focuses on detecting the inﬂuence of X chromosome to defective pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) such as deletions and duplications on XCI. Two groups of women Toll-like receptors (TLRs) by microbes. were selected from the Estonian Genome Center at the Methods: Primary skin ﬁbroblasts from A-T and healthy University of Tartu population-based biobank, genotyped controls and Hela cell lines with high-density whole-genome SNP BeadArrays. ATM -/- were assessed for genes encoding inﬂammatory PennCNVprogrammewasusedforCNVcallingaccording response factors using RT-qPCR and citoﬂuorimetric to the manufacturer's protocol. Subjects group was com- analysis, before and after stimulation with E.Coli lipopoly- prised of 436 women with X chromosome aberrations over saccharide (LPS). LPS and TNF-α mediated Nf-kβ activa- 50kbinsizespanningthewholeXchromosome,whilethe tion was measured by western blot analysis. controls group was comprised of 436 women without X Results:CellslackingATMproteinwerelessresponsive chromosome defects of the mentioned size. Both sample than controls as shown by the defective gene expression of sets were further divided into age groups, taking into con- TLR-4andIL-6andasigniﬁcantreductionofIL-6secreted sideration the increased rate of skewing in older women. protein both at basal level and after LPS or TNF-α stimuli. XCI ratio was assessed using HUMARA method. No sig- In the same conditions, the niﬁcant difference between XCI ratios of women with and Nf-kβ activation pathway was less activated in A-T cells without X chromosome aberrations has been found so far. respect to healthy LCLs. However, as expected, an increase in XCI skewing is seen Conclusions: Our studies indicate for the ﬁrt time a in older women. defective trafﬁcking of TLR-4 in response to LPS stimuli. J. Bokajeva: None. M. Männistu: None. M. Nõukas: ThisdefectcouldcontributetohyposensitiveresponseofA- None. O. Tšuiko: None. R. Mägi: None. A. Salumets: Tpatientstoimmunogenicchallenge.Furtherinvestigations None. A. Kurg: None. in this pathways coul provide a potential target for therapeutic clinical intervention in A-T. P13.04D E.Pozzi:None.S.Cannito:None.M.Parola:None.M. Defective trafﬁcking of inﬂammatory response factors Vinciguerra: None. S. Augeri: None. C. Mariotti: None. exhibits hyposensitive immunogenic response in skin E. Giorgio: None. C. Mancini: None. E. Di Gregorio: ﬁbroblasts from Ataxia Telangiectasia patients None. M. Ferrero: None. E. Riberi: None. A. Brusco: None. S. Cavalieri: None. E.Pozzi1,S.Cannito2,M.Parola2,M.Vinciguerra3,S.Augeri4, C. Mariotti5, E.Giorgio1,C. Mancini1,E. DiGregorio6,M. P13.05A Ferrero1,E. Riberi7, A.Brusco1,6, S.Cavalieri1 Breakpoint mapping at nucleotide resolution in balanced translocations associated with clinical phenotypes 1Department of Medical Sciences, Genetic Unit, Turin, Italy, 2Department of Clinical and Biological sciences, Unit of M.Moyses-Oliveira1,A.Di-Battista1,M.Zamariolli1,V.Meloni1, Experimental Medicine and Clinical pathology, Turin, Italy, S. Bragagnolo1,D.Christofolini2, C.Steiner3,L. Sisdelli1,N. 3DNAMetabolismLaboratory,theFIRCInstituteofMolecular Kosyakova4, T.Liehr4, A.Reymond5,M.Melaragno1 Onclogy, IFOM, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Medical Sciences,ImmunogeneticUnit,turin,Italy,5UnitofGeneticsof 1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Diseases, IRCCS 2Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, São Paulo, Brazil, Neurologic Institute “Carlo Besta”, Milan, Italy, 6S.C.D.U. 3Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil, MedicalGenetics,A.O.U."CittadellaSaluteedellaScienza", 4Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany, 5University of Lausanne, Lausanne, SwitzerlandAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 479 Precise breakpoint mapping of balanced chromosomal withafunctionofoxidativestressresistancebyscavenging rearrangements is crucial to identify disease genes. We reactive oxygen species (ROS), but the gene function evaluated 11 female patients with balanced reciprocal remains to be explored. The aim of this study was to elu- translocations associated with phenotypic alterations. We cidate X gene function, mechanism and its role in eye mapped and sequenced their breakpoints, assessed the development using Drosophila and mice as a model rearrangements’ impacts on expression of disrupted genes, organism. addressed candidate genes to position effect, and inferred Materials and Methods: The GAL4-UAS system were mechanismsofformation.Fouroutof11patientspresented used to speciﬁcally knockdown homologue of X in the eye one of the chromosomal breaks in heterochromatic and of Drosophila and resulted in the small eye phenotype. highly repetitive DNA segments, such as centromeres or Various genetic crosses were performed to analyze the short arm of acrocentric chromosomes. We demonstrated phenotype were mediated through apoptotic or autophagy that nucleotide resolution characterization of breakpoints at pathway. The mice homologous gene knockout was gapsinthereferencegenomeisfeasiblewhencytogenomic generated using CRISPR/Cas9 technology. methods and short-read sequencing are associated. Most of Results: Knockdown of X in Drosophila resulted in the rearrangements were possibly formed by non- severe small eye phenotype, and the knockout mice were homologous end joining with breakpoints within repeat blind. In Drosophila, P35 baculovirus overexpression elements. Seven of the 11 patients presented with break- (active caspase inhibitor) and knockdown of pro-apoptotic pointswithinatotal ofninegenes. Sevenofwhichshowed genes showed complete rescue of small eye phenotype. To altered expression levels and the functional impairment of furtheridentifytheexactapoptoticpathway,variousplayers two of them, e.g. KIAA2022, IL1RAPL1, could be con- involved in JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK) apoptosis sidered causative of the patients’ phenotypes. The disrup- pathway rescue the small eye phenotype. tion of a promoter region triggered the description of a Conclusions: The small eye phenotype of X could be novel X-linked syndrome caused by AMMECR1 loss of involved in the JNK-mediated apoptosis pathway. Our function. In four patients, there was no gene disruption at future studies would betoprove JNK dependentapoptosis, the breakpoints, suggesting other pathogenic mechanisms. the role of ROS, mutagenesis study to explore more about Four candidate genes were considered potentially affected the function of X. bypositioneffectandexpressionabrogationofoneofthem, D. Suresh: None. Y. Ching: None. M. Lin: None. B. e.g.TSPAN7,wasconﬁrmed.Weemphasizetheimportance Liao: None. of breakpoint-junction characterization at nucleotide reso- lution in balanced chromosomal rearrangements to reveal P13.07C the genetic mechanisms associated to the patients’ pheno- Whole Genome Sequencing of 9 patients allowed a better types,mechanismsofformation,andgenomicnatureofthe understanding of complex chromosomal rearrangements disrupted DNA sequences. M. Moyses-Oliveira: None. A. Di-Battista: None. M. N.Chatron1,2,F. Diguet1,P. Rollat-Farnier1,K. Uguen1,3,J. Zamariolli: None. V. Meloni: None. S. Bragagnolo: Lauer Zillhardt4,A. Sorlin5,6,J.Andrieux7,S.Chantot- None. D. Christofolini: None. C. Steiner: None. L. Bastaraud8,P. Callier9, M.Cordier1,C.Dubourg10,11,F. Sisdelli: None. N. Kosyakova: None. T. Liehr: None. A. Girard12,S.Jaillard13,B.Keren14,J.Lespinasse15,N.Marle5,A. Reymond: None. M. Melaragno: None. Masurel5,M.Mathieu16,C.Metay17,M.Portnoï8,F.Prieur18,M. Rio19,J.Siffroi8,C. Schluth-Bolard1,2, D.Sanlaville1,2 P13.06B Functional analysis of a novel gene X causing small eye 1ServicedeGénétique,HospicesCivilsdeLyon,Lyon,France, phenotype through JNK-dependent apoptosis pathway 2EquipeGENDEV,CRNL,INSERMU1028,CNRSUMR5292 UCBL1, Lyon, France, 3Service de Génétique, CHU Brest, D.Suresh1,Y. Ching1, M.Lin1,B. Liao2 Brest, France, 4Unité de Diagnostic Préimplantatoire, Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux 1TzuChi University, Hualien city, Taiwan, 2National Health Universitaires de Strasbourg,Strasbourg, France, 5Service de Research institute, Miaoli, Taiwan génétique,CHUDijon,Dijon,France,6EquipeGAD,INSERM U1231, Dijon, France, 7Service de génétique, Hôpital Jeanne Introduction: A bioinformatics work comprising co- de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 8AP-HP, expression gene network in the mouse was built based on Département de Génétique médicale, UF de Génétique microarray and RNA-Seq platforms, revealed an unex- chromosomique, hôpital d’Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, plored gene X which might play a role in retinal develop- France, 9Service de génétique, CHU Dijon, Dijon, Dijon, ment.Xcontainsanevolutionaryconservedproteindomain France, 10Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique,480 J.delPicchia CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 11IGDR, CNRS UMR 6290, N.Chatron:None.F.Diguet:None.P.Rollat-Farnier: Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 12Laboratoire de None. K. Uguen: None. J. Lauer Zillhardt: None. A. cytogénétique constitutionnelle et prénatale, Strasbourg, Sorlin:None.J.Andrieux:None.S.Chantot-Bastaraud: France,13Servicedecytogénétiqueetbiologiecellulaire,CHU None. P. Callier: None. M. Cordier: None. C. Dubourg: Rennes, Rennes, France, 14Département de Génétique et None. F. Girard: None. S. Jaillard: None. B. Keren: Centre de Référence Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes None.J.Lespinasse:None.N.Marle:None.A.Masurel: Rares, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique - None. M. Mathieu: None. C. Metay: None. M. Portnoï: Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 15Service de génétique, CH None.F.Prieur:None.M.Rio:None.J.Siffroi:None.C. Métropole Savoie, Chambéry, France, 16Service de génétique Schluth-Bolard: None. D. Sanlaville: None. clinique et oncogénétique, CHU Amiens-Picardie, Amiens, France, 17AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, P13.08D 18Service de Génétique Clinique, Chromosomique et Contribution of CMA to genetic diagnosis of individuals Moléculaire,CHUHôpitalNord,Saint-Etienne,France,19AP- with dysmorphisms: a collaborative study of the SIGU HP, Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker-Enfants (Italian Society of Human Genetics) Cytogenetic and Malades, Paris, France Cytogenomic working group Chromosomal rearrangements are used to be considered as M.Garzo1,I.Catusi1,M.Recalcati1,M.Alfonsi2,A.Alghisi3,S. complex when involving at least 3 breakpoints on two Cappellani4,R.Casalone5,R.Caselli6,C.Ceccarini7,C.Ceglia8, differentchromosomes.Cytogeneticmicroarraysandwhole A. Ciaschini9,D.Coviello10,F. Crosti11,A. D'Aprile7,A. genome sequencing (WGS) revealed rare much more Fabretto4,R. Genesio12, M.Giagnacovo13,P. Granata5,I. complex situations with numerous breakpoints on a single Longo6, M.Malacarne10,G.Marseglia14,A. Montaldi3,A. chromosome overshooting the ﬁrst deﬁnition. Henceforth Nardone15,C.Palka16,V.Pecile4,C.Pessina5,D.Postorivo15,S. grouped under the chromoanagenesis term mechanisms Redaelli17,A. Renieri6,C. Rigon18,F. Tiberi9,M.Tonelli19,C. generating such rearrangements remain misunderstood and Valtorta1, N.Villa11,A. Zilio3, D.Zuccarello18,A. Novelli20,L. their deﬁnition elusive especially since such constitutional Larizza1,D.Giardino1 complex chromosome rearrangement (CCR) are rare. We performed WGS for 9 probable constitutional 1IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Ospedale chromoanagenesis: 4 cases with a minimum of 4 Copy SS Annunziata, U.O.C. di Genetica medica, Chieti, Italy, Number Variations on a single chromosome and 5 cases 3Azienda ULSS 6, U.O.S. Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, with at least 10 chromosome breakpoints identiﬁed in Vicenza,Italy,4IRCCSBurloGarofolo,S.C.GeneticaMedica, patients with balanced chromosomal rearrangements char- Trieste, Italy, 5ASST Sette Laghi, Osp. di Circolo e Fond. acterizedwithWGS(ANIproject).Weanalyzedpaired-end Macchi,SMeL specializzato Citogenetica e Genetica Medica, WGS data using BreakDancer and ERDS respectively for Varese,Italy,6AziendaOspedalieraUniversitariaSenese,U.O. breakpointandCNVcalling.OurSvaggapipelinewasused C. Genetica Medica, Siena, Italy, 7A.O.U. Ospedali Riuniti, for ﬁltering and annotation. Lab. di Citogenetica, Foggia, Italy, 8AORN SG Moscati, All rearrangements appeared to be more complex than UOSD Genetica Medica, Avellino, Italy, 9A.O.U. Ospedali initially thought with a total of 232 breakpoints and a Riuniti Umberto I-G.M.Lancisi-G.Salesi, Lab. Genetica maximum of 74 breakpoints clustered in 4 hotspots for a Medica SOS Malattie Rare, Ancona, Italy, 10E.O. Ospedali single patient. No statistical signiﬁcant imbalance was Galliera, Lab.di Genetica Umana, Genova, Italy, 11Ospedale observed compared to random distribution regarding TAD San Gerardo- ASST Monza, U.S. Genetica Medica, Monza, disruption or purine/pyrimidine nucleotide at breakpoint. A Italy, 12A.O.U. Federico II, U.O.C. di Citogenetica, Napoli, statistical depletion of gene-disrupting breakpoints was Italy,13ASSTLariana-OspedaleSant'Anna,Lab.diGenetica, observed compared to theoretical distribution (p=0,0016). Como, Italy, 14A.O.U. Careggi, S.O.D. Diagnostica Genetica, Nucleotide resolution showed the combination of several Firenze, Italy, 15Policlinico Tor Vergata, U.O.C. Laboratorio repairing mechanisms within a rearrangement adding diGeneticaMedica,Roma,Italy,16UniversitàG.D’Annunzio, complexity to complexity. Dipartimento di Pediatria, Chieti-Pescara, Italy, 17Università Gathering several exceptional observations we help to di Milano-Bicocca, Dipartimento di Medicina e Chirurgia, delineate the chromoanagenesis phenomenon. Breakpoint Monza, Italy, 18A.O.U. di Padova, U.O.C. Genetica e distribution compared to simpler rearrangements will help Epidemiologia Clinica, Padova,Italy, 19Università diBrescia, understand its origins and provide new insights in LCGMDipartimentodiMedicinaMolecolareeTraslazionale, cytogenomics such as guidelines for structural variant Brescia,Italy, 20OspedalePediatrico delBambinoGesù,U.O. pathogenicity classiﬁcation. C. Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Roma, ItalyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 481 Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) signiﬁcantly 1National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Ibaraki, Japan, increasedthepossibility toidentify copynumbervariations 2University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom (CNVs)associatedwithawiderangeofgenomicdisorders. HerewereportonacollaborativestudyoftheSIGU(Italian Chromosome translocations can be detected by cytogenetic SocietyofHuman Genetics) CytogeneticandCytogenomic analysis, but this is independent of expression data which working group, on 780 patients referred to CMA for dys- do not identify the origin of alleles. It is known that the morphisms as the only clinical manifestation(21%) or number of abnormal chromosomes in tumor cells is gen- associated with intellectual disability/developmental delay erallyincreasedduringprogressioninvivoorserialpassage (57%), congenital malformation(s)(10%), autism spectrum in vitro due to chromosome instability. This raises a fun- disorders(6%), epilepsy(3%) or growth anomalies(3%). damental question about whether chromosome rearrange- Overall329non-polymorphicCNVshavebeenidentiﬁedin ments can cause effects on gene expression in rearranged 266patients(34%)ofwhich78CNVshavebeendetectedin chromosomes in addition to fusion genes. Chromosome 56 patients(21%) with dysmorphisms as the only clinical sorting by ﬂow cytometry produces ﬂow karyotypes that manifestation. In 36% of these probands the CNVs have enable the distinction between normal and abnormal chro- beenclassiﬁedaspathogenic(pCNVs),with15%associated mosomes. In this study, a derivative chromosome t(9;14) to known syndromes, and in 64% as variants of uncertain and its homologous normal chromosomes 9 from the Ishi- clinical signiﬁcance(VOUS). The remaining 251 CNVs kawa 3-H-12 cell line were sorted to collect homologue- have been detected in 210 patients referred for dysmorph- speciﬁc samples. Chromosome sequencing of the der(9) isms combined to another clinical manifestation and clas- identiﬁed the breakpoint junction at 9p24.3 and 14q13.1 siﬁed as pCNVs in 38% of cases, with 21% associated to and uncovered the formation of a fusion gene, WASH1- known syndromes, and 62% as VOUS. The average size NPAS3.Of 293,903amplicons in theIon Ampliseq exome was2,9MbforallCNVs,>6MbforpCNVsand<1Mbfor panel, 11,809 amplicons are localized in chromosome 9, VOUS.Thisstudyallowedustoassessthedetectionrateof corresponding to 749 genes. Chromosome-speciﬁc exome CMA for patients referred for dysmorphisms as the only sequencing of sorted chromosomes demonstrated that 87% clinicalmanifestation,henceinformingabouttheconsistent ofthechromosome9exomewasampliﬁedinder(9),which or possible underlying genetic causes to validate/explore in include 982 SNVs. This permits the assignment of allelic the distinct patients groups by 3d-facial-analysis. Dys- variants and can lead to comparisons between normal and morphisms combined to other clinical ﬁndings could be abnormalchromosomes.ComparedtotheRNAsequencing evaluatedinthesamestudyandcarriersofpCNVsreceived data with the allele-speciﬁc variant proﬁles, each gene theirdiagnosis,whilethosewithVOUSremainamenableto expression along chromosome 9 is assigned to both or one be solved by novel literature insights. of alleles. We show that allele-speciﬁc chromosome M. Garzo: None. I. Catusi: None. M. Recalcati: None. sequencing of homologues is a robust technique for dis- M.Alfonsi:None.A.Alghisi:None.S.Cappellani:None. tinguishingallelesandthisprovidesavaluableapproachfor R.Casalone:None.R.Caselli:None.C.Ceccarini:None. the investigation of chromosome instability. C. Ceglia: None. A. Ciaschini: None. D. Coviello: None. F. Kasai: None. J.C. Pereira: None. A. Kohara: None. F. Crosti: None. A. D'Aprile: None. A. Fabretto: None. M.A. Ferguson-Smith: None. R. Genesio: None. M. Giagnacovo: None. P. Granata: None. I. Longo: None. M. Malacarne: None. G. P13.10B Marseglia:None.A.Montaldi:None.A.Nardone:None. VeryshortDNAsegments canbedetected andhandledby C. Palka: None. V. Pecile: None. C. Pessina: None. D. the repair machinery during germline chromothriptic Postorivo:None.S.Redaelli:None.A.Renieri:None.C. chromosome reassembly Rigon: None. F. Tiberi: None. M. Tonelli: None. C. Valtorta: None. N. Villa: None. A. Zilio: None. D. M.Hančárová1, L.Nazaryan-Petersen2,M.M. Mehrjouy2,Z. Zuccarello:None.A.Novelli:None.L.Larizza:None.D. Slamova1,J.Drabova1,T.Marikova1,D.Novotna1,M.Vlckova1, Giardino: None. Z. Vlckova3,M.Bak2,Z. Zemanova4,N.Tommerup2,Z. Sedlacek1 P13.09A Allelic gene expression proﬁles revealed by homologue 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles speciﬁc exome sequencing University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre F. Kasai1, J.C.Pereira2, A.Kohara1, M.A. Ferguson-Smith2 forFunctionalGenomeResearch,DepartmentofCellularand Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark,3GHCGenetics,Prague,CzechRepublic,4Centerof482 J.delPicchia Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Pavia, Italy, 3Pediatrics Department, Papa Giovanni XXIII Laboratory Diagnostics, General University Hospital and Hospital, Bergamo, Italy Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic Introduction: Chromothripsis is a one-step genome-shat- tering catastrophe resulting from disruption of one or few Detailed analyses down to the nucleotide resolution reveal chromosomes in multiple fragments and consequent ran- unexpected complexity of seemingly simpler and balanced dom rejoining and repair leading to complex chromosomal chromosomal rearrangements. This concerns also chromo- rearrangements. While chromotripsis has been extensively thripsis, a rare type of complex rearrangement involving observed in cancers, few investigations documented a local shattering of one or more chromosomes and random similar phenomenon in congenital disorders. We report a reassembly of the resulting segments. Chromothripsis can case of a newborn, conceived using a donor egg, with a inﬂuence expression of many genes and cause abnormal complexkaryotypeand phenotypic abnormalities including phenotypes. We studied the structure and mechanism of a congenital cardiomyopathy, genital ambiguity, agenesis of seemingly balancedde novo chromosomerearrangementin corpuscallosum,bilateral ocularabnormalitiesandabsence a boy with developmental and growth delay. Karyotyping of left 12th rib. andmFISHidentiﬁed11segmentsfromfourchromosomes Methods: Conventional cytogenetic analysis, array to participate in the rearrangement. Microarray analysis comparitive genomic hybridization, whole genome sequen- revealedtwodenovodeletionsof0.7and2.5Mbattwoof cing (WGS), and polymerase chain reaction were used to the breakpoints in 1q24.3 and 6q24.1-q24.2, respectively. identify the chromosome rearrangement and characterize They affected paternal chromosomes and possibly the breakpoints in our patient and his father. explainedmostsymptomsofthepatient.Subsequentwhole- Results: Conventional and molecular cytogenetic analy- genome mate-pair sequencing revealed that the four chro- sis showed a complex karyotype with structural variations mosomes were in fact broken into 29 segments longer than including deletions of three regions on chromosome 2, one kb. Sanger sequencing of all junctions showed addi- deletionsoftworegionsonchromosome4withinversionof tional complexity compatible with the involvement of dif- thefragmentbetweenthetwobreakpoints,andapericentric ferent repair pathways. A translocation of a 33 bp long inversion of chromosome 11. WGS analysis detected fragment to one of the junctions was observed which may further multiple complex balanced intra-chromosomal haveimplicationsforthedeﬁnitionofthelowersizelimitof rearrangements of chromosomes 2 and 4, with 17 break- structural variants. Our observations and review of pub- pointsresultinginthebreakageof11genes.Paternalorigin lished chromothripsis events indicate that even very small of the abnormal chromosomes has been conﬁrmed. fragments from the shattered chromosomescan be detected Conclusions: The pattern of random joining of chromo- and handled by the repair machinery during germline somal fragments observed in our case suggests that a chromothriptic chromosome reassembly. Supported by 17- chromothripsis event might have driven the formation of 29423A, 00064203, 00064165, LM2015091 (Czech Min- these complex rearrangements. The rearranged chromo- istries of Health and Education), 2013-14290 (Lundbeck somes were demonstrated to be of paternal origin suggest- Foundation), Global Genes, Local Concerns (University of ing that a chromothripsis occurred during spermatagenesis Copenhagen) and 4183-00482B (Danish Council for Inde- althoughtheonsetinthepreimplantationembryocannotbe pendent Research). excluded. M.Hančárová:None.L.Nazaryan-Petersen:None.M. A.Pansa:None.N.Kurtas:None.A.Cereda:None.B. M. Mehrjouy: None. Z. Slamova: None. J. Drabova: Facchinetti: None. G. Cassina: None. F. Comi: None. C. None. T. Marikova: None. D. Novotna: None. M. Perico: None. D. Nicoli: None. O. Zuffardi: None. U. Vlckova: None. Z. Vlckova: None. M. Bak: None. Z. Giussani: None. Zemanova: None. N. Tommerup: None. Z. Sedlacek: None. P13.12D Medical consequences of pathogenic CNVs in adults P13.11C New evidence of chromothripsis in congenital disorder G.Kirov,K.Crawford,M.Smith,K.Kendall,E.Rees,V.Escott- Price, J.Walters, M.J. Owen, M.C.O'Donovan A.Pansa1,N.Kurtas2,A.Cereda3,B.Facchinetti1,G.Cassina1, F. Comi1,C. Perico1,D.Nicoli1,O.Zuffardi2,U.Giussani1 Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom 1Medical Genetics, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bergamo, Background: Copy number variants (CNVs) increase risk Italy,2DepartmentofMolecularMedicine,UniversityofPavia, forlearningdifﬁcultiesandearly-onsetneurodevelopmentalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 483 disordersbuttheirroleinmedicaloutcomesinmiddle-and 7Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisbon, oldageislimited.TheUKBiobank,withhalfamillionwell Portugal, 8Serviço de Cirurgia Pediátrica, Hospital de Santo phenotyped adults, presents an opportunity to study the António,Porto,Portugal,9ServiçodeGenéticaMédica,Centro medical consequences of CNV in the general population. Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, Methods: We analysed 54 pathogenic CNVs in all 10Serviço de Endocrinologia Pediátrica, Centro Hospitalar e Biobank participants. We used logistic regression analysis Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 11ToxOmics - to test CNVs for associations with 58 broad medical Centro de Toxicogenómica e Saúde Humana, Nova Medical phenotypes, present in at least 2000 participants. School,Lisbon,Portugal,12Thisworkwaspartiallyfundedby Results: CNV carriers had an increased risk to develop Project:UID/BIM/0009/2016fromFundaçãoparaaCiênciae 37 of the 58 phenotypes at nominal levels of statistical a Tecnologia, Lisbon, Portugal signiﬁcance, with 19 of these associations surviving Bonferroni correction for 58 tests. Individual comparisons Introduction: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia(CAH) is due ofeachofthe54CNVsagainstthe58phenotypesproduced to 21-hidroxilase deﬁciency(21-OHD) in about 95% of the 18associationsthatsurvivedBonferronicorrectionfor3132 cases. 21-OH is encoded by CYP21A2 gene, and most tests and a further 57 that were signiﬁcant at a false frequent mutations occurring in CYP21A2 are due to gene discovery rate of 0.1. Thirteen CNV loci had three or more conversions originated from its pseudogene(CYP21A1P). signiﬁcantassociationsatFDR=0.1,with16p11.2deletions The clinical severity of CAH is associated with the leading the list with 15 signiﬁcant results. The most impairmentof21-OHactivity,whichisdirectlyrelatedwith common CNVs (at 0.5-0.7% frequency) have none or the molecular defect. CAH is classiﬁed as classic salt- minimal impact on medical outcomes in adults. wasting(SW) and simple virilising(SV) forms, and non- Conclusions: Some of the 54 CNVs proposed to be classic(NC) form of the disease. SW and SV are usually pathogenic have profound effects on physical health, even diagnosed after birth or during the ﬁrst years of life, in people who have largely escaped early neurodevelop- respectively, while most cases of NC-CAH are diagnosed mental outcomes. Our work provides clinicians with a during infancy, puberty or until adult age. Here we present morbidity map of potential outcomes among carriers of the molecular results performed in paediatric patients these CNVs, which will be made available on a dedicated with CAH. web resource, updated as new data is released by the Methodology: molecular analysis (using genomic DNA) Biobank. included mini-sequencing, restriction enzyme digestion, G. Kirov: None. K. Crawford: None. M. Smith:None. Sanger sequencing, Southern-blotting and/or multiplex K.Kendall:None.E.Rees:None.V.Escott-Price:None. ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation(MLPA). J. Walters: None. M.J. Owen: None. M.C. Results: We analysed 265 patients with CAH (65 with O'Donovan: None. SW, 51 with SV and 149 with NC). In 211 patients (80%) the genotypes were in agreement with their phenotypes, P13.13A whileintheremaining20%,onlyonepathogenicallelewas Congenital adrenal hyperplasia in paediatric age<:> identiﬁed or their genotype was normal. In the SW group molecular analysis of the CYP21A2 gene and implications the most frequent variant was the splicing mutation for genetic counselling g.655A>G(28.5%), in the SV was g.999T>A(25.5%), and in NC was g.1683G>T(61%). S.Gomes1,J.Silva1,I.Pereira-Caetano1,L.Lopes2,C.Limbert2, Conclusions: Knowing the molecular bases of CAH is D.Amaral2, R.Pina2, T.Kay3, L.Sampaio4,C. Pereira4,O. essential for a correct genetic counselling; prenatal Moldovan5,A. B.Sousa5, I.Rebelo6,I.Gaspar7, J.C. diagnosis and treatment during pregnancy can be offered Rodrigues8,F. Ramos9,L. Ramos9, I.Dinis10,R. C.Cardoso10, tocouplesatriskofhavingafemalechildwithSWorSVin A. Mirante10, J.Goncalves1,11,12 order to avoid sexual ambiguity of the newborns. S. Gomes: None. J. Silva: None. I. Pereira-Caetano: 1DepartamentoGeneticaHumana,InstitutoNacionaldeSaude None. L. Lopes: None. C. Limbert: None. D. Amaral: DR Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Serviço de None. R. Pina: None. T. Kay: None. L. Sampaio: None. Endocrinologia Pediátrica, Hosp. D. Estefânia, Lisbon, C.Pereira:None.O.Moldovan:None.A.B.Sousa:None. Portugal, 3Serviço de Genética Médica, Hosp. D. Estefânia, I.Rebelo:None.I.Gaspar:None.J.C.Rodrigues:None. Lisbon, Portugal, 4Serviço de Endocrinologia Pediátrica, F. Ramos: None. L. Ramos: None. I. Dinis: None. R.C. DepartamentodePediatria,HospitaldeSantaMaria,Lisbon, Cardoso: None. A. Mirante: None. J. Goncalves: None. Portugal, 5Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria,HospitaldeSantaMaria,Lisbon,Portugal,6Serviço de Pediatria, Hospital S. Francisco Xavier, Lisbon, Portugal,484 J.delPicchia P13.14B Lecaignec: None. C. Poirsier: None. E. Landais: None. Microdeletion 1p36 diagnostic follow-up of a cohort of 70 D. Martin: None. C. Richard: None. A. Tabet: None. S. patients diagnosed in France Redon: None. N. Gruchy: None. F. Vialard: None. M.Doco-Fenzy1,C.Jacquin1,P. Callier2,D.Sanlaville3,C. P13.15C Missirian4,P.Kuentz5,P.Jaeger3,A.Heddar6,C.Lecaignec7,C. Partial trisomy 21 map: ten cases further supporting the Poirsier1,E.Landais1,D.Martin8,C. Richard9,a.Tabet10,S. highly restricted Down syndrome critical region (HR- Redon11,N.Gruchy12,F. Vialard13 DSCR) on human chromosome 21 1Service de Génétique, CHU-Reims, Reims, France, 2Service M.C.Pelleri1,E.Cicchini1,M.B.Petersen2,3,L.Tranebjærg4,5, de Génétique, CHU-Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Service de T. Mattina6,P. Magini7, F.Antonaros1, M.Caracausi1,L. Génétique, CHU-Lyon, Lyon, France, 4Service de Génétique, Vitale1, C.Locatelli8,M.Seri9,P. Strippoli1,A. Piovesan1, G. CHU-Marseilles, Marseilles, France, 5Service de Génétique, Cocchi10 CHU-Besançon, Besançon, France, 6Service de Génétique, CHU-Cochin, Paris, France, 7Service de Génétique, CHU- 1Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Nantes,Nantes,France,8ServicedeGénétique,CHU-leMans, Medicine (DIMES), Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Genetics, le Mans, France, 9Service de Génétique, CHU-Clermont- Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg,Denmark, 3Department Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 10Service de Génétique, of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark, CHU-Robert Debré, Paris, France, 11Service de Génétique, 4DepartmentofClinicalGenetics/Rigshospitalet,TheKennedy CHU-Brest, Brest, France, 12Service de Génétique, CHU- Centre, Glostrup, Denmark, 5University of Copenhagen, Caen,Caen,France,13ServicedeGénétique,CHU-Versailles, Institute of Clinical Medicine, The Panum Institute, Versailles, France Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department of Pediatrics, Medical Genetics University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 7Medical The purpose of our study was to review the prevalence of Genetics Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Bologna, Italy, 1p36 deletion diagnosed in France in comparison with the 8Neonatology Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Bologna, same work made for 22q11 deletion (700 patients). The Italy, 9Medical Genetics Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, 1p36 deletion has a described incidence of 1/5000 to 1/ Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), 10,000 births living. It is also a common condition within UniversityofBologna,Bologna,Italy,10NeonatologyUnit,St. the microdeletions and potentially the most frequent after Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Department of Medical and 22q11deletionanyage.FollowinganationalACLFsurvey Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), University of Bologna, Bologna, with 15 centers, we report a cohort of 70 patients born Italy living,atleast30girlsand20boysdiagnosedbetween2004 and 2017. The age of patients is 2 days to 31 years. The Background:Downsyndrome(DS)ischaracterizedbythe diagnosis was possible in the ﬁrst years by the FISH tech- presence of an extra full or partial human chromosome 21 nique,MLPAandﬁnallythanksarray-CGHinpriority.This (Hsa21). An invaluable model to deﬁne genotype- isadeletioninterstitialinthemajorityofcases.Forrelatives phenotype correlations in DS is the study of the extremely tested more than 28 cases occurred de novo. Patients had rare cases of partial (segmental) trisomy 21 (PT21). A clinical signs consistent with those already described in systematic retrospective reanalysis of 125 PT21 cases literature. They had growth retardation, hypotonia and/or a allowed the identiﬁcation of a 34-kb highly restricted DS delay in acquisitions, or Intellectual disability (51/66 critical region (HR-DSCR) as the minimal region whose responses),IUGRand/orstunting(32/32responses),afacial duplication is shared by all PT21 DS subjects. dysmorphism (53/56). Cardiac malformations or large ves- Material and Methods: We reanalyzed at higher sels (> 33/53 responses), seizures (29/36 responses), brain resolutionthreecasespreviouslypublishedandwesearched abnormalities (30/43 responses), behavioral disorders (15/ for any new PT21 report in order to verify whether HR- 16 responses). Children were too young to have all signs. DSCRlimitscouldprospectivelybeconﬁrmedandpossibly Thesizeofthedeletionevaluatedinmostcasesandranged reﬁned. from 4100bp to 47Mb. Two groups with a distal or prox- Results: Hsa21 partial duplications of three imaldeletionweredetected.Thisstudyisnotexhaustivebut PT21subjectswerereﬁnedthrougharray-CGHandresulted raises the need to create registers for a better evaluation of fully consistent with the previous reports and with the the prevalence of microdeletions for better management. presenceofaduplicatedHR-DSCRonlyinDSsubjectsand M. Doco-Fenzy: None. C. Jacquin: None. P. Callier: not in non-DS individuals. Seven additional PT21 cases None. D. Sanlaville: None. C. Missirian: None. P. have been incorporated into the PT21 map. The PT21 map Kuentz: None. P. Jaeger: None. A. Heddar: None. C. now integrates 132 subjects onto a common frameworkAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 485 fully consistent with the presence of a duplicated HR- high frequency in sperm of old donors by ultra-sensitive DSCR, on distal 21q22.13 sub-band, only in DS subjects sequencing. Thus, there are important regulatory mechan- andnotinnon-DSindividuals.Nodocumentedexceptionto isms at different developmental stages of spermatogenesis the HR-DSCR model was found. thataffectthedownstreamtransmissionofdrivermutations. Conclusions: This prospective work further support the Our analysis forms a basis for understanding this type of association of the HR-DSCR with the diagnosis of DS, mutagenesisandtheassociatedrisksofdelayedparenthood representing an unbiased validation of the original model. in our society. Funded by: LIT213201001 and Further studies are needed to identify genetic determinants FWFP25525000 presumably located in the HR-DSCR and functionally B. Arbeithuber: None. E. Palzenberger: None. R. associated to the critical manifestations of DS. Reinhard:None.T.Ebner:None.P.Calabrese:None.L. M.C. Pelleri: None. E. Cicchini: None. M.B. Petersen: Muresan: None. I. Tiemann-Boege: None. None. L. Tranebjærg: None. T. Mattina: None. P. Magini:None.F.Antonaros:None.M.Caracausi:None. P13.18B L. Vitale: None. C. Locatelli: None. M. Seri: None. P. Functional analysis of sequence variants affecting splicing Strippoli: None. A. Piovesan: None. G. Cocchi: None. in Mendelian disorders P13.16D M.Y.Skoblov1,2,A.Marakhonov1,2,Y.Vyakhireva1,P.Sparber1, The activation of FGFR3 signalling has different M.Freire1,A. Filatova1 consequences in the transmission of mutations the male germline 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology B.Arbeithuber1,2,E.Palzenberger1,R.Reinhard1,T.Ebner1,P. (State University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation Calabrese3,L. Muresan4,I.Tiemann-Boege1 Introduction: The development of Next-Generation 1Johannes Kepler University Linz, Linz, Austria, 2Penn State Sequencing technology revealed that signiﬁcant part of University, State College, PA, United States, 3University of Mendelian disease-associated mutations is located in non- Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, coding regions and may affect splicing. Because of the 4University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom complexity of splicing regulation, it is not possible to pre- dict accurately the effect of genomic variants on splicing The majority of new mutations originate in the male events and RNA structure. In this work, we focused on germline.However,todatewelackinformationonaunique functionalanalysisofgenomicvariantsaffectingsplicingin type of mutagenesis—expansion of driver mutations in the a variety of Mendelian disorders. male germline. These are associated with congenital dis- Materials and Methods: To determine the effect of orders,occuratthousand-foldhigherfrequenciesthanother mutations we used two approaches: (1) RT-PCR from mutations, and drastically increase with paternal-age. To availablepatient’ssamples and(2) in-vitro minigene assay. date, the mechanisms propagating these germline driver For different cases, we performed one or both methods. mutations are not completely understood. Here we exam- Results: We analyzed >25 previously uncharacterized ined the origin and expansion of four driver mutations in genetic variants in >12 genes, associated with different sperm and a dissected testis differing in mutation rates and Mendelian disorders. These variants are located in both thestrengthofdysregulationofthemutantFGFR3receptor: exons and introns and mostly were classiﬁed as variant of c.1138G>A, c.1138G>C both causing achondroplasia unknown signiﬁcance (VUS). We determined the effect of (ACH),c.1948A>Gassociatedwiththanatophoricdisplasia these variants on mRNA structure; it allowed us to classify II (TDII), and c.1948A>C causing hypochondroplasia most of them as pathogenic and to make assumption of the (HCH). Only two out of four mutations (c.1138G>A and mechanisms involved in the molecular pathogenesis of c.1948A>G) showed that mutant DNA concentrated within diseases (e.g. RNA degradation by NMD, disruption of differentclustersoftheolddonor’stestis,resultingfromthe functional domain of protein). Additionally, we compared growth advantage of mutant stem cells caused by the acti- our experimental data with prediction tools for splicing vation of FGFR3. Interestingly, no measurable clustering events and revealed that it is not always possible to predict was observed for the ACH mutation with the lower muta- accurately the effect of mutation on splicing. tion frequency (c.1138G>C). We also observed that muta- Conclusions: Although it is now known that mutations tions with a stronger effect on FGFR3 signaling (TDII) affecting splicing can cause the Mendelian diseases, showed a reduced transmission into sperm. In contrast, however their contribution may be underrepresented due mildlyactivatingmutations(HCH)weremeasuredatavery to limitation of diagnostic procedures. To prove the486 J.delPicchia pathogenicity of these mutations, additional functional P13.20D analysis is often required. MicroRNAs as the link between Ribosomal Proteins M.Y. Skoblov: None. A. Marakhonov: None. Y. Regulation and Colorectal Cancer: A promising Vyakhireva: None. P. Sparber: None. M. Freire: None. therapeutic target A. Filatova: None. C. Savva1,D.Avramopoulou1, Z.Ellinas1,D.Fatouros2,I. P13.19C Vizirianakis2, K.N.Felekkis1 Interstitial microduplication Xp22.2 in two brothers with developmental delay and mild facial dysmorphism 1University of Nicosia, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece B. Krabichler1,S.Scholl-Bürgi2,U.Albrecht2,J. Zschocke1, C. Fauth1 Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third leading cause of death in the world. Due to its slow development from pre- 1DivisionofHumanGenetics,MedicalUniversityofInnsbruck, malignant lesions, perspectives to reduce the burden of Innsbruck, Austria, 2Clinical Department of Pediatrics I, disease by early detection and treatments are particularly Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria promisingforthisdisease.Although,alist with thecancer- relatedmiRNAshasbeencreated,theirroleinCRCremains Interstitial microduplications affecting chromosome band to be elucidated. There appears to be a clear link between Xp22.2areveryrarewithonlyafewcasesdescribedsofar. Ribosomal Proteins (RPs) and cancer as deregulation of Reported symptoms include developmental delay, intellec- RPs was shown to interfere with basic biological processes tual disability, and minor dysmorphism. While all affected such as cell cycle regulation, apoptosis, genome integrity individualsaremales,carrierfemalesusuallyhaveanormal and tumorogenesis. This attribute requires a tight and phenotype, which suggests that intellectual disability is careful regulation of RPs expression which might tend to probably due to a dosage effect of one or more duplicated cycle through carcinogenesis and cancer progression. We genes. However, due to the rarity of Xp22.2 micro- hypothesize that this cycling is at least partially controlled duplications, their heterogeneous size and variable locali- by miRNAs. Preliminary in silico analysis demonstrated zation the contribution of single genes to the clinical that ﬁve miRNAs (miR-129-5p, miR-19b-1-5p, miR-193b- phenotype is difﬁcult to evaluate. 5p,miR-1207-5p,miR-663a)regulatemorethan85%ofthe Here we report on male siblings with mild to moderate human RPs turning those miRNAs into potential crucial global developmental delay, minor dysmorphism and players in RP expression regulation. Interestingly, those measurements within normal ranges. Family history is miRNAs appear to also regulate genes that are involved in unremarkable, both parents and the older sister are healthy. proliferation and cancer related pathways. Expression ana- Molecular karyotyping revealed an interstitial microdupli- lysis in a panel of CRC cell lines with increasing aggres- cation Xp22.2-Xp22.31 of 5 megabases in both affected siveness, demonstrated differential expression of the above brothers (arr[hg18] Xp22.31p22.2(9301848_14415165)x2). miRNAs. The aim of this project is to explore the con- The duplication, which was probably inherited from the nection between RPs and miRNAs in relevance to CRC, healthy mother contains 36 OMIM-annotated genes, with the goal to expose promising miRNA therapeutic tar- including CLCN4, MID1, HCCS, ARGHAP6, FRMPD4, gets at different stages of carcinogenesis. Furthermore, it is and OFD1. Hemizygous loss of function mutations of expectedthatalternationofmiRNAexpressionincolorectal CLCN4 (encoding the chloride/hydrogen ion exchanger tissuethroughanexosomal-baseddrugdeliverysystemwill ClC-4) and FRMPD4 (encoding a neural scaffolding improve disease outcome. protein) cause X-linked intellectual disability type C. Savva: None. D. Avramopoulou: None. Z. Ellinas: MRX15 and MRX104, respectively. Both genes are highly None. D. Fatouros: None. I. Vizirianakis: None. K.N. expressedinbrainandundergoXinactivationinfemales.It Felekkis: None. is tempting to speculate that increased expression of genes like CLCN4 and FRMPD4, which are subject to dosage P13.21A compensation, may contribute to intellectual disability in Genetic heterogeneity & di/oligogenic inheritance males with X chromosomal duplications. Analysis of involvement in variable expressivity of Noonan syndrome furtherpatientswithoverlappingXpmicroduplicationswill be required to elucidate the contribution of these genes to L. Ferrari1, E.Mangano2, M.Bonati3,I.Monterosso1,I. the clinical phenotype. Brambilla4,F.Chiapparoni2,C.Battaglia1,R.Bordoni2,P.Riva1 B. Krabichler: None. S. Scholl-Bürgi: None. U. Albrecht: None. J. Zschocke: None. C. Fauth: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 487 1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Sciences 'Mario Serio', Medicine University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Institute of University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 3Department of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, Milan, Science’sHealth,AnnaMeyerChildren’sUniversityHospital, Italy, Milan, Italy, 3Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, Florence, Italy 4St. Matteo Hospital, Pavia, Italy Obesity, with its complications, emerges as a major con- Noonan syndrome (NS) is characterized by an autosomal tributortotheglobalhealthburdenassumingthestatusofa dominant inheritance, variable expressivity and genetic pandemic. It’s extremely complex disorder resulting of heterogeneity, given the high number of variants in interactionofbiological,socialandbehaviouralfactorsthat PTPN11, SOS1 RAF1, NRAS, KRAS, BRAF, MEK1 and cause increase in food intake and reduction in energy SHOC2genes.DespitetheincreasingapplicationofNGSin expenditure.Althoughraremonogenicforms,severalgenes 30% of patients pathogenetic mutations remain unknown. and regions of susceptibility have been described, the Further NS genes and pathogenetic mechanisms are genetic causes underlying remain largely unknown, despite expected. We search for new NS genes by a targeted NGS the role of genetic background is indisputable. GWAS analysis using a panel of 26 RAS pathway genes, in nine revealed consistent association between SNPs with BMI NS patients negative after genetic screenings. New poten- and fat-mass, but cannot demonstrate the undoubted caus- tially pathogenetic variants were detected in NS genes: c. ality, and elucidating the culprit events continues to be T355C (p.Y119H) in LZTR1 and c.A2882G (p.D961G) in challenging, especially when it’s not known the way in A2ML1 genes. We also observed in the same patient whichvariantsprimarilyact.Toexpandourknowledge,we mutations in A2ML1 (p.K110T) and SOS2 (p.Q742X) and performed WES in 30 strictly clinical classiﬁed Caucasian identiﬁedtwonewNScandidategenesinthreepatients.All probands, with severe early-onset obesity. We screened a of them have healthy parents and inherited a missense set of 80 genes responsible/susceptibility for syndromic/ mutationinanewNSgenefromoneparentandthesecond monogenic forms, including pathways of obesity develop- one in a known NS gene from the other parent. The co- ment.Weidentiﬁedpotentiallypathogenicvariantsin75%. presence of both mutated genes probably contributes to the 5 cases presented a single variant in genes related to NS phenotype. Functional studies on lymphoblastoid cells increase of BMI/WHR, 3 patients had variants in hypo- from the three trios are ongoing. We propose an additive thalamic leptin-melacortin pathway, whereas remaining effect of subclinical mutations leading to the RAS pathway cases showing complex genetic background with substitu- activation, causing NS. According to this hypothesis NS tions in 2/more genes. Interesting, in light of the genetic couldbeclassiﬁedasmono/di/oligenicdisease,amodelthat background we planned personalized treatment in patient could explain, with genetic heterogeneity, the variable withfamilyhistoryofdiabetes,hepaticsteatosisandsevere expressivity. Subclinical expression of speciﬁc variants, obesitywhopresentedpathogenicvariantinSH2B1,leaded escaping unfavorable selective pressure, show high allelic signiﬁcant weight loss. The systematic discovery of rare frequency and therefore could be co-inherited. This model variants in complex diseases suggests that the reverse- could also explain the missing of pathogenetic mutation in strategy is fruitful for assigning pathogenic effects of sev- 30% of NS patients. eral genes simultaneously: the genotype-ﬁrst approach will L. Ferrari: None. E. Mangano: None. M. Bonati: be able to identify clinically recognizable phenotypes None. I. Monterosso: None. I. Brambilla: None. F. R.Artuso:None.V.Palazzo:None.L.Giunti:None.S. Chiapparoni: None. C. Battaglia: None. R. Bordoni: Landini: None. A. Provenzano: None. A. La Barbera: None. P. Riva: None. None. S. Guarducci: None. M. Pantaleo: None. B. Lucherini: None. I. Sani: None. S. Bargiacchi: None. P. P13.22B Reho: None. E. Bosi: None. F. Peluso: None. A. Genomicknowledgeasthepowerfultooltounderstandthe Pagliazzi: None. L. Dosa: None. G. Traﬁcante: None. obesity M. Della Monica: None. S. Stagi: None. S. Giglio: None. R.Artuso1,V.Palazzo1,L.Giunti1,S.Landini2,A.Provenzano2, P13.23C A. LaBarbera2,S. Guarducci1,M.Pantaleo1,B. Lucherini1,I. Atypical recombinant chromosomes arising from parental Sani1,S. Bargiacchi1,P. Reho2,E. Bosi2, F.Peluso2, A. paracentric inversions: report of three patients Pagliazzi2,L.Dosa1,G.Traﬁcante1,M.DellaMonica1,S.Stagi3, S. Giglio1,2 P. Kuentz1,2,3,B. Keren4,D.Sanlaville5,6,A. Masurel7, A. Mosca8,2,3,N.Marle8,2,3,M.Payet8,C.Ragon8,M.Pouleau8,C. 1Medical Genetic Unit, Meyer's Children University Hospital, Thauvin-Robinet7,2,3, L.Faivre7,2,3,C. Schluth-Bolard5,6,P. Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Callier8,2,3488 J.delPicchia 1Génétique Biologique, PCBio, Centre Hospitalier questionandmayguidefuturerecommendationsforgenetic Universitaire de Besançon, Besançon, France, 2Fédération counseling. Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et P.Kuentz:None.B.Keren:None.D.Sanlaville:None. Anomalies du Développement (FHU TRANSLAD), Centre A. Masurel: None. A. Mosca: None. N. Marle: None. M. HospitalierUniversitairedeDijonetUniversitédeBourgogne Payet: None. C. Ragon: None. M. Pouleau: None. C. Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 3UMR-Inserm 1231 GAD, Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Schluth- Génétique des Anomalies du développement, Université de Bolard: None. P. Callier: None. Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 4Département de génétique, APHP, UPMC Inserm, UMR7225, ICM, GH Pitié- P13.24D Salpêtrière,Paris,France,5ServicedeGénétique,Laboratoire A complicated WES diagnosis: hereditary spherocytosis de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Groupement Hospitalier due to autosomal recessively inherited mutation in EPB42 Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 6Lyon associated with mosaic genome-wide paternal uniparental Neuroscience Research Center, GENDEV Team, INSERM isodisomy U1028; CNRS UMR5292; UCBL1, Bron, France, 7Centre de Génétique et Centre de reference "Anomalies du A.Walczak1,A.Biernacka1,2,P.Gasperowicz1,A.Koppolu1,2,J. Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs", Hôpital Kosińska1,G.Kostrzewa3,V. Murcia-Pieńkowski1,2,M. d’Enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, Rydzanicz1,M.Biela4,J.Kozłowska5,M.Sąsiadek5,R.Śmigiel4, France, 8Laboratoire de Génétique chromosomique et R. Płoski1 moléculaire, Plateau Technique de Biologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,WarsawMedicalUniversity, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate School of Molecular Introduction: Paracentric inversions can generate aneu- Medicine, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, somic gametes with duplication-deﬁciency distal to the 3Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical University of inversion breakpoints and the formation of unstable dicen- Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Paediatrics and tric and acentric derivatives leading to low embryonic via- Rare Disorders, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, bility. We report atypical recombinant monocentric Poland, 5Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical chromosomes arising from parental paracentric inversions University, Wroclaw, Poland in three patients with syndromic intellectual disability. Materials and Methods - Results: Chromosomal Introduction: Genome-wide uniparental disomy is very microarray showed similar rearrangements characterized rare phenomenon. In over 10 patients described so far the by interstitial duplications-deﬁciencies proximal to the manifestations were mostly due to known imprinting dis- breakpoints of a parental paracentric inversion. The study orders. We report a case of a child without imprinting of genotypes in the three patients using SNP microarray defects features with mosaic paternal genome-wide uni- showedthat:(i) the parentalorigins of theduplications and parentalisodisomy(GWUPiD)andsymptomaticautosomal the deletions were from the parents with the paracentric recessively inherited mutation in EPB42. inversions; (ii) there were three haplotypes in the duplica- Materials and Methods: 3y old girl was referred for tions showing that the gain of copy came from both whole exome sequencing (WES) due to chronic anemia, homologouschromosomesoftheparentwiththeinversion; chronicliverfailure,cystsofthebileductstreatedbyKasai (iii) for each patient, there was a copy neutral region procedure. After delivery, she developed jaundice, anemia between the deletion and the duplication, ﬂanked by low andhepatopathy.Manymetabolicdisorderswereexcluded. copy repeats causing reported cryptic inversions. We thus WES (DNA from blood, repeated 3 times, also from hypothesized the presence of an additional cryptic para- independently collected blood sample) was performed on centric inversion in the same parent, either on the HiSeq1500.ToidentifyGWUPiDapanelofforensicSTRs chromosome bearing the initial paracentric inversion, or (short tandem repeats) was analyzed. on the homologous chromosome. In both cases, the Results: Bioinformatics analysis of WES revealed lower speculated mechanism may involve a crossingover within than average number of variants. We also observed the small loop of a double inversion loop. “pseudo” homozygous variants with low percentage of Conclusions: It is currently thought that heterozygotes reference allele (~15%), in particular we found p. forparacentricinversionshaveariskofabnormaloffspring (Arg310Gln)/c.929G>A in EPB42 (associated with spher- comparable to that of the general population, and that ocytosis)at85%levelmosaic(conﬁrmedbyamplicondeep prenataldiagnosisshouldnotbeofferedsystematically.The sequencing).Thevariantwasobservedinfather’ssamplein observations of this study have called this dogma into heterozygous state. STR analysis conﬁrmed GWUPiD in patient’s blood with biparental inheritance (BPI) presentedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 489 at low level. DNA extracted from buccal cells, nails, hair Conclusions: The most common type of SINEs are Alu follicles and urine sediment showed normal BPI. elements that are associated with NAHR and breakpoints Conclusions: To the extent of our knowledge this is the with large LCRs (>10 kb) with high sequence homology ﬁrstcaseofarecessivediseaseoccurringinthemechanism also promote NAHR. Furthermore, we can assume that of GWUPiD diagnosed by WES. other mechanisms may be involved in the stabilization of Support: National Science Centre, Poland 2017/25/N/ DNA double-strand breaks in these cases, as NHEJ, that NZ4/00250,WroclawMedicalUniversityST-E160.17.055 result in non-recurrent rearrangements leading to variation A. Walczak: None. A. Biernacka: None. P. Gasper- indeletionssizesandbreakpointslocation.Thebreakpoints owicz: None. A. Koppolu: None. J. Kosińska: None. G. investigated were in regions with repetitive elements, with Kostrzewa: None. V. Murcia-Pieńkowski: None. M. the exception of two samples, suggesting an important role Rydzanicz: None. M. Biela: None. J. Kozłowska: None. in mediating terminal rearrangements, previously seen in M. Sąsiadek: None. R. Śmigiel: None. R. Płoski: None. other terminal deletions but not reported in 5p distal deletions. The elucidation of the breakpoints can suggest P13.25A mechanisms underlying structural variants involved in Repetitiveelementsassociatedwithbreakpointsofdistal5p terminal deletions syndromes. Grants: FINEP-CT INFRA deletions suggest mechanisms mediating these 0160/12 SP8, FAPESP 2016/09452-0 rearrangements S.N. Chehimi: None. E.A. Zanardo: None. F.A.R. Madia: None. A.T. Dias: None. G.M. Novo-Filho: None. S.N.Chehimi1,E.A.Zanardo2,F.A.R.Madia1,A.T.Dias2,G. M.M. Montenegro: None. A.M. Nascimento: None. J.G. M.Novo-Filho2,M.M.Montenegro2,A.M.Nascimento1,J.G. Damasceno: None. Y.G. Oliveira: None. L.L. Vieira: Damasceno2,Y. G.Oliveira2, L.L. Vieira2,C. A.Kim3,L.D. None. C.A. Kim: None. L.D. Kulikowski: None. Kulikowski2 P13.26B 1Laboratorio de Citogenomica, Departamento de Pediatria, Functional retrogene at the RB1 locus Faculdade de Medicina FMUSP, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Laboratorio de Citogenomica, C. Dehainault1, M.Boutte1,L. Golmard1, A.Fievet1, H. Departamento dePatologia,FaculdadedeMedicina FMUSP, Pacquement1,L. LumbrosoLe Rouic1,M.Gauthier Villars1, C. Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Unidade de Houdayer1,2 Genetica, Departamento de Pediatria, Instituto da Crianca, Hospital das Clinicas HCFMUSP, Faculdade de Medicina, 1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2Université Paris Descartes, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France Introduction: Cytogenomic techniques, such as single Retrotransposons are a major class of mobile elements nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarrays, allow the accounting for 45% of our genome. The DNA of a retro- detection of copy number variants and structural char- transposonistranscribedintoRNAthenreverse-transcribed acterizationofbreakpointsitesinseveralgenomicdiseases. into a cDNA copy which is reinserted into the genome at a Mechanisms have been proposed to explain genomic rear- new location. Retrotranspositions are frequent and usually rangements, including nonallelic homologous recombina- lead to inactive elements due to the lack of promoter. tion (NAHR), nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), However, we report a rare phenomenon of retro- replicative mechanisms and long interspersed element transposition leading to a functional retrogene, segregating (LINE)-mediated retrotransposition. in a retinoblastoma family. A father and his son were Material and Methods: We used Illumina Inﬁnium affected by retinoblastoma, a malignant tumor of the eye CytoSNP-850K and UCSC Genome Browser (GRCh37/ duetoRB1mutation.GiventheabsenceofRB1mutationby hg19)inordertomapthebreakpointsin14patientswith5p DNA sequencing, we embarked upon RNA analyses distal deletion. demonstrating an abnormal RB1 transcript including 2 Results: The results revealed breakpoint patterns on exonsoftheHPF1gene.Oddlyenough,HPF1islocatedon chromosome 5 ranging position chr5: 17,235,998- another chromosome. Following genomic analyses showed 34,402,152. The structural characterization of breakpoints theinsertionofHPF1fullcDNAintothelargeintron17of reveals that 10 of the 14 cases presented predominantly RB1.Thisinsertionwaspresentinthetwoaffectedpatients LINEsthanSINEs.Weonlydetectedonepatientwithlarge andnotinunaffectedindividualsfromthefamily.Hencethe low copy repeats (LCRs >10 kb), having 98 - 99% retrotransposition of the HPF1 gene into RB1 leads to a similarity. chimeric fusion transcript RB1-HPF1-RB1 by using new splicesites.Thephenomenonkeepstheframebutdisruptsa490 J.delPicchia major functional domain of pRb and is likely to cause instance of a ring 4 chromosome recurring in siblings after retinoblastoma. As the grand parents are unaffected, it extensivetestingonparents,whichsuggeststhiswasdueto suggests a recent retransposition e.g. in their gametes. maternal gonadal mosaicism. Beyondtheidentiﬁcationofthehiddencausalmutation,we E. Phillips: None. O. Caluseriu: None. K. Schlade- describe here a very rare phenomenon as functional retro- Bartusiak: None. J. Chernos: None. R. McLeod: None. genes have an estimated frequency of one retrogene per M. Thomas: None. million year [Marques et al. PLoS Biology 2005]. C. Dehainault: None. M. Boutte: None. L. Golmard: P13.28D None. A. Fievet: None. H. Pacquement: None. L. Exploring by whole exome sequencing patients with initial Lumbroso Le Rouic: None. M. Gauthier Villars: None. diagnosis of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: the C. Houdayer: None. interconnections of epigenetic machinery disorders P13.27C C.Gervasini1,G.Negri1,P.Magini2,D.Milani3,M.C.Gandini1, Clinical and molecular characterization of an almost E. DiFede1,M.Crippa4,E. Biamino5,G.B.Ferrero5, M. completeringchromosome4intwosisters,withrecurrence Piccione6,S.Sotgiu7,C.Perria7,G.Vitiello8,M.Frontali9,E.A. due to gonadal mosaicism Colombo1,A. Boni10,M.L. Cavaliere11, M.A.Pisanti11, L. Giordano12,M.J.Bamshad13,D.A.Nickerson13,J.D.Smith13, E. Phillips1,O.Caluseriu2, K.Schlade-Bartusiak3,J.Chernos1, I.Loddo14,P. Finelli4,15, L.Larizza4,T. Pippucci2 R. McLeod1,M.Thomas1 1Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, 1Cumming School of Medicine, Calgary, AB, Canada, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, Milano, Italy, 2University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 3University of 2U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada AziendaOspedaliero-UniversitariadiBologna,Bologna,Italy, Bologna, Italy, 3Unità di Pediatria ad alta Intensità di Cura, Introduction: Autosomal ring chromosomes are rare Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milano, Italy, Milano, Italy, cytogenetic ﬁndings that arise from breakage and fusion of 4Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Lab, IRCCS the chromosome ends. Rings are mitotically unstable, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, Milano, Italy, usually sporadic, and associated with a “ring chromosome 5DipartimentodiPediatria,UniversitàdiTorino,Torino,Italy, syndrome”, characterized by a variable phenotype of Torino, Italy, 6Dipartimento Materno Infantile, Azienda growth retardation, few or no minor anomalies, and intel- Ospedali Riuniti Villa Soﬁa Cervello, Università di Palermo, ligence ranging from normal to moderate intellectual dis- Italy, Palermo, Italy, 7Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e ability. We describe the clinical features and molecular Sperimentale. U.O.C. Neuropsichiatria Infantile, A.O.U. di characterization of two sisters with ring chromosome 4. Sassari, Sassari, Italy, Sassari, Italy, 8Dipartimento di Materials and Methods: Karyotype analysis was Medicina Traslazionale, Sezione di Pediatria, Università performed on both sisters and parents. Chromosome Federico II, Napoli, Italy, Napoli, Italy, 9Istituto di microarray was performed on both sisters to delineate the Farmacologia Traslazionale CNR, Roma, Italy, Roma, Italy, imbalance at the breakpoints. Clinical correlation including 10Unità di Neurologia Infantile, IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze physical examination and formal neurodevelopmental Neurologiche, Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy, 11Service of assessments are compared for both sisters, as one sister Medical Genetics, Ospedale Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy, Napoli, received growth hormone therapy. Italy, 12Neuropsychiatric Department, Spedali Civili Brescia, Results: Both sisters had a large ring 4 chromosome in Brescia, Italy, Brescia, Italy, 13Department of Genome the majority of cells analyzed on karyotype (97% and 83% Sciences,UniversityofWashington,Seattle,Washington,USA, respectively). Microarray results were identical in the Seattle, WA, United States, 14Dipartimento di Medicina di sisters, showing a 55.8 kb duplication on the terminal 4p Laboratorio e Biotecnologie Avanzate, IRCCS ISMETT, armanda1.5Mbdeletionontheterminal4qarm.Nogenes Palermo, Italy, Palermo, Italy, 15Department of Medical of interest were identiﬁed in these regions. Parental Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, Università degli karyotypes on lymphocytes and ﬁbroblasts were normal, Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, Milano, Italy with no ﬁnding of mosaicism for the ring 4 chromosome. Polymorphic marker analysis revealed maternal origin of Background: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is an the ring. autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental disease affecting Conclusions: We describe the clinical features and 1:125,000newbornscharacterizedbyintellectualdisability, molecular imbalances of two teenage girls with almost growth retardation, facial dysmorphisms and skeletal completering4.Toourknowledge,thisistheﬁrstreported abnormalities. RSTS is caused by mutations in genesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 491 encoding for writers of theepigenetic machinery: CREBBP Italy,4NeuroscienceInstituteCavalieriOttolenghi,Orbassano, (~60%) or its homologous EP300 (~10%). However, no Italy, 5Institute of Protein Biochemistry, National Research causative mutation is identiﬁed in up to 30% of patients. Council, Napoli, Italy, 6Centre for Integrative Biology, Methods: To identify novel candidate genes for RSTS, University of Trento, Trento, Italy, 7University of Turin, we performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) on eight Department of Public Health and Pediatrics, Turin, Italy, individualswithadiagnosisofRSTSwhohadnormalhigh- 8Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, resolution array CGH testing and were CREBBP- and University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 9Department of Medical, EP300- mutation-negative. Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, University G. Results: In four families, we identiﬁed putatively causal D'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy variants in three genes (ASXL1, KMT2D and KMT2A) encodingmembersoftheepigeneticmachineryknowntobe ELOVL5 gene is associated with autosomal dominant Spi- associated with the Bohring-Opitz, Kabuki and nocerebellar Ataxia 38 (SCA38, MIM#611805), a rare Wiedemann-Steinersyndromes.Eachvariantisnovel,arose adult-onset cerebellar neurodegeneration. This gene de novo and was predicted to result in loss-of-function. In encodes for an elongase, an enzyme localized in the endo- the remaining patients additional candidate variants in plasmicreticulum(ER)whereitisinvolvedinthesynthesis XRN2orinPLXNB2,notyetrelatedtoanyhumandisease, of a subset of polyunsaturated fatty acids. We explored and in XYLT2 or PLCB4 associated respectively to pathogenic mechanism of SCA38, studying aberrant spondyloocular and auriculocondylar type 2 syndromes ELOVL5-p.Gly230Val protein. are identiﬁed. We demonstrated a subcellular mislocalization in peri- Conclusions: These results underscore the broad clinical nuclearareaofaberrantproteinindifferentcellularmodels. spectrum of RSTS and other Mendelian disorders of the Basedonthese,wehypothesizedp.Gly230Val-ELOVL5is epigenetic apparatus. The overlapping features of distinct a misfolded protein able to activate the cellular unfolded intellectual disability syndromes herein underlined reﬂect protein response (UPR). Supporting that idea, we showed a common pathogenic molecular mechanisms affecting the signiﬁcantincreaseofELOVL5proteininSCA38ﬁbroblasts complex regulation of balance between open and closed after a treatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG-132. In chromatin. COS7 cells stably expressing p.Gly230Val ELOVL5 we Grants: This work has been supported by Dotazione demonstrated the activation of ER-stress response by a d’Ateneo-Linea 2 to CG signiﬁcant increase of UPR markers CHOP, ATF-4 and C. Gervasini: None. G. Negri: None. P. Magini: None. XBP1 and an alteration of ER homeostasis by a slow-down D.Milani:None.M.C.Gandini:None.E.DiFede:None. proteintransportfromERtotheGolgi.Moreover,theuseof M. Crippa: None. E. Biamino: None. G.B. Ferrero: the chemical chaperone PBA, acting on unfolded p. None. M. Piccione: None. S. Sotgiu: None. C. Perria: Gly230Val-ELOVL5 in COS7 cells, led to a physiological None. G. Vitiello: None. M. Frontali: None. E.A. ER relocalization of the protein. To determine whether the Colombo: None. A. Boni: None. M.L. Cavaliere: None. activationofUPRwasassociatedwithneuronaldegeneration, M.A.Pisanti: None. L. Giordano:None. M.J. Bamshad: we measured cell viability of primary cortical neurons None. D.A. Nickerson: None. J.D. Smith: None. I. overexpressing wild type or aberrant ELOVL5. Preliminary Loddo: None. P. Finelli: None. L. Larizza: None. T. data suggested a slightly increased of cells death in p. Pippucci: None. Gly230Val ELOVL5 neurons. In conclusion, our results support a role for altered ER-stress response in SCA38 P13.29A pathogenesis, suggesting chemical chaperones might be ER stress as pathogenic mechanism in Spinocerebellar useful in the treatment. Telethon Grant: GGP14225 Ataxia 38 (SCA38) E. Di Gregorio: None. M. Ferrero: None. M. Manes: None.E.Hoxha:None.C.Costanzi:None.A.DiCampli: E. DiGregorio1,M.Ferrero2, M.Manes3,E. Hoxha4,C. None.D.Tripathy:None.S.Cavalieri:None.E.Giorgio: Costanzi3,A. DiCampli5,D.Tripathy6, S.Cavalieri2,E. None. C. Mancini: None. E. Pozzi: None. E. Riberi: Giorgio2,C. Mancini2, E.Pozzi2,E. Riberi7, E.Chierto2,N. None. E. Chierto: None. N. Mitro: None. D. Caruso: Mitro8,D.Caruso8,M. Basso6, M.Sallese9, F.Tempia4,B. None. M. Basso: None. M. Sallese: None. F. Tempia: Borroni3,A. Brusco1 None. B. Borroni: None. A. Brusco: None. 1S.C.D.U.MedicalGenetics,CittàdellaSaluteedellaScienza, P13.30B Turin, Italy, 2Department of Medical Sciences, University of Adult-onsetbeta-thalassemiaintermediacausedbya5Mb Turin, Turin, Italy, 3Neurology Unit, Department of Clinical somaticclonalsegmentaldeletioninhemopoieticstemcells and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, Brescia, involving the HBB locus492 J.delPicchia C.L.Harteveld1,C.A.J.Bosch2,C.Vrettou3,L.Maragoudaki3, A.L. Ruivenkamp: None. E. Kanavakis: None. C. J.Apostilidis4,S. G.J.Arkesteijn1,M.J. V.Hoffer2,C.A.L. Kattamis: None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None. Ruivenkamp5,E.Kanavakis6,C. Kattamis7,J.Traeger- Synodinos3 P13.31C Chromosome arm scale de novo genome assemblies better 1HemoglobinopathyExpertCentre,LeidenUniversityMedical detect and resolve structural variation and chromosomal Centre,Leiden,Netherlands,2DptofClinicalGenetics,Leiden abnormalities related to and causing genetic disease University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Genetics, National & Kapodistrian University of A. Hastie, A.Pang,J. Lee,E. T.Lam, X. Zhang,T. Athens, St. Sophia’s Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, Anantharaman, S.Marin, H.Sadowski, M.Borodkin, H.Cao 4Department of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation,EvangelismosHospital,Athens,Greece,5Dpt Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States ofClinicalgenetics,LeidenUniversityMedicalCentre,Leiden, Netherlands, 6Genesis Genoma Lab, Athens, Greece, Current methods for detection of balanced structural varia- 7Emeritus Professor, National & Kapodistrian University of tion can be broken down into two categories: traditional Athens, St. Sophia’s Children’s Hospital, Greece, Greece cytogenetics and molecular methods. Cytogenetics may include chromosomal karyotyping, ﬂuorescence in situ Heterozygous beta-thalassemia individuals, inheriting a hybridization (FISH), chromosomal microarray and adap- single defective allele, are usually asymptomatic, but in tions of them. Molecular methods primarily include NGS extremely rare cases a transfusion dependent beta- sequencing based methods. Bionano genome mapping, an thalassemia intermedia develops later in life. We report a optical mapping approach, is a method that combines the rare case of late-onset thalassemia intermedia caused by advantagesofdifferentcategorieswhilesolvingmanyofthe inheritance of 1 thalassemic HBB variant along with an limitations.Comparedtocytogenetics,Bionano mapping is acquiredsomaticdeletionofthenormal transHBBlocusin high throughput and removes manual interpretation, it also peripheral blood cells, resulting in hemizygosity for the has much higher resolution, detecting balanced events as beta-thalassemia mutation in erythrocytes. Direct Sanger smallasabout30kbpcomparedtomulti-megabasesneeded sequencing characterized the beta-thalassemia mutation in for cytogenetic approaches, and unbalanced events starting HBB (HBB:c.315+1G>A) in DNA isolated from leuco- at 500 bp. NGS based methods often are limited by read cytes, buccal cells and hair. Leucocyte DNA was analysed lengths that cannot provide unambiguous information for genomic copy number variations (CNVs) using the across repeat elements longer than individual reads. This Affymetrix CytoScan HD Array with Chromosome Ana- limitation results in signiﬁcantly reduced sensitivity for lysis Suite (ChAS, version 3.0) and software, according to balanced variation and abnormalities as well as for inser- the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, tions and even some categories of larger deletions. This is Santa Clara, CA, USA). Sanger sequencing of leucocyte particularly true in highly medically relevant locations DNAgaveaskewedratioofnormal(G)versusvariant(A), where segmental duplications mediate chromosomal although DNA from buccal cells and hair showed classic abnormalities. heterozygosity. Array analysis showed a 4.97 Mb deletion Genome mapping using Bionano Genomics’ Saphyr (hg19/GRCh37: 1,313,791-6,287,277) on the short arm of System and new direct labeling chemistry (DLS) facil- chromosome 11 of maternal origin, which included the itates economical whole genome and highly sensitive patient’s normal beta-globin gene cluster, causing hemi- structural variation detection. We present genome assem- zygosity of the paternally inherited beta-thalassemia muta- blies of individuals with genetic disease caused by tion,explainingthepredominanthemizygosityforthebeta- extremely long tandem repeat array expansion thalassemia mutation and her evolving clinical phenotype. and collapse, and by rearrangements mediated by Typical heterozygosityfor thebeta-thalassemia mutationin large segmental duplications that can be completely DNAinothertissues(buccalcells,hair)suggestsasomatic resolved by Bionano mapping. Bionano mapping is a fast origin of the segmental deletion affecting the hemopoietic and cost effective method for the detection of a broad stem cells. The late onset of expression of beta-thalassemia range of traditionally refractory SVs across the human intermedia indicates a preferential survival of the hemo- genome. poietic cells containing the deleted region, which con- A. Hastie: None. A. Pang: None. J. Lee: None. E.T. tributes to the majority of erythropoiesis. Lam: None. X. Zhang: None. T. Anantharaman: None. C.L. Harteveld: None. C.A.J. Bosch: None. C. S.Marin:None.H.Sadowski:None.M.Borodkin:None. Vrettou: None. L. Maragoudaki: None. J. Apostilidis: H. Cao: None. None. S.G.J. Arkesteijn: None. M.J.V. Hoffer: None. C.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 493 P13.32D neuropsychological deﬁcits, including intellectual Unbalancedde novo translocations areformed byinverted disability (ID). duplications on derivative chromosomes Materials and Methods: In this study, we analyzed: (1) expression of eight X-chromosome genes; (2) X inactiva- N.V. Shilova,M. E.Minzhenkova, Z.G.Markova tion pattern by the HUMARA technique, and (3) the neuropsychological IQ using Wechsler Adult Intelligence Federal State Budgetary Institution "Research Centre for and Raven General Matrix scales. Medical Genetics", Moscow, Russian Federation Results: Eleven out of 13 KS patients selected for this work presented karyotype 47,XXY, one 49,XXXXY and Introduction: It has now been estimated that in 0,23% of another 48,XXYY. Among the genes analyzed, XIST patientswithdevelopmentaldelayandintellectualdisability (Xq13.2) and GTPBP6 (Xp22.33/Yp11.32) showed dif- unbalanced de novo translocations are detected. The ferential expression in peripheral blood by RT-qPCR. As mechanisms underlying unbalanced de novo translocations expected, XIST differed between all patients with KS and have been intensively studied, but still enigmatic. male controls (P=0.0046). Differently, GTPBP6 had a Materials and Methods: We have analyzed 5 de novo higher expression in all KS patients than controls translocations, ascertained either by conventional GTG- (P=0.0005, females; P=0.0167, males). Among these, banded chromosome analysis or by array analysis, con- 46.1% (n=6) present ID, in which the GTPBP6 expres- ﬁrmed with targeted FISH. All samples were analyzed by sion is also high (P=0.0012, females; P=0.0152, males). multicolor banding (MCB) FISH technique with probe sets In addition, seven out of 13 KS patients revealed XCyte for chromosomes 4, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 18, 21 and X. informative HUMARA tests. All four KS patients, with Results: The translocations were present in all cells. IQ value above 79 (IQ above the borderline), showed FISH with corresponding subtelomeric DNA-probes con- skewed X inactivation (SXI) but GTPBP6 expression did ﬁrmed the deleted and duplicated segments previously not differ between controls. In contrast, in three KS found on arrays. MCB pattern indicated inverted duplica- patients, whose IQ values were below 75 (low IQ), was tion of the terminal region of the centric segment of observed random X inactivation (RXI) and the GTPBP6 derivative chromosome in all cases. Inverted duplications expression was increased (P=0.00167, females; were not detected on translocated segments in any of P=0.00476, males). the cases. Conclusions: These data suggest the trend that SXI can Conclusions: Our ﬁndings suggest that unbalanced de negatively regulate the GTPBP6 expression and, therefore, novo translocations are formed by inverted duplications on likely improves the neuropsychological performance of KS derivativechromosomes.A”fold-back”mechanismoflarge patients. inverted duplications formation may be the ﬁrst step of de A.C.Vidi:None.J.S.Souza:None.L.Simonetti:None. novotranslocationorigin.Followingend-joiningbetweenof M.I. Melaragno: None. I.S. Kunii: None. C.B. Mello: free end of the inverted duplication and another chromo- None. G.M.G. Carvalheira: None. M.R. Dias da some would give rise to an inverted duplication transloca- Silva: None. tion chromosome. N.V. Shilova: None. M.E. Minzhenkova: None. Z.G. Markova: None. P14 New diagnostic approaches, technical aspects & quality control P13.33A Skewed X inactivation seems to regulate the GTPBP6 P14.001A expression and be associated with neuropsychological Ultra-exome:a new approach to solve the unsolved performance in Klinefelter patients A. Torella1,2, F.Musacchia2, F.Del Vecchio Blanco1,G. A. C.Vidi, J.S. Souza,L. Simonetti, M. I.Melaragno, I.S. Esposito1, G.Casari2,R. Castello2, T.Giugliano1,M.Pinelli2,3, Kunii, C. B.Mello,G.M.G.Carvalheira, M. R.Dias daSilva M.Mutarelli2, V.Nigro1,2 Unifesp, São Paulo, Brazil 1Medical Genetics, Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania ‘Luigi Vanvitelli’, Napoli, Italy, Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome (KS) displays a broad 2Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), reproductive and endocrinological spectrum, in which the Pozzuoli, Italy, 3Department of Translational Medicine, most common karyotype is 47,XXY. KS patients may Section of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Napoli, Italy present dysmorphological features and develop494 J.delPicchia TrioWES-negativepatientsmaycarryveryelusivevariants microarray platform (Oxford Gene Technology), while this that require additional testing. Trio WGS, high resolution CNV was under the detection limit of the previously used array CGH, as well as transcriptomic studies can detect a v2platform.Thev3platformcombinesthemostup-to-date part of missing variants. However, some structural infor- content information from ClinGen and the DDD project mation is lost anyway and the cost/workload of these with exon-focused probe design for single-exon CNV additional approachesmaybelimitingfactors.Therecently resolution in disease-relevant genes. developed linked-read sequencing technology from We show that the use of an exon-focused array design 10XGenomics combines a novel barcoding strategy with results in an increased diagnostic yield, which will even Illumina sequencing. Genomic DNA fragments are parti- further increase with the implementation of whole genome tioned into separate micro-reactions, where the same index sequencing, as this enables the simultaneous detection of sequence is incorporated into each of the sequencing frag- CNVs and single nucleotide variants (SNVs) for this group mentinsertsderivedfromagivenlongfragment.However, of patients. WESprovideslittleinformationforgeneswithlongintrons. Miller DT, Adam MP, Aradhya S, Biesecker LG, et al., To overcome this limitation, we redesigned our WES cap- Consensusstatement:chromosomalmicroarrayisaﬁrst-tier turetargetincludingspacedpolymorphicregionslocatedin clinical diagnostic test for individuals with developmental deep introns (>30kb). These WES barcoded reads contain disabilitiesorcongenitalanomalies.AmJHumGenet.2010 linked exons with long-range sequence information that is May 14;86(5):749-64. advantageousforidentiﬁcationintragenicstructuralvariants S. Altıner: None. A. Boogaerts: None. J. Vermeesch: and phasing. In addition, we are able to distinguish very None. K. Van Den Bogaert: None. similar genes, such as SMN1 and SMN2. We are applying thistechnologytosolvetheWES-negativepatientsaffected P14.003C by a number of different genetic disorders Training a Facial Analysis Software to Recognize a Very A. Torella: None. F. Musacchia: None. F. Del Vecchio Rare Condition: Aymé-Gripp Syndrome Blanco: None. G. Esposito: None. G. Casari: None. R. Castello:None.T.Giugliano:None.M.Pinelli:None.M. K. W.Gripp1,S. M.Amudhavalli2,R. Hanson2,B.Angle3,K. Mutarelli: None. V. Nigro: None. Bontempo3,N.Fleischer4 P14.002B 1AI duPont Hospital, Wilmington, DE, United States, Increased diagnostic yield with exon-focused array 2Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United States, platforms 3Advocate Children’s Hospital, Park Ridge, IL, United States, 4FDNA, Boston, MA, United States S.Altıner1,2,A.Boogaerts2,J.Vermeesch2,K.VanDenBogaert2 Introduction: Subjective impressions of an identiﬁable 1TrabzonKanuniTrainingandResearchHospital,Department facial phenotype arise during clinical practice. It is chal- ofMedicalGenetics,Trabzon,Turkey,2DepartmentofHuman lenging to assess this impression objectively, particularly Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium for very rare syndromes. Aymé-Gripp syndrome (AGS) is such a rare condition, resulting from speciﬁc MAF muta- Array-ComparativeGenomicHybridisation(Array-CGH)is tions and characterized by developmental delay and ID, the ﬁrst-tier genetic test for patients with unexplained cataracts,hearingloss,shortstature,pericardialeffusionand developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism spec- skeletal anomalies. We evaluated an automated facial ana- trum disorders or multiple congenital anomalies. Although lysis toolfor itsabilitytodistinguishbetween patientswith pathogenicgenomicimbalancesaredetectedinasubstantial AGS and hundreds other rare genetic syndromes. subsetofthisgroup(15%-20%),theunderlyingcauseofthe Methods: Frontal facial photographs of 13 individuals phenotype cannot be determined in almost 50% of patients with molecularly conﬁrmed AGS were used to train the (Miller et al., 2010). Face2Gene (FDNA Inc, USA) tool against 216 other In order to increase the diagnostic yield of array-CGH, syndromes. In addition, we compared to images from 20 platforms are being adjusted in accordance with the unaffected individuals and 20 individuals with Down discovery of novel disease-causing genes. Moreover, an syndrome (DS), chosen for its similarities to the facial increased probe density across exons enables the detection features of AGS. Classiﬁcation statistics were used, of exonic copy number variants (CNVs) in addition to Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curves and their whole gene or multiple exon variation. Area Under the Curve (AUC) calculated. Wepresentsixcasesforwhichapathogenicvariantcould Results:ThetrainingofthetechnologyyieldedandAUC be detected by means of the CytoSure™ Constitutional v3 of 0.97 which is above the signiﬁcance level thresholdAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 495 required by the tool and AGS is now included as a clinicalandwholeexomesequencing.NUCLEIC-CARDTM recognized condition. Comparison between the 3 cohorts allowslong-termstorageandstabilityofdrybloodsamples yieldedan accuracy of 89.1%, double the random accuracy for easy samples shipment at room temperature to testing of 37.7%. In binary comparisons, the analysis correctly laboratories. differentiated between AGS and controls with an AUC of M. Rosso: None. A. Gervasoni: None. A. Squassina: 0.99 (STD 0.01). None. A. Breda Klobus: None. S. Castriciano: None. Conclusions: Even few images can be sufﬁcient for an automated facial analysis tool to identify characteristic P14.005A facial features of rare syndromes such as AGS, and thus Genetic testing approach for patients with congenital allow for targeted molecular testing if clinically indicated. anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) K.W.Gripp:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest; FDNA. S.M. Amudhavalli: None. R. Hanson: None. B. A. DomingoGallego1,G.Bullich1, P.Ruiz1,L. Lorente Angle: None. K. Bontempo: None. N. Fleischer: A. Grandoso1,M.Furlano2,G.Fraga3,Á.Madrid4,G.Ariceta4,L. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA. Martínez Ribot5, J.PiñeroFernández6,I. LlanoRivas7,M. AguirreMeñica8,L. Guirado2, D.Torrents9,R. Torra2, E.Ars1 P14.004D NUCLEIC-CARDTM as innovative blood collection device 1Molecular Biology Laboratory, Fundació Puigvert, Instituto for NGS genetic analysis de Investigaciones Biomédicas Sant Pau (IIB-Sant Pau), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, REDinREN, Instituto de M.Rosso1,A. Gervasoni1, A.Squassina1, A.Breda Klobus2,S. Investigación Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 2Nephrology Castriciano1 Department, Fundació Puigvert, Instituto de Investigaciones BiomédicasSantPau(IIB-SantPau),UniversitatAutònomade 1CopanItaliaSpa,Brescia,Italy,2BredaGeneticsSrl,Brescia, Barcelona, REDinREN, Instituto de Investigación Carlos III, Italy Barcelona, Spain, 3Pediatric Nephrology Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, Background: Clinical genetic analysis and research, 4Pediatric Nephrology Department, Hospital Vall d’Hebron, including Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS), have Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, increased in recent years. Fresh blood has been always 5Genetics Department, Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Universitat consideredthegoldstandard,butitispronetohandlingand Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6Nephrology biological risks during shipping. Copan developed the Department,PediatricsService,HospitalUniversitarioVirgen NUCLEIC-CARDTM (NC) for collection, preservation, delaArrixaca,Murcia,Spain,7GeneticsDepartment,Hospital stabilization, transport and long-term storage at room tem- Universitario Cruces, Biocruces Health Research Institute, perature of blood samples. The objective of this study was CentreforBiomedicalResearchonRareDiseases(CIBERER), to report theperformance ofthe NC, asanalytical accuracy Barakaldo-Bizkaia, Spain, 8Department of Pediatrics, of clinical (~6,300 clinically relevant genes) and whole Nephrology Unit, Hospital Universitario Cruces, Barakaldo- (WES) exome sequencing of DNA extracted from blood Bizkaia, Spain, 9Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), spots on NC. Joint BSC-CRG-IRB Research Program in Computational Methods:DNA,extractedfromtheentireNCbloodspot Biology, Barcelona, Spain of16donorsusingamodiﬁedQIAamp®DNAminikitwith ® the Copan NAO (nucleic acid optimizer) baskets protocol, Introduction: Congenital anomalies of the kidney and were used for this study. Besides clinical exome analyses, urinary tract (CAKUT) are a heterogeneous group of two of the samples were also used for WES. embryonic malformations representing the most common Results: High-throughput sequencing, performed on causeofchronickidneydiseaseintheﬁrst3decadesoflife. DNA extracted from dried blood spots onto NC gave About 40 monogenic causes of CAKUT are known excellent yield, reaching high quality levels, comparable explaining<20%ofCAKUTcases.Weaimtoimprovethe with the ones obtainable from EDTA-blood samples. Also, genetic diagnosis of this nephropathy. it has been possible to achieve overlapping values in terms Methods: Ninety unrelated patients with CAKUT (21% of ﬁnal average coverage on target, target percentages at with perinatal death) mostly bilateral (86%), with a 10x, 20x and 30x, and base call quality. suspicion of monogenic cause due to extrarenal defects Conclusions: Data obtained in this study demonstrated (29%) and/or positive familial history of CAKUT (46%) thatgoodqualityDNAcanberecoveredfrombloodspotted underwent a two-step genetic analysis. 1) HNF1B gene on Copan NUCLEIC-CARDTM, and that such DNA is mutation screening, for CNV and SNV; and if negative; 2) perfectly suitable for high-throughput analyses such as targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) of a >200496 J.delPicchia kidney-disease gene panel including 62 genes associated Results: HaplotypeCaller’s weighted QUAL ﬁeld pro- with CAKUT. vides the most powerful metric for ﬁltering. Sequencing Results:Causativemutationswereidentiﬁedin38%(34/ depth (DP), while widely used, has relatively little to do 90) of patients [9% (3/34) with perinatal death] involving withcallaccuracy.ForIlluminaHiSeqplatformandGATK the following genes: HNF1B (27), PAX2 (5) and ACE (3). Best Practices-like processing pipeline, we report the Probablypathogenicvariantsweredetectedin3%(3/90)of optimal ﬁltering parameters to be: DP≥6 & QUAL≥75. patients in JAG1, NEK8 and DYNC2H1 genes. Variants of Thissetofcutoffsachievesatradeoffbycallingreasonably uncertain signiﬁcance were detected in 8% (7/90) of manyvariants(45361usingtargetedsequencingkit)while patients in the: SIX2, RET, PAX2, GLI3, NOTCH2 and minimizing false positive rate (0.34%). In comparison, PAX8 genes. naive depth-only ﬁltering (DP>12) called only 36 171 Conclusions: HNF1B screening allowed the etiologic variants with a FPR of 0.71%. diagnosisinone-quarter(27/90)ofourCAKUTpatients,of Conclusions:Wepresentaformalyetsimpleapproachto whomonlyonepresentedwith perinatal death.NGSofour determinethemostoptimalqualityﬁlteringcutoffsforNGS kidney-disease gene panel identiﬁed a likely pathogenic calls. This allows to get the most out of a NGS sample variant in an additional 12% (11/90) of patients. Our without compromising accuracy of the results. approach achieved a 42% diagnostic yield (63% with K.Tsukanov:None.O.Klimchuk:None.D.Plakhina: positive familial history/extrarenal defects). Whole exome None. A. Krasnenko: None. V. Ilinsky: None. sequencing is undergoing in selected cases. Funding: Instituto Carlos III/FEDER:(PI15/01824-PI16/ P14.007C 01998). Germline analysis using FFPE-tissue in cancer families A.DomingoGallego:None.G.Bullich:None.P.Ruiz: with high mortality rates None.L.LorenteGrandoso:None.M.Furlano:None.G. Fraga: None. Á. Madrid: None. G. Ariceta: None. L. K.Keupp1,M.Larsen1,B.Bluemcke1,B.Versmold1,A.Waha1, Martínez Ribot: None. J. Piñero Fernández: None. I. J.Driesen1,A. Baasner1,L. Buelow1,C. Eßer1,B. Markiefka2, Llano Rivas: None. M. Aguirre Meñica: None. L. B. Wappenschmidt1,E. Hahnen1,R. K.Schmutzler1 Guirado: None. D. Torrents: None. R. Torra: None. E. Ars: None. 1Center for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute for Pathology, Cologne, Germany P14.006B Determination of optimal call quality cutoffs for clinical The identiﬁcation of disease-causing germline mutations in applications of NGS families with hereditary cancer is essential for predictive testing of unaffected family members and estimation of K.Tsukanov1,2,O.Klimchuk1,2,D.Plakhina1,2,A.Krasnenko1,2, individual lifetime risks. Germline testing usually requires V. Ilinsky1,2 blood- or saliva-derived DNA of the index patient. How- ever, due to high rate of mortality living affected family 1Genotek Ltd., Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Genotek IT, members may not be available in cancer families. The Moscow, Russian Federation establishment of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in genetic diagnostics enables comprehensive risk gene ana- Introduction: NGS generates large number of variants of lyses even in DNA isolated from formalin-ﬁxed-parafﬁn- varying quality. It is important to decide which calls to embedded (FFPE) tissue. Here, we show successful post retain for downstream, but few formalized, practical mortem germline analysis in high risk breast (BC) and recommendations exist on how to do it. ovarian cancer (OC) families by using DNA from non- Materials and Methods: We sequenced two platinum cancerous FFPE-tissue derived from tumor surgery. Of genome samples, NA12877 and NA12878, using Agilent particular importance is the exact discrimination between FocusedExome enrichment kit on Illumina HiSeq 2500 tumorandsurroundinghealthytissuebecauseonlyanalysis platform.Thedatawascalledusingin-housepipelinebased in non-cancerous tissue assures the identiﬁcation of germ- on GATK Best Practices. We tested multiple combinations linemutations.Sofar,in111familieswithoutalivingindex of quality metrics (depth of coverage, B allele count, B patient, we performed NGS using FFPE-derived DNA allelefraction,andHaplotypeCaller’sQUALscore)toﬁlter samples by employing the TruRisk® gene panel and iden- the resulting calls. By comparing the remaining calls with tiﬁed a mutation prevalence of about 29 % within 15 ana- platinum genome reference callsets, sensitivity and false lyzedcancerpredispositiongenes.Thisresultiscomparable positiveratewerecalculatedforeachcombinationofcutoff to the mutation prevalence identiﬁed using blood-derived values. DNA in familial BC and OC cases. Based on ourAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 497 experience, we highly recommend using non-cancerous P14.009A FFPE material for germline analysis in families without a Detection of low-level mosaicism by array CGH using low living index in a routine diagnostic setting. Particularly, in amountsofDNAlabeledwithCYTAGSuperCGHlabeling hereditary cancer families this procedure is of substantial kit relevance for subsequent predictive gene analysis, risk calculation and cancer prevention in further family P. Pande1,J. Coleman1,N.Rana1,M. Mathieu2 members. K. Keupp: None. M. Larsen: None. B. Bluemcke: 1Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY, United States, 2Enzo None. B. Versmold: None. A. Waha: None. J. Driesen: Life Sciences, Lausen, Switzerland None. A. Baasner: None. L. Buelow: None. C. Eßer: None.B.Markiefka:None.B.Wappenschmidt:None.E. Background: aCGH is a powerful clinical diagnostic tool Hahnen: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. allowing the genome-wide assessment of CNVs with high resolution. Despite several studies validating aCGH for the P14.008D detection of cytogenetic abnormalities, only a few have Cell-free DNA analysis with the 2100 Bioanalyzer system reported on array sensitivity. Here, we determined the sensitivity of whole-genome aCGH by labeling low DNA H.Mundi1,E. Graf2,R. Nitsche2 inputswithCYTAG®SuperCGHlabelingkitanddetecting low levels of artiﬁcial mosaicism. 1Agilent Technologies LDA, Cheadle, United Kingdom, Methods: Female genomic DNA from a patient with 2Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany Jacobsen syndrome and from a single normal source were used in this study. Sensitivity was assessed by preparing Sequencingofcell-freeDNA(cfDNA)extractedfromblood differentpercentagesofartiﬁcialmosaicism(5%,8%,10%, specimens or other body ﬂuids is possible due to the and 15%), labeling 50 ng of DNA with CYTAG® establishment of low input library protocols for next- SuperCGH labeling kit (Enzo, ENZ-GEN120), and hybri- generation sequencing workﬂows. Accurate quantiﬁcation dizing the labeled DNA onto SurePrint® G3 human CGH of cfDNA samples is essential to determine suitable input 4x180k microarrays. amountsforcfDNAlibrarypreparationpriortosequencing. Results: DLRS were 0.115, 0.104, 0.102, and 0.105 for The main component of cfDNA samples is the mono- samples with 5%, 8%, 10%, and 15% artiﬁcial mosaicism, nucleosome with a size around 170 bp, sometimes with respectively. Female genomic DNA with Jacobsen syn- additional species representing nucleosome multimers. drome has a 12.5Mb terminal deletion on the q arm of Further, cfDNA samples may contain larger DNA frag- chromosome 11. With a setting for the Average Log Ratio ments dependent on the donor’s health status, preanalytical in the CytoGenomics software of 0.0 or 0.05, the 12.5Mb sample treatment, or extraction method. High molecular deletionwasvisualizedanddetectedinsampleswithaslow weightmaterialcannegativelyinﬂuencelibrarypreparation as 8% of artiﬁcial mosaicism. and subsequently result in lower sequencing depth. There- Conclusions: Upon labeling of 50 ng of DNA with fore, reliable quantiﬁcation of cfDNA requires a method CYTAG® SuperCGH labeling kit, the lowest limit of that separates DNA fragments by size, such as electro- detection was deemed to be 8%. The results demonstrated phoresis.Thispostershowstheuseofanewcell-freeDNA that aCGH is an invaluable tool to detect segmental assay forthe2100Bioanalyzer system asanadd-on forthe aneuploidy with length around 10Mb in mosaic samples High Sensitivity DNA assay. The cell-free DNA assay with low DNA input thereby offering new possibilities for enables automated cfDNA quantiﬁcation with pre-deﬁned aCGH analysis in prenatal or oncology. regions. Moreover, the results include sample purity as a P.Pande:None.J.Coleman:None.N.Rana:None.M. score to qualify cfDNA samples according to their con- Mathieu: None. tamination level with high molecular weight material. The featuresofthecfDNAassayaredescribedwithexamplesof P14.010B typical sample patterns. Integrated genetic analysis: Harnessing the power of NGS H. Mundi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- cant;AgilentTechnologiesLDA.E.Graf:A.Employment A. J.Obregon-Tito, C.Lee, J.Li,M. Teguh,Y. Shen (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Agilent Technologies. R. Nitsche: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fulgent Genetics, Temple City, CA, United States Agilent Technologies. Introduction: The study of copy number variants is often equated to microarray platforms. Microarray platforms are498 J.delPicchia appropriate to detect genetic imbalances but present chal- Methods: We analyzed adult patients consulted to the lenges that might be overcome by NGS technologies. We adult genetic service in 2017, who underwent CES. propose an NGS based approach to chromosomal analysis Results:CESrevealedadiagnosisin10ofthe28patients withanincreasedsensitivityandanunbiasedrepresentation (35.7%) (age range: 20 to 104 years old) (Table 1). 14 of the whole genome. pathogenic variants (PVs) or likely PVs were identiﬁed in Materials and Methods: We compare the results of 12 genes: CPT1A,CPT2,MMAHC,CXCR4,ACVRL1, microarray analysis and pair-ended, low-coverage whole FANCA,PTEN,NF1,BRCA1,SLC26A2,HBB,TGFBR1. Two genome sequencing to test 31 samples from cell lines and patients carried two diagnoses (Patient 8 and 9 in table 1). 19 deidentiﬁed individuals. All variants were veriﬁed by Two patients (2/28 = 7.1%) with autosomal recessive orthologous methods. disorders (Citrin Deﬁciency, Autosomal recessive Poly- Results: The NGS-based approach identiﬁed all variants cysticKidneyDiseasewithHepaticFibrosis)werefoundto identiﬁed by microarray plus 52 additional copy number harbor only one mutant allele in the causative genes variants (CNVs). The NGS-based test exhibits increased (SLC25A3 and PKHD1 respectively). We also identiﬁed sensitivity with a detection limit of up to 200bp when secondary ﬁndings in two cases (2/28 = 7.1%) without average sequencing coverage is 1X. Identiﬁcation of exact primary molecular diagnosis (Hb Constant Spring carrier breakpoints requires higher coverage. Furthermore, the and G-6-PD deﬁciency carrier). Furthermore, we identiﬁed NGS-based chromosomal analysis allows the identiﬁcation the variants in the genes that strongly support the clinical of structural abnormalities that microarray is unable to diagnosis,butthepathogenicitycannotbeconﬁrmedsolely detect.Primerdesignforsegmentalduplicationisextremely by CES in 21.4% (6/28) of the patients. difﬁcult for areas of high homology, a limitation shared by Discussion: We report the high yield of diagnosis and microarray, MLPA or qPCR. In contrast, NGS-based secondary ﬁndings (14/28 = 50%) from CES in adult chromosomalanalysisandstringentbioinformaticprotocols patients. The yield was increased to 71.4% (20/28) if all allowprecisemappingofreadswithupto1basedifference possible/actionable results were included. Our results in 300 bp DNA block (~99.7% identity) correctly comput- demonstrated the efﬁcacy of CES as a primary diagnostic ing CNVs in areas of segmental duplication. tool in adults. Conclusions: Compared to microarray platforms, NGS- based chromosomal analysis exhibits an increased sensitiv- ity and an option to streamline genetic testing. NGS-based CNV analysis can be part of a step-wise testing algorithm that includes multigene panels and exomes, resulting in a cost and time effective alternative to current strategies. A.J. Obregon-Tito: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant;FulgentGenetics.C.Lee:A.Employment(full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fulgent Genetics. J. Li: A. P. Phowthongkum: None. V. Shotelersuk: None. K. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fulgent Suphapeetiporn:None.C.Srijomtong:None.C.Ittiwut: None. W. Kamolvisit: None. P. Damrongphol: None. Genetics. M. Teguh: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fulgent Genetics. Y. Shen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fulgent Genetics. P14.013A Diagnostic yield and clinical utility of clinical exome sequencing P14.012D High Yield of Clinical Exome Sequencing as a primary A. Narravula1,N.Kienle1,I. Hövel1,A. Romito1, A.Bertoli- molecular diagnostic tool in Adults Avella1,Z.Yüksel1,O.Paknia1,S.Nampoothiri2,Z.Hadipour3, F. Hadipour3,G.Oprea1,S.Kishore1,P. Bauer1,4, A.Rolfs1,5 P. Phowthongkum,V. Shotelersuk, K. Suphapeetiporn,C. Srijomtong,C. Ittiwut, W.Kamolvisit, P.Damrongphol 1CENTOGENE AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & Faculty of Medicine, Bangkok, Thailand Research Centre, Cochin, India, 3Medical Genetics Department,SaremCellResearchCenter&Hospital,Tehran, Introduction: Clinical exome sequencing (CES) is Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Institute of Medical Genetics and increasingly used asamoleculardiagnostic toolfor genetic Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, disorders. We presented here the use of CES as a primary Germany, 5Albrecht-Kossel-Institute, Rostock, Germany diagnostic tool in adults.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 499 Introduction: Clinical exome sequencing (CES) involves otherintellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;CENTOGENEAG. the sequencing and analysis of the coding regions of only A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; the clinically-relevant genes in the genome compared to CENTOGENE AG. B. Research Grant (principal investi- sequencing all 20,000 genes as in a whole exome gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell sequencing (WES). as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Albrecht-Kossel- Aim: To assess the clinical utility of CES (CentoDx Institute.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent Plus™)inpatientstestedtodateusingdiagnosticyieldasa or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; measure. CENTOGENE AG. Methods: Previously reported 91 CES cases were analyzed to identify cases with diagnostic variants (patho- P14.014B genic/ likely pathogenic) and those with variants of Clinical exome sequencing in 508 Middle Eastern families unknown signiﬁcance (VUS). with Mendelian diseases provides a high diagnostic yield Results:In45(49.4%)of91casestested,CESresultedin and discovery of novel genes a (likely) conﬁrmed diagnosis. Additionally, in 25 cases (27.5%), one or more VUS were detected. Out of these, T. I.M.M.Ben-Omran parental testing was recommended for 13 cases to help reclassify the VUS as it matched the phenotype of the Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar patient. Seven (7.7%) patients were (likely) carriers of one diagnostic variant or VUS. Fourteen (15.4%) cases were Background: Clinical Exome Sequencing (CES) is rapidly negative and no phenotype-related variant was detected. becoming a standard molecular diagnostic tool in rare and Conclusions: The high diagnostic yield of CES (49.4%) diverse genetic disorders such as neurocognitive/neurode- when compared to WES can likely be attributed to CES velopmental, neuromuscular disorders, and multiple con- being used to diagnose cases with known, suspected genital anomalies. The clinical indications recommended diagnoses as well as undiagnosed cases with unknown, for CES, the overall molecular diagnostic yield for diverse complex phenotypes. CES is a versatile test with high phenotypes, along with differences in molecular diagnostic clinicalutilityforavarietyofdiagnosticindications.Dueto yields between CES as ﬁrst-tier test or reﬂex test, will be its cost- and time-efﬁcient nature and high diagnostic rate, determined in a cohort of 508 patients from a highly con- CESisagoodalternativetosequential testing,NGSpanels sanguineous population. or WES. Especially in regions with economic barriers to Methods: A clinical cohort of 508 probands from Qatar genetic testing, CES should be considered a prime test of underwent singleton or trio CES from April 2014 to choice. December 2016. Cases were considered ‘solved’ when A. Narravula: A. Employment (full or part-time); mono-orbi-allelicpathogenicorlikelypathogenicvariants Signiﬁcant;CENTOGENEAG.N.Kienle:A.Employment (collectively “PV”), including pathogenic CNVs, were (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE AG. I. present in a disease gene, consistent with the known mode Hövel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; of inheritance of a disorder. CENTOGENE AG. A. Romito: A. Employment (full or Results: The CES diagnostic yield for our cohort of part-time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE AG. A. Bertoli- patients was 48.0% (n=245). Consanguinity and a positive Avella: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; family history predicted a higher diagnostic yield up to CENTOGENE AG. Z. Yüksel: A. Employment (full or 56%. Eleven patients (2.1%) had two distinct genetic part-time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE AG. O. Paknia: A. disorders.18novelcandidategeneswereidentiﬁed.As65% Employment (fullor part-time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE offamilies wereconsanguineous,aconsiderablenumberof AG. S. Nampoothiri: A. Employment (full or part-time); probands (56%) were homozygous for a PV in a gene Signiﬁcant; Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & associated with an autosomal recessive trait, and another Research Centre. Z. Hadipour: A. Employment (full or 9% had PV in genes with AR or autosomal dominant part-time); Signiﬁcant; Sarem Cell Research Center & inheritance.Nevertheless,aconsiderablenumberofpatients Hospital. F. Hadipour: A. Employment (full or part-time); had PVs in AD (29%) or X-linked genes (5%), or de novo Signiﬁcant; Sarem Cell Research Center & Hospital. G. copy number variants (1.8%). Oprea: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Conclusions:Due to its high diagnostic yield in this CENTOGENE AG. S. Kishore: A. Employment (full or population group, CES is recommended as a ﬁrst-line part-time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE AG. P. Bauer: A. diagnostic approach in the genetics clinic. Employment (fullor part-time); Signiﬁcant; CENTOGENE T.I.M.M. Ben-Omran: None. AG. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or500 J.delPicchia P14.016D G.Oliveira1,L. L.Vieira1,M. Rocha1,A. S.Brasil1,A.M. Copy Number Variations calling from Whole Genome Nascimento2,T.V.M.M.Costa1,J.G.Damasceno1,F.Kok3,C. Sequencing data as a substitute to array CGH A. Kim4,L. D.Kulikowski1,2 M.Coutelier1,M. Holtgrewe2, M.Jäger3, R.Flöttman1,M. 1Laboratório de Citogenômica, Departamento de Patologia, Mensah1,M. Spielmann1,P. Krawitz4, D.Horn1,D.Beule2, S. Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Mundlos1 Paulo, Brazil, 2Laboratório de Citogenômica, Departamento dePediatria, FaculdadedeMedicina da Universidadede Sao 1Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Mendelics Análise Genômica, Sao 2Core Unit Bioinformatics, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Paulo, Brazil, 4Unidade de Genética, Departamento de Germany, 3Core Unit Genomis, Berlin Institute of Health, Pediatria, Instituto da Criança do HCFMUSP, Sao Paulo, Berlin, Germany, 4Institut für Genomische Statistik und Brazil Bioinformatik, Bonn, Germany Over the last years the identiﬁcation of CNVs from whole Along with Single Nucleotide Variants (SNV), Copy exome sequencing (WES) data has become a common Number Variations (CNV) are a major player in genetic practiceforresearch.Inthisstudy,weevaluated32patients diseases, and can be detected inup to 15%of patients with with multiple congenital malformations and developmental heterogeneous diseases. They can affect the coding part of delay with WES (Illumina) technique using the Exome- thegenomeandexertagenedosageeffect,orbelocatedin Depth software and with array (Illumina) using the Blue- non-coding regions, where they can alter the DNA tri- Fuse software for CNVs evaluation. According to dimensional organization and the enhancer-promoter con- information from Illumina, the average of the minimum tacts. If Whole Exome and Genome Sequencing are now resolutionforCNVsdetectionbyarrayisabout18kb,thus classical high-throughput approaches for SNP detection, weselectedonlyCNVslargerthanthisvaluetomeasurethe array-CGH remains the gold-standard for genome-wide consistency between the both methodologies. Array analy- study of CNV. Efﬁciently combining the detection of both sis for all patients showed 44 CNVs, among then 29 typesofvariantswith asingletechniquewouldprove tobe alterationsweredeletionsand15wereduplications.Exome a speed- and cost-effective approach towards the determi- analysis,ofthesamesamples,showed60CNVswherein39 nation of thecausativevariant.In 27index cases withlimb weredeletionsand21duplications.So,theoverlappingrate malformations, we compare array-CGH results with calls of genomic changes was 13.8% between the techniques. from WGS with different algorithms, either based on split- The extraction of CNVs information obtained from the reads and abnormal paired-end insert size (Delly), or on WES isanadvantageous approachsince itcanimprove the coverage variations (CNVnator, cnvkit, FREEC). With cost-effectiveness and reduce the number of genomic tests default parameters, 13 to 89% (on average 59%) of array- required to diagnosis. However, WES is not developed for CGH deletions can be detected by at least one algorithm the evaluation of CNVs, and shows a high rate of false- with 50% reciprocal identity. This is only the case for 0 to positive and false-negative results. On the other hand, the 45% of ampliﬁcations (on average 31%). Many false array is a gold standard technique with high accuracy for positivevariantsarealsocalled,andﬁlters,includingcohort detection of deletions and duplications. Thus, to date, the genotyping, need to be adapted to improve detection efﬁ- screening by arrays allows yet a better detection of the ciency.Furthertuningishencerequiredtoreachanefﬁcient CNVsmakingpossibletheconclusionofdiagnosisformost pipeline in terms of both sensitivity and speciﬁcity, but patients, suggesting array performance present an out- CNVdetectionfromWGSdataisapromisingalternativeto standing level when compared to exome in routine diag- array-CGH. nostics. Grants: FINEP-CT INFRA 0160/12 SP8, CAPES. M. Coutelier: None. M. Holtgrewe: None. M. Jäger: É.A. Zanardo: None. S.N. Chehimi: None. F.P. None. R. Flöttman: None. M. Mensah: None. M. Monteiro:None.F.A.R.Madia:None.G.M.Novo-Filho: Spielmann: None. P. Krawitz: None. D. Horn: None. None. A.T. Dias: None. M.M. Montenegro: None. Y.G. D. Beule: None. S. Mundlos: None. Oliveira:None.L.L.Vieira:None.M.Rocha:None.A.S. Brasil:None.A.M.Nascimento:None.T.V.M.M.Costa: P14.017A None. J.G. Damasceno: None. F. Kok: None. C.A. Kim: Investigating the CNVs in routine diagnostics using WES None. L.D. Kulikowski: None. and array in Brazilian patients P14.018B É. A.Zanardo1,S.N.Chehimi2, F.P. Monteiro3,F.A.R. Preliminary evaluation of a CYP21A2 genotyping by NGS Madia2,G.M.Novo-Filho1,A.T.Dias1,M.M.Montenegro1,Y.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 501 amplicon method based on LR-PCR enrichment for M.Böhmer1, M.Kucharík2,J. Budiš3,4,5, G.Minárik2,6,T. CYP21A2 and chimaeras Szemes3,7,8 J.Lezana Rosales1,J.Lopez Montiel1,C. SanchezLinares1,P. 1FacultyofNaturalSciences,ComeniusUniversity,Bratislava, Remon Ruiz2, M.DovisCostarelli1, J.LopezSiles1 Slovakia, 2Medirex a.s., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Department of Computer Science, 1MGC Genetaq, Malaga, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Slovak Centre of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Trisomytest Introduction: Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) s.r.o.,Bratislava,Slovakia,7DepartmentofMolecularBiology, related to CYP21A2 gene is an autosomal recessive dis- Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, orders affecting steroidogenesis. Slovakia, 8Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Material and Methods: We present a cohort of 33 Slovakia patients: asymptomatic (AP):9, clinical/biochemical pheno- type (CBP):20 (15 with clear diagnosis), unknown Introduction: The clinical noninvasive prenatal testing phenotype (UPP):4. (NIPT) is mainly focused on detecting whole-chromosome All DNA samples were sequenced using NEXTﬂex® aneuploidies using low-coverage whole genome sequen- Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia Amplicon Panel. In some cing. Nowadays, advanced versions of NIPT are able to samples: SALSA-MLPA P050-C1-CAH probemix and identify even various subchromosomal copy number var- Sanger sequencing were performed. iants (CNV) such as microdeletions and microduplications. Results: 11 samples showed a proﬁle compatible with However,theseCNVsarebeingdetectedonlyonautosomal presence of multiple copies and chimeric alleles. chromosomes,sinceitisquitechallengingtonormalizeand AP had a concordant genotype in 77,78% (7/9). train parameters on gonosomal chromosomes due to vari- NEXTﬂex and Sanger sequencing had concordantresults able amount of reads mapped to gonosomal chromosomes in 81,82% (9/11). according to fetal fraction and sex of the fetus. NEXTﬂex and MLPA data were concordant for IVS2-13 Materials and Methods: We extended our in-house statusin68,18%(15/22)andforcopynumberstatusin50% CNV detector with gonosomal CNV feature. The normal- (11/22). ization on autosomal chromosomes is done per chromo- Genotype-phenotype concordance in CBP was obtained some, while autosomes are normalized relative to all in 80% (12/15). autosomes. This allows us to train and normalize the Conclusions: NEXTﬂex is a great method to detect algorithmparametersandpredictlocalCNVsongonosomal chimaeras and multimodular RCCX state, whose detection chromosomes. Training was performed on 790 samples was not possible by Sanger or MLPA. NEXTﬂex also with more than 7M reads. potentially allows to distinguish multiple copies. Results: In addition to artiﬁcial testing samples with The discrepancies in AP and CBP could be due to allele introducedsexchromosomalmicroaberration,wewereable dropouts,causedbythepresenceofacopyofCYP21A2on to identify three subchromosomal aberrations on chromo- 3' end followed by TNXA, or by formation of super- some X in clinical samples. The lower limit of detection secondary structures close to I2-13. These potential was 1.66Mb. limitations will be checked by no LR-PCR. Conclusions:TheCNVdetectionsoftwarecurrentlyused It is necessary to perform further analyses (trio analysis, in NIPT can be extended to detect local aberrations on checkwithnoLR-PCR,testothergenesrelatedtoCAH)in gonosomal chromosomes. However, due to the normal- complex or not explained cases. ization only for single chromosome, it is unable to detect This study points out the importance of a multiapproach whole chromosome aneuploidies (monosomies, trisomies, analysisbased oncomplementary genetic tests, clinicaland ⋯) - a different method is employed to detect these. biochemical data to give an accurate diagnosis of CAH. Moreover,largescaleaberrationsareindistinguishablefrom J. Lezana Rosales: None. J. Lopez Montiel: None. C. their counterparts - for example deletion of the whole short SanchezLinares:None.P.RemonRuiz:None.M.Dovis arm (p) is indistinguishable from a duplication of whole Costarelli: None. J. Lopez Siles: None. longer arm (q). M. Böhmer: None. M. Kucharík: A. Employment (full P14.019C or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Medirex a.s. J. Budiš: A. Copy number variant caller for gonozomal chromosomes Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. G. Minárik: A. Employment (full or part-time);502 J.delPicchia Signiﬁcant; Medirex a.s., Trisomytest s.r.o. T. Szemes: A. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genone. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.. One. T. Ohnesorg: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genome.One. A. Sherstyuk: A. Employment P14.020D (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Genome.One.M.Dinger:A. Clinicalutilityofcopynumbervariant(CNV)detectionby Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genome.One, whole genome sequencing (WGS) Garvan Institute of Medical Research. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and B.Lundie1,A.E.Minoche2,V.Gayevskiy2,E.Lee1,L.Ewans1, pending grants as well as grants already received); G.Hollway1, T.Ohnesorg1,A. Sherstyuk1, M.Dinger1,2,M. J. Signiﬁcant; Garvan Institute of Medical Research. M.J. Cowley2, L.Burnett1 Cowley: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Garvan Institute of Medical Research. B. Research Grant 1Genome.One, Darlinghurst, Australia, 2Garvan Institute of (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Australia pending grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Garvan Institute of Medical Research. L. Background: We have recently completed clinical valida- Burnett: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; tionofClinSV,ananalysispipelinethatidentiﬁesregionsof Genome.One. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, CNV utilising evidence from split-reads, discordant pairs collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as and depth-of-coverage to obtain a comprehensive high grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Shire International. F. conﬁdenceCNVcall-set.Clinicalvalidationwasperformed Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Royal College of against clinical microarray, MLPA and NA12878 gold Pathologists Australiasia. standard. No lower limit for size was applied, allowing for unprecedented detection of CNV. Analytical sensitivity as P14.021A assessed against NA12878 was 86.6% and 99.1% for Validation of circulating tumor DNA analysis in a deletions <500bp and >500bp respectively. Results were diagnostic laboratory: pre-analytical factors and quality 100% concordant for reportable variants previously detec- control ted by microarray and MLPA. Aim: Increasing CNV detection resolution should S. Nikolaev1,L. Lemmens1,T. Koessler2,J.Blouin1, T. increase diagnostic yield, but to our knowledge there are Nouspikel1 no published studies on the clinical utility of genome wide analysis of CNV below the resolution of microarray. To 1Molecular and Genomic Diagnostics Laboratory, Geneva identify variants previously undetectable by other methods, University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of anddeterminetheclinicalutilityofhighresolutiongenome- Oncology, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland wide CNV analysis, we have begun a retrospective review of previously reported uninformative cases (n=161) using Wepresenttheresultsofourtechnicalvalidationprocessin ClinSV. establishinganalysisofcirculatingtumor DNA(ctDNA) as Results:Initialassessmentofasmallnumberofprevious a diagnostic tool in our laboratory. negative WGS cases has yielded diagnostic CNVs includ- Likemostcellsinourbody,tumorcellsshedDNAinthe ing: 1kb homozygous deletion of SPG7 exon 6 in a patient blood ﬂow. Detection of ctDNA and analysis of its withSpasticParaplegiaandacompoundheterozygousstop- mutational content can provide invaluable information on gainplusexon1deletionofDSTintwodeceasedneonates. the genetic makeup of a tumor, and assist oncologists in Conclusions: Genome-wide CNV analysis has wider decidingontherapyorinfollowingtheevolutionofresidual breadth and higher resolution than any other test available disease. However, the low absolute amounts of circulating andincreasesthediagnosticyieldofWGS.Itisparticularly DNA,andtheminorfractionofctDNAwithinit,constitute relevant to those patients with previous uninformative formidable analytical challenges. A key step into ctDNA genome and exome testing. detectionistoavoidanycontaminationwithgenomicDNA B. Lundie: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- resultingfromcelllysis.Severalbrandsofspecializedblood cant;Genome.One.A.E.Minoche:A.Employment(fullor collectiontubesareavailabletopreventleukocytelysis,but part-time); Signiﬁcant; Garvan Institute of Medical we found that they are not equally efﬁcient, depending on Research. V. Gayevskiy: A. Employment (full or part- storagetemperatureandontimebeforeplasmapreparation. time);Signiﬁcant;GarvanInstituteofMedicalResearch.E. We report our analysis of preanalytical factors pertaining Lee: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; toctDNAanalysis(collectiontubes,transportationtimeand Genome.One. L. Ewans: A. Employment (full or part- temperature) and our conclusions in terms of instructions time);Signiﬁcant;Genome.One,NSWHealth.G.Hollway: being provided to prescribing physicians and medicalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 503 professionals.WealsostresstheimportanceofproperDNA V. Wilson: None. A. Dubois: None. M. Areﬁ: None. J. quality control and compare several methods to this aim, Burn: None. D. Bourn: None. N. Rajan: None. including a differential amplicon length PCR technique whichallowsustodeterminemultipleQCparametersfrom P14.023C minimal amounts of circulating DNA. CFTR RealTime Panel using pre-plated LightSNiP assays, Altogether, these data should provide a useful practical a good strategy for CFTR genotyping guidetootherdiagnosticlaboratorieswishingtoimplement the assay of ct DNA in clinical practice. I.Valaskova1,2,J. Vinohradska1,R. M.Selingerova1, M. S. Nikolaev: None. L. Lemmens: None. T. Koessler: Ricankova1, R.Spesna1,R.Gaillyova1 None. J. Blouin: None. T. Nouspikel: None. 1University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk P14.022B University, Brno, Czech Republic Gene testing in CYLD cutaneous syndrome: 5-year data from the ﬁrst European service Pathogenic variants in the Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) transmem- braneconductanceregulator(CFTR)genehavebeenlinked V. Wilson1,A. Dubois2,M.Areﬁ3,J.Burn3, D.Bourn1,N. to CF, one of the most common life-threatening genetic Rajan3 diseases. We provide CFTR genotyping by “cascade” strategy. Initially, we test the most common CF-causing 1Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne, United variants by in-house methods. In next step we use com- Kingdom,2DepartmentofDermatology,NewcastleuponTyne, mercialkit(Elucigene®CF-EU2v1).Theseroutinemethods United Kingdom, 3Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle are followed by sequencing to detect rare and unknown upon Tyne, United Kingdom CFTR variants. Aim: To develop and validate a fast, accurate, cost- Patients with CYLD cutaneous syndrome develop multiple effective method for detecting prevalent CFTR pathogenic cylindromas, spiradenomas or trichoepitheliomas. The variants based on LightCyclerTechnology (Roche®) with occurrenceoftheserareskintumoursthatarerelatedtothe SimpleProbe® probes (LightSNiP assays, TIB Molbiol). hairfolliclehasbeenassociatedwithgermlinemutationsin Methods: We developed the CFTR RealTime Panel for CYLD. We established a UK wide gene testing service to usewithLightSNiPassaysenablingscoringof11prevalent detect CYLD mutations in patients fulﬁlling testing criteria. CFTR pathogenic variants (newborn screening data). Here we report outcomes of CYLD gene testing using LightSNiP assays were designed by TIB Molbiol (Berlin, Sanger sequencing of coding exons. We received a total of Germany). Panel contains LightSNiP assays pre-plated and 56referralsofnovelprobandsforCYLDgenetestingover5 dried-down for convenient storage and stability in Light- years.WedetectedpathogenicCYLDmutationsin39(69%) Cycler®480MultiwellPlates,96.LightSNiPassayscarried cases. Of these, 17 were novel mutations. Predictive cas- out RealTime PCR in the LightCycler®480 Instrument. cade testing was done in 13 further cases, of which 6 Results: From ampliﬁcation and detection with speciﬁc conﬁrmed the familial mutation. Previous estimates of probes by melting curve analysis, it is possible to obtain a mutation positivity ranged from 44-85% depending on the visualdiscriminationofnormalandpathogenicallelesinthe phenotype of CYLD cutaneous syndrome. Here, using homozygousandheterozygousstatus.ThecostoftheCFTR conservative inclusive criteria, we report a rate of germline RealTimePanelandElucigene®is19€and46€perpatient, exonicandsplicesitemutationof69%.Genetestingserved respectively. The detection rate of CF-causing variants is to conﬁrm the clinical diagnosis, inform genetic testing of 86% and 90%, respectively. unaffected relatives and in one case to facilitate pre- Conclusions:Basedonthefeaturesandtheeaseofuseof implantation genetic diagnosis. At risk patients who were SimpleProbe® technology, we suggest that the LightSNiP conﬁrmed to be mutation negative were able to plan their assay is a good strategy for detecting prevalent CFTR families without the concern of disease transmission. In pathogenicvariantstoprovidethecliniciancorrectresultsin summary, we highlight the experience of a single national a short time. centre performing CYLD testing. The ability to solve the I. Valaskova: None. J. Vinohradska: None. R.M. majority of cases by sequencing coding exons suggest that Selingerova: None. M. Ricankova: None. R. Spesna: additional assays, required to detect copy number changes None. R. Gaillyova: None. andrearrangements,canbereservedfortheinvestigationof mutation-negativecases,thusallowingamorejudicioususe P14.024D of resources. NGS-based approach to detect aneuploidies and large504 J.delPicchia chromosome aberrations in patients with congenital 1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm, University of Burgundy-Franche cytogenetic abnormalities Comté, Dijon, France, 2FHU-TRANSLAD, Université de Bourgogne/CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Centre of Reference H.Fukushima,Y. Sasaki, M.Tamura,A. Ishikawa, M. for Rare Diseases: Development disorders and malformation Mizukami, T. Tokino,A. Sakurai syndromes, Genetics Department, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France Sapporo medical university, Sapporo, Japan Whole-exome sequencing (WES) has proven to be a pow- Introduction: Approximately 25% of congenital disorders erful tool to identify the molecular bases of heterogeneous arecausedbychromosomeabnormalities.Theconventional conditions such as intellectual disability (ID) and/or multi- karyotyping methods such as G-banding and ﬂuorescence ple congenital abnormalities (MCA). A large number of in situ hybridization (FISH) have been used for the diag- results remain non-conclusive, especially for ultra-rare nosis of chromosomal abnormalities. However, they have conditions that limit genotype-phenotype correlations. severallimitationsincluding possible false-negativeresults, International data-sharing was used to identify additional time-consuming, and requiring an expert’s reading. We patientscarryingvariantsinthesamegene,inordertodraw evaluated the low-coverage whole-genome sequencing deﬁnitive conclusions on their implication in the disease. (WGS) using a semi-conductor next generation sequencing Here, we report our experience using the GeneMatcher technique for genome-wide detection of aneuploidies. initiative, a data-sharing platform designed to enable con- Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted nections between clinicians and researchers to help solve from peripheral blood or buccal cells from 9 patients 'unsolved' exomes and to identify new genes. Over the last diagnosed with congenital chromosomal abnormalities by twoyears,wehaveshared70candidategenesidentiﬁedby conventional cytogenetic method. WGS library preparation WES performed in individuals affected by ID/MCA. We and low-coverage genome sequencing (0.01-0.04X) were evaluated the ability to determine the involvement of these performed using Ion Torrent platform. Aneuploidies were genesandthenecessarytimeframe:59/70genes(84%)were detected using Ion Reporter Low-pass whole-genome matched to at least one other mutated individual, and 23 aneuploidy analysis pipelines. genes recurring in additional affected individuals were Results: We detected whole-chromosomal and sub- identiﬁed as the probable cause of a developmental disease chromosomal duplications/deletions from genomic DNA (39%).Thewaitingperiodbetweensubmissionandtheﬁrst by low-pass sequencing. We also detected the deletion in match varied, with an overall median of 4 hours. When a the end of chromosome and duplication at the adjacent matchoccurred,themedianresponsetime between theﬁrst region in one patient. By comparison of the results from emailtocontactasubmitterandtheresponsewasestimated conventional (G-banding) and novel (low-pass WGA) at 31 hours. The rapid identiﬁcation of these new genes method, the origin of unknown fragment attached to the remains essential for clinical characterization, genetic end of the chromosome has been suggested. counselling and for translation to the diagnostic ﬁeld. Conclusions: This study demonstrates that low-coverage GeneMatcher appears to be a very efﬁcient tool to identify WGS provides highly accurate, low-cost diagnosis of new genes in highly heterogeneous conditions. aneuploidy in cells from patients with congenital chromo- A. Bruel: None. A. Vittobello: None. F. Tran Mau somal abnormalities. Them: None. S. Nambot: None. V. Quéré: None. P. H. Fukushima: None. Y. Sasaki: None. M. Tamura: Kuentz:None.J.Thevenon:None.M.Assoum:None.S. None. A. Ishikawa: None. M. Mizukami: None. T. Moutton: None. N. Houcinat: None. N. Jean-Marçais: Tokino: None. A. Sakurai: None. None. M. Lefebvre: None. A. Mosca-Boidron: None. P. Callier: None. C. Philippe: None. L. Faivre: None. C. P14.025A Thauvin-Robinet: None. Our Genematcher data sharing experience: 10 days on average to conﬁrm the pathogenicity of a candidate gene P14.026B Challengingdetectionofanoveldeletionattheexon-intron A.Bruel1,2,A.Vittobello1,2,F.TranMauThem1,2,S.Nambot1,2,3, junction in MYH11 V. Quéré1,2,P. Kuentz1, J.Thevenon1, M.Assoum1,S. Moutton1,3,N.Houcinat1,3, N.Jean-Marçais1,3,M.Lefebvre1,2, E.Maurer1,J.Dumfarth2,S.Rudnik1,J.Zschocke1,M.Witsch- A.Mosca-Boidron1,2,P.Callier1,2,C.Philippe1,2,L.Faivre1,3,C. Baumgartner1 Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 505 1Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Introduction: Although complicated by the fragmented Innsbruck, Austria, 2University Hospital for Cardiac Surgery, nature of the next-generation targeted resequencing data, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria copy number variants (CNVs) may be detected by read- depth analysis. Along with whole exome sequencing, Introduction:Thedetectionofdeletionscomprisingmainly sequencing of large panels of disease-associated genes intronic and only small exonic regions are challenging as (Mendeliomes) are widely used in clinical practice. The theymay bemissedinexome andgenepanelanalysiswith diagnostic utility of CNV detection from Mendeliome standard software (including copy number variation tools) sequencing, however, remains underreported. and analysis settings. Here we report an analysis approach Materials and Methods: TruSight One panels (Illumina to overcome this limitation. Inc., San Diego, CA) targeting 4813 genes were sequenced Patient: We investigated a 37 y old man who was as a diagnostic test in 1407 consecutive patients at our currently hospitalized due to an iliac artery aneurysm. At department.Theindicationsfortestingwerenotrestrictedto the age of 19 y the patient had undergone surgical any disease group; many patients had undergone previous correction of an acute type A aortic dissection. Family moleculartestingincludingchromosomalmicroarrays.Raw history was negative. sequencing reads were mapped to hg19 reference genome. Method: Massive parallel sequencing of 10 genes: In addition to small variants, CNVs were called using ACTA2, FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFB2, SMAD3, CoNIFER software. All reported CNVs were validated as COL3A1, MYH11, MYLK, TGFB3 (GRCh37, hg19); appropriate. library: TruSightTMOne, Illumina; sequencer: NextSeq, Results: Among 1407 patients conclusive genetic Illumina; data analysis incl. CNV: SeqNext [JSI] and diagnosis was made after Mendeliome sequencing in 327 cnMOPS. Breakpoint detection by long range PCR and (23.2%), accompanied by additional 10.8% patients in sequencing; RNA analysis after cell culture. whom variants of unclear clinical signiﬁcance were Result: At the exon-intron 29 border of MYH11, reported. Rare CNVs were reported for 30 patients. The SeqNext called a delins variant followed by unaligned detectedCNVsrangedfromsingleexontocontiguousgene sequence in a small fraction of reads (26%). The aberrant deletions. In additional two cases, X-chromosome aneu- sequence was manually aligned to a 3´ intronic sequence, ploidies were suspected after noticing variant read ratio representing a heterozygous deletion c.3878_3880-85del. discrepancies. In 18 (1.3%) patients, the CNVs were This deletion comprises 1773 bp and include the last two classiﬁed as disease causing, while others remained of bases of exon 29 and a large part of intron 29. RNA unclear signiﬁcance. In 4/18 cases, the CNV was identiﬁed analysis is ongoing to determine the exact effect on in trans with pathogenic small variant. transcript level. Conclusions: CNV detection improved diagnostic yield Conclusions: The detection of large “mainly” intronic of Mendeliome sequencing by over 1% without increasing deletionsbypanel/exomsequencingischallengingasCNV- costs signiﬁcantly, and thus should be encouraged in all tools are not easily able to characterize them. Heightened clinical laboratories. awarenessandadditionalmethodssuchasRNAanalysisare Funding: Estonian Research Council PUT355 required for identiﬁcation and conﬁrmation of such S. Pajusalu: None. H. Roomere: None. T. Kahre: deletions. None. Ü. Murumets: None. V. Pata: None. K. E. Maurer: None. J. Dumfarth: None. S. Rudnik: Õunap: None. None. J. Zschocke: None. M. Witsch- Baumgartner: None. P14.028D DevelopingaTestDirectoryforRareandInheritedDisease P14.027C GenomicTestingintheNationalHealthServiceinEngland Copynumbervariantdetectionincreasesdiagnosticyieldof Mendeliome sequencing R.H.Scott1,E.R.A.Thomas1,L.Modiano2,C.Turnbull1,Z.C. Deans2,A.Prudhoe2,T.Fowler1,E.Graham2,M.J.Caulﬁeld1, S. Pajusalu1,2,H.Roomere1,T. Kahre1,2,Ü.Murumets1,V. S. L.Hill2 Pata1,K. Õunap1,2 1GenomicsEngland,London,UnitedKingdom,2NHSEngland, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu London, United Kingdom University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, To enable the National Health Service (NHS) to fully Tartu, Estonia beneﬁtfromtheadvancesingenomics,buildingonitslong history of laboratory and clinical genetics, NHS England is506 J.delPicchia establishinganewnationalGenomicMedicineService.The DNA were isolated from different tissues (blood, servicewilldeliveranationallyagreedrepertoireoftestsset chorionic villi and amniotic ﬂuid) and ampliﬁed by PCR out in a single, annually refreshed, ‘Test Directory’, cov- (DMPKgenespeciﬁcPCR(GS-PCR)andTP-PCR).FAM- ering the range of genomic testing for Rare and inherited labeled amplicons were resolved by capillary electrophor- disease and Cancer from highly targeted testing to whole esis (CE). The AmplideX® PCR/CE assay gave expected genome sequencing. resultsforthe49samples(100%sensitivityandspeciﬁcity) We describe the structured approach used to create the including resolution of homozygous and heterozygous Rareandinheriteddisease directoryandthecontentsofthe samples, and those with large CTG expansions (57-1800 resulting directory. repeats). Furthermore, previously unidentiﬁed mosaicism With the support of experts in each area, ‘Clinical was revealed in 6 patients. indications’fortestingwerelinkedto‘Testscope’(relevant Ten samples from DM1-patients (85-1500 repeats) were varianttypesandloci)andthen‘Testmethod(s)’capableof furthersizedbyGS-PCRandagarosegelelectrophoresis.In testing across the deﬁned scope. A previously presented one sample, the expanded allele (1300 CTG) revealed by evaluative framework was used to inform the optimal Southern blot analysis, was not detected. approach in each setting (Scott et al ASHG 2017). The AmplideX® PCR/CE DMPK technology is therefore The directory contains 350 clinical indications with 452 able to efﬁciently detect expanded alleles and differentiate testmethodcomponentsincluding24indications forwhole homozygousgenotypesfromothers.Itisabletosizealleles genome sequencing. It includes 61 ‘core’ indications, with a high resolution from 5 to 200 repeats, detect covering the bulk of testing by volume, to be performed expanded alleles up to at least 1,800 repeats, and size at each of the new laboratory hubs and 289 ‘specialised’ expanded alleles up to at least 1,500 repeats. AmplideX® indications to be performed by a subset. PCR/CE DMPK technology appears to be a simpler and The directory will be a component of a National faster approach than conventional techniques for the GenomicsInformaticsSystemthatcapturesalltestrequests molecular DM1 diagnosis. and resultsto facilitate monitoring of activity and equity of S. Rondeau: C. Other Research Support (supplies, access to testing and provide data crucial to ongoing equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); assessment of optimal testing approaches and other quality Modest; Asuragen. S. Paisley: None. M. Simon: None. A. improvement activities and, for consented patients, Munnich: None. J. Steffann: None. J. Bonnefont: None. research. R.H. Scott: None.E.R.A.Thomas:None.L. Modiano: P14.030B None. C. Turnbull: None. Z.C. Deans: None. A. Interstrand crosslinked DNA in body ﬂuids of cancer Prudhoe: None. T. Fowler: None. E. Graham: None. patients treated with a platinum agent M.J. Caulﬁeld: None. S.L. Hill: None. J.J. Jonsson1,2,H.G.Thormar1,3,B. Gudmundsson1,2,4,H.I. P14.029A Ragnarsson1, D.Gudmundsson1,H.Sigurdsson1,2 A new powerful PCR-based assay for the molecular diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy type I 1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Landspitali - National University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Lifeind ehf., S. Rondeau,S. Paisley, M.Simon,A. Munnich,J. Steffann,J. Reykjavik, Iceland, 4Lifeind ehf, Reykjavik, Iceland Bonnefont Introduction: Northern Lights Assay (NLA) is a versatile Medical Genetic Unit, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, technique for detecting various types of DNA damage in Paris, France body ﬂuids including single-stranded breaks, double- stranded breaks, intrastrand and interstrand DNA cross- Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is caused by expansion links (ICL), single-stranded DNA and bulky lesions. With of the CTG repeats in the 3’ UTR of DMPK gene. The NLAwetestedwhetherspeciﬁcDNAlesionsinbodyﬂuids conventional diagnostic strategy is based on a ﬂuorescent areseenincoloncancerpatientstreatedwithacombination PCR (ampliﬁcation up to 110 CTG), followed by Southern therapy of a platinum crosslinking agent and a thymidylate Blot for apparently homozygous patients. It is therefore synthase inhibitor. expensive and time-consuming. We have assessed the Materials and Methods: Randomly selected 27 colon sensitivity and speciﬁcity of a new prototype diagnostic cancer patients treated with standard CapOx infusion procedure (Asuragen’s AmplideX® PCR/CE DMPK tech- including capecitabine and oxaliplatin (125 mg/m2). We nology) on 49 samples (7 controls and 42 DM1-patients). collected a complete set of plasma, saliva and urine from each patient immediately after the infusion, isolated DNAAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 507 and analyzed with NLA. NLA based on Two-Dimensional malignancies. Here we describe the comparison of two B- Strandness-Dependent Electrophoresis (2D-SDE) in cell mitogens, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and DSP30 com- microgels. bined with IL2 as mitogens in a range of common B-cell Results: We detected ICL in urinary sediments in all disorders excluding CLL. The results showed that DSP30/ patientsanalyzed.ICLweredetectedincfDNAinplasmain IL2 was an effective mitogen in mature B-cell disorders, 7 patients and nicked, double-stranded, nucleosomal revealing abnormal cytogenetic results in a range of B-cell cfDNA was detected in 9 patients. Of those patients 4 had malignancies. The abnormality rate increased when com- both types of DNA lesions. pared to the use of LPS to 64% (DSP30/IL2) from 14% Conclusions: Treatment with the platinum agent oxali- (LPS). In a number of cases the disease burden was pro- platin commonly results in interstrand crosslink DNA in portionally very low, less than 10% of white cells. In 37% urinary sediment cells and sometimes in plasma cfDNA ofthesecases,theDSP30culturerevealedabnormalresults. rightafterinfusion.Theﬁndingofnicked,double-stranded, Importantly, we also obtained abnormal conventional nucleosomal cfDNA could result from treatment with the cytogenetics results in 3 bone marrow cases in which thymidylate inhibitor capecitabine comprising de novo immunophenotypingshowedanabsenceofanabnormalB- DNA synthesis, oxaliplatin and/or from cellular stress. cell clone. In these cases the cytogenetics results correlated These DNA lesions at different time points after therapy with the provisional diagnosis and altered their staging could be potential biomarkers in cancer theragnostics to level.TheuseofDSP30andIL2isrecommendedforusein evaluate response to treatment or risk of side-effects. manyB-cellmalignanciesasaneffectivemitogenandtheir The Icelandic Centre for Research Technology Develop- use has been shown to enable successful culture of the ment Fund 142709-0612 malignant clone, even at very low levels of disease J.J. Jonsson: C. Other Research Support (supplies, K. Dun: None. equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Signiﬁcant;Lifeindehf..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock P14.032D options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; A gene-agnostic trio exome sequencing strategy Lifeind ehf. H.G. Thormar: A. Employment (full or part- outperforms gene panel analysis time); Signiﬁcant; Lifeind ehf.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); J.Baptista1,2,K.Stals1,E. DeFranco1,2, V.Fryer1,M. Signiﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. B. Gudmundsson: A. Employ- Wakeling2,A. Parrish1, L.Mallin1,A.Bussell1,J. Settle1,A.C. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. B. Gunning1,R. Caswell2,C. Tysoe1,E. Baple1,2,S.Ellard1,2 Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already 1Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, received); Signiﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. E. Ownership Interest UnitedKingdom,2UniversityofExeterMedicalSchool,Exeter, (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); United Kingdom Signiﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. H.I. Ragnarsson: None. D. Gudmundsson: None. H. Sigurdsson: None. The identiﬁcation of the genetic aetiology in children with non-speciﬁc/heterogeneous phenotypes, or without the full P14.031C spectrum of syndromic features, poses a challenge. For DSP30 as a mitogen in B-cell malignancies including those these cases, selection of a gene panel for next generation of a low disease burden sequencing (NGS) can be restrictive whereas a gene- agnostic inheritance-based whole exome trio offers a more K. Dun comprehensiveanalysis.Weanalysed266consecutivetrios referred for diagnostic testing. Whole exome sequencing Cytogenetics, Hobart, Australia was performed using Agilent (v5/6) capture and Illumina sequencing (HiSeq2500/ NextSeq500). Rare potentially Chromosome abnormalities detected during cytogenetic deleterious variants were ﬁltered by mode of inheritance investigations for B-cell malignancy offer prognostic and classiﬁed using ACMG-AMP guidelines. We ascer- information that can have wide ranging clinical impacts on tainedwhetherthediseasegenewasincludedinatleastone patients. These impacts may include monitoring frequency, Genomics England PanelApp gene panel. Likely patho- treatment type and disease staging level. The use of the genic/pathogenic variant(s) were identiﬁed in 43% (113/ syntheticoligonucleotideDSP30combinedwithinterleukin 266) of cases. For 9 patients the disease gene was not 2(IL2)hasbeendescribedasaneffectivemitotic stimulant included within a PanelApp gene panel and the maximal in B-cell disorders, predominantly in chronic lymphocytic diagnostic yield for a phenotype-driven panel analysis leukaemia (CLL) but also a range of other B-cell wouldhavebeen39%.In6casesthegeneswereveryrecent508 J.delPicchia discoveries where our ﬁndings have provided further evi- ﬂexibility, and fast turnaround time in high quality DNA dence to support the disease gene association (e.g. KLH7, synthesis. RHOBTB2 and AIMP2). We identiﬁed three strong biolo- L. Arbiza: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- gical candidate genes (NXN, NAXD and PIGB) and via cant; Twist Bioscience. S. Chen: A. Employment (full or GeneMatcher found additional cases/collaborations that part-time);Signiﬁcant;TwistBioscience.C.Thompson:A. subsequently conﬁrmed these as novel disease genes. The Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Twist gene-agnostic trio approach using inheritance ﬁltering Bioscience. K. Butcher: A. Employment (full or part- enabled a diagnosis for an additional 9 patients (8% of time); Signiﬁcant; Twist Bioscience. R. Zeitoun: A. diagnoses). We will discuss how the fast pace of gene Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Twist discovery in the NGS era coupled with the clinical/genetic Bioscience. R. Gantt: A. Employment (full or part-time); heterogeneity provides a strong case for using this strategy Signiﬁcant; Twist Bioscience. H. Chilton: A. Employment combined with GeneMatcher and future re-analysis to (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Twist Bioscience. maximise diagnostic yield. J.Baptista:None.K.Stals:None.E.DeFranco:None. P14.034B V. Fryer: None. M. Wakeling: None. A. Parrish: None. Rapid whole exome sequencing in critically ill children L. Mallin: None. A. Bussell: None. J. Settle: None. A.C. Gunning: None. R. Caswell: None. C. Tysoe: None. E. W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse, A. H.vander Hout, Y.J. Vos,T. Baple: None. S. Ellard: None. Dijkhuizen,J.B.G.M.Verheij,I.M.vanLangen,B.Sikkema- Raddatz,M.J.deGroot,H.H.J.Drok,R.Kinds,G.Beunders, P14.033A E.Zonneveld-Huijssoon,J.C.Herkert,F.Vansenne,J.S.Klein Improving the performance, cost, and ﬂexibility of custom Wassink-Ruiter,E.Gerkes,K.J.vanderVelde,M.A.Swertz,R. target enrichment & whole exome sequencing J.Sinke, C. C. vanDiemen L. Arbiza,S. Chen,C. Thompson,K. Butcher,R. Zeitoun,R. University of Groningen, University Medical Center Gantt, H.Chilton Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands Twist Bioscience, San Francisco, CA, United States Introduction: We recently successfully explored rapid diagnostic whole-genome sequencing in critically ill new- Whole Exome Sequencing and Target Enrichment approa- borns, aiming to improve their clinical care and replace ches provide a powerful solution for effectively focusing time-consuming and/or invasive diagnostic testing. Now, sequencing costs on genomic regions of interest. However, we implemented rapid sequencing in standard diagnostics, hybridization-basedenrichmentcanposevariouschallenges with adapted procedures and an expanded age-range to leading to context-speciﬁc biases and lack of uniformity include all critically ill children. affecting quality and efﬁciency. Here we present data Materials and Methods: Twenty-ﬁve critically ill or obtained using Twist Bioscience's new NGS Target deceasedpatientsundertheageof16yearswereincluded EnrichmentSystem,whichshowssubstantialimprovements between April 2017 and February 2018.Trio exome inmultiplexingcapacitywithsingle-plexperformance,high sequencing was performed using Agilent SureSelect XT uniformity with fold 80 base penalties as low as 1.3, and exome v6 capturing . After ﬁltering using a virtual gene- nearoptimalcaptureacrosslowtohighGCcontentregions. panel of 3850 monogenic disease genes and inheritance- Altogether,theseimprovementsleadtoatargetcoverageof mode, selected variants were discussed in a multi- upto>98%and>95%ofbasesat20xand30xrespectively disciplinary team. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic withonly4.5GBsequencing,amuchwiderlinearlyscalable variants matching the patients’ phenotype were reported. cost to coverage relation for high-coverage applications, Variants in genes not matching the patient’s and >99% precision and sensitivity in variant calling on phenotype but considered as actionable, were reported both hg38 and the hg19 human assemblies which are as incidental ﬁndings. natively supported. These results are possible due to a Results: Turnaround time was less than 14 days in all carefully designed system including double-stranded bioti- samples.Pathogenicorlikelypathogenicmutationsexplain- nylated probes, an optimized stringency workﬂow, and ing the phenotypes were detected in 9 of the 25 children efforts focusing on optimizing bait design and target pro- (36%) and involved the MTM1, PDHA1, MAP3K7, ﬁles. This allows capturing 99% of potentially pathogenic KCNQ2, PTPN11, KCNT1, TBCK and CRLF1 and CHD7 clinVar variants in just 33MB of coding sequence targets genes. Incidental ﬁndings with clinical consequences were basedonaCCDSexome,orcanbeincorporatedincustom found and communicated in two families. user designs taking advantage of Twist's unique ability,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 509 Conclusions: Rapid trio-exome sequencing is feasible Conclusions: Our results show that deep WES (100x) and has a high yield (36%) and a speed comparable with withleastbiasedtechnologies canprovidesimilarcoverage whole genome sequencing with targeted panel analysis. (97% of 10x bases) and CDS variant discovery to the W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. A.H. van der Hout: standard 30x WGS. Both WES and WGS are effectively None. Y.J. Vos: None. T. Dijkhuizen: None. J.B.G.M. incapableofvariantdiscoveryinlowmappabilityregionsof Verheij: None. I.M. van Langen: None. B. Sikkema- the exome due to limitations of short read technology. Our Raddatz: None. M.J. de Groot: None. H.H.J. Drok: study may help to select the resequencing approach for None. R. Kinds: None. G. Beunders: None. E. Zonne- human genetics studies. veld-Huijssoon:None.J.C.Herkert:None.F.Vansenne: ThisstudywassupportedbyRSFgrantno.145000069. None. J.S. Klein Wassink-Ruiter: None. E. Gerkes: Y. Barbitoff: None. D. Polev: None. I. Shcherbakova: None. K.J. van der Velde: None. M.A. Swertz: None. R. None. A. Kiselev: None. A. Glotov: None. E. Serebrya- J. Sinke: None. C.C. van Diemen: None. kova: None. A. Kostareva: None. O. Glotov: None. A. Predeus: None. P14.035C Systematic dissection of biases in whole exome and whole P14.036D genomestrategies forhuman genomeresequencing reveals Increased burden of possibly pathogenic variants in major determinants of human coding sequence coverage disease-associated genes in patients with negative exome sequencing result Y. Barbitoff1,2,3, D.Polev1, I.Shcherbakova1,A. Kiselev4,A. Glotov1,E. Serebryakova1, A.Kostareva4,O.Glotov5,A. A. Maver,B. Peterlin Predeus2 Clinical institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia 1Biobank of the Research Park, Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation, Although exome sequencing has considerably improved 2Bioinformatics Institute, Saint Petersburg, Russian diagnosticyieldinpatientswithsuspectedgeneticdiseases, Federation, 3Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, it is still not possible to identify a conclusively causative Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, Russian genetic variant in a notable proportion of patients. In these Federation, 4Almazov National Medical Research Centre, cases,weneverthelessobservemultipleresidualﬁndingsin Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5City Hospital #40, genesassociatedwithreferralphenotype,includingvariants Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation of unknown signiﬁcance and carriership of known patho- genic and known risk factor variants. To assess the rele- Introduction: Advantages and diagnostic effectiveness of vanceoftheseﬁndings,westudiedifpatientswithnegative wholeexome(WES)vs.wholegenome(WGS)sequencing or inconclusive diagnostic exome result carry an excess of inresearchandclinical practicearestillheavilydebated.In variants in genes associated with referral diagnosis. We our study, we took an effort to systematically assess cov- selected196patients with negativediagnostic exome result erage of CDS regions provided by several modern WES from ﬁve broad disease groups, including hypertrophic platforms and a PCR-free WGS kit. cardiomyopathy,skeletalmyopathies,hearingloss,epilepsy Materials and Methods: We performed bioinformatic and Parkinson disease (PD). For each group, we system- analysis of 312 WES samples sequenced with four aticallyassessedtheburdenofvariantsindisease-associated technologies (Agilent SureSelect, Roche SeqCap EZ genesandcomparedthisrateinpatientsversuscontrols.We MedExome, Illumina Nextera Rapid Capture, and Illumina observedaconsistentexcessofknownpathogenicandloss- TruSeq Exome), as well as 17 PCR-free WGS samples. of-function variants in disease-associated gene panel for all Results: We identiﬁed the ~400 kb region of human ﬁve surveyed disease categories. The difference was most exome that could not be effectively characterized using notable in case of PD, where patients had on average 5.2 short (2x150) read technology and b37 human genome times more variants in PD-associated gene panel versus reference. Using several novel metrics to characterize exon controls, followed by hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (1.7x), coverage in WES and WGS, we showed that some of the myopathies (1.4x), hearing loss (1.4x) and epilepsy (1.1x). WES platforms (SureSelect and MedExome) achieve In conclusion, we observed an overall excess of possibly substantially less biased CDS coverage than others, with pathogenic variants in disease-associated genes in patients lower within- and between-interval variation and GC- with negative or inconclusive exome results. This suggests content bias. We also showed that the overall power for that residual ﬁndings in exome data might be relevant in SNPandindeldiscoveryinCDSregionisindistinguishable thesepatientsandfurtherstressestheneedforimprovement for WGS and best WES platforms.510 J.delPicchia of variant interpretation process, especially by sharing data Conclusions: We suggest that this form of artiﬁcial across multiple institutions. intelligence is ready to support medical genetics in clinical A. Maver: None. B. Peterlin: None. and laboratory practices and will play a key role in the future of precision medicine. P14.037A Y. Gurovich: A. Employment (full or part-time); DeepGestalt- using deep learning to detect rare genetic Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc. Y. Hanani: A. Employment (full syndromes from facial phenotype or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc. O. Bar: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc. L. Basel- Y. Gurovich1,Y. Hanani1, O.Bar1,L. Basel-Salmon2,3, P.M. Salmon:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Signiﬁcant;FDNA Krawitz4,S. B.Kamphausen5,M.Zenker5,N.Fleischer1,D. Inc. P.M. Krawitz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Gelbman1, L.M. Bird6,K. W.Gripp7 Modest;FDNAinc.S.B.Kamphausen:None.M.Zenker: None. N. Fleischer: A. Employment (full or part-time); 1FDNA Inc, Boston, MA, United States, 2Recanati Genetic Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc.D.Gelbman: A.Employment (full Institute, Rabin Medical Center & Schneider Children’s or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc. L.M. Bird: F. Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel, 3Sackler Faculty of Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; FDNA Inc. K.W. Medicine,TelAviv,Israel,4InstituteforGenomicStatisticand Gripp: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Bioinformatics, University Hospital Bonn,Rheinische- FDNA inc. Friedrich-Wilhelms University, Bonn, Germany, 5Institute of HumanGenetics,UniversityHospitalMagdeburg,Magdeburg, P14.038B Germany,6DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityofCalifornia, ExtractionandsequencingofDNAfromhumantissueﬁxed San Diego, CA, United States, 7Division of Medical Genetics, and stored in formalin A.I.duPontHospitalforChildren/Nemours,Wilmington,DE, United States A. Alqahtani1,A. Skelton2, L.Eley1, S.Annavarapu1,3,D. Henderson1,B. Chaudhry1 Introduction: Advances in machine-learning, computer vision and deep-learning enable computerized systems to 1Cardiovascular Research Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne, prioritize variants through recognition of syndromic phe- United Kingdom, 2Bioinformatics Support Unit, Newcastle notypes. One of the main challenges for such a system is upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Department of Cellular being able to generalize well for hundreds of (individually Pathology, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom rare) genetic syndromes from small amounts of data. Methods: DeepGestalt is a machine-learning framework Introduction: Formalin is widely used to preserve human that uses deep convolutional neural networks (DCNNs) to tissues for pathological investigation. However, the DNA score genetic syndromes by analyzing frontal facial 2D- isolatedisusuallyfragmentedandcorrupted,limitingitsuse photos. The framework was trained stepwise: First, face fordiagnosisorresearch.Wewantedtoextracthigh-quality location and facial landmarks were automatically detected, DNA from formalin-ﬁxed tissue suitable for use in Sanger followed by face alignment and cropping into multiple and next-generation exome sequencing. regions. Then a general face representation was learned Methods: Using human tissue stored in formalin for using DCNNs and used to train a specialized multiple 12 months, we created a novel protocol to extract high- DCNN.Resultsareaggregatedandsortedtoobtaintheﬁnal quality DNA, combining proteinase-K and heating with ranked list of syndromes. DeepGestalt was trained on a Chelex resin. We also evaluated the effect of uracil-DNA- phenotype-genotypedatabasecuratedbyclinicalgeneticists glycosylase (UDG), an enzyme suggested to remove using a community-driven tool called Face2Gene (FDNA formalinartefacts.Theyield,purity,fragment sizedistribu- Inc, USA) and is the framework powering this tool. tion, efﬁcacy as a template for PCR and sequences of PCR Results: 1. Multiclass: 502 images of randomly sampled products were compared. Using this protocol, next- diagnosed cases, yielded 91% top-10-accuracy for 216 generation whole exome sequencing was performed on different syndromes. 2. Noonan genes: Clinicians and DNAextractedfromanexplantedheartthathadbeenstored DeepGestalt were asked to classify photos of patients in formalin for over two years. The results were compared diagnosed with any of 5 gene-mutations in Noonan with those from freshly obtained DNA (blood) and the Syndrome, yielding no recognition by clinicians while utility of Sanger sequencing as a conﬁrmatory strategy was DeepGestalt had 64%-top-1-accuracy, compared to a 20%- also evaluated. random chance. 3. Yes/No type testing recognizing Angel- Results and Conclusions: High-quality DNA was man Syndrome, yielding 71%-accuracy by clinicians while obtained from formalin-ﬁxed tissue using our protocol. DeepGestalt identiﬁed 92%. ThisincreasedthePCRproductlengthobtainedfrom200toAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 511 400bp. However, whilst UDG removed some artefacts it Conclusions: We show that single-tube, long-range RP- introduced others. Results of NGS exome sequencing on PCR can be adapted to different repeat sequences using formalin-ﬁxed DNA compared favourably to fresh DNA high-resolution,easy-to-usefragmentsizingplatforms.This with 94% speciﬁcity, but 73% sensitivity. Thus, it is ﬂexibility may accelerate the development and adoption of possible to obtain high-quality DNA template from STR-based assays for clinical research and molecular formalin-ﬁxed samples, but limited sensitivity to detect all diagnostics. variantslimitsitsusetoconﬁrmationofknown,ratherthan *For Research Use Only, Not for Use in Diagnostic discovery of novel, variants.Supported by Saudi Arabia Procedures Cultural Bureau and Ministry of Education G.J. Latham: A. Employment (full or part-time); A. Alqahtani: None. A. Skelton: None. L. Eley: None. Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, S. Annavarapu: None. D. Henderson: None. B. stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Chaudhry: None. Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. C. Redmond: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. K. Nichol- P14.039C son: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Generalization of an Assay System using Repeat-primed Asuragen, Inc. E. Lagow: A. Employment (full or part- PCR and Capillary Electrophoresis to Resolve Multiple time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. J. Wallace: A. Employ- AT- and GC-rich Short Tandem Repeats Associated with ment(fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant;ThermoFisher,Inc.E. Neurological Diseases Schreiber: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher, Inc. S. Higdon: A. Employment (full or G.J.Latham1,C. Redmond1, K.Nicholson1,E. Lagow1,J. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher, Inc. E. Bram: A. Wallace2, E.Schreiber2,S.Higdon2,E. Bram1 Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other 1Asuragen, Inc., Austin, TX, United States, 2Thermo Fisher, intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States P14.040D Introduction: DNA repeat sequences constitute roughly Impactofimprovinggeneannotationondiagnosticyieldof 50% of the human genome. Short tandem repeats (STRs) Mendelian disorders impact human disease through variable length effects on gene expression, splicing, and translation. Over 30 Men- D.Zhang1, S.Guelﬁ1,A. E.Jaffe2,L. Collado-Torres2, M. delian disorders are associated with STR expansions, yet Ryten1 diagnostic applications have often been thwarted by a lack of rapid, simple, and accurate assay systems. Here we 1Institute of Neurology (UCL), London, United Kingdom, describe the analytical performance of multiple repeat- 2Lieber Institute for Brain Development, Baltimore, MD, primed (RP) PCR assays* resolved on the SeqStudio United States Genetic Analyzer. Materials and Methods: Mono-, tri-, and hexa- nucleo- Genetic diagnosis of Mendelian disorders requires clinical tide repeat expansions from AT- and GC-rich STR disease scientists to distinguish pathogenic variants from many markers (TOMM40, FMR1 and C9orf72) were ampliﬁed potentially functional variants present in any human gen- from clinically-derived samples (n=49) using AmplideX® ome. Variant interpretation is reliant on gene annotation; PCR/CE kits* (Asuragen). FAM-labeled amplicons were however,asourunderstandingoftranscriptomiccomplexity resolved on SeqStudio and 3500 Genetic Analyzers improves it is apparent that existing annotation is incom- (Thermo Fisher). plete. Comparison of Ensembl and AceView annotations Results: All genotype results were concordant between reveals over 15,800 genes that lie in intronic or intergenic instruments and deviations were at most one repeat within regions according to the other database. Consequently, the sizeable range. Tunable run conditions extended repeat incorrect or incomplete annotation may cause pathogenic quantiﬁcation by 25% (to 180 C9orf72 G C repeats) from variants to be misassigned, hidden amongst false positives 4 2 baseline conditions, enhanced expanded peak detection oroverlookedwithinmis-annotatednon-codingregions.To sensitivitybyupto100-fold,andenabledrapidruntimesas address this problem, we used publicly available tran- shortas20min.Further,differentassayscouldbeanalyzed scriptomic data to improve the annotation of 2806 OMIM- on the same plate to improve batch run efﬁciency. Studies morbid genes. We obtained annotation-agnostic quantiﬁ- are ongoing to assess STRs in myotonic dystrophy type 1 cationoftranscriptionfrom54GTExtissuesusingrecount2 and Huntington’s disease. andcombinedthiswithRNA-seqreadsspanningexon-exon junctions to link putatively transcribed regions to known512 J.delPicchia OMIM genes. We characterised these transcribed regions myopathy (n=1, ISPD), Myelination disorder (n=1, using sequence properties (leveraging information from EIF2B5), congenital disorder of deglycosylation (n=1, ENCODE and using ORFﬁnder) and their expression in NGLY1), and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (n=1, PITX2). relationtothereferencegene.DespiteOMIMgeneshaving Therefore, in this study, we demonstrated the possibility of been extensively studied, we discovered over 5Mb of shortening the diagnosis duration of WES for ICU patients additional unannotated transcription within 50Kb of an with potentially genetic disease. This project is funded by OMIM gene, which predominantly fell within intronic the Mistry of Health and Welfare. regions (72%). Restricting our analysis to non-overlapping W. Hwu: None. Y. Chien: None. N. Lee: None. T. genes, we ﬁnd that 0.35Mb of transcribed regions connect Chen: None. J. Hsu: None. F. Lai: None. to known OMIM isoforms, many of which are expressed within disease relevant tissues. Overall, we improve the P14.042B annotation of OMIM genes, a vital step for the accurate A simple and fast method for direct-to-PCR genotyping assignmentofvariantpathogenicity,andanticipatethatthis will lead to improvements in diagnostic yield from whole A. Berndt, C.Oberkanins, H.Puehringer, S.Németh genome sequencing. D. Zhang: None. S. Guelﬁ: None. A.E. Jaffe: None. L. ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria Collado-Torres: None. M. Ryten: None. Introduction: PCR is known to work well on crude and P14.041A complextemplatesunlessinterferingsubstancesarepresent. Rapidgeneticdiagnosisemployingwholeexomesequencing In case of blood, it is essential to remove heme, which is a for critical illness in infants and children potent inhibitor of most DNA polymerases. Material and Methods: We have developed a simple, W.Hwu1,Y. Chien1, N.Lee1,T. Chen2, J.Hsu2, F.Lai3 inexpensive and time-saving method to skip DNA extrac- tionwhen using Taqman-based ViennaLab RealFastassays 1Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University for genotyping and variant detection on fresh and frozen Hospital,Taipei,Taiwan,2DepartmentofComputerScience& blood. After a 10 min heat denaturation and quick Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, centrifugation step, the resulting supernatant is diluted into Taiwan, 3Department of Pediatrics, Taipei, Taiwan direct-to-PCR(D2PCR)bufferanddirectlyusedastemplate in PCR. Critical illness in infants and children is one of the most Results:TheD2PCRapproachforRealFastassayscanbe challenging ﬁelds in maternal and children health. Because performed on any common qPCR instrument capable of precisemanagementsin respective tothe diseases areoften detecting FAM/HEX (single-plex assays) or FAM/HEX/ notpossibleinpatientswithgeneticdiseases,theprognosis ROX/Cy5 (duplex assays) ﬂuorescence. Optimal time can be poor even though a large amount of resources are saving is achieved only when combining D2PCR testing consumed. This project employs rapid whole exome with fast mode thermocycling on the Magnetic Induction sequencing (WES) and artiﬁcial intelligence-assisted data Cycler (MIC; Bio Molecular System). Using magnetic processing to ﬁt the needs of acute disease managements. induction technology for heating and fan forced air for The inclusion criteria include patients admitted to intensive cooling,40cyclePCRrunscanbeshortenedto40min,and care unit and suspecting to have genetic etiologies, and/or the analysis of samples from drawing blood to ﬁnal result inbornerrorofmetabolism.Afamilialtrioweresampledfor can be completed in less than one hour. WES analysis. From May 2017 to Dec 2017, 23 patients Conclusions: Reduction of the turnaround, and in were enrolled for WES trio analysis. The clinical diagnosis particular the hands-on time for molecular genetic assays of enrollment includes shock (n=4), seizure (n=7), iskeytoincreasingthecapacitiesanddailythroughputofa Respiratory failure (n=5), Sudden infant death syndrome diagnostic laboratory. As a consequence, costs can be (n=1), Abnormal newborn screening (n=2), and Undiag- reduced and delivering reports to patients can be nosed disease with multiple systemic involvement (n=4). accelerated. Of them, 13 (56.5%) had molecular diagnosis. The mean A. Berndt: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- duration of turnaround time to have tentative diagnosis is cant; ViennaLab Diagnostics. C. Oberkanins: A. Employ- was 6.3±1.4 days (range 4.3-9.9 days). Disease causing ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ViennaLab genes identiﬁed included Immunodeﬁciency (n=2; CD3E Diagnostics. H. Puehringer: A. Employment (full or part- and C3), Cardiomyopathy (n=2; 2 COQ4 cases), Channo- time); Signiﬁcant; ViennaLab Diagnostics. S. pathy (n=3; KCNQ5, RYR2, and SCN8A), Peroxisomal Németh: None. biogenesis disorder (n=2, PEX1 and PEX7), congenitalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 513 P14.043C condition with clear clinical delineation and negative or Integrated functional characterization of a non-coding inconclusive routine laboratory results. GPC3 allele in a family with recurrent Simpson-Golabi- A. Vitobello: None. J. Thevenon: None. P. Callier: Behmel syndrome None. T. Jouan: None. L. Duplomb: None. M. Bordes- soules:None.Y.Duffourd:None.E.Tisserand:None.A. A. Vitobello1,J. Thevenon2,P. Callier1,3,T. Jouan1, L. Boland: None. R. Olaso: None. J. Deleuze: None. D. Duplomb1,M. Bordessoules1,Y. Duffourd1,E.Tisserand1,A. Sanlaville: None. C. Thauvin: None. L. Faivre: None. Boland4,R. Olaso4,J.Deleuze4,D.Sanlaville5,C. Thauvin1,3,6, L. Faivre1,3,6 P14.044D Widespread uptake of the Human Phenotype Ontology 1Inserm UMR 1231 GAD team, Genetics of Developmental (HPO)intheNationalHealthService(NHS)inEnglandas disorders, Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, part of the 100,000 Genomes Project France,2.ServicedeGénétique,CHUdeGrenoble,Grenoble, France, 3CHU Dijon, FHU TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, E. R.A. Thomas1,A. Devereau1,H.Brittain1,A. Tucci1,M. 4Centre National de Recherche en Geń omique Humaine Ryten1,2,D.Smedley1,A.Rendon1,M.J.Caulﬁeld1,R.H.Scott1 (CNRGH), CEA, Evry, France, 5Service de Génétique, Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU de Lyon, HCL, Lyon, 1Genomics England, Queen Mary University of London, France, 6CHU Dijon, Centre de ref́eŕ ence Anomalies du London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Neurology, University Dev́ eloppement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Centre de College London, London, United Kingdom Geń et́ique, Dijon, France The 100,000 Genomes Project is an NHS transformation Sipson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome type 1 (SGBS1 -MIM project which is founding a national research database 312870) is an X-linked condition occurring primarily in linking genomic and clinical data from thousands of males, characterized by pre- and postnatal overgrowth, patients with rare disease or cancer. The rare disease pro- coarse facial features, variable intellectual disability, con- gramme recruits individuals across >200 recruitment cate- genital heart defects, supernumerary nipples, hepatomegaly gories, spanning the majority of monogenic diseases. and increased risk to develop neoplasia such as Wilms Phenotype data have been collected primarily as HPO tumor. SGBS1 isusually caused by deletion or mutation in terms. For each recruitment category, a ‘questionnaire’ of the gene encoding glypican-3 (GPC3), an outer membrane relevant HPO terms (1 to 82 per category, median 26.5) is glycoprotein implicated in WNTs, Hedgehogs (Hh), ﬁbro- presented to clinicians in an electronic data capture tool, blast growth factors (FGF), and bone morphogenetic pro- with the facility to add extra terms where relevant. Pheno- teins (BMP) signaling modulation. To identify the genetic typicdatahavebeencollectedon>20,000participantswith variant responsible for recurrent cases of Simpson-Golabi- a mean of 6 positive and 20 negative terms from around Behmel syndrome type 1 within a family with negative 1,000 contributing clinicians. HPO terms have directed whole exome sequencing (WES) results, we performed an application of gene panels beyond the recruited disorder, integrated genomic and transcriptional analysis. Whole with 24% of diagnostic variants lying within these addi- genome sequencing (WGS) coupled with patient-derived tionalpanels.Onreviewofthedata,2%offamiliesneeded ﬁbroblastsRNAexpressionanalysiswasperformedinorder further clariﬁcation or enrichment of the terms initially to interrogate non-coding regulatory mechanisms, poten- entered to inform the analysis. HPO functions better in tially accounting for dysregulation of GPC3, GPC4, some clinical contexts (e.g. paediatric developmental dis- CXORF5orothercandidategenesimplicatedinovergrowth orders) than in others (e.g. inherited cancer, due to limited syndromes for a differential analysis. WGS allowed us to capture of histological subtypes and precise age of onset). identify the presence of a complex rearrangement resulting Using set HPO questionnaires standardises the pattern of in a duplication of Xq24 with concomitant deletion in datacapturebetweenusersandencouragesdepthofcapture Xq26.2 corresponding to a portion of the second intron of of positive and negative features; however, this approach the gene GPC3. RNA expression not only revealed GPC3 maylimitthecaptureofadditionalrelevantphenotypesand loss of expression, but also allowed the identiﬁcation of introducebiasintothedataset.Ourexperienceindicatesthat SGBS-speciﬁc transcriptional pathways associated with HPOisanintuitiveandrichontologywhichcanbeusedat glypican-3 knockout. We provide evidence of the utility of scale in frontline healthcare. genome-wide genetic and expression analyses as com- E.R.A. Thomas: None. A. Devereau: None. H. plementary approaches to interrogate the transcriptional Brittain: None. A. Tucci: None. M. Ryten: None. D. readout of non-coding variants in an ultra-rare genetic Smedley:None.A.Rendon:None.M.J.Caulﬁeld:None. R.H. Scott: None.514 J.delPicchia P14.045A Imputation is now a routine step in genome-wide associa- MolecularDiagnosisofHuntingtonDiseaseusingNanopore tion studies (GWASs) and has facilitated the discovery of Sequencing many novel signals. While the validity of genetic imputa- tion algorithms has been determined, the limitations to S. C.Yau,K. Brown,A. Bond,G.R. Taylor imputation reference panels from short-read sequencing inaccessibility has not been systematically assessed. Here, Viapath Analytics, London, United Kingdom we investigated these limitations and their impact on GWAS in the Cooperative Health Research In South Tyrol Detection of repeat expansions is challenging for short (CHRIS) study, a population based study with 4,661 gen- read next generation sequencing and ﬂuorescent PCR otypedandphenotypedindividuals.Bycomparingimputed assays are limited by their inability to amplify large genotypestomicroarraygenotypesintheCHRISstudy,we expansion alleles. Long read sequencing technology such demonstrated a low quality of imputation for variants pre- as Oxford Nanopore Technology (ONT) has the potential sentinregionsdeﬁnedbythe1000GenomesProjectPhase to overcome these limitations. We investigated the per- 3 as inaccessible to short-read sequencing. Screening the formance of ONT sequencing in Huntington Disease summary statistics of 58 biochemical trait GWASs per- using a 2.1kb amplicon that includes the unstable patho- formed in the CHRIS study, we detected an aspartate ami- genic CAG and polymorphic CCG repeats. 48 samples notransferaseassociatedlocusinaninaccessibleregionthat tested by ﬂuorescent PCR spanning 15 to 101 CAG is driven by microarray genotyped variants, and cannot be repeats (including all alleles in the intermediate and reproduced through 1000 Genomes imputation. Con- reduced penetrance ranges) were analysed. Amplicons sistently, in the publicly available NHGRI-EBI GWAS were prepared using the Nanopore 1D barcoding protocol catalog and in UK Biobank GWASs, we observed a lower and analysed on MinION Flow Cell (R9.4). FASTQ ﬁles density of trait-associated variants in inaccessible regions were generated using Albacore (ONT) to perform both when compared to accessible regions. In summary, we basecalling and demultiplexing. BAM ﬁles were gener- show that the nature of short-read sequencing affects the ated using minimap2. Allele calls were performed by ability of GWASs to discover trait associated loci in inac- RepeatHMM* (with the predeﬁned HTT model) using cessible regions. FASTQandBAMinputs.Repeatlengthestimatesbyboth J.S.Mitchell:None.E.König:None.M.Gögele:None. Nanopore sequencing and ﬂuorescent PCR showed a C. Pattaro: None. P.P. Pramstaller: None. C. concordance (R2) >0.9957. RepeatHMM analysis with Fuchsberger: None. BAMinputsproducedthebestresultswithaspeciﬁcityof 0-1repeatforalleleswith20-39repeats.However,alleles P14.047C with <20 repeats were overestimated by 1-2 repeats. The X-chromosomal INDELs examined by ddPCR for female 2.1kb amplicon reduced the preferential ampliﬁcation of sex determination in NIPD and in forensic science the smaller alleles in relation to large expansion alleles, thereby increasing the speciﬁcity of the assay. Provided M.Korabecna1,2,B. Veselá1,I.Svobodova1, E.Pazourkova1 sequencing depth was 100-fold or greater, we achieved high accuracy of repeat calling. This study shows that 1FirstFacultyofMedicine,CharlesUniversity,Prague,Czech Nanopore long-read sequencing has the potential to pro- Republic,2GeneralFacultyHospitalinPrague,Prague,Czech vide a diagnostic assay for repeat expansions. *Lui et al. Republic Genome Medicine (2017) 9:65 S.C.Yau:None.K.Brown:None.A.Bond:None.G.R. Introduction: In families with gonosomal recessive dis- Taylor: None. eases, fetal sex is determined prenatally by detection of Y- chromosomal sequences in cell-free fetal DNA in maternal P14.046B plasma.Whenthesesequencesarenotfound,femalesexof The impact of reference panel short-read sequencing the fetus is reported. Here, we present a methodology inaccessibility on genotype imputation allowing the detection of paternal X-chromosomal alleles onmaternalbackgroundandtheconﬁrmationoffemalesex J.S. Mitchell, E. König, M.Gögele,C. Pattaro,P. P. by positive ampliﬁcation signals. Pramstaller, C. Fuchsberger Material and Methods: Using ddPCR we examined X- chromosomal INDELs: rs2307932, rs16397, rs16637, Institute for Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Afﬁliated Institute rs3048996, rs16680 in buccal swabs of 50 females to of the University of Lübeck, Bolzan, Bolzano, Italy receive the population data. For all examined INDELs, we tested the performance of ddPCR for mixtures 20%, 10%,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 515 5%and2.5%ofonehomozygoteonthebackgroundofthe increaseligationefﬁciency and suppress chimeraformation oppositeone.Weexaminedthecell-freeplasmaDNAfrom aswellasadaptordimers.Wetestedtheperformanceofour 13 pregnant women bearing Y-chromosome negative method using three sample types: sheared genomic DNA, fetuses. cfDNA,andFFPEDNA.Wealsotested itsperformancein Results:Wedetectedtheminorfraction(representingthe liquid biopsy applications using libraries from mixtures of paternalX-chromosomalalleleonthematernalbackground) NA12878 and NA24385 cell line DNA with mutant allele in all artiﬁcial mixtures. We conﬁrmed the presence of fractions (MAFs) down to 0.2%. When compared to paternal X-chromosome in 12 out of 13 female bearing commercially available methods, our approach yielded pregnancies (92.31% sensitivity). signiﬁcant increase in sensitivity and PPV, especially in Conclusions: We developed the ddPCR approach allow- low input range (1-25ng). Our results demonstrate that our ingthedeterminationofpaternalX-chromosomalalleleson methodology provides a useful tool for applications where maternal background for non-invasive prenatal diagnostics. high conversion of input DNA samples is needed. Thisapproachmaybeusedforprenatal paternity exclusion Y. Zheng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; and for determination of female sex in forensic samples. IntegratedDNATechnologies.Z.Zwirko:A.Employment Supported by grants no. VI20172020102 by Ministry of (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. Interior of the Czech Republic, no. Progres Q25/LF1 and M. Light: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; no. SVV 260 263 of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Integrated DNA Technologies. K. Lai: A. Employment Sport of the Czech Republic, and by the grant RVO-VFN (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. 64165 of the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic. U. Chakravarty: A. Employment (full or part-time); M. Korabecna: None. B. Veselá: None. I. Svobodova: Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. K. Bryan: A. None. E. Pazourkova: None. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. S. Rose: A. Employment (full or part-time); P14.048D Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. Y. Bao: A. A novel duplex-ready library construction method for Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA improved conversion of low-input and highly degraded Technologies. M. Jarosz: A. Employment (full or part- DNA time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. D. Kupec: A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;IntegratedDNA Y.Zheng,Z.Zwirko,M.Light,K.Lai,U.Chakravarty,K.Bryan, Technologies. Y. Wang: A. Employment (full or part- S. Rose,Y. Bao, M.Jarosz,D.Kupec, Y. Wang,C. Chen time);Modest;IntegratedDNATechnologies.C.Chen:A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Integrated DNA Technologies, Redwood City, CA, United Technologies. States P14.049A Diagnostic tools based on next generation sequencing High-throughput SMRTSequencing of clinically relevant (NGS) are fundamentally transforming clinical oncology. targets Current library preparation strategies only allow relatively low library conversion, especially when the input is low, S.Ranade,L.A.Aro,I.McLaughlin,C.Heiner,P.Baybayan,A. making the detection of low-frequency mutations by NGS Toepfer,B. Bowman,R. Hall particularlychallenging.Inaddition,mutationartifactsarise from various sample storage and preparation processes, Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States which can signiﬁcantly lower the positive predictive value (PPV) of a clinical NGS diagnostic assay. These artifacts High throughput sequencing of targeted genomic DNA or can be identiﬁed by “duplex sequencing”, where strand- cDNA to access disease associated causal variants using speciﬁc unique molecular identiﬁers (UMIs) are used to NGS approaches is a standard study practice in translation ﬁlteroutartefactualDNAdamages.Theduplexsequencing research.However,short-readdataispronetomis-mapping strategy requires high conversion in library preparation to and coverage bias posing many challenges during variant enable sequencing and pairing both strands of the same analysis beyond simple SNPs. We explore the use of long- DNA molecule. reads delivered by SMRT Sequencing for complete char- To achieve high library conversion for low input DNA acterization of a range of genomic variants including samples and to increase sensitivity and PPV, we developed structural variations, haplotype phasing, low-frequency a novel library construction chemistry. The method SNPs, repeat expansions and GC-rich promoter regions. provides superior library conversion efﬁciency using a We have developed ﬂexible multiplexing options as well unique, mutant DNA ligase and sequencing adapters that as analysis pipelines using Circular Consensus Sequencing516 J.delPicchia (CCS) or Long Amplicon Analysis (LAA) tools to support started with amplicon-based sequencing on the Sequel thetargetedSMRTSequencingapplications.CCSgenerates (PacBio).Wesequencedampliconsupto16kb,andlearned a highly accurate (QV30) consensus read from each single that long-read sequencing works well for HLA typing, intra-molecular multi-pass polymerase read. The CCS mtDNA, or long range amplicons designed to avoid pseu- approach is highly reliable for identiﬁcation of minor dogene regions. We also reasoned that small amplicons variantswithallelicfrequenciesaslowas1%.Ontheother (<1kb) can be sequenced accurately on a long-read hand, Long Amplicon Analysis (LAA) derives highly sequencer and started to transfer our amplicon-based accurate consensus reads (>QV50) by de novo clustering workﬂows from the IonTorrent towards the Sequel. Ulti- subreads originating from multiple copies of the targets. mately,weaimtocombinealldifferentworkﬂowsintoone LAAgeneratesphased,full-lengthconsensussequencesfor amplicon-based sequencing run. A LIMS-based automated variousgenesinasinglesequencingrunandismostuseful workﬂow and an automated bioinformatic pipeline thereby for imputation free allele segregation. facilitate streamlined sample processing and data analysis, In this work, we demonstrate SMRT Sequencing work- and assure highest ﬂexibility. We believe that long-read ﬂows for efﬁcient and cost-effective sequencing of a broad amplicon sequencing is a ﬁrst step to make use of the range of clinically relevant targets from 250 bp to >10 kb. advantagesoflongreadsinNGS-baseddiagnostics,thereby Speciﬁcally, we illustrate the advantage of SMRT Sequen- allowingtocombinedifferentsequencingapproachesinone cing to overcome the challenges of traditional methods test. Once the price for (long-read) genomes is at a range when genotyping CYP2D6 and CYP2D7 as well as high acceptable for routine diagnostics, targeted sequencing resolution four ﬁeld HLA typing. approaches will ultimately be replaced by genome S. Ranade: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- sequencing. niﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. L.A. Aro: A. Employment K. Neveling: None. R. Derks: None. M. Kwint: None. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. M. van de Vorst: None. T. Gardeitchik: None. M. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Nelen: None. intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. I. McLaughlin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- P14.051C cant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. C. Heiner: A. Employment (full StandardSangerre-sequencingprotocolsachieve5%limit or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. P. Bayba- of detection for single nucleotide polymorphisms and yan:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Paciﬁc insertion and deletion variants using a novel signal Biosciences. A. Toepfer: A. Employment (full or part- processing algorithm time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. B. Bowman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Bios- H.M.F. Leong1, E.Schreiber1,W.George1, S.Berosik1,J. ciences. R. Hall: A. Employment (full or part-time); Marks2, S.Schneider1 Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. 1thermo ﬁsher scientiﬁc, south san francisco, CA, United P14.050B States, 2thermo ﬁsher scientiﬁc, South san francisco, CA, Long-read sequencing goes clinical United States K. Neveling,R. Derks, M.Kwint, M.van deVorst,T. Introduction: Detecting minor genetic variants is essential Gardeitchik, M.Nelen to cancer and infectious disease management. Many have turned to next generation sequencing for this based on an Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands assumptionthatthelimitofdetectionforSangersequencing is a variant allele frequency (VAF) of 20%. We have Next generation sequencing has revolutionized the ﬁeld of recently developed algorithmic methods to reduce this to human genetics by offering new possibilities to unravel 5% for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and human diseases. Due to limitations of short reads however, insertion/deletion variants (indels). various traditional tests including single gene sequencing, Materials and Methods: Samples with indels spanned MLPA or genescan are still performed, leading to a com- 33 different amplicons from 21 different genes; SNPs plex landscape of different available genetic tests running spanned 22 different amplicons from eight different genes. on a variety of platforms. A generic ‘one test ﬁts all’ Samples were from DNA reference standards, genomic strategywouldbeamoreefﬁcientandcost-effectivewayto DNA, and DNA extracted from formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn- performgenetictesting.Long-readsequencingdoesprovide embedded tissues. DNA was quantiﬁed using the RNase-P anopportunitytomoveastepclosertowardsthisobjective. quantitative polymerase chain reaction assay, and serially Togetafeelforbothplatformandunderlyingchemistrywe diluted. Allelic proportions spanned 0.6125% to 50% forAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 517 SNPsand2.5%to50%forindels.Sampleswereampliﬁed, inpatientswithnormalkaryotype(n=73)whereDNMT3A sequenced, and pre-processed using standard protocols and mutations conferred shorter OS (49 months vs 23 months; tools for Sanger sequencing from Applied BiosystemsTM. P= 0.02). A signiﬁcant difference in OS was observed Results: 121 samples had deletions from 1 to 48 base when two groups: OS of pts with ≥2 mutations was pairs (bp) and 82 samples had insertions from 1 to 6-bp. 25 months vs 49 months; P= 0.003), consistent with what 1130 samples contained 0 to 16 SNP variants. For SNPs, a shown previously. Our experience conﬁrms that the pre- detection sensitivity of95.9%andspeciﬁcityof99.8% was sence of even isolated RUNX1 mutations, although rare, observed at 5% VAF. For indel detection, there were zero identify patients with shortersurvival.Patients withnormal falsepositivesandzerofalsenegativesdownto2.5%VAF. karyotypewhencarryingDNMT3Amutationsor>2somatic For indel characterization accuracy, type was 100%, length mutations have a signiﬁcantly shorter survival than pre- 100%, location 93%, sequence 93%, and VAF 92% within dictedbyIPSS-R.Ourobservations,althoughcarriedoutin 3% of the expected value. a limited group of cases, strongly conﬁrm the prognostic Conclusions: With new algorithms to process data from importanceofmutations,andsupporttheimplementationof Sanger sequencing, it is possible to reliably and auto- NGS analysis of somatic mutation, especially for MDS matically detect 5% minor variants. patients without cytogenetic abnormalities. H.M.F. Leong: A. Employment (full or part-time); S. Palchetti: None. A. Valencia: None. S. Bonifacio: Signiﬁcant; thermo ﬁsher scientiﬁc. E. Schreiber: A. None. L. Falai: None. D. Parrini: None. M. Betti: None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; thermo ﬁsher B. Boschi: None. B. Minuti: None. E. Contini: None. E. scientiﬁc. W. George: A. Employment (full or part-time); Masala: None. V. Santini: None. E. Pelo: None. Signiﬁcant;thermoﬁsherscientiﬁc.S.Berosik:A.Employ- ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;thermoﬁsherscientiﬁc. P14.053A J. Marks: None. S. Schneider: A. Employment (full or A versatile and highly sensitive method for microRNA part-time); Signiﬁcant; thermo ﬁsher scientiﬁc. detection with real-time TaqMan® assays P14.052D L. Wong,C. Liu, F. Hu,S. Dong Targeted sequencing analysis of commonly mutated genes in myelodysplastic syndromes using NGS: Impact and Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, South San Francisco, CA, United clinical implications in a single center States S.Palchetti1,A.Valencia2,S.Bonifacio3,L.Falai3,D.Parrini3, MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding M.Betti3,B. Boschi3,B.Minuti3,E. Contini3,E.Masala2,V. RNAs of approximately 22 nucleotides transcribed from Santini2,E. Pelo3 genomes of plants, animals, and viruses. They are highly conserved and are thought to be micro-managers of gene 1AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Medicina regulation, controlling at least one-third of human genes, SperimentaleeClinica,UniversitàdeglistudidiFirenze,AOU thereforehavingaprofoundimpactonalmosteverycellular Careggi, Florence, Italy, 3SOD Diagnostica Genetica, AOU pathway. Publications showing the diverse function of Careggi, Florence, Italy miRNAs have continued to increase signiﬁcantly: miRNAs are involved in the developmental stages of cells, natural The pathogenetic role of mutations in myelodysplastic cell death, andmajor diseasessuchascancer, diabetes,and syndromes (MDS) is presently investigated, and important cholesterolbiosynthesis.MiRNAshavealsobeenshownto clinical implications of these mutations are apparent. Clin- beimportantbiomarkers.ExpressionofmiRNAsisthekey ical guidelines suggest including mutation evaluation in step to understanding their diverse functions. We have current practice. We sequenced a panel of 22 genes using developed a method for the detection and quantiﬁcation of Haloplex system and the Miseq platform to assess the miRNAsthat ishighly speciﬁc and sensitive.By extending mutational landscape of MDS patients. We evaluated the miRNAs on both the 5’ and 3’ ends via single strand 98 sequential MDS patients diagnosed in our center. At ligation and poly A tailing with universal reverse tran- least one genomic alteration was observed in 89% of scription, respectively, we were able to incorporate 1) patients. The most frequently mutated genes were TET2 unbiased pre-ampliﬁcation utilizing the universal adaptor (26%), SF3B1 (24%), DNMT3A (22%), SRSF2 (21%), sequences and 2) ﬂexible assay design to provide the most ASXL1 (21%), RUNX1 (9%), and TP53 (7%). The uni- optimalandversatilemiRNAdetection.Theuniversalityof variate analysis showed that only RUNX1 mutations were the template library from the upstream chemistry allows associatedwithashorterOS(49months(WT)vs12months downstream real-time TaqMan qPCR miRNA-speciﬁc (mut);P=0.001).Wealsoanalysedtheimpactofmutations detection requiring only 1 to 10 ng of input sample. This518 J.delPicchia versatile approach allows detection of a large number of (37%) no reason for the ‘de novo’ MMS in the affected miRNAs for proﬁling or detection of a smaller set of index patient could be found. miRNAs for screening and validation using the same uni- T.Liehr:None.I.Schreyer:None.A.Kuechler:None. versal cDNA template. Data for differential expression E. Manolakos: None. S. Singer: None. A. Dufke: None. between normal brain tissue and the various cancer cell lines will be presented. P14.055C L.Wong:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Detection of 17 targets in a single PCR tube by a novel Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. C. Liu: A. Employment (full or probe system combining melting curves and Taqman part-time);Signiﬁcant;ThermoFisherScientiﬁc.F.Hu:A. probes Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. S. Dong: A. Employment (full or part-time); S. M.Echwald Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Anapa Biotech A/S, Hoersholm, Denmark P14.054B Parental origin of deletions and duplications; about the Inmanyclinicalsettings,achievingmultiplexanswersfrom necessity to check for cryptic inversions the same sample provide beneﬁts both in terms of cost, speed, added clinical value as well as preservation of lim- T. Liehr1,I.Schreyer1,2,A. Kuechler3,E. Manolakos4,S. ited samples. In cases such as cancer susceptibility testing, Singer5,A. Dufke5 sepsis, RSV-testing, gastrointestinal testing and many oth- ers, a broad spectrum of targets are relevant for testing. 1Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, However, PCR readout is commonly limited to the current InstituteofHumanGenetics,Jena,Germany,2JenaUniversity maximum of 4-5 ﬂuorophores on most instruments. We Hospital, Center for Ambulant Medicine, Jena, Germany, havedevelopedahomogenousassaymethodtoallowread- 3Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Humangenetik, Jena, out of more than 20 answers from a single PCR reaction. Germany, 4Access to Genome, ATG Labs, Athens, Greece, Methods:Themethodutilizesasystemoftarget-speciﬁc 5Institut für Medizinische Genetik und angewandte Genomik, labelled probes allowing each to be read outby subsequent Tübingen, Germany melting curve analysis, allowing more than 5 probes per ﬂuorophore channel, thereby greatly increasing the level of Copy number variants (CNVs) are the genetic bases for multiplexing achievable. By utilizing meltcurve readout of microdeletion/microduplication syndromes (MMSs). Cou- modiﬁed probes - one for each target - rather than only of ples with an affected child and desire to have further chil- the PCR amplicons, the system also adds an extra level of dren are tested for a potential parental origin of the CNV speciﬁcity to meltcurve analysis. routinely either by molecular karyotyping or two color Result: To test the system, we designed probes based on ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), yet. In the latter previously designed TaqMan probes targeting 17 different case a critical region probe (CRP) is combined with a hemorrhagic fever viruses and tested them against artiﬁcial control probe for identiﬁcation of the involved chromo- DNA targets. Testing was perfomed in single wells some. However, CNVs can also appear due to other rea- containing all probes labeled with different ﬂourophors sons, like a recombination of a submicroscopic, cryptic and was able to separately detect all 17 targets. PCR was inversion in one of the parents. 74 patients with different performed on a Bio-Rad CFX instrument, a MIC PCR MMSs and overall 81 CNVs were studied here by a novel cycler as well as the Agilent AriaMX. three color FISH. The way how three locus-speciﬁc probes Conclusions: The method comprise a robust, high- are selected (one in the CRP and two ﬂanking it in a dis- multiplex, homogeneous system to provide 20+ readouts tanceof5-10Mb)enablestodetectorexcludetwopossible per PCR reaction on most PCR platforms in use in current parental conditions as origins of the CNV in the index: (i) clinical diagnostics direct parental origin of the CNV (deletion or duplication) S.M. Echwald: A. Employment (full or part-time); or (ii) a parental cryptic inversion. Thus, for overall 51/81 Signiﬁcant; Anapa Biotech A/S. CNVs (63%) a parental origin could be determined. 36/51 (70.5%)inheritedtheCNVdirectlyfromoneoftheparents, P14.056D but 15/51 (29.5%) were due to a detectable parental inver- Illuminizing the AmpliSeqTM Assay sion by three color FISH. A 2:1 ratio of maternal versus paternal inheritance was found. The new, here suggested T. Singer, P.Capek,E. S. Allen,T. Ghosh, P.Taylor, S. B. three color FISH approach increased the detection rate for Greene, K.Bojanovic Machado,M.Chu,Y. Sun,S. Lee,G.J. parentaloriginin this study by140%. Still, for 30/81 casesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 519 Bean,I.Khrebtukova,J.Bruand,D.M.Agius,R.M.Kelley,G. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Illumina is P. Schroth employer. D.M. Agius: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Illumina is employer. R.M. Kelley: A. Employ- Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, United States ment(fullorpart-time);Modest;Illuminaisemployer.G.P. Schroth: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; A challenge for any multiplex PCR assay is combining Illumina is employer. manyampliconsinonereactionandachievinghightarget speciﬁcity. AmpliSeqTM biochemistry is the industry P14.057A leading assay that allows for efﬁcient ampliﬁcation of a Improved indices for high ﬁdelity de-multiplexing on high number of amplicons, enabling high speciﬁcity and Illumina instruments uniformityofcoverageacrossawiderangeoftargets.We modiﬁedtheAmpliSeqTMlibrarypreparationworkﬂowso L.Kurihara,J.RoseFigura,S.Sandhu,B.Lahann,J.Irish,V. that the resulting amplicon libraries are amenable to Makarov sequencing on Illumina platforms. We designed speciﬁc dual index adapter sequences to ensure optimal perfor- Swift Biosciences, Ann Arbor, MI, United States mance and demultiplexing on Illumina® sequencing sys- tems (MiSeq™, MiniSeq™, NextSeq™, iSeq™, Demand for improved indexing capabilities has increased HiSeq™) and to allow pooling of up to 96 samples into due to higher sequencing output, increased multiplexing to one sequencing run. We tested multiple cancer speciﬁc lower cost, and to avoid misassignment of reads from DNA panels as well as the Exome panel with this new indexing errors. Sequencing reads may be misassigned due workﬂow and investigated sequencing performance, as to “index hopping” on Illumina patterned ﬂow cells. This well as somatic and germline variant detection sensitivity misassignment can lead to false positives in ultra-sensitive and speciﬁcity on a wide variety of samples, including variant detection, which is detrimental to analysis of liquid formalin-treated and degraded FFPE tissue samples. Fur- biopsyresultsanddetectionoflowfrequency(<1%)alleles. ther, we assessed detection of known gene fusions and It is also necessary to eliminate errors associated with evaluated gene expression measurements with RNA- insufﬁcient edit distances between index sequences. We speciﬁc panels. Custom panels were designed and tested have observed misassignment due to insufﬁcient edit dis- over a wide range of amplicons. We observed high uni- tanceamongIlluminaTruSeqHTindicesatafrequencyup formity of coverage for all panels tested with high cor- to 1.5%. Therefore, we developed 96 single (i7) 8 base relation between Illumina’s sequencing platforms. Single indices,whichcanbepairedwiththeTruSeqHTi5indices nucleotide variants (SNVs) were reliably detected at 5% to achieve 768-plex high throughput dual combinations. and down to 1%, even in very degraded FFPE samples Theseindiceswerevalidatedusinganovelmethodonboth with only 10 ng DNA input. Detection of CNVs was Illumina’s 2 and 4-channel technologies. This method demonstrated with the Comprehensive v3 and Focus involved the use of 96 libraries with unique, non- panels. We assessed variant call sensitivity and false overlapping inserts to facilitate tracking of index mis- positive rate in Platinum genome NA12878 and results assignment.Thisallowedustoassessnotonlywhichindex will be discussed. has misassigned library molecules, but to also pinpoint the T. Singer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; origin and rate of misassignment. With our 96 i7 indices, Illumina is employer. P. Capek: A. Employment (full or misassignment was observed at rates <0.1%. For even part-time); Modest; Illumina is employer. E.S. Allen: A. higher ﬁdelity de-multiplexing, we have paired our 96 Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Illumina is indicesassingle useinboth thei5andi7positions,known employer. T. Ghosh: A. Employment (full or part-time); as Unique Dual Indices (UDIs). We are validating the 96 Modest; Illumina is employer. P. Taylor: None. S.B. new indices as UDIs for avoidance of index hopping, and Greene: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; foreliminatingPCR-inducedchimerismduringmultiplexed Illuminaisemployer.K.BojanovicMachado:A.Employ- library ampliﬁcation performed during hybridization cap- ment (full or part-time); Modest; Illumina is employer. M. ture workﬂows. Chu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Illumina L. Kurihara: A. Employment (full or part-time); is employer. Y. Sun: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant;Swift Biosciences. J.RoseFigura:A.Employ- Modest;Illuminaisemployer.S.Lee:A.Employment(full ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. S. orpart-time); Modest; Illuminaisemployer. G.J. Bean:A. Sandhu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Illumina is Swift Biosciences. B. Lahann: A. Employment (full or employer. I. Khrebtukova: A. Employment (full or part- part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. J. Irish: A. time); Modest; Illumina is employer. J. Bruand: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift520 J.delPicchia Biosciences. V. Makarov: A. Employment (full or part- 1University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2Oslo University Hospital, time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. Oslo, Norway P14.058B Introduction: The identiﬁcation of a causative mutation in CFTR Mutation detection from newborn dry blood spots hereditary connective tissue disorders (HCTD) enables by using NGS technology correct follow-up and treatment of patients and relatives. Compared to conventional methods, next generation F. Gerundino1,B.Minuti1,C. Centrone1,C. Pescucci1,M. sequencing (NGS) is expected to increase the rate of Trafeli1,F. Buchi1,P. Santelli1, M.Cavicchi2 molecular ﬁndings. The pretest likelihood of ﬁndings may depend on the clinical indication as well as on the requisi- 1SOD Diagnostica Genetica, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy, tioning physician. 2CentroRegionalediRiferimentoFibrosiCistica,AOUMeyer, MaterialsandMethods:Resultsfrom100exome-based Florence, Italy analysesusingapanelof34HCTDgeneswerecomparedto information in medical records and requisition forms. Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common life threatening Results: In 51 % of patients, Sanger sequencing of autosomal recessive disease in Caucasian population and selected genes had previously been performed. Gene panel it is caused by mutations in the Cystic Fibrosis Trans- analysis identiﬁed a clinically relevant and likely patho- membrane Regulator (CFTR) gene. Since an early diag- genic sequence variant in 18 % and a relevant, unclassiﬁed nosis is known to improve the outcome of CF patients, a variant (VUS) in 10 % of samples. newborn screening (NBS) has been implemented in many A likely pathogenic variant or VUS was identiﬁed in 28 countries with different strategies. In Tuscany, molecular (82.4%) of genes in the panel. Likely pathogenic variants analysis of selected CFTR variants has been introduced were identiﬁed in nine genes (26.5%), especially genes into NBS since 2011 for those newborns with an elevate associated with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, all were requested immunoreactivetrypsinogen(IRT)concentrationondried from a university hospital. Requisitions indicating cardio- blood spots (DBSs). To improve the screening procedure, vascular symptoms were associated with higher rate of aNextGenerationSequencing(NGS)assayabletodetect pathogenic ﬁndings than other requisitions (19.6 % vs 6.8 a panel of 276 CF-causing variants, according to CFTR2 %). Certain clinical symptoms were frequently noted in project, has been introduced. The aforementioned NGS medical records but infrequently in requisitions. approach has proven to be a reliable and fast method for Interpretation: Many relevant and likely pathogenic the identiﬁcation of the CFTR variants on DNA from sequence variants were identiﬁed, however in HCTD the DBS. So far, 180 samples have been analyzed: 155 cases ﬁndings of VUS remains a signiﬁcant challenge. A multi- were negative, one variant has been detected in 22 cases gene panel as ﬁrst tier test would reduce costs compared to whereas two variants have been identiﬁed in 3 cases. Sanger sequencing preceding analysis. The likelihood of Among the identiﬁed variants, one would not have been identifying a pathogenic sequence variant depended on the detected bythe previously used panel. The opportunity to requisitioning instance and indication for analysis. test a larger number of variants could increase the chance M.K. Pope: None. H.M. Johnsen: None. K.B. Rypdal: toidentifytwoCF-causingvariantsimprovingtheclinical None. Y. Sejersted: None. B. Paus: None. management of newborns. Furthermore, according to clinical indications, the re-analysis of NGS data con- P14.060D cerning the whole gene sequence could be performed Implementationofanewautomatedsamplequalitycontrol improving turnaround time and reducing time-consuming tool in a whole exome sequencing workﬂow procedures. F. Gerundino: None. B. Minuti: None. C. Centrone: R. Nitsche1,E. Viering1,J.Petersen2,M.Beckhaus2,S. Wolf2 None. C. Pescucci: None. M. Trafeli: None. F. Buchi: None. P. Santelli: None. M. Cavicchi: None. 1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility, High Throughput P14.059C Sequencing Unit, Heidelberg, Germany Application of next generation sequencing in the diagnosis of hereditary connective tissue disorders Objectives: The High Throughput Sequencing Unit of the DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility provides M.K. Pope1,H.M. Johnsen2,K. B. Rypdal1,Y. Sejersted2, B. general sequencing services. This project demonstrates the Paus2,1 use of an automated electrophoresis system as a quality control (QC) tool in a whole exome sequencing workﬂow.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 521 Mandatory for the experimental success of whole exome isuseofhybridisation-basedapproachessuchasSureSelect sequencing is the quality of the incoming genomic DNA enrichment protocol (Agilent). (gDNA)materialandtheDNAsamplesatvariousstagesof Materials and Methods: Two separate panels were the library preparation workﬂow. adopted, optimised and tested as a proof-of-concept: Methodology: Exome libraries were prepared according ClearSeq Comprehensive Cancer (4 samples) and a custom totheAgilentLowInputSure-SelectXTHumanAllExonv5 SureSelectpaneldesignedfordiagnosticsofsyndromicand protocol from FFPE tumor tissue samples. To ensure non-syndromic forms of craniosynostoses (14 samples). success quality control was veriﬁed with an Agilent 4200 The Next Generation Sequencing was performed using TapeStation system of the received gDNA samples and IonTorrent S5 platform. during the library preparation. Results: The following quality control parameters were Results: Intermediate QC steps were taken throughout achievedforbothpanels:coverage-97%,ontarget–74%, the protocol to monitor library preparation for sequencing, mean depth – 274, ISP loading – 80%, 97% aligned such as evaluation of DNA after fragmentation, analysis of speciﬁcally. Bioinformatic analysis was performed on the adapter-ligatedandampliﬁedDNA,andlastly,qualiﬁcation Ion Reporter™ Software and variants were classiﬁed based of the ﬁnal library. The initial QC of incoming gDNA was on the results obtained from several predictors (e.g. determined based on the DNA integrity number (DIN). All PolyPhen-2, SIFT, Mutation Taster, CADD). Previously samples had a low DNA integrity, what is usual for DNA known mutations were detected across both panels, extracted from FPPE material. conﬁrming their effective performance. Conclusions:QualitycontrolisanimportantpartofNGS Conclusions: Hybridisation-based enrichment is recog- workﬂows, library preparation protocols recommend quan- nizedasavalidalternativeforampliﬁcation-basedpanelsin tiﬁcation and qualiﬁcation of the DNA samples at various diagnosis of complex disorders. Further optimisation of stages.Theincreasingsamplethroughputcreatesaneedfor cost-effectiveness ratio should increase the viability of the automation especially in a core facility where many approach and allow for better parallelisation of sequencing precious samples are proceeded with time pressure. The multiplesamples.Presentedresultsclearlyindicatethatitis implementation of the automated electrophoresis system possible to adopt hybridisation-based approaches such as enabled to increase the efﬁciency of the workﬂow and SureSelectenrichmentprotocol (Agilent) ontheIonTorrent ensure good sequencing results. S5 platform, what signiﬁcantly widens the options for R. Nitsche: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- semiconductor based sequencing of clinical samples. niﬁcant;AgilentTechnologies.E.Viering:A.Employment D. Popiel: None. A. Dawidziuk: None. G. Koczyk: (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Agilent Technologies. J. None. B. Wojciechowicz: A. Employment (full or part- Petersen: None. M. Beckhaus: None. S. Wolf: None. time); Modest; Perlan Technologies. M. Socha: None. E. Olech: None. A. Sowińska-Seidler: None. A. P14.061A Jamsheer: None. Adopting hybridisation-based enrichment in molecular diagnostics of complex disorders via next-generation ion P14.062B semiconductor sequencing Optimization of a next generation sequencing innovative protocol for the accurate detection of punctual mutations D.Popiel1,A. Dawidziuk1,G.Koczyk1,2,B. Wojciechowicz3, M. and copy number variants in children with intellectual Socha4,E. Olech4,1, A.Sowińska-Seidler4,A. Jamsheer4,1 disability and obesity 1Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, Poland, M.Derhourhi 2InstituteofPlantGeneticsofthePolishAcademyofSciences, Poznań, Poland, 3Perlan Technologies, Poznań, Poland, UMR8199 - EGID, Lille, France 4Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland Introduction: Whole-exome sequencing has considerably beneﬁtedthemoleculardiagnosisofpatientswithsuspected Introduction: In current paradigm of next-generation Mendeliandisorders,butitspoorabilitytoaccuratelydetect sequencing, the ease of use and hands-on time in labora- copy number variations (CNVs) remains a major limitation tory settings are the main factors in adopting IonTorrent for sensitive genetic screening. We developed a next- semiconductor-based sequencing platform. The enrichment generation sequencing strategy (CoDE-seq) enabling the strategies for diagnostic panels are ampliﬁcation-based accuratedetectionofbothCNVsandpunctualmutationsin (AmpliSeq), which creates a potential for pseudogene one step, and assessed CoDE-seq for the molecular diag- interference or compositional biases. An alternative choice nosis of intellectual disability and obesity.522 J.delPicchia Methods: CoDE-seq is based on an augmented whole- 1 195 387 for MCF7/M and 1 376 487 for MCF7/T. The exome sequencing protocol, with probes distributed uni- software automatically performed a ﬁltering of the frag- formly throughout the genome in addition to exome. This ments obtained on quality, adapter trimming and mapping new method was validated in 40 patients for whom of the fragments obtained according to reference genome chromosomal DNA microarray was available. Subse- hg19.Genevariantswithstatisticalsigniﬁcance(p=1.0E- quently, CNVs and punctual mutations were assessed in 4) were selected by manual software. 82 children or young adults with suspected monogenic The NGS sequencing of PIK3CA, ALK, EGFR, EGFR- obesity and/or intellectual disability, and their available AS1, ERBB2, ESR1 genes has revealed identical genetic parents. aberrations - mutations in the cell lines (Table 1). The Results: CoDE-seq not only detected all CNVs (n=97) presence of PIK3CA mutation (c.1633G>A) may be identiﬁedbychromosomalDNAmicroarraysbutalsofound associated to tamoxifen and metformin resistance in both 84 additional CNVs, due to a better resolution. When sublines and parental line. compared to CoDE-seq and chromosomal DNA micro- Table 1. Concordance of mutational status in cell lines arrays, whole-exome sequencing failed to detect 37% and MCF7, MCF7/M, MCF7/T. 14% of CNVs, respectively. In the 82 patients with Gene MCF7 MCF7/М MCF7/Т suspected Mendelian obesity and/or intellectual disability, a likely molecular diagnosis was achieved in more than PIK3CA c.1633G>A c.1633G>A c.1633G>A Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: 30% of the patients. Half of the genetic diagnoses were 66%(of17311 67%(of12976 65%(of11224 explained by pathogenic CNVs while the other half by reads) reads) reads) pathogenic punctual mutations. ALK c.2535T>C c.2535T>C c.2535T>C Conclusions: CoDE-seq has proven cost-efﬁcient for the Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: accurate detection of CNVs and punctual mutations. It 100%(of8773 100%(of2210 100%(of3463 reads) reads) reads) avoids the sequential genetic screening approaches cur- rently used in clinical practice, and is highly effective for EGFR c.474C>T c.474C>T c.474C>T Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: the molecular diagnosis of intellectual disability and 99%(of1121 99%(of2520 99%(of2606 obesity. reads) reads) reads) M. Derhourhi: None. EGFR, c.2361G>A c.2361G>A c.2361G>A EGFR- Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: P14.063C AS1 99%(of1365 100%(of1489 99%(of2174 reads) reads) reads) The study of mutational status of estrogen-dependent EGFR c.2982C>T c.2982C>T c.2982C>T MCF-7 breast cancer cells Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: 51%(of4994 41%(of2128 47%(of1581 V. Safronova,D.Golovina,S. Semina,A. Scherbakov, M. reads) reads) reads) Gudkova, M.Krasil’nikov, L.Lyubchenko ERBB2 c.1963A>G c.1963A>G c.1963A>G Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: 100%(of3402 100%(of2800 100%(of2231 FSBI «N.N. Blokhin national medical research centre of reads) reads) reads) oncology», Moscow, Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian ERBB2 c.3508C>G c.3508C>G c.3508C>G Federation Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: 99%(of1188 99%(of1076 99%(of2903 The experiments were performed on in vitro cultured reads) reads) reads) estrogen-dependent MCF-7 breast cancer cells and MCF-7 ESR1 c.30T>C c.30T>C c.30T>C sublines resistant to antiestrogen tamoxifen and/or metfor- Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: 50%(of941 53%(of735 46%(of625 min-MCF-7/TandMCF-7/M.Nextgenerationsequencing reads) reads) reads) (NGS) using commerсial panel for gene targeted enrich- ESR1 c.1782G>A c.1782G>A c.1782G>A ment - Gene Reader Actionable Insights Tumor Panel Allelefraction: Allelefraction: Allelefraction: (GRTP - 101X)- was performed on the platform QCI 53%(of23574 51%(of8793 53%(of6958 Analyser version 1.1. For reliable evaluation of gene reads) reads) reads) mutations 1.5% of tumor cells in the sample are enough. DNA libraries under study were normalized by concentra- tion followedby pooling.The qualityofthereads obtained V. Safronova: None. D. Golovina: None. S. Semina: aftersequencingwashigherthanQ25formorethan70%of B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or studied DNA samples. The numbers of the reads for DNA consultant and pending grants as well as grants already samples analyzed after ﬁltering were 1 490 465 for MCF7, received);Modest;RussianScienceFoundation,grant14-Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 523 15-00362, and Russian Foundation for Basic Research, genetic variants detected due to misleading reads and to grant 16-04-00347. A. Scherbakov: B. Research Grant detect new ones that were not previously detected due to a (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and seemingly low allele frequency. Thus we can increase the pending grants as well as grants already received); quality of interpretation of the NGS data, which is Modest; Russian Science Foundation, grant 14-15- especially important for DNA diagnostics. 00362, and Russian Foundation for Basic Research, grant K. Karandasheva: None. A. Tanas: None. V. 16-04-00347. M. Gudkova: B.Research Grant(principal Strelnikov: None. investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrants as well as grants already received); Modest; Russian P14.065A Science Foundation, grant 14-15-00362, and Russian Improvement of the molecular diagnostics in disease genes Foundation for Basic Research, grant 16-04-00347. M. by detection of genomic deletions/insertions including Krasil’nikov: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, pathogenic mosaic and promoter variants from NGS data collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Russian Science K. Mayer,M. Ziegler,D.Becker,J. Schiller,H.Klein Foundation, grant 14-15-00362, and Russian Foundation for Basic Research, grant 16-04-00347. L. Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics Lyubchenko: None. (AHC), Martinsried, Germany P14.064D NGS in a clinical diagnostic setting evolved routine testing Exclusion of unreliably mapped reads from the results of for many genetic diseases. The identiﬁcation of single Ion AmpliSeq targeted NGS nucleotide polymorphisms (SNVs) and small insertions/ deletions (InDels) in protein coding regions is straight K. Karandasheva1,A.Tanas1,2,V.Strelnikov1,2 ahead. However, reliable detection of larger genomic dele- tions and insertions from NGS enrichment data remains 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian sophisticated, especially for those presenting as mosaicism Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical and/or are located in regulatory regions. As structural var- University, Moscow, Russian Federation iations (SVs) may vary signiﬁcantly in size, their detection from short reads and distinction from NGS errors is chal- Introduction: The use of the NGS is fraught with errors: lenging.SomaticmosaicismalsopresentinleukocyteDNA not all of the identiﬁed genetic variants are true and can be is underestimated. NGS methods have the capacity to conﬁrmedbyalternativemethods.Incorrectlymappedreads identify pathogenicmosaicvariants,providinginsights into are among the causes of NGS analysis errors. We believe their spectrum and underlining their importance for clinical that using Ion AmpliSeq Targeted Sequencing Technology molecular diagnosis. For a cohort of 400 patients with enables to eliminate unreliably mapped reads algor- connective tissue diseases (290 cases, 34 genes) and neu- ithmically utilizing additional information about the geno- rocutaneous syndromes (50 cases, NF1/SPRED1 gene; 60 mic coordinates of targeted regions and primers used for cases, TSC1/2 gene) the coding and to some extend the ampliﬁcation.Thusalignmentsthatdonotcorrespondtothe promotor regions were enriched in a custom design and experiment design can be excluded from the downstream analyzed by NGS (Agilent Sure Select QXT, Illumina analysis. NextSeq500). For the detection of SVs emerging as copy MaterialsandMethods:WehaveanalyzedNGSdataof number variations (CNVs) affecting at least one target the 30patients(lymphocytesDNAhasbeenusedtoprepareIon analysis combined the application of ExomeDepth, CoN- AmpliSeq Comprehensive Cancer Panel libraries) and VaDINGandXHMM.Theintersectionofatleasttwotools compared variant calling results based on the initial set of ishighlysensitiveforheterozygousandhomozygousCNVs reads and on the revised set obtained by excluding whereas pooled results of all tools indicate SVs present as unreliable reads. mosaics.PreliminaryresultsidentiﬁedSVsrepresentingone Results:Weidentiﬁedseveralgroupsofgeneticvariants: heterozygous COL3A1 deletion and one heterozygous (1) observed in both sets, 6072 variants; (2) detected TGFB3 duplication. Moreover, three SVs suspected to exclusively in the original data, 127 (systematic, false imply mosaics comprise one COL5A1 two exon duplica- positive); detected in the revised data only, 63 (false tion, one complete FLNA gene deletion and one TSC2 negative, previously undetectable). promoter deletion. Conclusions: We conclude, that the use of additional K. Mayer: None. M. Ziegler: None. D. Becker: None. informationaboutthedesignedstartandendofthetargeted J. Schiller: None. H. Klein: None. regions allows to reduce the number of false-positive524 J.delPicchia P14.066B 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Rapid WES as a routine diagnostic test for children from Hospital Brugmann, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, the neonatal intensive care unit Belgium, 2Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequencing Solutions Inc., San Jose, CA, United States M.van Slegtenhorst,M. Wilke,H.T. Brüggenwirth, J.N.R. Kromosoeto, F.Sleutels, W.G.deValk, Y.van Bever,A. S. Objectives: Loss of a fetus in a multiple pregnancy is Brooks,G.M.S.Mancini,M.W.Wessels,M.Joosten,R.J.H. recognizedtobeacomplicatingfactorwhenusingmaternal Galjaard, L. H.Hoefsloot plasma for aneuploidy screening. Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from a non-viable embryo or fetus is released into the Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, maternal bloodstream and may lead to an increased chance Netherlands of a discordant NIPT result; however, the nature of this biological process is not well understood. The objective of Whole exome sequencing (WES) has proven to be a suc- thisstudyistoobservechangesinfetalcfDNAovertimein cessful approach for solving a wide range of genetic dis- pregnancies with one non-viable twin. orders.Wehaveofferedthistestsince2014onalargescale Methods: We present a cohort of four patients with in a diagnostic setting for various indications. Some of the euploid twin pregnancies in which fetal reduction was limitingstepsinthediagnosticsettingarethehighcostsand performed. Maternal blood was obtained prior to the a turnaround time of approximately 4 months, resulting in procedure and at sequential time points. cfDNA was non-optimalclinicalmanagement,especiallyforchildrenin isolated from maternal plasma and polymorphic DANSR theneonatalintensivecareunit(NICU).Inthepastyearwe assays were used to determine the fetal fraction in each have set up a workﬂow for rapid WES testing in children sample. from the NICU in Sophia Children’s hospital. Initially, we Results:Fetalfractionwasobservedtodecreasebetween included 9 children with different indications to optimize time points in all cases but no consistent pattern was the workﬂow. The samples consisted of 3 trios, 1 duo and observed.Incontrasttotheaverageincreaseinfetalfraction 5 single patients. Although different analysis pipelines had over time previously reported in singleton pregnancies, no to be used, in 4 out of 9 cases we found the explanatory patient had a higher fetal fraction at the end of the series pathogenic mutation. The turnaround time was relatively than the start, likely reﬂecting the loss of contributory fetal high (average 8 weeks), but workﬂow adjustments fraction from the co-twin. decreased this to 4 weeks maximum. In the past 3 months Conclusions: In this small cohort, the fetal fraction of weperformedtrioWESon7childrenfromtheNICU,using cfDNA dropped in the weeks following fetal reduction. one uniform workﬂow with a multiple congenital anomaly Because a similar pattern may occur in pregnancies panel of 2764 genes. When requested, we expanded the complicated by a spontaneous fetal reduction, a larger analysistofullexome.Onecertaindiagnosiswasmadeand study, in terms of number of pregnancies followed and atleast3fullexomeanalysesprovidedpromisingcandidate measurements per pregnancy, may provide additional data genes. All reports were completed within 3 weeks. In to more comprehensively describe these patterns. conclusion, fast WES analysis for NICU children helps to E. Bevilacqua: None. J.C. Jani: B. Research Grant establish an early deﬁnitive diagnosis. This experience will (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and help us to implement a comparable workﬂow for prenatal pending grants as well as grants already received); testing later this year. Signiﬁcant; Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequencing M. van Slegtenhorst: None. M. Wilke: None. H.T. Solutions Inc. L.H. Kunz: A. Employment (full or part- Brüggenwirth: None. J.N.R. Kromosoeto: None. F. time); Signiﬁcant; Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequen- Sleutels: None. W.G. de Valk: None. Y. van Bever: cingSolutionsInc.V.Valmeekam:A.Employment(fullor None. A.S. Brooks: None. G.M.S. Mancini: None. M.W. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Wessels: None. M. Joosten: None. R.J.H. Galjaard: Sequencing Solutions Inc. M. Holstrom: A. Employment None. L.H. Hoefsloot: None. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Ariosa Diagnostics Inc., Roche Sequencing Solutions Inc. E. Wang: A. Employ- P14.067C ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Ariosa Diagnostics Fetal fraction following selective reduction in twin Inc., Roche Sequencing Solutions Inc. M. Schmid: None. pregnancies P14.068D E. Bevilacqua1,J. C.Jani1,L. H.Kunz2,V. Valmeekam2,M. Validation of gene causality for neurological disorders by Holstrom2,E. Wang2, M.Schmid2 WES/WGS analyses in a diagnostic settingAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 525 A. M.Bertoli Avella1, Z.Yüksel1,H.Yavuz1, C.Baldi1,A. storedinourdatabase(CentoMD®)weaimedtovalidatethe Marais1,J. M.Garcia-Aznar1,N.M.Grüning1,L. Abbasi role of newly identiﬁed genes as causative for a speciﬁc Moheb1,O.Paknia1,K. K. Kandaswamy1, M.Werber1,M. disorder. Weiss1,G.E. Oprea1,F. Al-Hakami2,3, N.Alshaikh3,4,S. Results: Based on application of an ad-hoc bioinfor- Alameer3,5,A. Shawli3,M.J.Maraﬁ6,A. A. Elmonairy6, F.Al- matics pipeline, Sanger conﬁrmation and evaluation of Mulla7,W.Al-Twaijri8,K.Al-Thihli9,A.M.AlShamsi10,H.A. clinical information, we have identiﬁed bi-allelic causative Abdelrahman11,L.Al-Gazali12,A.Shukla13,K.M.Girisha13,M. variants for: 1) GTPBP2 related to a neurodevelopmental Garshasbi14, Y.Housawi15,F.Al Mutairi8, N.Al-Sannaa16,M. phenotype with severe, early onset motor and cognitive Alfadhel8,O.Brandau1,A. Rolfs1,17, P.Bauer1 impairment, 2) NUDT2 causing a hypotonia- neurodevelopmental disorder, 3) NKX6-2 related to spastic 1CENTOGENE AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Molecular Medicine ataxiawithhypomyelinatingleukodystrophyand4)ACER3 Section, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of National related to early onset, progressive leukodystrophy. Guard Health Affairs, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 3King Saud Bin Conclusions: We conﬁrmed the pathogenicity of bi- AbdulazizUniversityForHealthSciences,MinistryofNational allelicGTPBP2,NUDT2,NKX6-2andACER3variantsand Guard Health Affairs, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 4Pediatric broaden the related phenotypic spectra. Therefore, these Neurology Section, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Ministry of genesshouldbeaddedtothegrowinglistofcausativegenes National Guard Health Affairs, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, for hereditary neurodevelopmental disorders to be consid- 5Department of Pediatrics, King Abdulaziz Medical City, ered during molecular diagnosis. Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 6Kuwait Medical Genetics Centre, Kuwait, Kuwait, #families #patients #disease 7Genatak Center for Genomic Medicine, Kuwait, Kuwait, cvaaurisainntgs 8King Abdullah International Medical Research Centre, King gene ﬁrst Previously Centogene Previously Centogene Previously Centogene Extension association published data published data published data of Saud bin Abdulaziz Uiversity for Health Sciences, Neurology with phenotype monogenic Division, Department of Pediatrics, King Abdulaziz Medical disease City, Ministry of National Guard Health Affairs (NGHA), GTPBP2 2016 1 5 3 5 1 5 yes Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 9Department of Genetics, Sultan NUDT2 2017 1 3 2 5 1 1 yes Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman, 10Department of NKX6-2 2016 7 8 15 12 7 4 yes ACER3 2016 1 2 2 2 1 2 yes Paediatrics, Tawam Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, Total 2016-2017 10 18 22 24 10 12 forevery 11Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Health gene Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 12Department of Pediatrics, College of A.M. Bertoli Avella: A. Employment (full or part-time); Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates Modest; Centogene. Z. Yüksel: A. Employment (full or University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 13Department of part-time);Modest;CentogeneAG.H.Yavuz:A.Employ- Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal ment (full or part-time); Modest; Centogene AG. C. Baldi: University,Manipal,India,14DepartmentofMedicalGenetics, A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;CentogeneAG. Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, A. Marais: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; DeNA Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Centogene AG. J.M. Garcia-Aznar: A. Employment (full 15Genetic and Metabolic Department, King Fahad Specialist or part-time); Modest; Centogene AG. N.M. Grüning: A. Hospital, Dammam, Saudi Arabia, 16John Hopkins Aramco Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;CentogeneAG.L. Health Care, Pediatric Services, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, Abbasi Moheb: A. Employment (full or part-time); 17Albrecht-Kossel-Institute for Neuroregeneration, Medical Modest; Centogene AG. O. Paknia: A. Employment (full University Rostock, Rostock, Germany orpart-time);Modest;CentogeneAG.K.K.Kandaswamy: A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;CentogeneAG. Introduction: Many newly suggested disease-gene asso- M. Werber: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; ciations result from ﬁndings in single patients or families. Centogene AG. M. Weiss: A. Employment (full or part- Independentconﬁrmation/validationaswellasdeﬁnitionof time); Modest; Centogene AG. G.E. Oprea: A. Employ- the corresponding clinical and mutational spectra is neces- ment (full or part-time); Modest; Centogene AG. F. Al- sary before these variants/genes can be considered as Hakami:None.N.Alshaikh:None.S.Alameer:None.A. causative. Shawli: None. M.J. Maraﬁ: None. A.A. Elmonairy: Patients and Methods: We have performed whole None. F. Al-Mulla: None. W. Al-Twaijri: None. K. Al- exome sequencing (WES) and whole genome sequencing Thihli: None. A.M. Al Shamsi: None. H.A. Abdelrah- (WGS) as diagnostic tool for 10,859 and 1,118, respec- man: None. L. Al-Gazali: None. A. Shukla: None. K.M. tively,indexcases.Withasystematicanalysisofthedataas Girisha: None. M. Garshasbi: None. Y. Housawi: None.526 J.delPicchia F. Al Mutairi: None. N. Al-Sannaa: None. M. Alfadhel: possibility of in-the-ﬁeld sequencing experiments for None. O. Brandau: A. Employment (full or part-time); population genetics studies. Modest; Centogene AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or A. Trimouille: None. C. Mouden: None. C. Boury: part-time); Modest; Centogene AG. P. Bauer: A. Employ- None. A. Courrèges: None. P. Fergelot: None. M. ment (full or part-time); Modest; Centogene AG. Martin-Négrier: None. P14.070B P14.071C Human mitochondrial DNA sequencing by Oxford Detection of phage nucleic acid in human blood plasma in Nanopore MinION data from NIPT protocol A. Trimouille1,2,C. Mouden3,C. Boury3, A.Courrèges4,P. I.Gazdaricová1,D.Smoľak1,2,A. Balá3,2,J.Budi3,2,J. Fergelot1,2,5,M.Martin-Négrier4,6 Gazdarica1,2,M. Kajsik1,4,J.Turňa1,4,5,T. Szemes1,2,4 1CHU Bordeaux - Service de Génétique Médicale, Bordeaux, 1FacultyofNaturalSciences,ComeniusUniversity,Bratislava, France, 2Univ. Bordeaux - INSERM 1211, Bordeaux, France, Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty of 3INRA, UMR Biodiversity of Genes and Ecosystems, Mathematics, Physics, and Informatics, Comenius University, Transcriptomics and Genomics Platform, Cestas, France, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4CHU Bordeaux - Service de Pathologie, Bordeaux, France, 5Slovak Center of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, 5Plateforme Génome Transcriptome, Centre de Génomique Bratislava, Slovakia Fonctionnelle de Bordeaux, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 6Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Institut des Introduction: Whole genome NIPT designed to detect Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, Bordeaux, France chromosomal or subchromosomal aberrations in the fetus. NIPT assays based on whole genome sequencing are Mitochondrial cytopathies can be caused by mitochondrial actuallyanalyzingtotalpresentcellfreeDNAisolatedfrom DNA (mtDNA) anomalies such as point variants or large- human plasma. Obtained sequencing data contains reads scale single deletions. In addition to these causative mapped to reference human genome, but also a signiﬁcant anomalies, multiple deletions of mtDNA can arise due to number of unmapped reads, some of them belonging to pathogenic variants in nuclear genes involved in the main- viruses. The main objective of this study was to identify tenance of mtDNA. These 3 types of anomalies (point nucleic acids of phages, the most abundant organisms in variants, single and multiple deletions) are investigated for biosphere, in NIPT data and to try to build viral contigs diagnostic purpose thanks to ampliﬁcation of mtDNA by 2 from the unmapped reads. long-range PCR, and sequencing by NGS short reads Materials and Methods: We sequenced total DNA and technology.However,theuseofshortreadsdoesnotallow transcribed RNA (cDNA) from plasma of both healthy to easily and accurately identify the deletion breakpoints at individuals and individuals with bacterial infection. In the nucleotide level. addition, we analyzed samples from the surface of mucous In order to determine if long read sequencing technolo- membrane for both groups. In analysis, human reads were gies overcome this limitation, we perform mtDNA sequen- removed and all remaining fragments were taxonomically cingofseveralcontrolsandpatientswithsingleormultiple labeled using metagenomic classiﬁers and phage mappers. deletions on Oxford Nanopore MinION. Presence and composition of phages in samples were This technology allowed an accurate identiﬁcation at the visualized using Krona graphs. nucleotidelevel ofthebreakpoints ofthedeletions,evenin Results:Wedetectedthepresenceofphagesequencesin the case of complex multiple deletions. This breakpoint asmallnumberofsamplesinbothgroups.Wehypothesize determination is useful for family testing in the case of that phages can be used as indicators of certain pathophy- single deletion. Furthermore, studies could also take siological conditions. advantage of this method to decipher the mechanisms of Conclusions: NIPT data offers a lot of additional occurrence and to track the accumulation of mtDNA information and various bioinformatic approaches can be multiple deletions in mitochondrial or degenerative dis- used to obtain additional results. Our results demonstrate eases, but also during normal aging. the detection of phage sequences in the data which are In addition, despite a higher per base error rate in usually discarded in common NIPT analyses. comparison with other NGS technologies, the accuracy of I. Gazdaricová: None. D. Smoľak: None. A. Balá: Oxford Nanopore MinION sequencing is sufﬁcient to None. J. Budi: A. Employment (full or part-time); correctly determine the mitochondrial haplogroup of each Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Comenius University Science patient. Due to the portability of MinION, it raises the Park, Bratislava, Slovakia. J. Gazdarica: A. EmploymentAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 527 (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Comenius results. Data trends showed a positive correlation with University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia. M. Kajsik: improvement for all these quality metrics, however only None.J.Turňa:None.T.Szemes:A.Employment(fullor ‘reportcompleteness’andreportingtimesreachedstatistical part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Comenius University signiﬁcance.Whethertheoverallimprovementinlaboratory Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia. performance was due to participation in this program, or from accumulated laboratory experience over time, is not P14.072D clear. Either way, the outcome is likely to assist referring Chromosome microarray proﬁciency testing and analysis clinicians and improve patient care. of quality metric data trends through an external quality D.C. Wright: None. L. Carey: None. N. Adayapalam: assessment program for Australasian laboratories None.N.Bain:None.S.M.Bain:None.A.Brown:None. N. Buzzacott: None. J. Cross: None. K. Dun: None. C. D.C. Wright1,L. Carey2,N.Adayapalam3,N.Bain4,S.M. Joy: None. C. McCarthy: None. S. Moore: None. A.R. Bain5,A.Brown6,N.Buzzacott7,J.Cross8,K.Dun9,C.Joy10,C. Murch: None. F. O'Malley: None. E. Parker: None. J. McCarthy11,S.Moore5,A. R.Murch12,F. O'Malley13,E. Watt: None. H. Wilkin: None. K. Fagan: None. M.D. Parker14,J.Watt14,H.Wilkin15,K.Fagan16,M.D.Pertile17,G. Pertile: None. G.B. Peters: None. B. Peters18 P14.073A 1Children's Hospital Westmead, Westmead, Australia, 2NSW DevelopmentandclinicalutilityofINGEMMcustompanels Health Pathology, Randwick, Australia, 3Royal Brisbane Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 4NSW Health Pathology, R. MartinArenas1, A.Escudero1,A. Campos1, A.del Pozo Newcastle, Australia, 5SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia, Mate2,C.Prior1,C.Peña1,C.Gomez-Gonzalez1,E.Barroso1,E. 6Wellington Hospital, Wellington, New Zealand, 7Western Galvez1,F.Santos-Simarro1,F.Nieto1,G.Gordo1,H.Gonzalez- Genome Diagnostics, Perth, Australia, 8ASDG Quality Pecellin1,M. Solis2,I.Dapia1, J.Tenorio1,J. Nevado1,J. Assessment Program, Alexandria, Australia, 9Royal Hobart Moreno1,J.Solera1,K. Heath1,K.Ibañez2,L. Rodriguez- Hospital, Hobart, Australia, 10Mater Health Services, Laguna1,L.FernadezGarcia-Moya1,M.Bravo1,M.Palomares- Brisbane, Australia, 11Queensland Fertility Group, Brisbane, Bralo1,R. Mena1, M.Azca1,P. Lapunzina1, P.Arias1,P. Australia,12Retired,formelyatPathwestLaboratoryMedicine, Martinez1, R.Lleuger-Pujol1,S. Benito1,S. Garcia-Miñaur1,S. Nedlands, Australia, 13St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, Rodriguez-Novoa1,V. F. Montaño1,L. Stark1,V. Ruiz1,V. Australia, 14Canterbury Health Laboratories, Christchurch, Martinez-Glez1,I.Ibañez1, E.Vallespin1 Australia, 15Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 16Retired, formely at NSW Health Pathology, Newcastle, 1INGEMM NGS Diagnostic Group - Instituto de Genética Australia, 17Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) - Hospital La Paz - IdiPaz – Melbourne,Australia,18Retired,formelyatChildren'sHospital CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 2Bionformatics Unit - Instituto de Westmead, Westmead, Australia Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) - Hospital La Paz- IdiPaz - CIBERER, Madrid, Spain Chromosome microarrays are an essential tool for investi- gation of copy number changes in children with congenital Introduction: There are many ways to tackle the genetic anomalies and intellectual deﬁcit. Attempts to standardise study in patients in NGS. Custom panels offer better base- microarray testing have focused on establishing technical pair coverage, running times, costs and dataset handling and clinical quality criteria, however external quality than other NGS applications such as whole genome assessment programs are still needed. We report on a sequencing and whole exome sequencing. We present our microarray proﬁciency testing program for Australasian workﬂow and results in more than 10,000 patients studied laboratories. Quality metrics evaluated included analytical with 25 different INGEMM NGS custom panels. accuracy, result interpretation, report completeness, and PatientsandMethods:Sequencinglibrariesareprepared laboratory performance data: sample numbers, success and with SeqCap EZ system (RocheNimblegen) using NEXT- abnormality rate and reporting times. Between 2009 and ﬂex- DNA-barcodes (Bioo Scientiﬁc) and sequenced on a 2014ninesamplesweredispatchedwithvariableresultsfor NextSeq500 platform (Illumina). The researcher has analytical accuracy (30-100%), correct interpretation (32- selected a group of genes involved in their pathologies. 96%), and report completeness (30-92%). Laboratory per- Each panel has a particular size, and in our workﬂow we formancedata(2007-2014)showedanoverallmeansuccess combine different panels using NEXTﬂex-DNA-barcodes rate of 99.2% and abnormality rate of 23.6%. Reporting in the same run. Bioinformatic analysis was carried out by times decreased from >90 days to <30 days for normal the Clinical Bioinformatics Unit of INGEMM center. results and from >102 days to <35 days for abnormal528 J.delPicchia ResultsandDiscussion:Thediagnosticyieldcanchange coveredsamples,orincreasespersampledatarequirements betweenthedifferentcustompanelsandpathologies,butin to eliminate variations. UV absorption, intercalating dyes, general we observe a high level of diagnostic yield. Our capillary electrophoresis and quantitative PCR are widely biggest custom panel is the Clinical one, it contains 1,588 used for library quantiﬁcation. In this study we compared genes involved in intellectual disability, autism spectrum accuracy of these popular methods with ultra-low coverage disorders and other common genetic disorders, the diag- whole-genome sequencing (ULC-WGS). nostic yield is 50%. “BAF-complex panel” includes 96 Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted using genes involved in BAF-complex (Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome, QIAmp DNA mini kit (Qiagen). Libraries were prepared Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome) and other genetic disorders using NEBNext Ultra DNA Kit (NEB). We quantiﬁed with overlapping features: 45%. “Cardio-panel”, 325 genes libraries by Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies), related with cardiovascular diseases, 29%. “Hepato panel” different qPCR approaches, Qubit 3.0 (Life Technologies), with 125genes involvedingeneticliverdiseases:28%and 300PE sequencing at nano ﬂowcell on Miseq (Illumina) “Oft-panel”, genetic ophthalmological diseases and 298 with followed bioinformatic quantiﬁcation. Libraries were genes, 60%. To optimize the analyses, panel testing should pooled together and enriched using Focused Exome kit be performed by bioinformaticians, clinicians and labora- (Agilent Technologies) and sequenced on Illumina tory staff in close collaboration. HiSeq 2500. R. Martin Arenas: None. A. Escudero: None. A. Results: We found that ULC-WGS is the most accurate Campos:None.A.delPozoMate:None.C.Prior:None. library quantiﬁcation method. This method signiﬁcantly C. Peña: None. C. Gomez-Gonzalez: None. E. Barroso: decrease sample to sample variations thus being the most None. E. Galvez: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. F. cost-effective. We also found that insert size signiﬁcantly Nieto: None. G. Gordo: None. H. Gonzalez-Pecellin: inﬂuences capture efﬁciency. None. M. Solis: None. I. Dapia: None. J. Tenorio: None. Conclusions: Our results show that ultra-low coverage J. Nevado: None. J. Moreno: None. J. Solera: None. K. sequencing overcomes qPCR and other popular library Heath: None. K. Ibañez: None. L. Rodriguez-Laguna: quantiﬁcation methods in accuracy and cost-effectiveness. None.L.FernadezGarcia-Moya:None.M.Bravo:None. A.Krasnenko:None.I.Stetsenko:None.N.Plotnikov: M. Palomares-Bralo: None. R. Mena: None. M. Azca: None. K. Tsukanov: None. O. Klimchuk: None. V. None.P.Lapunzina:None.P.Arias:None.P.Martinez: Ilinsky: None. None. R. Lleuger-Pujol: None. S. Benito: None. S. Garcia-Miñaur: None. S. Rodriguez-Novoa: None. V. P14.075C F. Montaño: None. L. Stark: None. V. Ruiz: None. V. Reinterpretation and reclassiﬁcation in diagnostic Next- Martinez-Glez: None. I. Ibañez: None. E. Generation Sequencing: current daily practices and Vallespin: None. dilemmas of Dutch clinical genomics laboratory professionals P14.074B Ultra-lowcoveragesequencingisthemostaccuratemethod J.el Mecky1,L. Johansson1, T.Dijkhuizen1,A. vander Hout1, for library quantiﬁcation prior to post-pooling exome M.Plantinga1, A.Fenwick2,A. Lucassen2,I.vanLangen1 capture 1University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, A. Krasnenko,I.Stetsenko, N.Plotnikov, K. Tsukanov,O. Netherlands, 2University of Southampton, Southampton, Klimchuk, V. Ilinsky United Kingdom Genotek Ltd., Moscow, Russian Federation Introduction: Information on genetic ﬁndings is in rapid ﬂux: as new evidence becomes available, genetic results Introduction: Exome sequencing is a powerful tool for may turn out more/less pathogenic than initially commu- inherited disease diagnostics. The price of exome sequen- nicated by the laboratory, which can have important con- cing has reduced dramatically, but library preparation and sequences for patients. How laboratory professionals deal target enrichment are still expensive. Post-pooling target with this constantly changing information remains unclear; capture decreases enrichment price per sample, but in this therefore, this topic merits attention. casepre-poolingquantiﬁcationbecomescrucialforaccurate Thisistheﬁrstqualitativeresearchintohowreinterpreta- estimation of required sequencing data. Equal distribution tion (reviewing new evidence on variants) and reclassiﬁca- of reads per sample gives a possibility to sequence more tion (changing variants’ initial classiﬁcations, e.g. VUS to samples in a single run. On the other hand, sample to pathogenic) functions in everyday genomics laboratory sample variation can result in either dropout of underAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 529 practice, and into laboratory professionals’ perspectives on triplex PCR reaction. The IntelliQube utilizes the Array ® ideal (future) practice. Tape consumable and combines liquid handling with real- Methods: Fifteen laboratory specialists from all (nine) time qPCR analysis in 1.6 μL reaction volumes. Dutch genomics laboratories participated in a 7-day online Using TBP and GAPDH as reference genes, it was focus group. Brief follow-up telephone interviews were determined that Muc1 was upregulated in kidney 143-fold conducted with participants. and lung 297-fold in comparison to liver, which correlated Results: withpreviouslypublisheddata.UsingathreewayANOVA, • No formal local/national reinterpretation policies or it was shown that there was no signiﬁcant difference in guidelines exist, despite participants’ expressed. results between singleplex and triplex reaction formats, or • Participants identiﬁed a lack of phenotypic information between multiple runs on the IntelliQube. updates from clinic to laboratory Thisstudydemonstratestheabilityofthisinstrumentand • Practices among different laboratories appear similar: the associated Array Tape technology to successfully 1.Variantsarereinterpretedadhoc(commonlyatrequest multiplexBHQ qPCR assays inaone-stepRT-PCR format of clinicians or following identiﬁcation of a previously for gene expression studies, without compromising data detected VUS in a new proband) and never periodically. quality. Combined with the automated inline process and 2. Variants are reclassiﬁed depending on new evidence. economic beneﬁts of Array Tape, the IntelliQube and 3.Clinicians are recontacted by laboratories when reclas- associated BHQ probe chemistry may prove to be a very siﬁcations have a potentially clinically relevant impact on useful platform for multiplex qPCR applications in Human patients’ treatment/monitoring. Genetics. • However, important nuances are discernible: e.g. M. Freeman: None. L. Linz: None. K. Lind: None. V. laboratory specialists differ in what is considered sufﬁcient Novosadova: None. S.H. Bauer: Other; Signiﬁcant; LGC evidence for a reclassiﬁcation, and what are deemed Genomics. clinically relevant reclassiﬁcations that should be commu- nicated to clinicians. This has important implications for P14.077A guidelinedevelopment,asitdemonstratesthatpolicyinthis Copan buccal collection devices for Next Generation context may differ widely in its implementation. Sequencing analysis J.elMecky:None.L.Johansson:None.T.Dijkhuizen: None. A. van der Hout: None. M. Plantinga: None. A. A. Squassina1,A. Gervasoni1,M. Rosso1, S.Castriciano1,A. Fenwick: None. A. Lucassen: None. I. van BredaKlobus2 Langen: None. 1COPAN ITALIA, BRESCIA, Italy, 2Breda Genetics srl, P14.076D BRESCIA, Italy Multiplex, low-volume one-step RT-qPCR for gene expression analysis using the IntelliQube® and BHQ® Background: Since Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) probes and buccal samples are more and more used in Genetic ﬁeld, Copan developed buccal collection and preservation M.Freeman1,L.Linz1,K.Lind2,V.Novosadova2,S.H.Bauer3 devicesforGeneticapplications:humanDNA(hDNA)free ® FLOQSwabs (FS) available W/ or W/O Active Drying 1LGC Douglas Scientiﬁc, Alexandria, MN, United States, System; eNAT®, a molecular medium preserving nucleic 2TATAA Biocenter, Goteborg, Sweden, 3LGC Genomics, acids at room temperature, and NAO® (nucleic acid opti- Hoddesdon, United Kingdom mizer)basketforcompletesamplerecoveryfromtheswab. The objective of this study was to demonstrate the perfor- One-step reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) is widely mance of Copan collection and preservation devices for usedforgeneexpressionanalysis,RNAvirusdetection,and Genetic diagnosis and NGS analysis, including clinical routine RNA quantiﬁcation experiments. exome (~6,300 genes). ® Inthisstudy,weevaluatedtheIntelliQube real-timePCR Methods: Buccal swabs (BS), collected with dry FS and ® ® instrument for multiplex gene expression analysis using with FS stored in eNAT , were extracted using QIAamp ® commercially available RNA from human liver, lung, and DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) and processed using the NAO ® kidney tissue, a one-step RT-PCR master mix, and BHQ basket. Extracted hDNA was analyzed by Real-Time PCR, probe-based assays from LGC Biosearch Technologies. by electrophoresis on agarose gel and by NanoDrop BHQprobesandprimersweredesignedtotargetthemucin Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher). DNA extracted from ® 1 (MUC1), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 3dryFSand3ineNAT BS,tested4weekspostcollection, (GAPDH), and the TATA-box binding protein (TBP) in a were used to analyze clinical exome using NGS technique.530 J.delPicchia Results: All the samples gave appropriate quantity and Results: The median error rate ranged from 0.25-0.48% purity of hDNA (low 16, medium 40 and high 77 μg of inQ20-trimmedde-novosequencing,dependingonsequen- hDNA/swab) and no DNA degradation on gel. High- cing chemistry and short(350bp)-, medium(500bp)-, and throughput NGS performed on the extracted DNA gener- long(800bp)-read sequencing options. The percent of atedresultsatqualitylevelsasNGSresultsperformedusing correctly called mixed bases in resequencing data was EDTA-blood. greater than 99%; the false negative rate was 0.6%. Conclusions: Data obtained in this study demonstrated Homopolymer stretches of length 31 were sequenced that good quantity and quality of DNA can be recovered without error. The 5’ end of amplicons sequenced with from buccal swabs collected with the Copan hDNA free BigDyeDirectchemistryweresequencedﬂawlesslystarting FLOQSwabs® stored dry or in eNAT®medium. DNA at the ﬁrst base. recoveredisalsooptimalforNGSanalysessuch,asclinical Conclusions: Testing demonstrated robust performance exome sequencing. for basecalling and QV accuracy on a wide variety of A. Squassina: A. Employment (full or part-time); sequences generated on the new SeqStudio Genetic Signiﬁcant; COPAN ITALIA. A. Gervasoni: A. Employ- Analyzer. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; COPAN ITALIA. M. Y. Chu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Rosso: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. S. Schneider: A. Employment COPAN ITALIA. S. Castriciano: A. Employment (full or (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. S. part-time); Signiﬁcant; COPAN ITALIA. A. Breda Klo- Berosik: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; bus: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Breda Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. J. Bodeau: A. Employment (full Genetics srl. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. S. Chang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; P14.078B Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. D. Rodriguez: A. Employment Accuracy of DNA Sequence and Quality Values for a new (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;ThermoFisherScientiﬁc.D. Sanger Sequencing Instrument Woo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. D.A. Hom: None. Y. Chu,S. Schneider,S. Berosik,J. Bodeau,S.Chang, D. Rodriguez, D.Woo,D.A. Hom P14.080D Expanding the spectrum of SHOX mutations in idiopathic Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, South San Francisco, CA, United short stature patients through a custom array-CGH States A. Fanelli1, D.Babu1,S.Mellone1,G.Stress1,S.Bellone2,F. Introduction: Sanger Sequencing with capillary electro- Prodam2,G.Bona2,S. Vannelli3,M.Giordano1 phoresis is a cost-effective, time-efﬁcient, and highly accurate DNA sequencing method to interrogate DNA for 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Department of Health Mendelian variants and minor variants present at 5% or Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy, greater, using Minor Variant Finder software. With the 2PediatricUnit,UniversityofEasternPiedmont,Novara,Italy, introduction of the easy-to-use Applied Biosystems Seq- 3Ospedale Regina Margherita, Turin, Italy Studio Genetic Analyzer, featuring updated KB Basecaller, new spectral auto-calibration algorithm, and integrated The short stature homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) cartridge containing a new separation polymer, testing the resideswithinthepseudoautosomalregion1(PAR1)onthe accuracy of basecalls and Quality Values of SeqStudio sexchromosomes,andSHOXdefectsareresponsiblefor2- sequence data is important. 15% of idiopathic short stature (ISS) cases. Molecular MaterialsandMethods:Statisticallysoundvalidationof diagnosisforSHOXdeﬁciencyiscarriedoutbysequencing basecalling and QV accuracy requires generation of a the coding exons and by performing MLPA for deletions/ signiﬁcant number of diverse sequences. We used puriﬁed duplications. We screened 700 ISS patients for SHOX plasmids derived from shotgun sequencing of NA12878 defects for diagnostic purposes; ﬁfty-four patients (7.7%) NISTgenomereferencestandardforde-novosequencingas carried mutations. Among these, one patient showed a well as PCR resequencing of 38 amplicon targets, ranging single probe deletion at homozygous state that did not inlengthfrom143-873bases,inupto50humanspecimens involve any of the known enhancers. Since MLPA probes for mixed-base calling. 10,000 samples were generated, are enriched in the exons and in the known enhancers, we totaling 6,400,000 basecalls. Sequencing reads were tested hypothesised that they might be other non-coding elements for basecalling and quality value accuracy. with potential regulatory activity not yet described. To test our hypothesis, we developed a high-resolution customAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 531 array-CGHplatformwith8000probeswithinthePAR1and a single, characterized control prepared with the samples, we screened 50 individuals that tested negative with the which avoids requiring multiple control wells. Both CNV standardmethods.Twodeletionsof12.3kb(1patient)and analysis methods using the Novallele HRM Analyzer 7 kb (2 patients) downstream SHOX not present in 300 software generate accurate CNV calls. This product is only controlswereidentiﬁed.Theserearrangementsshared a1.8 available in the U.S.A. The products mentioned are for kbregion,whilethe12.3kbdeletionincludeda1kbregion Research Use Only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures. conserved among different species. A functional assay to Y.Machida:None.Z.Kabir:None.L.Jiang:None.S. test if these sequences affect the gene expression was per- Paquerault: None. S. Kanderian: None. J. formed in NIH3T3 cells. We observed an increase of luci- Huuskonen: None. feraseactivity(45%)fortheconstructharbouringthe1.8kb region compared to the promoter vector (p=0,0003). In P14.082B conclusion, we identiﬁed a novel region downstream of Quantitative ﬂuorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF- SHOX with potential regulatory activity that might be PCR) for rapid and culture independent aneuploidy responsible for ISS cases undiagnosed through standard analysis in spontaneous miscarriages procedures. A.Fanelli:None.D.Babu:None.S.Mellone:None.G. L.Falai,S.Bernabini,M.Betti,F.Sbernini,R.Ciampi,S.Fibbi, Stress: None. S. Bellone: None. F. Prodam: None. G. C. Romolini,E. Pelo, C.Pescucci Bona: None. S. Vannelli: None. M. Giordano: None. SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy P14.081A Accurate calls for copy number variation using the Spontaneous miscarriages occur in 10-40% of pregnancies. Novallele™ HRM Analyzer Thehighlevelofmiscarriagecanberelatedtodifﬁcultiesin embryonicdevelopmentcausedbyanomaliesintheembryo Y.Machida,Z.Kabir,L.Jiang,S.Paquerault,S.Kanderian,J. itself. It is well known that a large proportion of ﬁrst- Huuskonen trimester spontaneous abortions is caused by chromosomal disorders (40-64%): autosomal trisomies are most fre- Canon U.S. Life Sciences, Inc., Rockville, MD, United States quently detected, followed by monosomy X and poly- ploidies. The results of conventional cytogenetic studies of Introduction: The Novallele HRM Analyzer is web-based spontaneous abortions depend on tissue culturing and are software with comprehensive algorithms capable of ana- associated with a signiﬁcant cell culture failure rate related lyzing and displaying high-resolution melting (HRM) data to necrotic tissues, low mitotic rate and maternal cell con- for copy number variation (CNV) assessment. We investi- tamination. Cytogenetic studies show high rates of failure gated two analysis methods using the software. andchromosomalanalysisispossibleonlyinalownumber Methods: The ﬁrst method requires multiple, character- of samples (20 - 30%). Extended QF-PCR analysis of izedDNAcontrolsfromcelllines.Reviewofthedifference chromosomes13,15,16,18,21,22,XandYwasusedforthe plot using the software with the unknown samples overlaid rapid analysis of the most frequent chromosomal disorders ontheDNAcontrolssufﬁcestoassignacopynumber.The in spontaneous miscarriage in order to overcome the pro- second method requires only one characterized 2-copy blems connected with karyotyping such as culture failure, control prepared uniformly with the samples. A copy external contamination and selective growth of maternal numberisassignedtoeachsampleusingboththenumberof cells. The results of QF-PCR have been compared with melt peaks on the derivative plot and sample ﬂuorescence those of classical karyotyping. Since 2009 karyotyping in relative to the control on the difference plot. Samples were ﬁrst-trimester miscarriage has been replaced by DNA ana- extracted using four different commercial kits. Both lysis by QF-PCR. In about 98% of cases a report has been methods were investigated using SMN1 (n=1462) and produced; in almost 50% of them a genetic aneuploidy has SMN2 (n=1557) melt curves generated on ﬁve different beenidentiﬁedasthegeneticcauseofmiscarriage.Inorder types of thermocyclers. toestimatetherecurrenceriskofthosewomeninwhichthe Results: Both methods were 100% accurate. CNV calls genetic cause of the miscarriage has not been detected by were accurately assigned using all ﬁve thermocyclers and QF-PCR, we are taking into consideration a CGH Array all four sample extraction kits. analysis. Conclusions: The ﬁrst method issimpler ascomparedto L.Falai: None.S.Bernabini:None.M.Betti: None.F. the second method and allows a user to immediately Sbernini: None. R. Ciampi: None. S. Fibbi: None. C. perform their experiments using commercially available Romolini: None. E. Pelo: None. C. Pescucci: None. controls.Theadvantageofthesecondmethodisthatituses532 J.delPicchia P14.083C L.Corrado*1,F.Geraci*2,M.Severgnini*3,A.DiPierro1,V. Building high quality, chromosome-scale, de novo genome Frontini1,E. Mangano3,L. M.Genovese2,N.Barizzone1,R. assemblies by Bionano genome mapping and NGS D'Aurizio2,R. Croce1,F. De Marchi4,L. Mazzini4, A.Brusco5, sequencing G.DeBellis3,G.Manzini2,6,R.Bordoni*3,M.Pellegrini *2,S. D'Alfonso *1 J.Wang, A. Pang,E.Lam, T. Anantharaman, A.Hastie, H. Sadowski,Z.Zhu,R.Prins,M.Austin,H.Cao,M.Borodkin,G. 1Human Genetics Lab, Department of Health Sciencs, Papoutsoglou University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy, 2Institute of informatics and telematics of CNR, Pisa, Italy, 3instute for Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States biomedicaltechnologies,CNR-ITB,Segrate,Italy,4ALScenter AOUMaggioredellaCarità,Novara,Italy,5Medicalsciences, Diverse genetic variations exits among individuals and are University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 6Univeristy of Eastern crucialtotheunderstandingofhumanbiologyanddiseases. Piedmont (UPO), Vercelli, Italy Numerous efforts are underway to generate high-quality reference genomes for different ethnic groups. However, Repetitive DNA sequence represented a big technical human genomes arecomplex and contain large fractions of challenge for NGS technologies. Their analysis istradition- repetitive sequences that make generating high-quality ally based on PCR-ampliﬁcation followed by ﬂuorescence assemblies difﬁcult. Bionano genome mapping provides a capillary electrophoresis to identifyfragment length differ- solution to visualize genome structure. The synergistic ences. Theoretically, NGS technology could offer several approach of combining next-generation sequencing (NGS) potential advantages forTandem Repeat Polymorphisms data with Bionano maps produces affordable, contiguous, (TRPs)genotyping.Ouraimwastotestthefeasibilityofthe and accurate de novo genome assemblies. analysis of TRPs in NGS data. To do this we compared 16 Here,wepresentanimprovementtoBionano’straditional differentdisease-associatedTRPsgenotypesfromshort-read nickase-based approach by employing an enzymatic direct NGS data to those derived through ﬂuorescencefragment labeling approach. This new method doesn't introduce any analysis approach.We sequenced and analyzed 14 DNA undesirablebreaksintheDNAandallowsustocreatevery samples affected by various neurodegenerative diseases contiguous Bionano maps which can then be used to with repeatexpansions of different lengths for 16 disease scaffold NGS sequence assemblies to produce highly associated TRPs by Illumina MiSeq sequencing platform contiguous and structurally accurate hybrid assemblies that (300+300 bp reads). We performed a repeat speciﬁc cap- can span most repeat regions. This direct labeling is ture probes design (Duitama 2014) which uses theﬂanking compatible with a vast array of various organisms. regionsoftherepeatstodesignenrichmentprobesinunique We validated our approach with the well-studied human regions. For the target regionsenrichment, we used Sur- NA12878genome.StartingwithNGSassemblieswithN50 eSelect XT Kit, (Agilent technologies). Besides a known ranging from 0.18 - 14.5 Mbp, we produced hybrid bioinformaticstool(lobSTR),anewsoftwareprocedurewas assemblies with N50 from 70 to 80 Mbp. Chromosome- successfullyimplementedtopreciselygenotypeTRPs from arm length scaffolds were assembled in 20 out of 23 NGSdata to achieve genotype accuracy and efﬁciency. chromosomes, and alignments show that they were Overall, we were able to compare 224 genotypes. Locus- consistent with the hg19 reference. The hybrid assemblies speciﬁc TRP typing demonstrated a very good correlation incorporated 80-97% of total NGS sequences with over (up to 80%) between genotypes derived byﬂuorescence 99%scaffoldingaccuracy.Thescaffoldsgeneratedwiththis fragment analysis and those measured by our NGS data haveset anew standard for genomeassemblythat can approach.Evenforverylargeexpansionswehavebeenable be accomplished in less than one week and starting at 500 to identify the samples carrying a pathological expansion. dollars. This pilot experimentdemonstrated the feasibility of the J. Wang: None. A. Pang: None. E. Lam: None. T. analysis of TRPs in NGS data for a large number of loci. Anantharaman: None. A. Hastie: None. H. Sadowski: L.Corrado*:None.F.Geraci*:None.M.Severgnini None.Z.Zhu:None.R.Prins:None.M.Austin:None.H. *: None. A. Di Pierro: None. V. Frontini: None. E. Cao:None.M.Borodkin:None.G.Papoutsoglou:None. Mangano: None. L.M. Genovese: None. N. Barizzone: None. R. D'Aurizio: None. R. Croce: None. F. De P14.084D Marchi: None. L. Mazzini: None. A. Brusco: None. G. Disease associated tandem repeat genotyping from NGS De Bellis: None. G. Manzini: None. R. Bordoni *: None. target sequencing data M. Pellegrini *: None. S. D' Alfonso *: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 533 P14.085A (NA), Italy, 3MBBM Foundation, Monza, Italy, 4Sant’Anna ANextgenerationanalysisofmutationhotspotsinCFTR, Hospital, Como, Italy, 5Telethon Institute of Genetics and MTHFR and HFE Medicine - TIGEM and DISMET, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy, 6Telethon Institute of T.Rosseel,K.Claes,E.Imant,E.d'Haese,E.Debals,P.Coucke, Genetics and Medicine - TIGEM and University of Campania E. DeBaere, A. DeJaegher,K. De Leeneer Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy, 7MBBM Foundation,MonzaandSant’AnnaHospital,Como,Italy,8San CMGG Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium Raffaele University, Milan, Italy Speciﬁc point mutations in HFE or MTHFR give rise to The Italian Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases Program Haemochromatosis type 1 or Homocystinuria respectively, (TUDP)missionisbestowingamoleculardiagnosistorare forbothgenesitisnotfeasiblenorcostefﬁcienttoroutinely undiagnosed patients collected through a countrywide net- screen the complete coding region. Although the CFTR workofpediatrichubs.Patientsareprioritizedaccordingto mutation spectrum is more variable, a population bias is well deﬁned criteria, described using standardized and observed and targeted mutation analysis of preselected shared tools (i. e. Human Phenotype Ontology, HPO) and mutationsisfrequentlyofferedasaﬁrstlinetest.Numerous made “matchable” with other cases stemming from other commercially available kits were launched to analyse pre- UndiagnosedDiseasesProgramsallovertheworld,inorder deﬁned mutations in these genes. In an era where the to favor the ﬁnding of “second cases” and to conﬁrm ultra majority of routine diagnostic analyses moved to Next rare causal variants. We focus on pediatric patients with generation sequencing, we developed a (multiplex) NGS complex or syndromic diseases, who are subjected to in- approach to include CFTR, HFE and MTHFR targeted depth exome sequencing. A tabular output provides anno- mutationanalysisinourgeneralworkﬂow.Inthisworkﬂow tations of genes and variants with multiple predictions of we speciﬁcally target two HFE polymorphisms, MTHFR their potential impact and observed frequency in external c.677 C>T and the 50 most frequent CFTR mutations and internal control datasets. Selected variants of uncertain detected in the Belgian population. Library preparation is pathogenicsigniﬁcancearetestedthroughfunctionalstudies done with a modiﬁed Nextera XT protocol and sequencing to elucidate the disease causality and the pathogenetic on a Miseq. An intensive pooling strategy decreased the mechanism. For instance, depending on the supposed phe- sequencing cost, down to the limit were single nucleotide notypic effect, cellular model created by gene-editing or sequencing with NGS becomes cost effective. With in non-mammalian vertebrate models such as medaka ﬁsh are house developed scripts analyzing only the nucleotides of developed and characterized. Among the 200 patients we interest, we generate patient speciﬁc reports that can easily have gathered discussed, approximately two thirds have be interpreted. A thorough validation of this workﬂow was been prioritized and subjected to whole exome sequencing performed with hundreds of samples resulting in an overall as “trios” (case(s) and parents). Overall, the success rate of sensitivity (>99%) similar to Sanger sequencing and a diagnosingofTUDPisabout50%.Thankstoanewphased positive predictive value of >99%. Furthermore, the inde- exome sequencing technology, we will nowbe also able to pendencyofcommerciallyavailablekitsallowsustoeasily determine separately the maternal and paternal haplotypes change or add targets to our panels. in order to detect elusive mutations such as single exon T. Rosseel: None. K. Claes: None. E. Imant: None. E. deletions, polymorphic repeats and others. d'Haese:None.E.Debals:None.P.Coucke:None.E.De R. Castello: None. A. Torella: None. F. Musacchia: Baere:None.A.DeJaegher:None.K.DeLeeneer:None. None. M. Mutarelli: None. M. Dionisi: None. G. Oliva: None. M. Pizzo: None. G. Mancano: None. S. Maitz: P14.087C None. F. Grilli: None. G. Sgroi: None. G. Cappuccio: The Italian Telethon Undiagnosed diseases Program None. M. Pinelli: None. G. Esposito: None. G. Parenti: None. S. Banﬁ: None. A. Selicorni: None. N. Brunetti- R. Castello1,A. Torella1,F. Musacchia1,M.Mutarelli1, M. Pierri: None. V. Nigro: None. G. Casari: None. Dionisi1,G.Oliva2,M.Pizzo1,G.Mancano3,S.Maitz3,F.Grilli4, G.Sgroi3,G.Cappuccio5,M.Pinelli5,G.Esposito6,G.Parenti5, P14.088D S. Banﬁ6,A. Selicorni7,N.Brunetti-Pierri5,V. Nigro6,G. Initiative on Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases in Pediatrics Casari1,8,Telethon UndiagnosedDiseasesProgram (IRUD-P) in Japan: recent achievement and statistics 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine - TIGEM, Y. Matsubara1, K.Hata1, T.Kaname1,K. Kosaki2,theIRUD-P Pozzuoli (NA), Italy, 2Telethon Institute of Genetics and Consortium Medicine - TIGEM and ICAR-CNR, Naples, Italy, Pozzuoli534 J.delPicchia 1NCCHD, Tokyo, Japan, 2Keio University, Tokyo, Japan put together by a core group of four European Reference Networks. Solve-RD will deliver 7 main implementation TheInitiativeonRareandUndiagnosedDiseases(IRUD)is steps: (i) Collect Phenotypes, (ii) New phenotype patterns, a national consortium designed to help patients and their (iii) Re-analyse exomes / genomes, (iv) Novel molecular families suffering from rare and undiagnosed disease con- strategies, (v) Functional analysis, (iv) Clinical utility and ditionsinJapan.TheprojectstartedinJuly2015.Theaims (vii) Towards therapy. For analysis Solve-RD will apply of the project are to make diagnosis on patients with rare data driven and expert driven approaches. We anticipate to and undiagnosed diseases, to construct their genome data- increase diagnostic yield from 19.000 unsolved exomes/ basewithclinicalinformation,andtomakebankingsystem genomes by about 3-5%. Cohort speciﬁc innovative -omis of precious specimens. The pediatric version of IRUD strategies will be pursued, also addressing cost-effective (IRUD-P) is coordinated by dual centers, the National issues. Analysis of more than 800 patients with highly Center for Child Health and Development (NCCHD) and peculiar phenotypes will highly increase the chance to ﬁnd Keio University. The IRUD-P developed a nation-wide novel disease genes and novel disease mechanisms. We network for patient recruitment involving 17 regional core anticipate to solve more than 2.000 cases. Finding further clinical centers, and mainly performed whole exome matching patients will be secured by newly developed sequencingonchildrenwithundiagnoseddiseasesandtheir matchmaking approaches and by screening using MIPs parents.Tillnow,morethan2,000patients,whopassedthe technology in the more than 20.000 unclassiﬁed patients. ﬁrstscreeninginthecoreclinicalcenters,wereconsultedto FortheﬁrsttimeinEuropewewillalsoimplementanovel the IRUD-P centers. Specimens accompanied with medical brokerage structure connecting clinicians, gene discoverer information (n=6,600) were collected from patients and and basic researcher to quickly verify novel genes and their families, mainly in trios, and sent to the centers. Of disease mechanisms. 882 patients analyzed, genetically conﬁrmed diagnosis in O. Riess: None. O. Solve-RD Consortium: None. 295 patients (diagnostic yield was 33.4%). Nine patients were found to have pathogenic variants in novel genes. P14.090BAnalytical validation of MPS diabetes assay with Patient cohort represents children with a wide range of NIST and 1000G project reference materials undiagnosed disorders (malformation syndromes 49.4%, neuromuscular disorders 29.9%, skeletal and connective T.Simakova1,M.Glushkova1,N.Pilshchikova1,A.Korosteleva1, tissue diseases 6.6%, renal diseases 1.6%, liver diseases A. Slepchenkov1,C.Gülsev2,A. Pavlov1 1.3%, others 11.1%). For the remaining undiagnosed patients, the IRUD-P consortium has started data-sharing 1Parseq Lab, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Genomed network system (IRUD-Exchange) and disease model ana- Ltd, London, United Kingdom lysis.TheIRUD-Palsobuiltinternationalcollaborationand data sharing on rare and undiagnosed diseases. Introduction: Most MPS-based assays yield false-positive Y. Matsubara: None. K. Hata: None. T. Kaname: andfalse-negativeresults.AccordingtotheCLIAandCAP None. K. Kosaki: None. recommendations laboratories have to validate the perfor- manceoftestsbeforereportingpatientresults.Thisanalytic P14.089A validation includes wet-lab procedures as well as data Solve-RD. Solving the unsolved Rare Diseases analysis. Moreover, laboratories should perform revalida- tion after any assay alteration. This complex process of O.Riess1, O.Solve-RDConsortium2 proving that an assay works as expected and consistently achieves the expected result has not yet been thoroughly 1Universität Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Solve-RD described. partners, Europe, Germany Material and Methods: We have sequenced NIST RM- 8398and17GBR(1000Gproject)referencematerialswith Solve-RDisaH2020fundedﬂagshipEUprojectthatbrings 24-genes diabetes panel (104,3kbp). Alignment and variant together 21 partners from 10 countries and which will be calling have been performed using VariFind™ Software. running from 2018 to 2022. The main ambitions are (i) to For the reference and experimental data, we have applied solve large numbers of RD, for which a molecular cause is developed algorithm that selects regions with sequencing not know yet, by sophisticated combined Omics approa- quality above the given threshold. The algorithm calculates ches,and(ii)toimprovediagnosticsofRDpatientsthrough common, reference and experimental data-speciﬁc variants a “genetic knowledge web”. Solve-RD will pursue a clear in these regions. All calculations have been made for the visionaryandintegrated“beyondtheexome”approach.The diploid genome, i.e. homozygous variants have been entire Solve-RD project has been motivated, designed and counted as two independent variants.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 535 Results: For the diabetes panel we have identiﬁed 629 buildsupacollective,high-qualityknowledgebasewithhigh common variants, 9 false-negative and 4 false-positive transparency and traceability,withthe abilitytosharefurther variants. Sensitivity and speciﬁcity are 98.1% and 98.9% to international databases. Discordances in classiﬁcation are respectively (95% CI). We have found 15 discordant bases ﬂagged and resolution facilitated through communication among 1 174 744 total analyzed bases in 18 reference with the relevant partners. samples. General accuracy of the assay is above 99.9%. Conclusions: Harmonization ofvariant classiﬁcationis a Conclusions: Wehave developed streamlined automated priorityformulti-sitehealthcaresystemswhereequalaccess validation approach for targeted MPS-based assays that is to quality healthcare is a goal. TVX enables such suitable toperformfast assay revalidation onanyalteration harmonization while continuously curating and accumulat- in the bioinformatic pipeline or laboratory protocol. ing expertise. Developedvalidationalgorithmhasbeentestedondifferent S.Alagaratnam:None.T.Søreng:None.T.Håndstad: sequencing platforms and multiple targeted panels. None. V. Wirta: None. B. Ray-Sannerud: None. T.Simakova:None.M.Glushkova:None.N.Pilshchi- kova: None. A. Korosteleva: None. A. Slepchenkov: P14.092D None. C. Gülsev: None. A. Pavlov: None. Clinical reassessment of post-laboratory variant call format&lt;VCF&gt;ﬁles P14.091C Trusted Variant eXchange: a database for secure sharing L.Alsubaie1,M.Alfadhel1,S.Alturki1,A.Alothaim1,A.Alfares2 of variant classiﬁcations between trusted partners 1KingAbdulazizMedicalCity,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,2Qassim S. Alagaratnam1, T.Søreng1,T. Håndstad2,V. Wirta3,B. Ray- University, Qassim, Saudi Arabia Sannerud1 Background:Nextgenerationsequencinghasbeenleading 1Life Sciences programme, Group Technology and Research, the genetic study of human diseases for the past ten years, DNV GL, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, generating a huge amount of sequence variant data, which Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Clinical Genomics are stored in variant call format ﬁles. To our knowledge, facility, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, therehasbeenlittlediscussionabouttheutilityofVCFﬁles Stockholm, Sweden for reanalysis. Results: In this study, twenty samples were clinically Introduction: Guidelines aim to standardize the classiﬁca- reassessedusingvariantinterpretationsoftware.Wereported tion of genetic variants for rare diseases and cancer. How- sevencases(n=20)differentlyfromtheoutsidelaboratory. ever, adherence to guidelines can vary greatly within a Thisaccountsforalmost35%ofallcasesandismainlydue single healthcare system or country, leading to discordance to the ability to gather more information about the patient’s in variant classiﬁcation. International classiﬁcation data- phenotype.Onewholegenomesequencecasechangedfrom basessuchasClinVarcansupportthevariantinterpretation inconclusive to negative. In addition, we identiﬁed variants process, but issues of data incompleteness and incon- related to the patient’s phenotype in six cases; two of them sistency remain. To address this, we have developed the were whole genome sequence and four were whole exome Trusted Variant eXchange, or TVX. sequence, all reported as negative before the reanalysis. Materials and Methods: Requirements for TVX were Conclusions:Comprehensivephenotypingofindividuals collected and collated through a series of workshops and is crucial step in identifying candidate phenotype-related feedbackcycleswithourclinicalpartnersthroughBigMed,a variants.Weoutlinethebeneﬁtobtainedfromaccesstothe research project funded by theNorwegianResearch Council. patient’smedicalrecordsandcommunicationwithreferring The database was designed with the following in mind: physicians. scalability, for varying data volumes; and adaptability, for Keywords: report, variants, classiﬁcation, vcf, reassess- evolving technological and regulatory needs. The database ment, genomic, genetic, counseling, NGS. wasbuiltusingcomponentsandmicroservices,basedaround L. Alsubaie: None. M. Alfadhel: None. S. Alturki: blob and table storage, queues and functions. None. A. Alothaim: None. A. Alfares: None. Results: TVX database facilitates sharing of evidence- based classiﬁcation of interpreted variants between trusted P14.093A clinical diagnostic partners, focusing on data quality and Identiﬁcationofthepost-zygoticmosaicnonsensemutation conﬂict reporting. After authentication, partners can submit inWDR45geneleadingtobeta-propellerprotein-associated and search for variants with their associated classiﬁcations neurodegeneration and deﬁning sex chromosomal throughasecureAPI.Enteringallnewvariantclassiﬁcations mosaicism at whole exome sequencing536 J.delPicchia N.H.Akcakaya1,B.Salman1,Y.TarkanArgüden2,Z.Görmez3, L. Pezzoli1, A.Pansa1, D.Marchetti1,B. Facchinetti1,A.R. R. Dönmez4,B. Colakoglu4,Z. Yapici5,S.Hacıhaneﬁoğlu2,U. Lincesso1,L.Perego1,L.Pezzani1,A.Cereda2,U.Giussani1,M. Ozbek6,S. A. UgurIseri1 Iascone1 1DepartmentofGenetics,AzizSancarInstituteofExperimental 1LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics,ASSTPapaGiovanniXXIII, Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department Bergamo, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, ASST Papa ofMedicalBiology,CerrahpasaFacultyofMedicine,Istanbul Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istinye University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Neurology, Dokuz Eylul Faculty of Introduction: Compound heterozigosity for a point Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 5Department of Neurology, Istanbul mutation and a deletion is a well-known pathogenic Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, mechanism for recessive conditions, but its overall inci- 6Department of Medical Genetics, Acıbadem Faculty of dence has never been investigated. The aim of this Medicine, Acıbadem University, Istanbul, Turkey study was to assess retrospectively the frequency of this genetic alteration in a large exome dataset from Introduction: Beta-propeller protein-associated neurode- unselected cases. generation (BPAN) is a very rare X-linked dominant dis- MaterialsandMethods:Wereviewedtheexomedataof ease. BPAN has been associated with WDR45 gene and 642 patient-parents trios analysed for diagnostic purpose identiﬁed almost exclusively in females. The clinical pre- during the last three years. The ﬁndings on the techniques sentation of BPAN is marked with a biphasic disease employed to conﬁrm the genetic alterations are discussed. course.Herein,wesetouttocharacterizethegeneticdefect Results: Among the 642 patient-parents trios exome underlying the complex pheonotype in describe a novel, analyses, 9 probands (1,4%) showed a pathogenic homo- WDR45 mutation by using WES and also aim to deﬁne the zygouspointmutationalthoughonlyoneofthetwoparents mosaic/heterozygous ratios of WES on sex chromosomes. in each trio proved to be a carrier. This ﬁndings suggested Case:34yearsoldmalepatientwithamedicalhistoryof there must be another genetic alteration underpinning the delayed psychomotor development and intellectual disabil- homozygous status of the probands. Indeed, 6 patients ity. After age of 24 years he developed moving difﬁculty, showed deletions spanning one exon up to a whole gene slowness and contraction in the legs. The neurological that were conﬁrmed by MLPA, 2 patients carried large examination revealed dystonia-parkinsonism. deletions and one showed uniparental isodisomy of Results and Discussion: WES was performed to patient chromosome 2, detected by CGH- and SNP-array and mosaic c.873C>G; p.Y291*(NM_007075) mutation respectively. was found. The variant was conﬁrmed in mosaic state only Conclusions: Our data show that a small but signiﬁcant in the patients’ blood but other family members did not percentage of recessive conditions can be caused by carrythemutation.However,ithasbeenobservedthatthere compound heterozigosity for point mutations and genomic are other mosaic/heterozygous variants on X chromosome rearrangements. This pathogenic mechanism can be sus- in exome data. pected in exome data but need conﬁrmation by different To ﬁgure out the percentage of heterozygous SNVs, the techniques, that should be tailored on a case by case basis. ratio number of heterozygous SNVs to total number of A unifying wide method to detect all possible genomic SNVs is calculated for chromosome X. In order to identify alterations is currently not available. heterozygosity rates were calculated for 101 female and 89 L.Pezzoli:None.A.Pansa:None.D.Marchetti:None. maleindividuals.WESheterozygosityratesofsexchromo- B. Facchinetti: None. A.R. Lincesso: None. L. Perego: somescanbeusedforqualitycontroloridentifyanomalies None. L. Pezzani: None. A. Cereda: None. U. Giussani: of sex chromosomes. None. M. Iascone: None. This work was supported by grants from the Scientiﬁc ResearchProjectsCoordinationUnitofIstanbulUniversity, P14.095C Project Number 26646. Measuring coverage and accuracy of whole exome N.H. Akcakaya: None. B. Salman: None. Y. Tarkan sequencing in clinical context Argüden:None.Z.Görmez:None.R.Dönmez:None.B. Colakoglu: None. Z. Yapici: None. S. Hacıhaneﬁoğlu: S.Kong1,2,I.Lee1,X.Liu1,J.N.Hirschhorn1,3,2,K.D.Mandl1,2 None. U. Ozbek: None. S.A. Ugur Iseri: None. 1Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, P14.094B 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Broad How many homozygous mutations in exome sequencing Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States data are true homozygous?Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 537 Purpose: To evaluate the coverage and accuracy of whole We tested our method using a cohort of 20 solved cases, exome sequencing (WES) across vendors. who on average harbor 312 variants with a high CADD Methods: Blood samples from three trios underwent score and alow minorallele frequency (of which many are WES at three vendors. Relative performance of the three classiﬁed as variants of unknown signiﬁcance). We show WES services was measured for breadth and depth of thatourmethodsuccessfullycapturesthetruecausalvariant coverage in clinically implicated genes. The false negative in85%ofthecaseswithinthetop10ofprioritizedvariants. rates were estimated using the segregation pattern within This indicates that our ranking algorithm helps to reduces each trio. the number of variants that need manual interpretation. We Results:Meandepthofcoverageforallgeneswas189.0, expectouralgorithmtobeparticularlyhelpfulforunsolved 124.9 and 38.3 for the three vendor services. Fifty-ﬁve of cases, where the causal mutation might not be in known the ACMG 56 genes, but only 56 of 63 pharmacogenes disease-causinggenes,butratherinothergenesthatareco- were 100% covered at 10x in at least one of the nine regulated with the known disease-causing genes and so-far individuals for all three vendors; however, there was remain ignored in current analyses. substantial inter-individual variability. For the two vendors Ourweb-basedgenefunctionpredictionsandHPObased with mean depth of coverage >120x, analytic positive geneprioritizationmethodisfreelyavailableathttp://www. predictive values (aPPV) exceeded 99.1% for SNVs and genenetwork.nl/. GeneNetwork.nl also provides lookup homozygous indels, and sensitivities were 98.9 - 99.9%; functionality for predicted GO-terms, Reactome pathways however, heterozygous indels showed lower accuracy and and KEGG pathways, based on the co-regulation network sensitivity. Among the trios, false-negative rates in the of 31,995 samples. offspring were 0.07 - 0.62% at well-covered variants P.Deelen:None.S.vanDam:None.J.M.Karjalainen: concordantly called in both parents. None. H. Brugge: None. P. Folkertsma: None. C.C. van Conclusions: The current standard of 120x coverage for Diemen: None. W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. J.C. clinical WES may be insufﬁcient for consistent breadth of Herkert: None. T. Gillett: None. M.A. Swertz: None. L. coverage across the exome, and additional measures of Franke: None. sensitivity may beuseful.Ordering cliniciansandresearch- ers would beneﬁt from vendors' reports that estimate P14.097A sensitivity and aPPV, including depth of coverage across Power efﬁciency of research reanalyze of negative clinical the exome and across pre-speciﬁed genes of interest. WESdatatoidentifynewgenesinIntellectualdisabilityor S. Kong: None. I. Lee: None. X. Liu: None. J.N. Congenital anomalies Hirschhorn: None. K.D. Mandl: None. A. Bruel1,2,S.Nambot1,3,V. Quéré1,2,M.Assoum1,2,A. P14.096D Vittobello1,2,S. Moutton1,2,N.Houcinat1,2, D.Lehalle1,2,N. Improving diagnostic yield of exome-sequencing through Jean-Marçais1,2,J.Thevenon1,2,Orphanomix Group,M. prioritization of genes with predicted HPO assignments Chevarin1,2,T.Jouan1,2,C.Poë1,2,P.Callier1,2,4,E.Tisserand1,2, C.Philippe1,2,F.TranMauThem1,2,Y.Duffourd1,2,L.Faivre1,2, P. Deelen,S. vanDam, J.M. Karjalainen, H.Brugge,P. C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2 Folkertsma,C.C.vanDiemen,W.S.Kerstjens-Frederikse,J.C. Herkert,T. Gillett, M.A. Swertz, L. Franke 1Inserm UMR 1231 GAD team, Genetics of Developmental disorders, Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, France, 2FHU-TRANSLAD, Université de Bourgogne/CHU Netherlands Dijon, Dijon, France, 3FHU-TRANSLAD, Université de Bourgogne/CHU Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire Interpretation of genetic variants identiﬁed through whole de génétique moléculaire et de Cytogénétique, Plateau exome sequencing remains challenging, due to many var- Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France iants with unknown clinical signiﬁcance. In order to improve the diagnostic yield, we ﬁrst developed a method The diagnostic yield of clinical whole-exome sequencing that can predict per gene what the likely phenotypic con- (WES) in intellectual disability (ID) and/or congenital sequencesarewhenmutated,byintegratinggeneexpression anomalies (CA) is now about 30%, which means that 70% data on 31,995 public RNA-seq samples. We subsequently of patients remain without a molecular etiology. To go usedthisinformation,alongwithphenotypeinformationper beyond the stringent criteria of the ACMG recommenda- patient, to prioritize genes that, when mutated, likely cause tions in variant interpretation, which are limited to estab- each of these phenotypes. lished humandiseasegenes,afurtheranalysisinaresearch environment appears essential to identify novel disease538 J.delPicchia genes.Thus,weperformedasystematicresearchanalysisof Materials and Methods: We address the chances and negativeWESof500patients.ThesoloWESinterpretation challengesofHTSinthemoleculardiagnosisofMendelian was extended through a translational research approach to disorders as well as assess the sensitivity/recall, precision, all variants in order to identify candidate variants, by computation time, and disk footprint of four corresponding studying protein functions, model organisms, and a litera- HTS analysis pipelines. ture review. International data-sharing was used to identify Results: We exemplify the limitations of targeted (gene additional patients carrying variants in the same gene, in panel) and whole-exome sequencing (WES) as well as order to draw deﬁnitive conclusions on their implication in emphasize the potential of whole-genome sequencing the disease. (WGS) in the detection of single nucleotide variants With this strategy, we identiﬁed or contributed for the (SNVs) and copy number variations (CNVs). In addition, identiﬁcation of 45 disease-causing genes or candidates. we elucidate limitations of short-read HTS on exemplary The genes were classiﬁed in ﬁve categories: 1) new genes cases including the inﬂuence of homologous/repetitive (17 genes); 2) new genotype-phenotype correlations for regions (mappability <1) on variant calling and the impact known genes supported by data-sharing (5 genes); 3) ultra- of sequence composition on read depth, as well as show raredisorderswithlowrecurrence(8genes);4)non-OMIM differences in the performance of WGS analysis pipelines. genes recently published (5 genes); 5) candidate genes (10 Conclusions: We recommend to select the HTS method genes). This study demonstrates the power of research with care and to combine more than one independent reanalysis after negative clinical WES and shows that bioinformatics pipeline for the most comprehensive data screening results can rapidly lead to diagnosis. Despite analysis.TheuseofPCR-freeWGS(>60×)insteadofWES using omics technologies, such as whole-genome sequen- or panels and the inclusion of CNV analysis can contribute cing, many new genes implicated in rare human diseases to increased diagnostic yield in molecular diagnosis with remain to be identiﬁed. The performance of WES will lifetimevalue.Aslong-readHTSmayovercomelimitations certainly improve in the future. ofshort-readHTS,itisenvisionedasthefutureof(clinical) A.Bruel:None.S.Nambot:None.V.Quéré:None.M. sequencing. Assoum: None. A. Vittobello: None. S. Moutton: None. J. Meienberg: None. A.M. Kopps: None. M. Plüss: N. Houcinat: None. D. Lehalle: None. N. Jean-Marçais: None. S.M. Caspar: None. N. Dubacher: None. G. None.J.Thevenon:None.M.Chevarin:None.T.Jouan: Matyas: None. None. C. Poë: None. P. Callier: None. E. Tisserand: None. C. Philippe: None. F. Tran Mau Them: None. Y. P14.099C Duffourd: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin- Precise breakpoint detection of balanced and unbalanced Robinet: None. structuralvariationinwholegenomesequencingdatausing haplotype blocks created by linked-reads P14.098B High-throughputsequencingofMendeliandisorders:From J.Knijnenburg,M.Kriek,H.A.vanDuyvenvoorde,N.Pappas, raw data to diagnosis with lifetime value Y. Ariyurek, H.P. J.Buermans,M. E.Y. Laurense-Bik, K. Kuipers-Heijboer, F. Baas J.Meienberg1, A.M.Kopps1, M.Plüss1,2,S.M. Caspar1, N. Dubacher1,G.Matyas1 LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands 1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Introduction: Routine diagnostics of genome wide Foundation for People with Rare Diseases, Schlieren-Zurich, balanced and unbalanced structural variation is still Switzerland, 2Institute of 4D Technologies, University of dependent on classical techniques such as karyotyping and Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, (SNP-)array. Both techniques result in a rough breakpoint Windisch, Switzerland detection where especially karyotyping can result in sig- niﬁcantmisinterpretationofchromosomalbreakpoints.New Introduction:High-throughputsequencing(HTS)iswidely sequencingtechnologiessuchaslongrangehaplotypingby used for clinical applications such as the molecular diag- mapping linked-reads to generate haplotype blocks (Chro- nosis of Mendelian disorders. As the applied technology/ mium Genome Solution, 10x Genomics, San Francisco workﬂow substantially affects the diagnostic yield, knowl- USA) are expected to overcome this problem, although edgeaboutthepitfallsandadvantagesofHTStechnologies repeatsequenceelementsatbreakpointsinthegenomemay and analysis pipelines is crucial for the successful applica- occasionally interfere with a precise detection. tion of hitherto unprecedented large-scale genetic testing. MaterialsandMethods:TotestwhetherthisNGSbased approach with linked-reads is suitable for routineAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 539 diagnostics, two patients, one with a de novo balanced Sensitivity to detect 1 exon deletions and duplications was translocation (8;17) and one with a duplication detected 0.93 and 0.99 for 5 exon deletions and duplications. The with SNP-array, were analysed. assay was observed to provide a uniform coverage over Results: The expected structural variants based on difﬁcult-to-sequenceregions(e.g.theRPGRgene)andGC- previous knowledge were identiﬁed and in both patients rich1stexons.OurresultsdemonstratethatWESassaywith precise breakpoints of these variants could be detected. In boosted clinical content provide high sequencing coverage the translocation patient, the breakpoint differed at least 15 and allows high variant calling sensitivity for different Mb from the estimated breakpoint and proved SOX9 to be genetic variations, which makes it well-suited for clinical causative for the phenotype of the patient. In the second diagnostics of inherited disorders. patient the orientation of the duplication fragment could be M.Mehine:None.M.Muona:None.M.Valori:None. deﬁned to be in tandem, making a gene disruption to be V. Kytölä: None. P. Salmenperä: None. M. Rantanen: causal for the phenotype unlikely. None. M. Gentile: None. S. Myllykangas: None. Conclusions:StructuralvariantanalysisusingWGSwith linked-reads promises to be a feasible technique for P14.101A detection of balanced and unbalanced structural variants Assessmentofin-solutionenrichmentcaptureprotocolsfor inthegenomeandmaybeanextstepinreplacingclassical whole-exome sequencing in HiSeq 4000 System cytogenetic techniques for genome wide screening. J. Knijnenburg: None. M. Kriek: None. H.A. van A.Díaz-deUsera1,2,J.Lorenzo-Salazar1,A.MendozaÁlvarez1,2, Duyvenvoorde: None. N. Pappas: None. Y. Ariyurek: R. González-Montelongo1,C. Flores1,2,3 None. H.P.J. Buermans: None. M.E.Y. Laurense-Bik: None. K. Kuipers-Heijboer: None. F. Baas: None. 1Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables(ITER)S.A.,GranadilladeAbona,S/CdeTenerife, P14.100D Spain, 2Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Comparison of whole exome sequencing assays with Candelaria, Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de boosted clinical content Tenerife, Spain, 3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain M.Mehine,M.Muona,M.Valori,V.Kytölä,P.Salmenperä,M. Rantanen, M.Gentile, S. Myllykangas Introduction: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) has become a central application in research and disease diag- Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland nosis. A performance comparison of the most common in solution-capture enrichment alternatives was needed in Utility of Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) in clinical order to develop adapted cost-effective workﬂows for diagnosticshasbeenlimitedbythenon-uniformsequencing HiSeq 4000 System (Illumina). coverage across exons, leaving a substantial proportion of MaterialsandMethods:Peripheralblood puriﬁedDNA the regions with shallow coverage that prevents accurate samples were enriched with a reference kit (SureSelect- variant detection. We evaluated a WES assay that is spe- QXT,Agilent)andwithvariousIlluminasolutions:TruSeq- ciﬁcally designed for clinical use, enables wide breadth of Nano, Nextera-DNA Exome with standard protocol (Nx- coverage resembling high-coverage gene-panel based Std) and with various modiﬁcations (Nx-Mod), including assays, and provides high sensitivity in variant detection. insert sizes, input DNA and post-enrichment PCR cycles. We performed WES capture experiments using an assay Pools of 5-7 samples at 2 nM library concentrations were with boosted clinical content, namely xGen Exome sequenced with 75 bp paired-end reads. Bcl2fastq (v2.18), ResearchPanel(IDT)assaythatwasspiked-inwithcustom BWA (v0.7.15), Samtools (v1.3), Picard (v2.10.10), designed clinical content. Sequencing was performed using QualiMap (v2.2.1), and GATK (v3.8) software were used an Illumina NovaSeq sequencing system and data was for analysis. down-sampled to 100M reads. Performance of the WES Results and Conclusions: The best average enrichment assay was demonstrated by using reference samples with (reads on target) was obtained for the Nx-Std solution high-quality variant calls (The Genome In a Bottle Con- (69%), although at distance from that provided by the sortium and Platinum Genome samples for SNVs and reference kit (89%). However, Nx-Mod with 350 bp insert INDELs and Coriell samples for assessing Del/Dups and size had lower mean proportion of duplicate reads than the complex genetic variants). In clinically associated CCDS reference (23% vs. 25%) while returning a comparable genes, the assay achieved high average sequencing depth proportion of target bases at >10X depth of coverage (84% (183x) and coverage (99.7% of regions covered >20x). vs. 91%). TruSeq-Nano performed the worst in all SensitivitytodetectSNVswas0.998,andforINDELs0.97. comparisons, except in the proportion of duplicate reads540 J.delPicchia (17%). At least for the proportion of duplicate reads, these a theoretical turn-around time of 10 days after the invasive results support that performance of HiSeq 4000 is not procedure. comparable to that of previous HiSeq systems, providing Phase 2: The prospective study has just started. guidance for the design of WES projects. Conclusions:Retrospectiveanalysisandmodelingofour Funding: Fellowship by Spanish Ministry of Education, pipeline show that implementing WES as a routine test in Culture, and Sports to ADU (FPU16/01435). CEDeI the prenatal setting is technically feasible. fellowship (Cabildo de Tenerife) to AMA. N. Corsten-Janssen: None. J. el Mecky: None. K. A.Díaz-de Usera: None. J.Lorenzo-Salazar: None.A. Bouman:None.Y.J.Vos:None.J.B.G.M.Verheij:None. Mendoza Álvarez: None. R. González-Montelongo: H. Westers: None. R. Kinds: None. A.J. Scheper: None. None. C. Flores: None. B. Sikkema-Raddatz: None. R.J. Sinke: None. I.M. van Langen: None. R.H. Sijmons: None. C.C. van P14.102B Diemen: None. Implementing fast whole exome sequencing sequencing as diagnostic test for fetal multiple congenital anomalies on P14.103C ultrasound Outcome of Whole Exome Sequencing for diagnostic cases of a clinic pediatric center: the Medical Genetic Unit of N.Corsten-Janssen,J.elMecky,K.Bouman,Y.J.Vos,J.B.G. MeyerChildren’s hospital experience M.Verheij, H.Westers, R.Kinds, A. J.Scheper,B. Sikkema- Raddatz,R.J.Sinke,I.M.vanLangen,R.H.Sijmons,C.C.van A. Provenzano1,A.La Barbera1,V. Palazzo2, R.Artuso2,S. Diemen Landini1,L. Giunti2,P. Reho1,E.Bosi1,A. Pagliazzi1,F. Peluso1,S.Bargiacchi2,G.Traﬁcante2,L.Dosa2,E.Andreucci2, University of Groningen, University Medical Center B.Rinaldi1,S.Guarducci2,M.Pantaleo2,B.Lucherini2,I.Sani2, Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands D.Formicola1, P.Romagnani3,S. Stagi4,B. Giusti5, M.Della Monica2,P. Fiorini6,E. Agostini6,R. Biagiotti7,C. DeFilippi8, Introduction: Identifyingthecause offetal anomaliesseen S. Toni9,L. Genitori10,A. Iolascon11,O.Zuffardi12,S. Giglio1,2 on ultrasound provides important information to improve perinatalmanagement.Theconventionaltest(chromosomal 1Medical Genetics Unit, Dpt. Experimental and Clinical microarray) leads to a diagnosis in approximately 25% of Biomedical Sciences, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, the fetuses with multiple congenital anomalies (MCA). Meyer Children's University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, WholeExomeSequencing(WES)isapromisingtechnique 3Nephology Unit, Meyer Children's University Hospital, toimprovediagnosticyield.ImplementingWESinprenatal Firenze, Italy, 4Auxoendocrinology Unit, Dpt. Healt’s setting is challenging due to uncertainties around fetal Medicine, Meyer Children's University Hospital,, Firenze, phenotyping, variant interpretation, ethical issues of inci- Italy,5AtherothromboticDisease,Dpt.ExperimentalMedicine, dental ﬁndings and variants of unknown clinical sig- University of Florence, Firenze, Italy, 6Neonatal Intensive niﬁcance and the requirement of short turnaround times. Care Unit, Medical Surgical Feto-Neonatal Department, Method: MeyerChildren'sUniversityHospital,Firenze,Italy,7Prenatal Phase 1: Retrospective WES analysis (blindly) of six DiagnosisUnit,MeyerChildren'sUniversityHospital,Firenze, fetuses (including parents) with known postnatal genetic Italy, 8Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Meyer Children's diagnosistotestifthisdiagnosiscouldbemadeonthefetal University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 9Tuscany Regional Centre phenotype only. Variants were ﬁltered using human of Pediatric Diabetes, Meyer University Children's Hospital, phenotype ontology (HPO) or using our custom virtual Firenze,Italy,10NeurosurgeryUnit,NeuroscienceDepartment, gene panel (about 3850 disease genes, excluding late-onset MeyerChildren'sUniversityHospital,Firenze,Italy,11Medical diseases genes). Genetics Unit, Dpt. Molecular Medicine and Medical Phase 2: Prospective study of fast trio WES analysis in Biotechnology,UniveristyFedericoII,Napoli,Italy,12Medical additiontoconventionalgenetictestsfortwenty-ﬁvefetuses Genetics Unit, Dpt Melecular Medicine, University of Pavia, with two or more congenital malformations. Pavia, Italy Result: Phase 1: WES analysis on fetal DNA resulted in a WES has shown an unprecedented success rate in the coverage > 95%. Five of six known diagnoses could be identiﬁcation of disease causing genes in projects ranging conﬁrmedusingourgenepanel.HPOwasnothelpful.One from tailored sequencing, used to discover the molecular causalpathogenicPTPN11mutationwasmissedduetolow bases of a recognizable syndrome in a homogeneous group coverage of the variant. Modelingthe WES pipeline shows of patients, to the systematic application of pan-genomic sequencing in large heterogeneous cohorts. The usefulnessAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 541 ofanunbiasedsequencingapproachhasbeenhighlightedin 4UMR1231 GAD, Inserm - Université Bourgogne-Franche various heterogeneous disorders, including intellectual dis- Comté, Dijon, France, 5Service de Cytogénétique, Hôpital ability, developmental delay, kidney diseases and con- Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP,, Paris, France, 6Institut genital heart defects. We analyzed 400 WES and 20 WGS Cochin,INSERMU1016;UniversitéParisDescartes-Faculté on pediatric patients affected by different rare diseases. In de Médecine ; APHP, HUPC, site Cochin, Laboratoire de particular,westudiedpatientswithrenaldiseases,including Cytogénétique, Paris, France, 7HCL, Service de Génétique, pediatric kidney tumors, MODY, pediatric glioblastoma, BRON Cedex, France, 8Unité Fonctionnelle d'Innovation en Chiari Malformation-type 1, cardiomyopathies and patients Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, with isolated/syndromic intellectual disability.In 54 trios CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 9HCL, Cellule with different clinical conditions (excluding renal diseases, bioinformatique de la plateforme NGS du CHU Lyon, BRON MODY and Chiari malformation that showed greater Cedex, France, 10Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Laboratoire de diagnostic success) we obtained a diagnosis in more than a Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR5558,, Villeurbanne, halfcases,withadetectionrateof54%,whileinasingleton France, 11Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfants analysis WES approach helped us to identify variants in Malades, APHP et Institut Imagine,, Paris, France, causative genes on 15/21 cases. We showed that WES 12Laboratoire de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, identiﬁed signiﬁcantly more conclusive diagnoses than the FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, standardcarepathwaywithoutincurringhighercostshelped 13Centredegénétique,HôpitalCouple-Enfant,CHUGrenoble- also by the use of genotype-driven approach, as a comple- Alpes, F-38700 La Tronche, Grenoble, France, 14Centre de ment to the traditional phenotype-driven one.Deep pheno- génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, typing and WES end a diagnostic odyssey, allows for France precise genetic counselling and has the potential to change clinical management. It is also the start point for the Structural variants (SV) include copy number variants development of targeted pharmacologic therapies, which (CNV) and balanced chromosomal abnormalities (BCA). can translate these discoveries into efﬁcacious novel treat- Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) enables to detect SV at ments to achieve a personalized genomic medicine. base-pair resolution. However, CNV and BCA are difﬁcult A. Provenzano: None. A. La Barbera: None. V. to detect using a short-read sequencing, and long-read Palazzo: None. R. Artuso: None. S. Landini: None. L. approaches are not yet available for diagnosis. Recently, Giunti: None. P. Reho: None. E. Bosi: None. A. 10XGenomics proposed a pseudo long-read technology, Pagliazzi: None. F. Peluso: None. S. Bargiacchi: None. using linked-reads to reconstruct long DNA fragments. G.Traﬁcante:None.L.Dosa:None.E.Andreucci:None. Since long read methods remain very expensive, 10X- B. Rinaldi: None. S. Guarducci: None. M. Pantaleo: Genomicscouldbeagoodalternative.Themainaimofthis None. B. Lucherini: None. I. Sani: None. D. Formicola: work is to determine if 10X-Genomics solution enables a None. P. Romagnani: None. S. Stagi: None. B. Giusti: more sensitive detection and better comprehension of SV None. M. Della Monica: None. P. Fiorini: None. E. than a short read WGS. We included 13 patients with Agostini: None. R. Biagiotti: None. C. De Filippi: None. known or suspected SV, with signed informed consent: 5 S. Toni: None. L. Genitori: None. A. Iolascon: None. O. possible chromoanagenesis, 7 reciprocal translocations and Zuffardi: None. S. Giglio: None. 1 roberstonian translocation. Whole-genome analyses were performed using Chromium (10X-Genomics) library pre- P14.105A paration before HiSeq X (Illumina) sequencing, and com- Does 10X Genomics technology improve the identiﬁcation pared to a classical HiSeq X sequencing. Two different andcharacterization of structural variants? pipelines were used, using BreakDancer for classical WGS and LongRanger for 10X-Genomics WGS. For Break- C.Jubin1,2,K.Uguen3,Y.Duffourd4,V.Malan5,J.Dupont6,N. Dancer, we used a local database ﬁlter out recurrent SV. Chatron7,A. Vitobello4,8, P.Rollat-Farnier9,C.Baulard1,2, M. The variant interpretations were blinded for bothtechnolo- Lelorch5, A.Leduc1,2,E. Tisserand4,F. TranMau-Them4,8,M. gies. The classical WGS pipeline allowed the diagnosis of Delepine1,2,M.Till7,V.Meyer1,2,C.Bardel9,10,S.Lyonnet11,A. known SV in 10/13 patients. The 10X-Genomics pipeline Mosca-Boidron4,12,J.Thevenon13,L. Faivre4,14,C. Thauvin- found1/13SVtaggedas“highconﬁdent”,and9/13as“low Robinet4,14,C. Schluth-Bolard7,A. Boland1,2,R. Olaso1,2, P. conﬁdent”. None of them detected the roberstonian trans- Callier4,12,S.Romana5, J.Deleuze1,2,D.Sanlaville7 location. In conclusion, 10X-Genomics solution didn’t improve the SV detection in this small cohort. To increase 1Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine the SV detection we point out the importance of local (CNRGH),CEA,Evry,France,2LabexGenMed,Evry,France, databases to ﬁlter recurrent SVs and the improvement of 3Service de génétique, CHRU de Brest, Brest, France, informatics pipelines using 10X-Genomics data.542 J.delPicchia C. Jubin: None. K. Uguen: None. Y. Duffourd: None. incremental inclusion of mitochondrial DNA analysis, V.Malan:None.J.Dupont:None.N.Chatron:None.A. automated data reinterpretation, and availability of Vitobello: None. P. Rollat-Farnier: None. C. Baulard: secondary analysis (such as pharmacogenomics and None. M. Lelorch: None. A. Leduc: None. E. Tisserand: Mendelian predisposition panels) to enhance the utility None.F.TranMau-Them:None.M.Delepine:None.M. of genomic analysis. Till: None. V. Meyer: None. C. Bardel: None. S. B. Lundie: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- Lyonnet: None. A. Mosca-Boidron: None. J. Thevenon: cant;Genome.One.L.Ewans:A.Employment(fullorpart- None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. C. time); Signiﬁcant; NSW Health, Genome.One. E. Lee: A. Schluth-Bolard:None.A.Boland:None.R.Olaso:None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genome.One. P.Callier:None.S.Romana:None.J.Deleuze:None.D. G. Hollway: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- Sanlaville: None. cant; Genome.One. T. Ohnesorg: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genome.One. A. Statham: A. P14.106B Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genome.One. Utility of clinical Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS): L.Burnett:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; diagnostic success factors now and into the future Genome.One. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as B.Lundie1,L.Ewans1,2,E.Lee1,G.Hollway1,T.Ohnesorg1,A. grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Shire International. F. Statham1,L. Burnett1,3,4,5,M.Young1,H.Taouk1,E. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; (Honorary - no Richardson1, M.Dinger1,3 ﬁnancial compensation) Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia, Genetics Advisory Committee, Honorary - no 1Genome.One, Darlinghurst, Australia, 2NSW Health, ﬁnancial compensation) NSW Government.- Genetics Camperdown, Australia, 3Garvan Institute of Medical Services Network Executive Committee. M. Young: A. Research,Darlinghurst,Australia,4SydneyMedicalSchool,St Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genome.One. Leonards, Australia, 5St Vincent's Clinical School, UNSW, H. Taouk: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Darlinghurst, Australia Genome.One.E.Richardson:A.Employment(fullorpart- time); Signiﬁcant; Genome.One. M. Dinger: A. Employ- Introduction: Application of genomic technologies to ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genome.One, Garvan genetically heterogeneous complex disorders signiﬁcantly InstituteofMedicalResearch. B.Research Grant(principal increases diagnostic yields. WGS further increases diag- investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants nostic success over other genomic technologies. as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; National Methods: Genome.One is the world's ﬁrst ISO15189 Health and Medical Research Council of Australia. F. clinically-accredited WGS laboratory. In establishing this Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Australian Genomic clinical laboratory we solved various challenges and Health Alliance. identiﬁed potential directions to further leverage WGS for increasing clinical diagnoses. P14.107C Results: We reviewed clinical referrals from 400+ Low-coverage whole genome sequencing in plasma pedigrees (600+ individuals, 2/3 singleton referrals), with circulating cell-free DNA analysis: the Turner syndrome phenotypes ranging from intellectual disability to single experience organ disease. Many cases had extensive investigation (including microarray and exome sequencing) before P.Reho1,D.Larizza2,C.Montalbano2,D.Vergani3,M.Carella3, referral. 52% had reportable ﬁndings and 32% met ACMG A. Provenzano1,A.La Barbera1,V. Palazzo4, S.Landini1, E. class 4 or 5. Incidental ﬁndings were reported in 3% of Bosi1,R.Artuso4,A. Pagliazzi4,L. Giunti4,D.Formicola1,B. cases.Multidisciplinaryreviewmeetingsenabledcollabora- Lucherini4,M.Pantaleo4,I.Sani4,S.Guarducci4,S.Giglio1,4,O. tion between geographically distant groups, enhancing Zuffardi3 variant curation and patient care. Conclusions: We have largely solved issues relating to 1Medical Genetics Unit, Dpt. Experimental and Clinical library preparation, sequencing and primary bioinfor- Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio", University of Florence, matics. Variant prioritisation and interpretation remain Florence, Italy, 2Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, IRCCS challenges we are addressing with ﬁlter automation and Policlinico “San Matteo” Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 3Medical customsoftwaresolutions.Themostpromisingdiagnostic Genetics Unit, Dpt. Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, improvement (currently being implemented) is inclusion Pavia, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's ofstructural/copynumbervariantdetectionwith nolower University Hospital, Florence, Italy size limits. Further improvements are likely withAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 543 Turner syndrome (TS) is characterized by complete or Introduction: The ADME (absorption, distribution, meta- partial absence of the second sex chromosome, either in bolismandexcretion)genes'variationismarkedlyrelatedto mosaic or in all cells, in phenotypic female patients. ethnicityandshowsdistinctgeographicpatterns.Generally, Gonadoblastoma risk is increased in TS with Y chromo- the knowledge on distribution of ADME genes in isolated some, thus gonadectomy is strongly recommended before populations is limited, particularly in the Roma, transna- starting growth-hormone treatment. The detection of Y tional minority population of Indian origin. The aim of this chromosome, at low-level mosaic or as marker chromo- study is to determine the allele frequencies ADME “core some,maybetrickybystandardkaryotype(SK)andarray- list” markers and to compare them withworld-wide data in CGH (a-CGH). Thus, further molecular screening to detect ordertoelucidatethepositionofRomaintheglobalADME Y-chromosomal sequences is mandatory in TS individuals genetic landscape. who are negative by these approaches. Methods: The 95 loci from 32 ADME genes were We performed low-coverage (0.2x) whole genome genotyped using KASP method in 440 Croatian Roma sequencing (lc-WGS) of plasma cell-free DNA (cf-DNA) DNAsamples.Datawereanalyzedusingstandardstatistical to determine its potential role in TS diagnosis. population-genetics methods. Our study was performed on 64 TS patients, previously Results:Theanalysisofgeneticvs.geographicdistances characterizedbySKanda-CGHanalysisongenomicDNA, placed Croatian Roma among European populations but and 42 healthy controls (21 females, 21 males). Genome their proximity to South-Asian populations is also evident. coverageinformationfromcontrolswasusedasreferenceto Next, Roma show the outlying position on the global scale identify structural variants. in minor allele frequencies of 12 loci: for 9 loci within 8 We detected low-level mosaicism for XX or XY cell genes (rs1128503, rs1138272, rs1799853, rs1902023, lines, partial deletions/duplications of sex chromosomes rs3758581, rs8192709, rs10509681, rs12248560, indicating an iso-chromosome, X chromosome partial rs34059508) they have the highest frequency while for deletions, some of them suggesting a ring/marker chromo- three loci in three genes (rs28399433, rs28371725, some. WGS conﬁrmed SK results in 50/64 cases; we rs4149117)havethelowestfrequenciesoftheminorallele. detected nine X chromosome rearrangements at low-level Conclusions: The outlying positon in almost 13% of mosaic that, although hidden at SK, were conﬁrmed by a- ADME core markers results from the speciﬁc genetic CGH in all but 2 cases, and previously unreported Y historyoftheRomapopulation.Thisﬁndingmaybehelpful chromosome material was found in 5 patients. in developing personalized medicines’ protocols in drug Ourresultsshowthat,inclinicalsuspicionofTS,lc-WGS therapies for this speciﬁc population. The research was in cf-DNA is a valuable screening test for the detection of funded by Croatian Science Foundation grant (HRZZ-IP- low-level mosaicism and complex structural chromosome 2014-09-4454) to MPS. abnormalities, in the face of extremely content cost. T. Skaric-Juric: None. N. Smolej Narancic: None. B. P. Reho: None. D. Larizza: None. C. Montalbano: Janicijevic: None. M. Zajc Petranovic: None. Z. Tomas: None. D. Vergani: None. M. Carella: None. A. Proven- None. M. Pericic Salihovic: None. zano: None. A. La Barbera: None. V. Palazzo: None. S. Landini: None. E. Bosi: None. R. Artuso: None. A. P15.02B Pagliazzi:None.L.Giunti:None.D.Formicola:None.B. Association of ADORA3 gene polymorphisms with efﬁcacy Lucherini: None. M. Pantaleo: None. I. Sani: None. S. and toxicity of methotrexate Guarducci: None. S. Giglio: None. O. Zuffardi: None. M.B.Grk1,B.Jekić1,V.Milić2,V.Dolzan3,N.Maksimović1,T. Damnjanović1,M.DuanovićPjević1, M.Peić1 P15 Personalized/Predictive Medicine and Pharmacogenomics 1Institute of Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Rheumatology, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Biochemistry, P15.01A Phaemacogenetics Laboratory, Ljubljana, Slovenia Position of Croatian Roma in the global ADME core markers’ variation landscape Introduction:AdenosineA3receptor(ADORA3)ispartof the adenosine-mediated antiinﬂammatory pathway. These T. Skaric-Juric, N.SmolejNarancic, B. Janicijevic,M.Zajc receptorsareover-expressedinperipheral blood leukocytes Petranovic,Z. Tomas, M.PericicSalihovic and synovia of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Methotrexate (MTX), the anchor drug and part of the ﬁrst Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia treatment strategy in RA patients, exerts its antiinﬂamatory effects via increased release of adenosine into the544 J.delPicchia extracellular space. Adenosine binds to ADORA2a and A3 COL6A1 as a genetic cause of Collagen VI-related dystro- and initiates an antiinﬂammatory response. Therefore phies (COL6-RD). The variant, located in intron 11, leads ADORA3 gene polymorphisms could have an impact on to the insertion of a dominantly-acting pseudoexon that MTX therapy outcome. disrupts the gene’s critical motif. They estimate that ~25% Materials and Methods: We have analyzed 118 RA of all cases with COL6-RD, but negative by exon sequen- patientsonMTXmonotherapywhosediagnoseswerebased cingareduetothismutation.Thisvariantwasfoundinade on ACR/EULAR criteria. Genotypisation within ADORA3 novo pattern in over 30 patients, and we recently identiﬁed gene (rs3393, rs1544223, rs2298191) was performed using itinourlabina4yearoldgirlwithCOL6-RD.Aspartofin the KASP genotyping system. MTX efﬁcacy was assessed silico machine learning tools we are developing in our lab, basedonthechangesintheDiseaseactivityscore(DAS28) we designed 16 AONs with 2’-OMe modiﬁcations and a after 6 months of treatment according to the EULAR phosphorothioate backbone to correct the c.904+189C>T responsecriteria.Patientswithgoodandmoderateresponse variant. The most effective AONs were able to reduce the wereclassiﬁedas‘’responders’’,whereaspatientswithpoor mutant allele by 95% in a dose dependent manner. The response were considered ‘’nonresponders’’. Data of AONs designed in this work, as well as those designed in adverse effects were collected during this period. MTX the independent work by Bolduc et al., may offer a treat- efﬁcacy and toxicity were compared among patients with ment for children suffering from the collagen VI-like dys- different genotypes. trophy. We expect the knowledge gained in this project to Results: Among patients 106 (89,8%) were responders. be applicable to a wide range of splice mutations. Grant Adverseeffectswerereportedin24(20,3%)patients.There support: Thrasher Research Fund was no signiﬁcant difference in therapy response between D. Yagel: None. Y. Anikster: None. A. Veber: None. patients with different genotypes. Two patients had bone M. Shohat: None. marrow complications, both were carriers of rare alleles of all three polymorphisms (p=0,02). P15.04D Conclusions: According to our results, ADORA3 gene Reporting genetic risks to participants of the Estonian polymorphisms may inﬂuence bone marrow toxicity in RA Biobank, Genome Center patients treated with MTX. M.B. Grk: None. B. Jekić: None. V. Milić: None. V. M.Palover1,2, L.Leitsalu1,K. Krebs1,2,K. Läll1,3,M. Kals1,3,T. Dolzan: None. N. Maksimović: None. T. Damnjanović: Nikopensius1, A.Reigo1,L. Milani1, K.Fischer1, R.Mägi1, A. None. M. Duanović Pjević: None. M. Peić: None. Allik1,B. Kolk1,K. Metsalu1,M. Puusepp1, K.Mikkel1, M. Tammesoo1,E. Pintsaar1,T. Temberg1,S. Reisberg4,5,6, J. P15.03C Vilo4,5,6, T.Esko1,7,N.Tõnisson1,8, A.Metspalu1 Correction of splice mutation in COL6A1 gene with novel antisense oligonucleotides as prototype for other orphan 1Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, Tartu, geneticdiseases Estonia,2InstituteofMolecularandCellBiology,Universityof Tartu,Tartu,Estonia,3Institute ofMathematicsandStatistics, D.Yagel1,Y. Anikster1,2,A. Veber1,M.Shohat3 University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Software 1Metabolic Disease Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Technology and Applications Competence Center, Tartu, Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Estonia, 6Quretec Ltd, Tartu, Estonia, 7Broad Institute, Israel, 2The Wohl Institute for Translational Medicine, Sheba Cambridge,MA,UnitedStates,8DepartmentofGenetics,Tartu Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel, 3Sheba University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center,Tel- Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel Introduction:TheEstonianGenomeCenterattheInstitute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Estonia (EGCUT) holds Premessenger RNA splicing is a necessary step in the pro- genotype and health data of nearly ~52,000 individuals. At duction of a functional protein product. Many genetic var- the end of 2017, EGCUT has started offering personalised iants lead to aberrant splicing and cause genetic diseases. genetic risk predictions to its participants. The reports One prominent technique for correcting splicing-related include genetic risk scores for common diseases, carrier mutations is through the use of splice-switching antisense status, other hereditary risk factors, and pharmacogenetic oligonucleotides (AONs). The antisense drug Nusinersen recommendations. for SMA, recently approved by the FDA, is one notable Methods:Todate,47,000biobankparticipantshavebeen example. Cummings et al. recently identiﬁed a highly genotyped with the Illumina Global Screening Array and recurrent pathogenic splice variant (c.904+189C>T) in nearly 5,000 individuals have whole genome or exomeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 545 sequencing data available. Digital semi-automated report topotecan, vinblastine, and vinorelbine. These are com- assemblyandparticipantportalhavebeensetupforsigning prised of 3 - 17 biochemically-relevant genes, and have an informed consent for return of results, scheduling the misclassiﬁcation rates from 0% to 26.1%. Validation is counselling appointment and updating one’s records. For performed in patients with breast, bladder, ovarian, and common complex diseases genetic risk scores (GRS) are colon cancers. Signatures derived from tumour cell lines calculated. For type 2 diabetes, 10-year risk estimates predicted complete remission from paclitaxel treatment in incorporating both GRS and classical risk factors are 84% of breast cancer patients (10% more accurate than provided.Clinicallyactionablegeneticvariantsarereported differential expression analysis). Expression of MAPT based on ACMG guidelines. The immediate and long-term correlated with survival in paclitaxel-treated breast cancer feedback of the participants is surveyed to understand the patients. Cisplatin and hydroxycyclophosphamide- impact of the return of results. resistance were respectively predicted with 71% and 66% Results: 1283 participants have expressed interest accuracyinbladderandbreastcancerpatients.Analysisofa through logging into the patient portal, 499 have registered comprehensivesetML-basedgenesignaturesforapanelof for feedback visit and 209 have attended to the genetic drugs in primary tumours would be feasible to carry out counselling session from November 2017 to mid-February prior totreatment,andcould inﬂuenceselectionoftherapy. 2018, with an average of 24 participants in per week. If current treatment plans are not adequate, ML-based Conclusions: The EGCUT initiative of return of results genomic proﬁling may also offer alternative tailored stra- to population biobank participants provides insight on how tegiesforadjuvantchemotherapies.1Mol.Oncol.10:85-100, healthy individuals respond to personalised genetic risk 2016; 2F1000Res. 5:2124, 2017; 3bioRxiv. https://doi.org/ information.Thelong-termaimoftheprojectistopromote 10.1101/231712.Funding:NSERCDiscovery RGPIN-2015- the introduction of personalised medicine in Estonia. 06290. M. Palover: None. L. Leitsalu: None. K. Krebs: None. P.K. Rogan: Other; Signiﬁcant; CytogGnomix. E.J. K. Läll: None. M. Kals: None. T. Nikopensius: None. A. Mucaki: None. J.Z.L. Zhao: None. J.H.M. Knoll: Other; Reigo: None. L. Milani: None. K. Fischer: None. R. Signiﬁcant; CytoGnomix. Mägi:None.A.Allik: None.B.Kolk:None.K.Metsalu: None. M. Puusepp: None. K. Mikkel: None. M. P15.06B Tammesoo:None.E.Pintsaar:None.T.Temberg:None. Novel copy-number variations in pharmacogenes S. Reisberg: None. J. Vilo: None. T. Esko: None. N. contribute to interindividual differences in drug Tõnisson: None. A. Metspalu: None. pharmacokinetics P15.05A M.Santos1,M. Niemi2,M. Hiratsuka3,M.Kumondai3,M. Comprehensive prediction of responses to chemotherapies Ingelman-Sundberg4,V. M.Lauschke4,C. Rodríguez-Antona1,5 by biochemically-inspired machine learning 1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, P. K.Rogan, E.J. Mucaki,J. Z.L. Zhao,J. H.M.Knoll Spain, 2University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan, 4Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada Sweden, 5ISCIII Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases, Madrid, Spain Chemotherapy response varies signiﬁcantly among cancer patients, and drug resistance is responsible for signiﬁcant Introduction: Variability in pharmacokinetics and drug amount of this mortality. The patterns of gene expression response is shaped by single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) as and copy number changes in the tumour can predict treat- well as copy-number variants (CNVs) in genes with ment outcomes after chemotherapy by supervised machine importance for drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, learning (ML)1-3. Computational models based on tran- andexcretion(ADME).WhileSNVshavebeenextensively scriptome gene signatures of tumor cell lines were used studied, a systematic assessment of the CNV landscape in predictchemosensitivityandresistancefor25cancerdrugs. ADME genes is lacking. This learned set of genes was used to predict clinical out- Methods:Weintegrateddatafrom2,504wholegenomes comes from tumor transcriptomes. Gene signatures have from the 1000 Genomes Project and 59,898 exomes from been derived for 5-ﬂuorouracil, bortezomib, carboplatin, the Exome Aggregation Consortium to identify CNVs in cisplatin, docetaxel, doxorubicin, erlotinib, epirubicin, eto- 208 relevant pharmacogenes. poside, geﬁtinib, gemcitabine, hydroxycyclophosphamide, Results: We describe novel exonic deletions and imatinib, irinotecan, Ixabepilone, methotrexate, oxaliplatin, duplications in 201 (97%) of the pharmacogenes analyzed. paclitaxel, pemetrexed, rapamycin, sorafenib, tamoxifen, Thedeletionsarepopulation-speciﬁcandfrequenciesrange546 J.delPicchia fromsingletonsupto1%,accountingfor>5%ofallloss-of- (BioRad) and QuantStudio™3D (Applied Biosystems) function alleles in up to 42% of the genes studied. We platforms. Quantiﬁcation and detection limits and false experimentally conﬁrmed novel deletions in CYP2C19, positive rates were deﬁned. To establish genotypic CYP4F2, and SLCO1B3 by Sanger sequencing and concordance designs were tested in Horizon lines and/or validated their allelic frequencies in selected populations. FFPE samples previously quantiﬁed. Conclusions: CNVs are an additional source of pharma- Results:Thedesigndetectedthecompletebiomarker-set. cogenetic variability with important implications for drug False positive rate, and detection and quantiﬁcation means response and personalized therapy. This, together with the are described in the table. Selected variants were identiﬁed important contribution of rare alleles to the variability of in both Horizon lines and clinical samples within a 0.4- pharmacogenes,emphasizesthenecessityofcomprehensive 1.6% quantiﬁcation concordance. next-generation sequencing–based genotype identiﬁcation for an accurate prediction of the genetic variability of drug Descriptionoftheobtainedtechnicalparameters pharmacokinetics. ddPCR Sensitivity MeanFalse Mean MeanLimit TurnaroundTime This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of positiveRate LDiemteicttoiofn oQfuantiﬁcation Economy and Competiveness (grant SAF2015-64850-R), KRAS 0.001% 0.045% 0.657% 0.813% 1day by the Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport NRAS 0.810% 1.190% 1.190% (grant FPU16/05527), by the European Union’s Horizon EGFRindels 0.084% 0.359% 0.459% 2020 research and innovation program U-PGx under grant EGFRSNVs 0.063% 0.187% 0.285% BRAF 0.279% 0.513% 0.513% agreement 668353, and by the Swedish Research Council Pyrosequencing(data 5% 1-5% 5-10% 5% 2days (grant agreements 2015-02760, 2016-01153, and 2016- describedinpublished literature) 01154). SangerSequencing 15% 5% 5% 5-10% 2-3days (datadescribedin M. Santos: None. M. Niemi: None. M. Hiratsuka: publishedliterature) None. M. Kumondai: None. M. Ingelman-Sundberg: None. V.M. Lauschke: None. C. Rodríguez- Antona: None. Conclusions: Our results show ddPCR as an ultrasensi- tive low time-processing technology with affordable P15.07C requirements (simple designs, manageable procedures, Innovative, high-sensitive and short-term Digital Droplet suitability for complex samples). These features make PCR (ddPCR) methodology development, for oncologic ddPCR the optimal technique for biomarker quantiﬁcation therapy response associated biomarkers quantiﬁcation inoncologicaltherapy,providingusefulgeneticinformation fordrugselection.Thistestingtranslationtoclinicalroutine A.Andújar1,Y.Moreno1,S.Valverde1,L.Arocas1,R.Martínez1, would increase therapy effectiveness, shorten elapsed-time L.Pérez-Cabornero1,C.Buades1,S.Santillán1,V.Calabuig2,R. until treatment administering, and prevent adverse effects Miñambres2,C.M. Moya1, D.M. Valero-Hervás1 development. A. Andújar: None. Y. Moreno: None. S. Valverde: 1Medical Genetics Unit, Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, None. L. Arocas: None. R. Martínez: None. L. Pérez- Valencia, Spain, 2I+D+I Department, Sistemas Genómicos, Cabornero: None. C. Buades: None. S. Santillán: None. Paterna, Valencia, Spain V. Calabuig: None. R. Miñambres: None. C.M. Moya: None. D.M. Valero-Hervás: None. Introduction: Outstanding advances in pharmacogenetics knowledge and its inﬂuence in oncological therapy success P15.08D has impelled the need of a high-sensitive and short Pipeline for knowledge curation and decision support in turnaround-time methodologies for quantiﬁcation of opti- pharmacogenomics mal drug treatment biomarkers. ddPCR technique has demonstrated the best sensitivity and turnaround-time/cost S. U.Gjerald1, N.Vethe1,S.SkogstadTuv1,K. Nordal1,S. ratio. The aim of this work was to develop a ddPCR assay Alagaratnam2,T. Håndstad1, S.Bergan1,3 for biomarker quantiﬁcation in NRAS, KRAS, EGFR and BRAF genes. 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2DNV GL, Høvik, Materials and Methods: Mutant control fragments for Norway, 3University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway twenty-nine selected high frequency-biomarkers were generated through directed mutagenesis and conﬁrmed by The introduction of whole-genome sequencing in clinical SangerSequencing.Themethodologywasdevelopedusing practice has opened a path for preemptive, opportunistic allele frequency positive controls mixes for QX200 pharmacogenomics (PGx) testing. The PharmacogenomicsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 547 Knowledgebase (PharmGKB) distributes clinical dosing Germany, 8Department of Neurology, St. Elisabeth Hospital, guidelines, and provides a link between these guidelines Willemstad, Curaçao, Netherlands Antilles, 9Department of and genomic variants. Before applying this knowledge in BiomedicalandClinicalSciences"LuigiSacco",Universityof healthcare,itisnecessarytoverifyandadapttheguidelines Milan, Milano, Italy to local practices. We describe a pipeline for translating knowledge from knowledge databases such as PharmGKB Diabetic patients can develop painful (PDN) or painless into a system that is valid for PGx decision support in our (PLDN) neuropathy irrespective of the severity or dura- clinic. tion of diabetes. Understanding the underlying genetic We implement the pipeline using the Web Ontology background would allow developing personalized thera- Language (OWL) in order to keep the semantics of the pies. We examined the incidence of variants in ten decision support system compatible with PharmGKB Voltage-GatedSodiumChannels(VGSCs)genesinPDN/ knowledge. OWL ontologies allow for automatic testing PLDN patients and analyzed if differences in frequency, of ontology coherence, and the inference of dosing protein localization or pathogenicity correlated with the recommendations based on the genomic variants in each phenotypestratiﬁcation.VGSCsgenesweresequencedby patient. Molecular Inversion Probe-NGS and run on NextSeq500 Wedemonstratehowwehavetranslatedthesemanticsof Illumina©. The variant selection and the pathogenicity the PharmGKB linked data model into an OWL ontology. classiﬁcation were performed according to the ACGS We emphasize the strategy for aligning the PharmGKB guidelines. We analyzed 547 patients: PDN (41.5%) and deﬁnitions of indel and structural variants with patient PLDN(58.5%).Weidentiﬁed33rarevariantsexclusively variants. Thenwe outlinehowwe use aweb-based toolfor carried by PDN (N=38) and 42 exclusively carried by collaborativecurationofPGxknowledge.Finally,weshow PLDN (N=47). The distribution of the mutations among how we can provide curated dosing recommendations to the VGSCs genes is reported in the table. 6 PDN patients whole-genomesequencedpatients,exempliﬁedbythedrugs with more than 1 mutation were prevalently carrying azathioprine and clopidogrel. SCN9A mutations whereas the 8 plurimutated PLDN The work received funding from project number 247965 patients were prevalently carrying SCN10A mutations. of the IKTPLUSS-programme of the Research Council of According to pathogenicity classiﬁcation, 84.9% was Norway. representedbyClass3mutationsand12.1%byClass4in S.U.Gjerald:None.N.Vethe:None.S.Skogstad Tuv: the PDN cohort, whereas in the PLDN were 83.3% and None. K. Nordal: None. S. Alagaratnam: None. T. 9.5% respectively. Considering the protein localization, Håndstad: None. S. Bergan: None. PDNmostlycarriedvariantslocatedinthelinkerDII-DIII (83.3%), PLDN in the C-terminal (87.5%). This study P15.09A describes the genetic proﬁling in PDN/PLDN neuropathy Geneticproﬁlingofvoltage-gatedsodiumcannelsinpainful suggesting a preliminary approach for the phenotype and painless diabetic neuropathy stratiﬁcation based on VGSCs genetic characterization. Grant: PROPANE Health-602273. M.Marchi1,M.Molasy2,R.Almomani2,M.Gerrits2,E.Salvi1,3, I.D'Amato1,R.Malik4,5,D.Ziegler6,7,G.Bönhof6,I.Merkies2,8, SYMBOL PDN PLDN Total C. Faber2,G.Lauria1,9 SCN3A 2(50%) 2(50%) 4 1Neuroalgology Unit, IRCCS Foundation “Carlo Besta” SCN7A 7(50%) 7(50%) 14 Neurological Institute, Milano, Italy, 2Clinical Genetics and SCN8A 1(33.3%) 2(66.7%) 3 Department of Neurology, Maastricht University Medical SCN9A 4(50%) 4(50%) 8 Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Department of Health SCN10A 7(33.3%) 14(66.7%) 21 Sciences, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 4Institute of SCN11A 5(41.7%) 7(58.3%) 12 HumanDevelopment,CentreforEndocrinologyandDiabetes, SCN1B 2(50%) 2(50%) 4 University of Manchester and Central Manchester NHS SCN2B 2(40%) 3(60%) 5 Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science SCN3B 2(66.7%) 1(33.3%) 3 Center, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Department of SCN4B 1(100%) 0(0%) 1 Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, Doha, Qatar, 6Institute for Total 33(44%) 42(56%) 75 ClinicalDiabetology,GermanDiabetesCenter,LeibnizCenter forDiabetesResearch,HeinrichHeineUniversity,Düsseldorf, Germany, 7Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, M. Marchi: None. M. Molasy: None. R. Almomani: Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, None. M. Gerrits: None. E. Salvi: None. I. D'Amato:548 J.delPicchia None. R. Malik: None. D. Ziegler: None. G. Bönhof: P15.11C None. I. Merkies: None. C. Faber: None. G. Modulation of cGMP and cAMP as a new therapeutic Lauria: None. target for Fragile X Syndrome P15.10B B.Bardoni1,V.Trezza2,S.Martin1,P.Vincent3,L.Ciranna4,M. Detection of Familial Chylomicronemia Syndrome in a Jarjat1,S. Delhaye1,S.Castagnola1,F. Melancia2,T. Maurin1 cohort of patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia through a Next Generation Sequencing approach 1Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Valbonne, France, 2University Roma 3, Roma, Italy, 3Institut A. DiCostanzo, L.D'Erasmo, F.Cassandra,I.Minicocci, L. deBiologieParisSeine,Paris,France,4UniversitàdiCatania, Polito,M. Arca Catania, Italy La Sapienza, Roma, Italy Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most common form of inherited intellectual disability and a leading cause of aut- Aims:FamilialChylomicronemiasyndrome(FCS)isarare ism spectrum disorder (ASD). It is due to the functional recessive disease caused by mutations in LPL, APOC2, deﬁciency of the Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein APOA5, LMF1 and GPIHBP1 genes. It is characterized by (FMRP), an RNA-binding protein involved in translational very severe hypertriglyceridemia (HTG) with or without regulation of many proteins having key roles in synaptic episodesofabdominalpainandrecurrentacutepancreatitis. morphology and plasticity. No speciﬁc and effective treat- FCS diagnosis is often difﬁcult due to its phenotypic ment for FXS is available. We searched for FMRP targets similarity with other forms of severe hypertriglyceridemia. byHITS-CLIPduringearlydevelopmentofmultiplemouse Theaimofourstudywastodetectpathogenicmutationsin brain regions (hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum) at a candidate genes in patients with suspected FCS based on time when FMRP is most highly expressed and synapto- speciﬁc clinical criteria and evaluate clinical differences genesis peaks. Our data point out one speciﬁc phospho- between genotypes. diesterase mRNA as a prominent target of FMRP which Methods: By examining 3000 clinical records, 31 negatively modulates its translation and intracellular trans- patients were classiﬁed as suspected FCS on the following port. Since the abundance of this protein and activity are criteria: a) plasma trigliceridemia (TG) levels >1000 mg/dl increased in Fmr1-KO cortex and hippocampus impacting inmultipledeterminations;b)resistancetopharmacological the homeostasis of cAMP/cGMP, we propose here a new therapy; c) history of acute pancreatitis. All patients therapeutic approach for FXS, based on the speciﬁc phar- underwent fully clinical examination and their information macological inhibition of this protein. We will present data were collected retrospectively. Candidate genes were showing pharmacological inhibition ofthis enzymerescues sequenced using Next generation sequencing (NGS) some behavioral deﬁcits in newborn and adolescent Fmr1- technique. nullmicesuchassocialcommunication,discriminationand Results: 51.6% subjects were carriers of FCS causing interaction. Importantly, chronic blockade in newborn mutations, the majority in LPL gene (56.2%). Compared to Fmr1-KO mice, followed by a wash-out interval, results in non-carriers, FCS patients showed higher prevalence of therescueofthealteredsocialbehaviorinadolescentmice, history of acute pancreatitis (P=0.04) and early onset of showingthatthebeneﬁcialeffectsofearlypharmacological HTG (P=0.0008). Comparing homozygous carriers of blockade of our target are long-lasting. mutations in other genes with LPL homozygotes, the latter B. Bardoni: None. V. Trezza: None. S. Martin: None. group showed higher TG levels (P<0.001) and lower TG P.Vincent:None.L.Ciranna:None.M.Jarjat:None.S. reduction during treatment (P =0.03). Delhaye:None.S.Castagnola:None.F.Melancia:None. adj Conclusions: Our data suggests that the proposed T. Maurin: None. diagnostic criteria are highly predictive of FCS diagnosis insevereHTGpatients.MutationsinLPLgenearethemost P15.12D common cause of FCS and homozygous carriers of Preliminary genomic analysis of the GenoFit cohort: a mutations in LPL gene have the more severe clinical health and ﬁtness study phenotype. A. Di Costanzo: None. L. D'Erasmo: None. F. E.M.Quinn1,D.Crognale2,A.W.Ryan1,A.Butler2,J.Dolan1, Cassandra: None. I. Minicocci: None. L. Polito: None. J.Pratt2,T.Magalhaes1,R.Carr2,R.Moran1,K.O’Connell2,J. M. Arca: None. Conroy1, G.DeVito3,C. Boreham2,3,S.Ennis1,4Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 549 1Genomics Medicine Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 2UCD Institute 1Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal for Sport and Health, University College Dublin, Dublin, Physiology, University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Ireland, 3UCD School of Public Health, Physiotherapy and Leioa, Spain, 2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Sports Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, Donostia, San Sebastian, Spain, 3Department of Pediatrics, 4University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Leioa, Spain, 4Department of Oncohematology, University Hospital La Paz, In addition to the elucidation of complex disease risk, Madrid,Spain,5DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityHospital genomewideassociationstudies(GWAS)havepotentialto Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain, 6BioCruces Health Research uncover the genetic components of health, ﬁtness and Institute, Barakaldo, Spain wellness.Geneticvariantsassociatedwithquantitativetraits such as height, adiposity (BMI/waist hip ratio/visceral fat), Background & Aims: Hepatotoxicity is one of the most bloodpressureandhandgripstrengthhavebeenuncovered common drug-related toxicity during the treatment of in multiple studies. GenoFit is a recently initiated study of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). During the genetic basis of health and ﬁtness associated variation, induction,thistoxicitymaybeduetoasparaginasewhilein collected among attendees of a university ﬁtness centre. consolidation is typically associated with methotrexate GenoFit participants are physically assessed for general (MTX). Pharmacogenetic studies have identiﬁed SNPs health and ﬁtness measures including bone and muscle strongly associated with this toxicity in children with ALL health. Participants also complete a detailed lifestyle ques- duringtheinductionwhileduringconsolidation,mostofthe tionnaire.Theageproﬁleoftheparticipantsvariesfromthe studieshaveanalyzedfewvariantsinMTXpathwaygenes, student population to locally resident individuals in their with no clear markers. Recently, we found association 70s and 80s. Fitness and adiposity metrics are approxi- between another MTX-related toxicity, mucositis, and a mately representative of the general population. The ﬁnal SNP in miR-1206. Many genes involved in liver-speciﬁc target population is 5,000 individuals. The genomes of all signaling pathways are tightly controlled by miRNAs. In enrolled individuals will be whole genome sequenced to a consequence, we hypothesized that variants in miRNAs depth of 30x and genotyped using an Affymetrix precision targeting ASP-related genes in induction and MTX-related medicine research array containing over 800,000 markers. genes in consolidation could be also associated with drug- Todate,277individualshavebeengenotyped,andanalysed induced hepatotoxicity. using linear regression for quantitative trait association Methods: Therefore, we analyzed all the SNPs in using PLINK v1.9. Analyses have yielded nominally sig- miRNAs that could target these drug-related genes in a niﬁcant (uncorrected P < 0.05) association signals for large cohort of Spanish children with ALL homogeneously established genetic loci for adiposity (BMI/waist hip ratio: treated. FTO,MC4R,GNPDAP2,GRB14,CPEB4,FAM13A).With Results:Atotalof5SNPsin5miRNAsduringinduction the current sample size, no loci reached genome-wide sig- were associated with hepatotoxicity and 11 different SNPs niﬁcance. This non-obese Irish population sample is cur- in 10 miRNAs during consolidation, which suggests rently under active ongoing sample collection, phenotypic different mechanisms. Among them, we pointed out characterisation and molecular analysis with the aim of rs2648841 in miR-1208 which was the most signiﬁcant developing a valuable resource for future genomic studies. SNP associated with hepatotoxicity during consolidation E.M. Quinn: None. D. Crognale: None. A.W. Ryan: phase after Bonferroni correction, probably through a None.A.Butler:None.J.Dolan:None.J.Pratt:None.T. higher expression of its target genes in the MTX Magalhaes: None. R. Carr: None. R. Moran: None. K. pharmacodynamic pathway, DHFR, MTR and MTHFR. O’Connell: None.J.Conroy:None.G.DeVito: None.C. Conclusions: These results support the importance of Boreham: None. S. Ennis: None. miRNAsstudiestounderstandthedifferencesintoxicityto chemotherapy in children diagnosed with ALL. P15.13A A. Gutierrez-Camino: None. M. Umerez: None. B. rs2648841inmiR-1208isinvolvedinhepatotoxicityduring Santos: None. I. Martín-Guerrero: None. E. Lopez- consolidation in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia Lopez: None. N. García de Andoin: None. A. Sastre: treatment None. A. Navajas: None. I. Astigarraga: None. A. García-Orad: None. A. Gutierrez-Camino1, M.Umerez1,B. Santos1,I.Martín- Guerrero1,E.Lopez-Lopez1,N.GarcíadeAndoin2,3,A.Sastre4, P15.15C A. Navajas5,6,I.Astigarraga3,5,6,A.García-Orad1,6 Generation of patient-speciﬁc hiPSCs model to study POLD1-related MDPL syndrome550 J.delPicchia P. Spitalieri1,R. V.Talarico1,M. Murdocca1,C. DeMasi1,E. The study of human development and diseases relies on Campione2,A. Seraﬁno3, M.D'Adamo2,4,P. Sbraccia2,4,M. R. analysis of samples obtained and manipulated ex vivo. It is D'Apice4, G.Novelli1, F.Sangiuolo1 criticalinsuchstudiestoknowtheprovenanceandconﬁrm that the identity of these materials is correct. Analysis of 1Dept.ofBiomedicineandPrevention,TorVergataUniversity, highly variable short tandem repeats (STRs), provides a Rome, Italy, 2Dept. of Systems Medicine,Tor Vergata simple, inexpensive and highly speciﬁc genetic “ﬁnger- University, Rome, Italy, 3IFT, Italian National Research print” of a human sample. In this study, we describe a Council, Rome, Italy, 4University Hospital Policlinico Tor completeworkﬂowforcelllineauthenticationandchimeric Vergata, Rome, Italy receptor T-cell (CAR T) and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) sample matching. Analysis of serial dilutions of Mandibular hypoplasia, Deafness and Progeroid features puriﬁed genomic DNA from isolated human cell lines with concomitant Lipodystrophy and insulin resistance, identiﬁed the correct alleles from as little as 0.1ng of pur- deﬁne a multisystem disorder named MDPL syndrome. iﬁed DNA. Samples immobilized onto Copan NUCLEIC MDPL has been associated to de novo heterozygous Cardswerecorrectlyidentiﬁedwhenasuspensionof5-10x mutationsinPOLD1genewhichencodestheactivesiteof 105 cells were dried onto the cards. Contaminating HeLa DNA polymerase δ, involved in DNA replication and alleles could be detected in a mixture when they were repair mechanisms. Recent cellular studies revealed present in as little as 1% of genomic DNA from this complexaetiologyofthisdisorder,withanimportantrole population.BlindedsamplesofdonorandiPSCs,aswellas for POLD1 function in adipose homeostasis. To date, 22 manipulated CAR T cells, were correctly matched in every cases with POLD1-related MDPL syndrome have been case tested. Together, these results describe a facile and reported worldwide. In order to improve our under- consolidated workﬂow for establishing the provenance, standing on the molecular mechanisms of the MDPL authenticity and identity of ex vivo-obtained human disease, we generated human induced pluripotent stem samples. cells (hiPSCs) from dermal ﬁbroblasts obtained from a S. Jackson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- patient harbouring the recurrent heterozygous in-frame niﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. D. Yoder: A. Employ- deletionp.Ser605delwithinpolymerasedomain.Thecells ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher displayed expression of stemness markers by immuno- Scientiﬁc. K. Varma: A. Employment (full or part-time); ﬂuorescence studies and normal pluripotent stem cell Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. morphology. In addition, despite MDPL- hiPSCs showed normal phenotypes without signiﬁcant nuclear abnorm- P15.18B alities, we highlighted the presence of micronuclei, that Immunecheckpoints PD-1andPD-L1polymorphismsand correlates with DNA damage repair defects and genome outcome of cisplatin-based chemotherapy in malignant instability. Their subsequent differentiation into adipose mesothelioma tissue,thatismainlyinvolvedintheMDPLdisease,could represent an outstanding opportunity to yield additional K. Goričar1,V. Kovač2,V. Dolan1 insights into the pathophysiology of fat loss. Finally, this new tool might be used for drug screening and further 1Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry, development of targeted therapeutic approaches. Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, P. Spitalieri: None. R.V. Talarico: None. M. Mur- Slovenia,2InstituteofOncologyLjubljana,Ljubljana,Slovenia docca: None. C. De Masi: None. E. Campione: None. A. Seraﬁno: None. M. D'Adamo: None. P. Sbraccia: None. Introduction: Immune checkpoints such as programmed M.R. D'Apice: None. G. Novelli: None. F. cell death 1 (PD-1) or programmed cell death 1 ligand 1 Sangiuolo: None. (PD-L1) are key modulators of a balanced physiological immune response. Cancer cells can exploit these mechan- P15.17A isms to evade immune response and PD-1 or PD-L1 inhi- Conﬁrming the identity of human cell lines and other ex bitors have recently proved successful in several tumors. vivo-manipulated human samples However, PD-1 and PD-L1 expression may also confer resistancetocisplatin-basedchemotherapy,commonlyused S. Jackson,D.Yoder,K. Varma in treatment of malignant mesothelioma (MM). Our aim was therefore to determine whether polymorphisms in Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, South San Francisco, CA, United immune checkpoint genes inﬂuence treatment outcome in States MM patients.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 551 Materials and Methods: MM patients treated with melanoma individuals and 65 melanoma patients (25 stage gemcitabine/cisplatin or pemetrexed/cisplatin doublet che- III melanoma patients, 6 IV melanoma patients and 32 motherapyweregenotypedforsixpolymorphismsingenes disease-free melanoma patients). Nevus count information coding for PD-1 (PDCD1) and PD-L1 (CD274). Cox and and presence of clinically atypical nevi was available in logistic regression were used to assess their inﬂuence on 97.2% and 91.5% individuals, respectively. We detect treatment outcome. cfBRAFV600E in plasma of 83.3% of stage IV melanoma Results:Among171MMpatients,carriersofatleastone patient,14.8%ofstageIIImelanomapatients,3.1%disease polymorphic CD274 rs4742098 (c.*2635A>G) allele were free melanoma patients and 4.1% of non-melanoma more likely to achieve partial or complete response after patients. The amount of cfBRAFV600E plasma was higher gemcitabine/cisplatintreatmentcompared tocarriersoftwo instageIVmelanomapatients(377.8±5224copies/mL)and wild-typealleles(OR=2.19,95%CI=1.02-4.71,P=0.045). stage III melanoma patients (16.7±214.8 copies/mL) com- They also had signiﬁcantly longer progression-free (9.1 vs pare to non-melanoma individuals (5.28±3.64 copies/mL). 7.1 months, HR=0.64, 95% CI=0.43-0.94, P=0.025) and In addition, percentage of mutation differ between mela- overall survival (21.5 vs 14.0 months, HR=0.59, 95% noma patients (>0.65% cfBRAFV600E) and disease free CI=0.39-0.91, P=0.016). Regarding adverse events, melanoma patients and non-melanoma patients (<0.65% CD274 rs4742098 was associated with increased risk of cfBRAFV600).Associationbetweennevuscountorclinically nausea/vomiting (P=0.024) and alopecia (P=0.036). atypicalneviandcfBRAFV600Ewasnotstatisticallyassessed CD274 rs4143815 and PDCD1 rs10204525 were also due to the limited number of cfBRAFV600E subjects. How- associatedwithincreasedriskofnausea/vomiting(P=0.023 ever, individuals with high number of nevi showed higher and P=0.025, respectively). concentration of cfBRAFV600E. In conclusion, cfBRAFV600E Conclusions: Genetic variability of PD-1 and PD-L1 can be detected in individuals without melanoma. Thus, is immune checkpoints may inﬂuence response to gemcita- necessary to stablish normality threshold of cfBRAFV600E bine/cisplatinchemotherapyandcouldsupportpersonalized fortheimplementationoftheanalysisintoclinicalpractice. treatment in MM. This study was funded by Grant PI15/00956 from Fondo Acknowledgements: ARRS-L3-8203 project grant. Investigaciones Sanitarias, Spain. K. Goričar: None. V. Kovač: None. V. Dolan: None. J.A. Puig-Butillé: None.N.Calbet: None.M. Potrony: None. P. Aguilera: None. C. Carrera: None. S. Puig: P15.19C None. J. Malvehy: None. Detection of cfBRAFV600E in plasma from melanoma patients and non-melanoma individuals P15.22B Transcriptional modulation induced by ﬁngolimod J.A. Puig-Butillé1,N.Calbet2,M. Potrony3,P. Aguilera3,C. treatment in Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis Carrera3,S. Puig3,J.Malvehy3 patients 1Molecular Biology CORE, Biochemistry and Molecular F. Clarelli1,P. Provero2,3,L. Ferrè1,4,G.Sferruzza1,4,E. GeneticsDepartment,HospitalClínic,IDIBAPS,Universityof Mascia1,M.Sorosina1,L.Moiola1,V.Martinelli4,G.Comi4,F. Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Martinelli Boneschi5,F. Esposito1,4 EnfermedadesRaras,InstitutodeSaludCarlosIII,Barcelona, Spain,2MelanomaUnit,DepartmentofDermatology,Hospital 1Laboratory of Human Genetics of Neurological Disorders, Clínic de Barcelona, University of Barcelona,, Barcelona, CNS Inﬂammatory Unit & INSPE, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Spain,3MelanomaUnit,DepartmentofDermatology,Hospital Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Molecular Clínic de Barcelona, University of Barcelona, Centro de BiotechnologyandHealthSciences,UniversityofTurin,Turin, Investigación Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades Raras, Italy,3CenterforTranslationalGenomicsandBioInformatics, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Neurology, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, Approximately, 50% melanomas and 65% of benign nevi 5Department of Neurology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, harbor the somatic alteration p.V600E in BRAF gene. San Donato Milanese, Milan, Italy Detection of this mutation in plasma (cfBRAFV600E) is currently used for diagnosis and disease monitoring in Fingolimod (FTY) is a second-line drug approved for melanoma.However,therearenoinformationwhetherhost Relapsing RemittingMultiple Sclerosis (RRMS), known to factors may impact into cfBRAFV600E detection. In this prevent lymphocyte egress outside lymph nodes, thus study, we quantiﬁed the cfBRAFV600E by ddPCR in 211 reducing peripheral lymphocytes counts. We investigated individuals including 146 clinically conﬁrmed non- transcriptionalchangesinducedbythedruginimmune cell552 J.delPicchia subtypes, to better elucidate its mechanism of action at the L.Demougeot1,E.Gautier1,M.Rossi2,G.Baujat3,A.Lapointe4, molecular and pathway levels. E.Schaefer5,A.Goldenberg6,B.Isidor7,E.Colin8,D.Haye4,A. Twenty-four RRMS patients were sampled at baseline Verloes9,S.Marlin3,S.Manouvrier10,P.Edery2,N.Philip11,D. and after 6 months of FTY treatment. CD3+ T cells and Geneviève12, D.Lacombe13,S. Odent8,J. Clayton-Smith14,S. CD20+ B cells were sorted with MACS MicroBeads Douzgou14,M.Smith14,B. Arveiller15,A. Piton16,P. Saugier- system and RNA sequencing performed using Illumina Veber17,B.Gérard16,AnDDI-Rares,BRAIN-TEAM,Cardiogen, NextSeq500 platform. Differentially expressed genes DéﬁScience, FAI²R,FAVA-Multi, Filfoie,Filnemus, Filslan, (DEGs) were identiﬁed for each cell type using DESeq2 Fimarad, Fimatho,Firendo, G2M,MaRiH, MCGRE, Mhémo, R package. Genes modulated by FTY (fold change [FC]>2 MucoCFT, NeuroSphinx,Orkid, Oscar, RespiFIL,Sensgene, or FC<0.5 and false discovery rate [FDR]<5%) were Tetecou, C.Thauvin-Robinet1,L. Faivre1 considered for pathway analysis based on KEGG database. We observed a marked up-regulation in both T and B 1CLAD-Est, Dijon, France, 2CLAD-Sud-Est, Lyon, France, lymphocytes (313 up- and 240 down-regulated genes in 3Service de génétique, Necker, Paris, France, 4CLAD-Ile de T cells; 400 up- and 104 down-regulated genes in B cells), France, Paris, France, 5CLAD-Est, Strasbourg, France, with evidence of signiﬁcant overlap between the two cell 6CLAD-Nord-Ouest, Rouen, France, 7CLAD-Ouest, Nantes, types. Most of the DEGs had immune-related functions: France, 8CLAD-Ouest, Rennes, France, 9CLAD-Il de France, among them, CX3CR1 was strongly up-regulated (p Paris, France, 10CLAD-Nord-Ouest, Lille, France, 11CLAD- adjus- =6.4x10-26, FC=5.96) and CCR7 was down-regulated in Sud-Est, Marseille, France, 12CLAD-Sud-Ouest-Occitanie- ted both cell types (p =5.4x10-31, FC=0.18). DEGs were Réunion, Montpellier, France, 13CLAD-Sud-Ouest-Occitanie- adjusted enriched of genes involved in immune-related pathways Réunion,Bordeaux,France,14ManchesterCentreforGenomic (e.g. Cytokine-cytokine Receptor Interaction, Chemokine Medicine,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,15ANPGM,Bordeaux, Signaling Pathway). Network analysis elicited CD44 as a France, 16ANPGM, Strasbourg, France, 17ANPGM, Paris, hub gene involved in cell migration. France Ourdatasuggestthatﬁngolimodinducesmajortranscrip- tional changes in genes with immune and cell migration Over the previous decades, geneticists have had to adapt to functions; this modulation is shared between T and B the various technological and medical advances in their lymphocytes. ﬁeld. France is preparing for the arrival of next generation Supportedbythe“FondazioneItalianaSclerosiMultipla”, sequencing (NGS) in the care context, particularly for rare project 2013/R/13. diseasesand cancer. It was therefore mandatory for clinical F.Clarelli:None.P.Provero:None.L.Ferrè:None.G. geneticists (CG) to think about how they see their future Sferruzza: None. E. Mascia: None. M. Sorosina: None. role. A survey was distributed via Google Forms to 4 dis- L. Moiola: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers tinct groups of professionals. Overall, we received 126 bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Sanoﬁ- questionnaires from CGs, 130 from molecular biologists, Genzyme, Biogen-Idec, Novartis, Teva. V. Martinelli: D. 172 from medical specialists, and 20 from ERN ITHACA Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, coordinators. 60% of respondents think that only CGs and expert witness); Modest; Biogen-Idec, Sanoﬁ-Gen- should prescribe NGS tests, and even 100% for the pre- zyme,Novartis,Teva,Merck,Bayer.G.Comi:D.Speakers scription of exomes or genomes. Nevertheless, 80% think Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert that a specialist who has acquired skills in genetics could witness);Modest;Teva,Sanoﬁ-Genzyme,Novartis,Merck, prescribe gene panel analysis. The commonly raised issues Biogen-Idec, Excemed, Roche. F. Consultant/Advisory were the limited time dedicated to the implications of test Board; Modest; Teva, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Novartis, Merck, results, secondary data, management of VUS, and genetic Biogen-Idec,Excemed,Roche,Almirall,Chugai,Receptos, counselling. It should be noted that CGs see this primary Forward Pharma. F. Martinelli Boneschi: D. Speakers role in particular for polymalformative syndromes (75%), Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert but less systematically for nonsyndromic intellectual dis- witness); Modest; Teva, Biogen-Idec, Merck. F. Esposito: ability (44%), single organ diseases in adults (retinitis pig- D.Speakers Bureau/Honoraria(speakers bureau, symposia, mentosa24%,MODYdiabetes6%).CGsareworriedabout and expert witness); Modest; Teva, Merck. theincreaseinthenumberofconsultations,andthepossible reduced quality of patient information if growing numbers P15.24D oftestsareprescribedbynon-geneticists.Theseﬁndingsare The evolving role of the clinical geneticist facing new compared with the results of the 3 other surveys, including technologies: the opinion of French clinical geneticists, the ERN, surveyed in order to learn how the transition had molecular biologists and specialists, and the views of the been managed in other European countries. European Reference Network ITHACAAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 553 L. Demougeot: None. E. Gautier: None. M. Rossi: CHRNA3 rs472054 (HR=1.93, 95% C.I.: 1.06-3.51) and None. G. Baujat: None. A. Lapointe: None. E. Schaefer: rs578776 (HR=1.96, 95% C.I.: 1.09-3.51) were signiﬁ- None. A. Goldenberg: None. B. Isidor: None. E. Colin: cantlyassociatedwithtimetosmokingrelapseafterquitting None.D.Haye:None.A.Verloes:None.S.Marlin:None. smoking. S. Manouvrier: None. P. Edery: None. N. Philip: None. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated that smokers D.Geneviève:None.D.Lacombe:None.S.Odent:None. carrying G allele of CHRNB4 rs1316971 would quit J. Clayton-Smith: None. S. Douzgou: None. M. Smith: smoking easily with Varenicline. This study was the ﬁrst None. B. Arveiller: None. A. Piton: None. P. Saugier- report of the association between nicotinic acetylcholine Veber: None. B. Gérard: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: receptor subunit genes and smoking cessation with None. L. Faivre: None. Varenicline treatment in Chinese population. Grant No.: NHRI-106-10304PI & NHRI-107-10304PI P15.25A M. Lin: None. C. Wu: None. T. Wu: None. Y.W. Wu: Pharmacogenetic study of the nicotinic acetylcholine None. Y. Chang: None. C. Lai: None. K. Hsuch: None. receptor subunit genes and smoking cessation among H. Leu: None. L. Chen: None. Y.I. Tsai: None. K. smokers receiving Varenicline treatment Liang: None. M.Lin1,C.Wu1,T.Wu2, Y.W. Wu1,Y. Chang1,C. Lai3,K. P15.26B Hsuch4,H.Leu5,L. Chen6,Y. I.Tsai7,K. Liang1 The homozygous Ile148Met Variant of PNPLA3 confers high risk for morbid obesity in a central european 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, population Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Public Health, Chung-Shan MedicalUniversity,Taichung,Taiwan,3DepartmentofFamily A. Robubi,N.Loibner-Ott,P. Patri,A. Schmalzbauer,M. Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Mansfeld, N.Vock,U.Knaack, I.Klinghofer, K. R.Huber, S. 4DepartmentofFamilyMedicine,KaohsiungVeteransGeneral Kriwanek,W. Krugluger Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 5Healthcare Center, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 6Department of Danube Hospital, Vienna, Wien, Austria Psychiatry, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United States,7InstituteofHealthPolicyandWelfare,NationalYang- p { margin-bottom: 0.1in; line-height: 120%; } Morbid Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan obesityisaseriousepidemicthatisontheriseinallpartsof the world. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and modiﬁcations Introduction: Tobacco smoking is one of the major risk thereof enable short-term weight reductions and improve factorsformanychronicdiseasesandistheleadingcauseof metabolic conditions in morbidly obese patients, but the preventable deaths. Varenicline was approved by the FDA response varies widely between individuals. We propose in2006asanaidtosmokingcessation.However,notallthe that these differences may in part be due to genetic differ- smokersarebeneﬁtfromtheefﬁcacyofVarenicline.Onlya ences. We studied a Central European population of mor- few of pharmacogenetic studies were available and were bidly obese patients who underwent gastricbypass(n=99). primarily European Americans or of European origin. We Our genetic study was performed using next-generation- aimed to assess cessation effect of nicotinic acetylcholine sequencing (NGS) with a panel that included several genes receptor subunit genes on smokers receiving treatment of and polymorphisms associated with obesity and other Varenicline. obesity-relatedphenotypes.Onegeneticpolymorphismthat Methods: A total of 303 current smokers receiving stood out in particular was a single-nucleotide polymorph- Varenicline treatment were recruited from the smoking ism (SNP, rs738409) located in the gene coding for the cessation clinics and were followed up for abstinence at 3, palatin-like phospholipase domain-containing protein 3 6, 9, 12 months. Sixty-ﬁve single nucleotide polymorph- (PNPLA3,adiponutrin):oneinthreeoftheobesecollective isms on ten nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit genes was a homozygous carrier of PNPLA3-148Met allele were genotyped. compared to one in thirteen in the general population. Results: We found that smokers carrying one additional Interestingly, the number of heterozygous carriers was G allele of CHRNB4 rs1316971 had signiﬁcantly higher markedly lower (one in six vs. one in three) in the obese probability of abstinence (OR=1.62, 95% C.I.: 1.08-2.42; collective. Further, heterozygous carriers had difﬁculties OR=1.59, 95% C.I.: 1.06-2.39 at 6 or 9 month follow-up, sustaining their weight, one year post surgery. Our results respectively) when receiving Varenicline. Moreover, demonstratehowageneticvariantcanpredictthelongterm rs1316971 was also found to be associated with time to beneﬁt of a surgical procedure. quit smoking (HR=1.33, 95% C.I.: 1.03-1.73). Besides,554 J.delPicchia A. Robubi: None. N. Loibner-Ott: None. P. Patri: P15.28D None. A. Schmalzbauer: None. M. Mansfeld: None. N. Identiﬁcation of therapy-relevant "BRCAness"-associated Vock:None.U.Knaack:None.I.Klinghofer:None.K.R. candidate genes in ovarian cancer Huber: None. S. Kriwanek: None. W. Krugluger: None. T.Brunet1,S.Konrad1,M.Kiechle1,A.Meindl2,J.Ramser1,E. P15.27C Gross2 Establishmentoftumor-derivedorganoids:anapproachto personalized medicine 1Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 2Department of M.Ovejero-Sánchez1,2,3,J.Fernández-Mateos1,2,P. Vázquez- Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Munich, Munich, Cárdenas1,3,R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3 Germany 1MolecularMedicineUnit.DepartmentofMedicine.University Introduction: The majority of patients with ovarian cancer of Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of Biomedical is still diagnosed at an advanced stage of the disease gen- Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 3Institute erallyleadingtopooroutcome.WithPARPinhibitorsbeing of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC). approved as a targeted therapy option for BRCA-mutated University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain advanced ovarian cancer, the concept of “BRCAness“ has become increasingly important. “BRCAness“ describes the Introduction: Organoids are three-dimensional in vitro phenotypic characteristics that BRCA1/2-mutated tumors grown structures derived from induced pluripotent stem sharewithsporadic,nonBRCA1/2mutatedtumors,suchas cells, adult stem cells or embryonic stem cells capable of sensitivity to DNA double-strand break inducing agents. self-renewal and self-organization, that exhibit the same Our purpose was to search for other genes involved in organ functionality as the original tissue. They present homologous recombination repair that might be associated organ-speciﬁc differential cells types and tissue compart- with “BRCAness“ and/or better survival. mentalization. Additionally, they can be used to detect Material and Methods: We performed a qPCR-based genetic alterations in patients. In this work we studied the mRNA expression analysis of six candidate genes in 48 potential of this type of culture for modeling cancer. ovarian cancer tissues. Optimal cut-off points for gene Material and Methods: Organoids from fresh tumor expression values were calculated with the Maximally tissues of 40 patients with several types of cancer (colon Selected Rank Statistics in R. Overall survival (OS) was (CRC), endometrial, ovary, kidney, lung, head and neck illustrated by Kaplan-Meier curves. Univariate and multi- squamous cell carcinoma) were established. Tumor tissues variate Cox regression analyses were performed with R. were dissociated into functional units, seeded in Matrigel Results:Patientswith lowmRNAexpression ofBRCA1, and cultured with the appropriate medium. BRIP1 and RAD51C showed signiﬁcantly improved OS. Results: We established organoids from six types of Moreover, BRIP1 gene expression persisted as an indepen- cancer and determined their culture conditions. The dent predictive factor for OS (HR: 4.38 [CI:1.56; 12.32], p cytokines needed for each cell type were different but all =0.005) in multivariate Cox regression analyses. of them include EGF, Noggin, Y-27632 and Wnt-3A. For Discussion:OurdatasuggestapredictiveroleofBRCA1, organoids derived from CRC, R-spondin, FGF10, FGF2, BRIP1 and RAD51C for the survival of ovarian cancer prostaglandin E2, nicotinamide, A83-01 and gastrin are patients. Results may indicate that, besides BRCA1/2, needed. Organoids derived from kidney cancer, also need patients with aberrant expression of BRIP1 and RAD51C VEGF. Those derived from lung cancer require VEGF and mightalsobeneﬁtfromPARPinhibitors.Furthermore,they progesterone and β-estradiol are necessary for organoids contribute to the understanding of the complex concept of derived from gynecological cancers. “BRCAness”. To conﬁrm the results, candidate protein Conclusions: Organoids can be obtained from different expression in tumor tissues needs to be explored. cancer tissues. For their development, it is essential to T. Brunet: None. S. Konrad: None. M. Kiechle: None. choose the right cytokines to grow them in. These cultures A. Meindl: None. J. Ramser: None. E. Gross: None. have shown to mimic three-dimensional structure of the origin tissue and could be a perfect source to determine P15.29A genetic alterations in these patients. The effect of inﬂammation-related genetic polymorphisms This project was funded by PI16/01920 on the occurrence of non-motor adverse events of M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None. J. Fernández-Mateos: dopaminergic treatment in Parkinson's disease None. P. Vázquez-Cárdenas: None. R. González- Sarmiento: None. S. Redenšek1,M. Trošt2, V.Dolan1Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 555 1Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Slovenia, 2Department of Neurology, University Medical Barcelona,Spain,3PediatricNeurologyResearchGroup,Vall Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia d'Hebron Research Institute, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of Genetic and Introduction: The role of inﬂammation in pathogenesis of MolecularMedicine,HospitalSantJoandeDéuandInstitutde Parkinson's disease (PD) is supported by candidate-gene Recerca Sant Joan de Déu Universitat de Barcelona, and GWAS studies. It is widely accepted that pathways Barcelona,Spain,5CentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédicaenRed involved in disease pathogenesis may also inﬂuence treat- de Enfermedades Raras, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 6Secció mentoutcome.However,theinﬂuenceofgeneticvariability d’Errors Congènits del Metabolisme-IBC, Servei de in inﬂammatory pathways on treatment outcome has not Bioquimica i Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic de been studied in PD, yet. Our aim was to investigate the Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 7Departament de association of selected single nucleotide polymorphisms Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu (SNPs) in inﬂammatory pathways with non-motor adverse Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 8Women’s and Children’s Health events (AEs) of dopaminergic treatment in PD. Network & University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia Materials and Methods: We enrolled 223 PD patients and collected their demographic and clinical data including Almost 40 million people in Europe are affected by one of non-motor AEs (nausea/vomiting, orthostatic hypotension, the ~7000 rare diseases (RDs). Unfortunately, a signiﬁcant peripheral oedema, sleep attacks, visual hallucinations, and percentage of patients remain undiagnosed after years of impulse control disorders). DNA was isolated from investigation, representing a real burden to the health care peripheral blood samples and genotyped for NLRP3 system. rs35829419, CARD8 rs2043211, IL1β rs16944, IL1β The URDCat (Undiagnosed Rare Disease Program of rs1143623,IL6rs1800795,andTNFαrs1800629.Statistical Catalonia) project was launched in 2017 and aims to analysis using logistic regression was performed. enable the Catalan Health System to provide personalised Results: The study included 58% males and 42% genomicmedicineasafullyintegratedserviceforpatients females, with median age at PD onset 62 (55-71) years with RDs, initially as a pilot project for RDs with and median disease duration 7.5 (4-14) years. IL1β neurologic involvement. URDCat comprises a collabora- rs1143623 (c.-1591G>C) was associated with occurrence tionbetween16groups,associatedwith7hospitalsacross oforthostatichypotension(OH).Heterozygoteshadalower Catalonia. chance of developing OH (p=0.028; OR=0.510; 95% The project has several overarching objectives: (i) CI=0.279-0.931) compared to homozygotes for wild-type standardise the process of analysis and integration of allele. This association remained signiﬁcant after adjusting clinical and genomic data; (ii) implement a platform for for gender and disease duration (p=0.026; OR=0.500; analysis of genomics data that is suitable for clinical 95% CI=0.272-0.920). No other SNP showed any associa- practice; (iii) identify causative genetic variants of undiag- tion with other studied AEs. nosed RD patients; (iv) highlight the utility of genomics, Conclusions: Our pilot study indicates a link between andadvanceitsusageasatoolofpersonalisedmedicinefor inﬂammatory pathways and OH as AE of dopaminergic RDdiagnosticsand(v)educatestakeholdersinthevalueof treatment in PD. Further studies are needed to explain the genomic data. detected association. Deepphenotypingdatahasbeencollatedfrommorethan Grant: ARRS, grant P1-0170 750familieswithacustomisedPhenoTipsformusingHPO, S. Redenšek: None. M. Trošt: None. V. Dolan: None. ORDO and OMIM. Over 220 associated genomic datasets havebeenre-analysedindetailusingtheURDCatplatform, P15.30B based on RD-Connect. Pathogenic or candidate causative The Undiagnosed Rare Disease Program of Catalonia variants have been identiﬁed for almost 20% of the re- (URDCat) - illustrating the value of NGS for personalised analysedcases,whicharecurrentlybeingfollowedupinthe medicine laboratory.Inordertosolveremainingcases, wholeexome or genome sequencinghasbeen undertaken for around 500 L.Matalonga1,D.Ovelleiro1,S.Laurie1,M.Gut1,M.Pujadas2, prioritised index cases. A. Macaya3,F.Palau4,5, A.Ribes6,5,L. Pérez-Jurado7,8,5,S. L. Matalonga: None. D. Ovelleiro: None. S. Laurie: Beltran1,URDCat Consortium None. M. Gut: None. M. Pujadas: None. A. Macaya: None. F. Palau: None. A.Ribes: None. L. Pérez-Jurado: 1CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), None. S. Beltran: None. Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST),556 J.delPicchia P15.31C A. Almeida1,2,J. ConchaMayayo1,E.SangüesaSangüesa1,L. Genotyping approach supporting pre-emptive LópezdeFrutos2,B.MedranoEngay2,M.AndradeCampos2,M. pharmacogenomics testing: The Slovenian experience P. Giraldo Castellano2,M.P. Ribate Molina1, C.B. García within the UPGx project García1 T.Blagus1,S.Soldat1,M.Goričar1,K.Goričar1,S.Redenek1,V. 1Faculty of health sciences, San Jorge University, Villanueva Dolan1,L. Konta2,Ubiquitos Pharmacogenomics Consortium de Gallego, Spain, 2Grupo de Enfermedades Hematológicas y Metabólicas, Instituto Investigación Sanitaria Aragón (IIS 1Institute of Biochemistry, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2bio.logis Aragón). CIBERER: Instituto Carlos III, Zaragoza, Spain Zentrum fur Humangenetik, Frankufurt am Main, Germany Introduction:In2015EuropeanUnionapprovedEliglustat Introduction: The Horizon 2020 UPGx (Ubiquitous Phar- as ﬁrst-line oral treatment for adult patient with type 1 macogenomics: www.upgx.eu) project aims to make Gaucher disease. It is important for these patients to geno- actionable pharmacogenomics data and effective treatment type the gene that encode the main metabolizer enzyme of optimization accessible to every European citizen in order this drug (CYP2D6). The clinical trials of Eliglustat shows to improve patient treatment outcome and consequently thattheconcomitantuseofthisdrugwithCYP3Ainducers lower the expenses of the treatment. According to the is not recommended in this patients. For this reason, it is existing data published and Dutch Pharmacogenetics alsoimportanttoknowthegenotypeoftheothergenesthat Working Group (https://www.pharmgkb.org/page/dpwg), are involved in metabolism of this drug such as CYP3A4 theguidelinesmadebytheUPGxConsortiumrevealedthat and ABCB1 genes. actionable drug prescribing for 55 drugs is most strongly Material and Methods: DNA samples of 61 Spanish linked to 13 pharmacogenes (www.pharmgkb.org/cpic/pa patientswith type 1 Gaucherdiseasewere genotypedusing irs).Oneoftheaimsoftheprojectwastoimplementgenetic the xTAG® CYP2D6 kit v3 protocol for CYP2D6 gene, testing for a panel of pharmacogenes to support a clinical PCR- RFLP for CYP3A4*1B and ABCB1 haplotype, and study on pre-emptive pharmacogenomic testing in seven RT-PCR for CYP3A4*22. European countries, including Slovenia. Results: The metabolizer status of CYP2D6 was 4.9%, Methods: 1.Setting up a panel of common functional 13.1% and 82% for poor, intermediate and extensive, variants within pharmacogenes with major inﬂuence on respectively. The genotype of CYP3A4*22 showed that interpatient variability in drug response and existing 94.8% of patients were wild-type for this SNP and 5.2% evidence based treatment guidelines. 2.Setting up the heterozygous. The SNPs of ABCB1 gene (rs1045642, infrastructure and validation of methodology for prospec- rs2032582, rs1128503) related with low expression of P- tive genotyping for selected variants. glyprotein are infrequent in our cohort. This is important Results:Intotal 48commonfunctionalSNPs along with because it prevents the eliglustat accumulation in the CYP2D6 deletion and duplication were identiﬁed as the brain. targets for pharmacogenetics testing. Real-time PCR Conclusions: In the patients who have ultra-rapid ﬂuorescence-based endpoint genotyping (KASPar) was genotypeforCYP2D6,theuseofEliglustatisnotapproved. chosen as the genotyping method and SNPline (LCG For the rest of patients it is important to have genotyping Group) genotyping system was set up at the Pharmacoge- information about CYP3A4 and ABCB1 and to assess netics Laboratory. The respective KASPar assays were concomitant use of medications and herbal supplements to designed by LCG Group and Biologis and introduced, ensure a precision personalized medicine. validated and tested at the Pharmacogenetics Laboratory. A. Almeida: None. J. Concha Mayayo: None. E. LR-PCR ampliﬁcation followed by SNP genotyping was SangüesaSangüesa:None.L.LópezdeFrutos:None.B. used to detect CYP2D6 polymorphisms. Medrano Engay: None. M. Andrade Campos: None. M. Conclusions: We have successfully implemented the P.GiraldoCastellano:None.M.P.RibateMolina:None. genotypingmethodologyandinfrastructureforpre-emptive C.B. García García: None. pharmacogenomics testing within the UPGx Project. Acknowledgements:Horizon2020UPGxProject:Grant P15.34B No 668353. Pharmacogenetics of everolimus in the treatment of the T. Blagus: None. S. Soldat: None. M. Goričar: None. rare disease tuberous sclerosis K.Goričar:None.S.Redenek:None.V.Dolan:None.L. Konta: None. J.ConchaMayayo1,E. SangüesaSangüesa1,J.L. Peña Segura2,M. P.Ribate Molina1,C. B.García García1 P15.33APharmacogeneticsofEliglustatinGaucherdiseaseAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 557 1Faculty of health sciences, San Jorge University, Villanueva Introduction:Pharmacogeneticsisarelativelynewscience de Gallego, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, that has not been studied widely in health sciences degree Zaragoza, Spain programmes. Nevertheless, it is considered as a tool that contributes to precision medicine since it provides relevant Introduction: Everolimus is an immunosuppressant information about the patients and could predict the effec- recently accepted to treat adjacent symptoms to the rare tiveness of the drugs or the occurrence of adverse drug disease tuberous sclerosis (or Bourneville syndrome), as reactions. Health Sciences professionals, mainly the phar- renal angiomyolipoma and giant cell astrocytoma. The macists,shouldknowtheclinicalapplicationsofthisareaof prevalence of this pathology is between 1:6000 and knowledge or at least they should understand its main 1:10000. Most genes have shown to be close relationated conceptsandbasicvocabulary.Forthisreason,theﬁrstaim with pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of ever- of this project was to develop a guideline about Pharma- olimus, so their polymorphisms can cause a great inter- cogenetics for pharmacists who have not received any for- individual variability in its plasmatic levels. The narrow mation about it. therapeutic window of this drug generates the risk of Materials and Methods: Pharmacy students of the occurrence adverse drug effects or lack of effectiveness. subject “Pharmacogenetics and Pharmacogenomics” have The Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) analyzed to selected the most important information about the different study its genotype-phenotype relation are CYP3A5*3 sections of the guideline: glossary of terms, basic concepts (6986 A>G), CYP3A4*1B (g-290 A>G), CYP3A4*22 about pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, main (15389 C>T), ABCB1 (c.1236C>T), ABCB1 genes involved in metabolism, transport and receptors of (c.2677G>T), ABCB1 (c.3435C>T), PXR (c.44477T>C), drugswithpharmacogeneticrelevanceandfrequentlyasked PXR(c.63396C>T),PXR(c.69789A>G),CYP2C8*3(416 questions. The content is revised and corrected by G>A), CYP2C8*3’ (1196 A>G) and CYP2C8*4 (792 Pharmacy students of “Pharmacology” and “Pharmacoki- C>G). netics” subjects. In order to get an attractive aspect of the Material and Methods: A total of 8 voluntary patients guideline, Architecture students of “Analysis of Architec- who suffer tuberous sclerosis in treatment with everolimus tonic forms” develop its graphic design. participate in this study. Blood samples were collected in Results: After the edition period, the guidelines will be FTATMcards. RFLP-PCR has been performed to genotype distributed to the different pharmacies of the area close to the selected SNPs, being CYP3A4*22 genotyped by RT- San Jorge University. Its usefulness will be tested PCR. among them. Results: The TTT haplotype of ABCB1, CYP3A5*3, Conclusions: It is hoped that through this activity, CYP2C8*3, CYP2C8*4 and CYP3A4*22 would increase knowledge about pharmacogenetics will be accessible for the drug levels and thus produce a higher risk of adverse pharmacists so that this science could be more understood. effects. Ontheotherhand,theCYP3A4*1BandPXRSNPs C.B. García: None. E. Sanguesa: None. J. Concha: would decrease drug levels and thus produce lack of None.L.Lomba:None.V.López:None.J.N.Gutiérrez: therapeutic effectiveness. None. A. Estepa: None. M.P. Ribate: None. Conclusions: The genotyping of patients treated with everolimus is a useful tool to predict and explain P15.36D interindividual dose variations and thus offer relevant Pharmacogenomic recommendations based on different information to improve the treatment of patients. sequencing and genotyping platforms: challenges and J. Concha Mayayo: None. E. Sangüesa Sangüesa: solutions for using existing guidelines None. J.L. Peña Segura: None. M.P. Ribate Molina: None. C.B. García García: None. K. Krebs1,2, S.Reisberg3,4,5,M. Kals1,R. Mägi1,J. Vilo3,4,5,L. Milani1,6 P15.35B Strengthening pharmacogenetics 1Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics,University of Tartu,Tartu,Estonia,2InstituteofMolecularandCellBiology, C.B.García1,E.Sanguesa1,J.Concha1,L.Lomba1,V.López1, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Computer J.N.Gutiérrez2, A.Estepa2,M.P. Ribate1 Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Software Technology and Applications Competence Centre, Tartu, 1Faculty of Health Science, San Jorge University, Villanueva Estonia, 5Quretec Ltd, Tartu, Estonia, 6Science for Life de Gállego-Zaragoza, Spain, 2School of Architecture, San Laboratory, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala, Jorge University, Villanueva de Gállego-Zaragoza, Spain Sweden558 J.delPicchia Introduction:Thepastdecadehasshownanincreaseinthe differences. Despite the evidence for pharmacogenomic amount of genetic information that could be translated into (PGx) tests to provide precision medicine, clinical use is clinically actionable decisions tailoring medical therapy. still limited. We conducted a study on the prevalence of TheClinicalPharmacogeneticsImplementationConsortium drug-gene-interactions(DGIs)intheDutchLifelinesCohort has prepared curated genotype-based guidelines for trans- (www.lifelines.nl) and are exploring the practical barriers lating genetic information into drug prescription recom- and success factors of pre-emptive PGx-testing in a mendationsfor14genesassociatedwith36differentdrugs. clinical pilot. Here, we investigated how successfully we could translate Methods: Genotypes in Lifelines were identiﬁed using existing genotype data into informative recommendations. Illumina CytoSNP12 array data and GoNL (www. MaterialsandMethods:Wesurveyedthegenotypedata nlgenome.nl) imputed, translated to PGx star-alleles and of 44 448 Estonian Biobank participants: 2420 with whole predicted phenotypes following national PGx guidelines. genomesequence(WGS),2445with wholeexomesequen- Due to the absence of copy number variance (CNV), cing (WES), 8132 genotyped on the HumanOmniExpress genotypes for CYP2D6 were not available. DGIs were beadchip (OMNI), and 33157 on the Global Screening estimated using Lifelines questionnaire’s medication his- Array(GSA)fromIllumina.Thegenotypedataobtainedon tory. In addition to the Lifelines study, a clinical pilot both arrays were phased and imputed. For detecting star (n=300) is being conducted in our hospital’s outpatient alleles, we used gene-speciﬁc star allele deﬁnition tables clinics. The prevalence of DGIs will also be assessed for from the PharmGKB database. this clinical cohort. Results: The greatest challenge that we faced was large Results: 12.792 individuals, 95,5% of the genotyped allele deﬁnition tables that do not appear to cover all Lifelines Cohort, have at least one clinically relevant PGx possibleallelic combinations,and limited guidance onhow variant.Prescriptiondrugusewaslinkedtothegeneticdata toprioritizethevariantsincasesofmultipleornomatching in 6.415 (47,9%) individuals where 435 DGIs were star alleles. When comparing the proportion of multiple identiﬁed amongst 420 individuals (6,55%). We observed matching star alleles, WGS clearly stands out with 2.8% similar prevalence in the preliminary data of the clinical ambiguous calls, followed by 32% for GSA, 35% for cohort. OMNI and 61% for WES as several important variants fall Conclusions: PGx variants and estimated DGIs are outside the coding region of the genome. abundantly present in the Lifelines Cohort. Prevalence is Conclusions: Translating existing genotype and WGS expected to become even higher when CYP2D6 genotypes data into pharmacogenomic recommendations for biobank are taken into account and when DGIs are identiﬁed based participants illustrates the importance and innovative on drug prescription data which will become available in potential of curated guidelines: a crucial step in advancing the near future. the whole process of personalised medicine in general. P. Lanting: None. B.R. Comello: None. F. van Dijk: K.Krebs:None.S.Reisberg:None.M.Kals:None.R. None. B. Wilffert: None. R.H. Sijmons: None. Mägi: None. J. Vilo: None. L. Milani: None. P15.38B P15.37A SLCO1B1 c.521T>C genotype, sex, and initial statin The prevalence of predicted drug-gene-interactions in treatmentascontributingfactorstocontinuoussimvastatin 12.792 individuals from the Dutch Lifelines Cohort or atorvastatin treatment in a Dutch cohort P. Lanting1,B. R. Comello2,F. vanDijk1,B. Wilffert2,3,R.H. M.E.Jansen1,2,T.Rigter1,2,T.M.C.Fleur1,3,P.Souverein3,S. Sijmons1 J.H.Vijverberg3,4, W.Rodenburg2, M.C. Cornel1 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center 1VU University Medical Center, Section Community Genetics, Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, DepartmentofClinicalGeneticsandAmsterdamPublicHealth 2University of Groningen, Groningen Research Institute of researchinstitute,Amsterdam,Netherlands,2NationalInstitute Pharmacy, Department of PharmacoTherapy, -Epidemiology for Public Health and the Environment, Centre for Health & -Economics, Groningen, Netherlands, 3University of Protection, Bilthoven, Netherlands, 3Utrecht University, Groningen,UniversityMedicalCenterGroningen,Department DivisionofPharmacoepidemiology&ClinicalPharmacology, of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Groningen, Utrecht Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, Netherlands Netherlands, 4Amsterdam Medical Center and Amsterdam Public Health research institute, Department of Pulmonology, Introduction: (Adverse) effects of drug treatment for Amsterdam, Netherlands similar indications can show striking interindividualAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 559 Introduction: Statins reduce low-density-lipoprotein cho- chromosome 15q11-q13 region. We aim to improve the lesterol levels and lower the risk for cardiovascular events. quality of life and healthcare of patients and families Although statins are generally well-tolerated, patients can with PWS. experience adverse drug events (ADE), and discontinue Method:PWSpatientsunder18hadbeencoordinatedin their treatment. In this study we aim to investigate if and SJD-Hospital between March 2016 and December 2017. how pre-emptive pharmacogenomic SLCO1B1 c.521T>C Multidisciplinary medical following is needed due to the screening would have inﬂuenced the statin treatment out- multisystemic involvement. American Academy of Pedia- comes for patients in primary care. tric recommendations were followed and coordinated by a Methods: The amount of ADE experienced by 1159 Case Manager (CM). We assess patients’ experience, patients treated with statins in a Dutch cohort were consultation adherence and extraprotocolized needs. measured through three proxies: mean dose change, Results:37patientswereattendedcoordinately2-3times discontinuing treatment or switching statins and, time to per year at the hospital, thanks to the consecutive- establish stable dosing. Information on their statin use was concentrated visits and scheduled coordination of the CM. evaluated. For every outcome, patients were compared on Lost days of work and school absences were reduced. their SLCO1B1 genotype, sex, and type of statin. Analyses Meetingswithalltheinvolvedphysicianstodiscussthebest were corrected for relevant confounders. personalizedtherapeuticattitudeswerescheduledattheend Results: At baseline, female simvastatin users received a of the day. CM and the Social Worker were also included. lower dosecomparedtomalesimvastatin users.Regardless The degree of satisfaction of the family increased in ofdeterminants,approximatelyhalfofpatientsdiscontinued all cases. theirstatintreatmentwithinthreeyearsfollow-upofstarting Conclusions: The PWS functional plan improves the theirtreatment.TheproxiesforADEshowednostatistically patient’s care. CM plays an essential role to coordinate the signiﬁcant differences between SLCO1B1 genotypes TT assistance of each patient to interfere as less as possible in versus TC and CC, men versus women or simvastatin their lives: 1) grouping consultations to the hospital versus atorvastatin. avoiding unnecessary journeys, 2) coordinating with other Conclusions: The results indicate that SLCO1B1 areassuchasschoolorprimarycaretoensurecontinuityof c.521T>C screening would not have contributed to less care and 3) collaborating with other specialties for a global discontinuationandswitchesinsimvastatinandatorvastatin management of the patient and their families. prescription for patients in our Dutch regional cohort. M. Bolasell Girgas: None. A. Martinez-Monseny: Factors that do contribute to approximately half of patients None.M.Serrano:None.C.Arjona:None.M.Jabalera: discontinuingtheirstatintreatmentshouldbestudiedfurther None. A. Bosque: None. F. Palau: None. togaininsightindeterminantsofunsuccessfulimplementa- tion of statin treatment.Grant: RIVM (S/132001/01/PD), P15.40D Project: “Personalised medicine: eligible or not?” about PREemptive Pharmacogenomic testing for Preventing eligiblility of pharmacogenomics in primary care AdversedrugReactions(PREPARE)study:TheSlovenian M.E. Jansen: None. T. Rigter: None. T.M.C. Fleur: Experience within the UPGx project None. P. Souverein: None. S.J.H. Vijverberg: None. W. Rodenburg: None. M.C. Cornel: None. V.Dolzan1,T.Blagus1,S.Redenšek1,K.Goricar1,G.Mlinek2,. VivodPečnik3,B. MazejPoredo3, A.krinjar3,A.Zidanek3,B. P15.39C Rajter3,A.Čau3,K.Jeras4,M.Saje4,J. Klen5,M.Juterek6,M. New horizons for Prader-Willi patient’s assistance: Kolekuterič3,A.PoplasSusič3,M.Prica3,T.StegneIgnjatovič3, families’ centered health care R. Jakopičlahtič3,T. Terzič4,M.Vrbnjak4, M.Bokalič4,L. Bukovec4,M.Rus Makovec4,S.Kokot6,S. Doblekar7,R. M.Bolasell Girgas, A.Martinez-Monseny, M.Serrano,C. Verboten Kopriva8,B.Ejupi6,B. KoresPlesničar4, Ubiquitous Arjona, M.Jabalera, A.Bosque,F. Palau Pharmacogenomics Consortium Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain 1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Biochemistry, Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Ljubljana, Background: Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a genetic Slovenia, 2University Medical Center, Ljubljana, Slovenia, condition with recognizable pattern of physical ﬁndings 3Health Care Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, with signiﬁcant neurocognitive, endocrine and behavioral 4University Psychiatric Clinic Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, abnormalities. It is caused by lack of expression of genes 5HealthCareCenterKočevje,Kočevje,Slovenia,6HealthCare from an imprinted region of the paternally inherited Center Litija, Litija, Slovenia, 7Health Care Center Litija,,560 J.delPicchia Litja, Slovenia, 8Health Care Center Litija, Slovenia;, Litija, S. Laurie1,S.Beltran1, M.Bayes1,B. Fuste1,M.Gut1, L. Slovenia Matalonga1,D.Piscia1, J.Dawson2,R. Thompson2,E. López- Martín3,M.Posada3,L.Monaco4,C.Wang4,G.B.vanOmmen5, Introduction: The clinical study PREPARE within the S. Sims6,E. Zeggini6,H.Löchmuller2, I.Gut1,BBMRI-LPC Horizon2020 Ubiquitous Pharmacogenomics (U-PGx) consortium project (www.upgx.eu) aims to establish if implementation of PGx-guided drug prescribing for a panel of drug- 1CentroNacionaldeAnálisisGenómico(CNAG-CRG),Center pharmacogene pairs reduces drug-genotype associated for Genomic Regulation; Barcelona Institute of Science and adverse drug reactions (ADRs) in comparison to patients Technology (BIST); Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), receiving standard of care treatment in seven European Barcelona,Spain,2InstituteofGeneticMedicine,MRCCentre countries, including Slovenia. for Neuromuscular Diseases, Newcastle, United Kingdom, Methods and Results: Within a prospective, block- 3Institute of Rare Diseases Research, IIER-ISCIII; Centre for randomized, controlled clinical study, Slovenia was rando- Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, CIBERER, mizedtostartwithPGx-guidedprescribing(studyarm)and Madrid, Spain, 4Fondazione Telethon, Milano, Italy, willswitchtostandardofcare(controlarm)after18months. 5Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Up to now, 150 patients participated in the study. They Center,Leiden,Netherlands,6WellcomeTrustSangerInstitute, were invited when having a drug with DPWG guideline Hinxton, United Kingdom (index drug) ﬁrst prescribed in the routine care. DNA samples from patients were genotyped for a panel of 50 The2016BBMRI-LPCWESCallofferedauniquefree-of- genetic variants in 13 pharmacogenes. Within 3-5 working charge opportunity to genetically diagnose rare disease daysgenotypedataandDPWGguidelineswereavailableto patients with biological samples deposited within the physicians to modify the treatment with the index drug if EuroBioBank network. 800 whole exomes were sequenced recommended. Treatment outcomes were followed for from 17 distinct projects, each having 2-3 principal inves- 12 weeks. The most commonly prescribed index drugs tigators from different countries. The projects spanned a were statins (40%), tacrolimus (20%) and antidepressants wide range of rare disease phenotypes, including neuro- (23%). The number of polymorphic pharmacogenes was muscular disorders, inborn errors of metabolism, albinism, from 1 to 8 per patient, with the average of 4.2. In total 74 and sudden cardiac depth, amongst others, and informed patients (50%) carried polymorphic CYP2D6, which is the consent had to permit data sharing for research purposes gene with the highest number of therapeutic recommenda- through controlled access repositories such as the EGA tions.In30.5%ofpatientsthetherapeuticrecommendations (https://ega.crg.eu/)andRD-Connect(http://rd-connect.eu/). included the index drug. Clinical and phenotypic information for every case was Conclusions: Within the U-PGx project and the PRE- collected in RD-Connect’s customised PhenoTips instance, PARE study panel-based pre-emptive pharmacogenomic using standards such as the Human Phenotype Ontology was successfully introduced in Slovenia. (HPO), OMIM and Orpha codes, and sequencing under- Acknowledgements:Horizon2020UPGxProject–grant taken at the CNAG in Spain, and the WTSI in the UK. No 668353. Sequencing data was processed using the RD-Connect V.Dolzan:None.T.Blagus:None.S.Redenšek:None. standard analysis pipeline and results made available K. Goricar: None. G. Mlinšek: None. . Vivod Pečnik: through the RD-Connect Genome-Phenome Analysis Plat- None. B. Mazej Poredo: None. A. krinjar: None. A. form (https://platform.rd-connect.eu/) once all call require- Zidanek:None.B.Rajter:None.A.Čau:None.K.Jeras: ments had been met. The Platform allows researchers to None. M. Saje: None. J. Klen: None. M. Juterek: None. analyse and interpret their genotype:phenotype data pri- M.Kolekuterič:None.A.PoplasSusič:None.M.Prica: vately for up to 6 months before it is shared with other None. T. Stegne Ignjatovič: None. R. Jakopič lahtič: authorised users. It also facilitates anonymised data sharing None. T. Terzič: None. M. Vrbnjak: None. M. Bokalič: through APIs from initiatives such as the GA4GH/IRDiRC None. L. Bukovec: None. M. Rus Makovec: None. S. MatchMaker Exchange (http://www.matchmakerexchange. Kokot: None. S. Doblekar: None. R. Verboten Kopriva: org/) and Beacon Network (https://beacon-network.org). None. B. Ejupi: None. B. Kores Plesničar: None. We report on the challenges and lessons learned from conducting such a complex transnational collaborative P15.41A initiative and present an up-to-date diagnostic yield of the 800 exomes for rare disease research: outcomes of the project as a whole, with some illustrative success stories. transnationalBBMRI-LPCWEScallincollaborationwith S.Laurie:None.S.Beltran:None.M.Bayes:None.B. EuroBioBank and RD-Connect Fuste: None. M. Gut: None. L. Matalonga: None. D. Piscia: None. J. Dawson: None. R. Thompson: None. E.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 561 López-Martín: None. M. Posada: None. L. Monaco: TCGA(2outof66).MTTassaysrevealedthatdepletionof None.C.Wang:None.G.B.vanOmmen:None.S.Sims: the protein through shRNAs, or treatment with an speciﬁc None. E. Zeggini: None. H. Löchmuller: None. I. small-molecule inhibitor, sensitized HeLa cells to rapamy- Gut: None. cin. mTOR pathway activation, measured by p-S6/p-S6K1/ p-AKT, was not altered in shRNA-treated cells, suggesting P15.42B mTORi sensitizing effects occurred through alternative Novel candidate gene associated with mTOR inhibitor effectors. response in Renal Cell Carcinoma Conclusions: We propose a novel candidate gene associated with mTORi response, which may help to select J.Roldán-Romero1,M.Santos-Romero1,J.Maroto2,G. patients sensitive to mTORi therapy. Anguera2,F.Algaba3,S.Ruiz-Llorente4,C.Montero-Conde1,A. J.Roldán-Romero:None.M.Santos-Romero:None.J. Cascon1,5,G.Roncador6,N.Djouder7,M. Robledo1,5,C. Maroto: None. G. Anguera: None. F. Algaba: None. S. Rodriguez-Antona1,5 Ruiz-Llorente: None. C. Montero-Conde: None. A. Cascon: None. G. Roncador: None. N. Djouder: None. 1Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Human Cancer M. Robledo: None. C. Rodriguez-Antona: None. Genetics Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Medical P15.43C Oncology, Hospital de la Santa Creu I Sant Pau, Barcelona, Framework for clinical assessment of Mendelian inherited Spain, 3Section of Pathology, Fundació Puigvert-Universitat risk alleles Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4CNIO-Lilly Epigenetics Laboratory, Spanish National Cancer Research O.Senol-Cosar1,2, D.C. Hoskinson1,3,M.Lebo1,2, H.Mason- Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 5Centro de Investigación Suares1,2 Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 6Monoclonal Antibodies Core Unit, 1Laboratory for Molecular Medicine/Partners Personalized BiotechnologyProgramme,SpanishNationalCancerResearch Medicine, Cambridge, MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 7Growth Factors, Nutrients School/Brigham and Women Hospital, Boston, MA, United andCancerGroup,CancerCellBiologyProgramme,Spanish States, 3Tempus Labs, Chicago, IL, United States National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain There is an increased interest and demand in clinical Introduction: Inhibitors of the mammalian target of rapa- genomics to interpret and return Mendelian-inherited risk mycin (mTORi) are used totreat several cancers, including alleles to the electronic medical records. Although this is renal cell carcinoma (RCC). Although response to these emerging as part of routine clinical practice, there is no drugs can be partially explained by mutations activating formal terminology nor a framework for classiﬁcation of mTOR pathway, the majority of responders have no these low-penetrant variants. Therefore, we established an mutations identiﬁed. This suggests that additional genes evidence-based framework to clinically classify risk alleles may contribute to mTORi response. In this study, genomic into three categories recommended by ACMG: established screeningofchromophobeRCC(chRCC)patientssensitive risk allele, likely risk allele, and uncertain risk allele. Evi- to mTORi, together with in vitro functional studies, iden- dence used for risk allele classiﬁcation was collected by a tiﬁed a novel candidate predictive gene. thorough literature search for case/control studies, meta- Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing analyses, functional data, and included cohort size, pheno- (WES) was applied to three chRCC patients sensitive to typing, statistical signiﬁcance, and replication of results mTORi. An independent chRCC series was collected for over time. For example, to be classiﬁed as an established targeted sequencing and immunohistochemistry (IHC) of risk allele, a variant must meet the following criteria: 1) candidategenes.RapamycinsensitivityandmTORpathway signiﬁcant results after Bonferroni, false discovery rate or activationwasassessedincellswithshRNA-mediatedgene permutation correction; 2) odds ratio > 2; 3) results repli- silencing. cated in at least 5 studies by different laboratories using Results: WES revealed one single mutated gene, not underlying cohorts, including through meta-analyses. To related to mTOR pathway, shared by the three chRCC test this method, we classiﬁed seven well-established risk tumors. Two of the somatic mutations were loss-of- alleles all of which met our criteria for established risk function, one was a misssense variant. IHC staining and variant. In addition, we classiﬁed ﬁve previously reported Sanger sequencing validated the results. Inactivation of the risk alleles. Of these, two were established risk alleles, one gene was detected at low frequency in an independent was likely risk allele, and two were uncertain risk alleles. chRCC cohort (3 out of 96 tumors), in agreement with This framework establishes a standardized approach to562 J.delPicchia classifyingriskvariantswithhighindividualoddsratiosand Center,AmericanHospitalofParis,Neuilly,France,21Service provides clinicians and patients with important, con- de Génétique, CHU Angers, Angers, France, 22Centre textualizableinformation.Thisprocesswillbeincorporated PREDIR,HôpitaldeBicêtre,AP-HP,Paris-SudUniversity,Le into our laboratory for additional risk allele interpretations Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 23UMR 7268-ADÉS, Faculté de and will be extended to a similar framework for protective Médecine de Marseille, Aix-Marseille Université-EFS-CNRS, alleles. Marseille, France, 24Oncology, Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, O. Senol-Cosar: None. D.C. Hoskinson: None. M. Paris, France, 25Département de Génétique Assistance Lebo: None. H. Mason-Suares: None. Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 26Department of Digestive P15.44D Oncology,BeaujonUniversityHospital,AP-HPandUniversity Guidelines for reporting secondary ﬁndings of genome Paris 7 – Denis Diderot, Clichy, France, 27Institut de sequencing in cancer genes: the SFMPP recommendations Cancérologie de Lorraine Alexis Vautrin, Nancy, France, 28Clinique Beau Soleil, EA2415, Association française P. Pujol1,2,P. VandePerre1,3,L. Faivre4,D.Sanlaville5,6,7,C. d’urologie, Montpellier, France, 29ICFuro, intergroupe Corsini1,B. Baertschi8,9, M.Anahory10,D.Vaur11,12, S. coopérateur francophone de recherche en onco-urologie, Olschwang13,14,15,N.Souﬁr16,17,N.Bastide18,S. Amar10,19,M. Paris, France, 30UMR 1027, Inserm, Université Toulouse III- Vintraud20,O.Ingster21,S.Richard22,P.LeCoz23,J.Spano24,O. Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 31Plateforme Sociétale Caron25, P.Hammel26,E. Luporsi27,A. Toledano20, X. Genotoul, 37 allées Jules Guesde, Toulouse, France, Rebillard28,29,A.Cambon-Thomsen30,31,O.Putois32,J.Rey33,34, 32PsychoanalyticPsychopathology,DepartmentofPsychology, C.Hervé35,C.Zorn36,K.Baudry1,V.Galibert1,J.Gligorov37,D. Strasbourg University, Strasbourg, France, 33Laboratoire de Azria38,B. Bressac-De Paillerets39,N.Burnichon40,25,41,M. Biopathologie Cellulaire et Tissulaire des Tumeurs, CHU Spielmann42, D.Zarca43,I.Coupier1, O.Cussenot44,45, A. Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 34Réseau TenGen, Paris, Gimenez-Roqueplo46,25,S. Giraud46,47, A.Lapointe48,P. France,35Laboratoired’EthiqueMédicaleetMédecineLégale Niccoli49,I. Raingeard50,M. LeBidan51,T. Frebourg52,A. EA4569, Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris Descartes, Raﬁi53,D.Geneviève54 Paris, France, 36Zorn & Associés law ﬁrm, Strasbourg, France, 37APHP, INSERM U938, IUC-UPMC, Sorbonne 1Department of Cancer Genetics, University of Montpellier Université, Paris, France, 38Department of Radiation and University Hospital (CHU), Montpellier, France, Oncology, Radiobiology Unit, Biometric and Bio-informatic 2Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France, 3Université Divisions,MontpellierCancerInstitute(ICM),IRCM,INSERM Toulouse III Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 4Fédération U1194, Montpellier, France, 39Département de Biologie et Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Pathologie Médicales, Gustave Roussy, Université Paris- Anomalies Du Développement (TRANSLAD), Centre Saclay, Villejuif, France, 40Université Paris Descartes, PRES Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France, 5Department Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France, of Genetics, Lyon University Hospitals, Lyon, France, 6Lyon 41INSERM, UMR970, Paris-Cardiovascular Research Center, Neuroscience Research Centre, CNRS UMR5292, Inserm Paris, France, 42Institut Gustave-Roussy, department of U1028, Lyon, France, 7Claude Bernard Lyon I University, medical oncology, Villejuif cedex, France, 43Institut Français Lyon, France, 8INSERM Ethics Committee, Paris, France, du Sein, 15 rue Jean Nicot, Paris, France, 44Department of 9University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 10Pech de Urology, Tenon Academic Hospital, Assistance Publique- Laclause, Bathmanabane & Associés law ﬁrm, Paris, France, Hôpitaux de Paris, Pierre et Marie Curie Medical School, 11Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, CLCC Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France, 45Groupe de recherche François Baclesse, Normandy Centre for Genomic and clinique-UPMC n°5, Oncotype-Uro, Institut Universitaire de PersonalizedMedicine,Caen,France,12INSERMU1079-IRIB, Cancérologie de l’UPMC, Pierre and Marie Curie Medical Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, School, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France, 46Réseau University of Rouen, Rouen, France, 13Aix Marseille TenGen, France, Paris, France, 47Laboratoire de Génétique Université, INSERM GMGF UMR S_910, Marseille, France, Moléculaire, CHU Lyon, Lyon, France, 48Ethique médicale – 14DépartementdeGénétiqueMédicale,Hôpitald’enfantsdela EA 4569 – Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Timone, Marseille, France, 15Groupe Ramsay Générale de Faculté de Médecine, Coordination Associations Filières de Santé, Hôpital Clairval, Marseille, France, 16Department of SantéAnDDI-Rares,VML(VaincrelesMaladiesLysosomales) Genetics, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France, 17INSERM U976 association,Paris,France,49AssistancePublique-Hôpitauxde Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris, France, 18BRCA France Marseille,CentreHospitalierUniversitairelaTimone,Service association, Paris, France, 19Cancer Immunotherapy Lab, d’Oncologie Medicale (P.N.), Marseille, France, 50CHU NeurosurgeryDepartment,Tel-Aviv MedicalCenter,TelAviv, Montpellier Service d’Endocrinologie, Diabète, Maladies Israel,20Departmentofradiotherapy,HartmannRadiotherapy métaboliques, Montpellier, France, 51Polyposes Familiales –Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 563 APTEPF association, Paris, France, 52Department of Niccoli: None. I. Raingeard: None. M. Le Bidan: None. Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Normandy Centre for T. Frebourg: None. A.Raﬁi: None. D. Geneviève:None. Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 53Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill-Cornell Medical P15.45A College, New York, NY, United States, 54Department of Secondaryﬁndingsonmultigenepanels:Anewfrontierfor Genetics, University of Montpellier and University Hospital clinical utility in hereditary cancer genes (CHU), Montpellier, France E. D.Esplin1,S. Yang1,E. Haverﬁeld1,S. T. Michalski1,J. Large-scale genomic sequencing for clinical purposes has Sotelo2,L.Kipnis2,A.Chittenden2,J.Stopfer2,K.Schneider2,R. ledtoanincreasediscoveryofsecondaryﬁndings(SF).The Sacca2,S.Stickevers2,D.Koeller2,S.Gaonkar2,E.Vaccari2,S. increasing use of multi-gene panel analysis to explore Cochrane2,W.Espinel3,M.Champine3,J.Jeter4,K.Sweet4,R. familialcancerpredispositionandoftumorgenomeanalysis Pilarski4, R.Pearlman4, K.Shane4,P. Brock4,J.Westman4,H. rise important questions regarding SF in cancer suscept- Hampel4,S. E. Lincoln1,S. Aradhya1,R. L. Nussbaum1 ibility genes. The American College of Medical Genetics andGenomics(ACMG)publishedapolicystatementforSF 1Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Dana Farber management for a list of genes including 29 cancer genes. Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States, 3Huntsman There are currently no equivalent recommendations in CancerInstitute,SaltLakeCity,UT,UnitedStates,4TheOhio Europe. From June 2016 to May 2017, the French Society State University, Columbus, OH, United States ofPredictiveandPersonalizedMedicine(SFMPP)establish aworkinggroupincluded47expertstoelaborateguidelines Medically actionable secondary ﬁndings in whole exome/ aboutmanagement ofSFincancergenespresentedhere.A genome sequencing (WES/WGS) are reported independent ﬁrst workgroup includingethicists, lawyers, representatives of WES/WGS indication. Multigene panels can cover 100s ofpatients’associations,andpsychologists,providesethical of genes and reveal hereditary cancer gene secondary reﬂection,informationguidelinesandinformationmaterials ﬁndings. We report the prevalence of secondary ﬁndings (writtenconsentformandvideo).Asecondgroupdedicated identiﬁed via multigene panel in 3000 individuals of mul- to medical expertise including oncologists, clinical and tiple ethnicities undergoing cardiovascular genetic testing molecular geneticists provides independent evaluation and andtheclinicalutilityofthesecancer-riskgeneﬁndings.We classiﬁcation of 60 genes. The main criterions were the analyzedde-identiﬁeddatafor47cancer-riskgenesin3679 “actionability” (access to validate screening or prevention patients referred for hereditary cardiovascular genetic test- strategies), the risk evaluation (severity, penetrance, and ing. Frameshift, nonsense, and splice-site disruptions were disease’s age of onset), and the level of evidence from classiﬁed as pathogenic variants (PV).We observed 141 published data. Genes were dividedinto 3subgroups: class PVs in cancer-risk genes, for a prevalence of 6.03%, 1forwhichitisrecommendedtoreturntheresults(n=28), including PVs with established management guidelines in class 2 for which the restitution remains questionable ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, MUTYH, PALB2, PMS2. (n=18) and class 3 for which it is not recommended to The prevalence of secondary ﬁndings by ethnicity in our returntheresult(n=14).TheseﬁrstEuropeanguidelineson cohort was: African American (1.73%), Asian (8%), His- SF in cancer predisposing genes may help clinicians and panic (4.98%), Caucasian (6.43%).Multigene panel cancer- laboratories to standardize and guide practices. risk secondary ﬁndings prevalence is higher than studies P.VandePerre:None.L.Faivre:None.D.Sanlaville: using WES/WGS. The distribution of ﬁndings by ethnicity None. C. Corsini: None. B. Baertschi: None. M. suggests pathogenic missense variants from lower pre- Anahory: None. D. Vaur: None. S. Olschwang: None. valence populations are underrepresented in current data- N. Souﬁr: None. N. Bastide: None. S. Amar: None. M. bases, and the true prevalence of secondary ﬁndings is Vintraud: None. O. Ingster: None. S. Richard: None. P. underreported. Follow-on analysis assessed the clinical Le Coz: None. J. Spano: None. O. Caron: None. P. utility of cancer-risk gene panels in breast cancer patients. Hammel: None. E. Luporsi: None. A. Toledano: None. In 80% of breast cancer cases clinical management for X. Rebillard: None. A. Cambon-Thomsen: None. O. patientsand/ortheirfamilymemberswaschangedbasedon Putois: None. J. Rey: None. C. Hervé: None. C. Zorn: PVs in ATM, CHEK2, MUTYH, PALB2, PMS2 and others, None. K.Baudry: None. V.Galibert: None. J. Gligorov: impactingtheoutcomeofalmosthalfofpatients.Thesedata None.D.Azria:None.B.Bressac-DePaillerets:None.N. support the clinical utility of PVs in cancer-risk genes and Burnichon:None.M.Spielmann:None.D.Zarca:None. suggest a role for multigene panels in the detection of I. Coupier: None. O. Cussenot: None. A. Gimenez- clinically actionable secondary ﬁndings. Roqueplo:None.S.Giraud:None.A.Lapointe:None.P. E.D. Esplin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock564 J.delPicchia options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; workﬂow does not necessitate upfront library preparation, Invitae. S. Yang: A. Employment (full or part-time); and instead converts the captured molecules into libraries Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock compatible with Illumina sequencing. We have designed options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; and optimized baits speciﬁc to the full exonic content of a Invitae. E. Haverﬁeld: A. Employment (full or part-time); growing library genes associated with cancer, neurological Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock disorders, autism, cardiac disease, and other conditions. options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; These are designed, balanced, and pooled on a per gene Invitae.S.T.Michalski:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); basis, and can be combined into customized panels, Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock allowing rapid turnaround of speciﬁc custom gene subsets. options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Here, we present the ability to rapidly deploy custom gene Invitae. J.Sotelo:None.L.Kipnis:None.A.Chittenden: panels across a variety of panel sizes and content, while None. J. Stopfer: None. K. Schneider: None. R. Sacca: maintaining high speciﬁcity, uniformity of coverage across None. S. Stickevers: None. D. Koeller: None. S. targetcontent,andsensitivitytodetectnucleicacidvariants Gaonkar: None. E. Vaccari: None. S. Cochrane: None. from clinically relevant samples. W. Espinel: None. M. Champine: None. J. Jeter: None. A.J. Barry: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- K. Sweet: None. R. Pilarski: None. R. Pearlman: None. niﬁcant; New England Biolabs. K.M. Patel: A. Employ- K. Shane: None. P. Brock: None. J. Westman: None. H. ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;DirectedGenomics.A. Hampel: None. S.E. Lincoln: None. S. Aradhya: A. B. Emerman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. niﬁcant;NewEnglandBiolabs.S.Adams:A.Employment Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Directed Genomics. S. intellectualproperty);Modest;Invitae.R.L.Nussbaum:A. Bowman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Directed Genomics. E. Mauceli: A. Employment (full or Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other part-time); Signiﬁcant; Directed Genomics. B. Textor: A. intellectual property); Modest; Invitae. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; New England Biolabs. C. Elfe: A. Employment (full or part-time); P15.46B Signiﬁcant; Directed Genomics. F. Stewart: A. Employ- Novel approach enables rapid deployment of high quality, ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; New England Biolabs. ﬂexible content target enrichment panels E. Dimalanta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- niﬁcant; New England Biolabs. S. Russello: A. Employ- J.Barry1,K. M.Patel2,A. B. Emerman2,S.Adams2,S. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; New England Biolabs. Bowman2, E.Mauceli2,B. Textor3,C. Elfe2, F.Stewart1,E. T.B.Davis:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Dimalanta1,S. Russello1, T.B. Davis1,C. L. Hendrickson2 NewEnglandBiolabs.C.L.Hendrickson:A.Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Directed Genomics. 1New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, United States, 2Directed Genomics,Ipswich,MA,UnitedStates,3NewEnglandBiolabs, P15.47C GmbH, Ipswich, MA, United States Targeted high-throughput sequencing in thyroid cancer diagnostics Efﬁcient utilization of targeted gene panels for clinical research is challenged by the wide variation in gene con- V. Yakushina1,2, L.Lerner3,T. Kazubskaya4,T. Kondrat’ieva4, stituents speciﬁc to a given study. While focused gene A. Lavrov1,5 panels efﬁciently provide the necessary depth of coverage for low frequency variant detection, the high costs and 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian technicalrequirementsassociatedwithpaneldesignpresent Federation, 2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, challenges. The NEBNext Direct technology utilizes a Moscow, Russian Federation, 3PreMed-European novel approach to selectively enrich nucleic acid targets Technologies, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4N.N. Blokhin ranging from a single gene to several hundred genes, Russian Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russian without sacriﬁcing speciﬁcity. The approach rapidly hybri- Federation, 5Russian National Research Medical University, dizes both strands of genomic DNA with biotinylated Moscow, Russian Federation probes prior to streptavidin bead capture, enzymatic removalofoff-targetsequences,andconversionofcaptured Introduction: Identiﬁcation of driver and secondary molecules into sequence-ready libraries. This results in an mutations with targeted high-throughput sequencing is a exceptionally uniform coverage proﬁle for a given target. promising approach in diagnosis and management of thyr- Unlike alternative hybridization methods, this 1-day oid cancer.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 565 Materials and Methods: Point mutations, fusions and intelligence, and a 5-year-old girl with moderate mental CNV known to be associated with sporadic thyroid cancer retardation of unknown cause, speech delay and light skin, were selected from COSMIC and TCGA project data. hairandeyesweretestedwiththeTruSightOnegenepanel Additionally, exons of RET gene harboring germline onaMiSeqplatform.Consequently,theyoungerbrotherof mutations were included. Design of primers for targeted the WS patient, who had bilateral deafness, pigmentation ampliﬁcation of regions with pathogenic point mutations changes,CNS malformationsandborderline IQ,was tested was done with AmpliSeq Designer v. 5.4.1, the length of by targeted amplicon NGS sequencing for the mutation amplicons was set in range of 125-375 b.p. The technical detected in his relative. The family of the older brother validationwasperformedoncelllinesSW620,MCF7.FNA subsequently decided to undergo preimplantation genetic samplesofpapillaryandfollicularcarcinomas(15samples) diagnosis.Fourday-3embryoswerebiopsiedandtestedfor and surgical samples of normal thyroid tissue (11 samples) carrier status of the mutation through targeted NGS. were analyzed. Analytical sensitivity was assessed via Results: Despite their wide phenotypic variability all introduction of DNA with known mutations into DNA of threepatientswerefoundtobeheterozygouscarriersofthe normal tissue, which did not harbor pathogenic mutations. samenon-sensemutationinPAX3:Chr2:g.223160283T>A, Results:Thedesignincludedover450pointmutationsin NM_181459.3:c.415A>T, NP_852124.1:p.Lys139Ter. Per- 25 genes, 3 regions of CNVs and 25 types of fusions. forming PGD we established that two of the four embryos Mutations expected in cell lines (according COSMIC CLP tested were not carriers and were suitable for transfer. andCancerCellLineEncyclopedia)weredetected:APCp. Conclusions: Variable expressivity complicates not only Q1338*andKRASp.G12V–inSW620;PIK3CAp.E545K the clinical identiﬁcation of a particular syndrome and – in MCF7. The panel is highly sensitive and successfully subtype, but also makes genetic counselling in regard to identiﬁesaslowas3%ofalleles.InPTCsamplesfollowing prenatal diagnosis challenging and risky. Performing PGD mutations were detected: BRAF p.V600E (5 samples); gives the opportunity to avoid the moral dilemma whether KRAS p.G12V; fusions ETV6-NTRK3, PAX8-PPARG, to keep the embryo in conditions where the phenotype NCOA4-RET.InthesamplewithETV6-NTRK3,secondary could vary from debilitating to less severe. mutation IDH1 p.V178I was found. Supported by The L.T. Balabanski: None. R.V. Vazharova: None. S. Foundation for Assistance to Small Innovative Enterprises Ivanov: None. M. Atanasoska: None. A. Kalchev: None. in Science and Technology (№ 442ГС2/9119 - С3-40846). G. Nenkova: None. S. Dzhuneva: None. M. Malinov: V. Yakushina: None. L. Lerner: None. T. Kazubs- None. D. Toncheva: None. kaya: None. T. Kondratieva: None. A. Lavrov: None. P15.49A P15.48D Whole Genome Sequencing in healthy people Observationofwidephenotypicvariabilityin3individuals with the same pathogenic mutation in PAX3 M.CHATZIDAKI1,2,G.THODI3,Y. L. LOUKAS1,2,E. MOLOU3,O.TRIANTAFILLI3, Y. DOTSIKAS1,K. L. T. Balabanski1,2, R.V. Vazharova1,3, S.Ivanov1,M. SCHOULPIS4 Atanasoska1,A. Kalchev1, G.Nenkova1, S.Dzhuneva1, M. Malinov1,D.Toncheva1,2 1Department of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, ATHENS, Greece, 2NEOSCREEN LTD, 1Gynecology and Assisted Reproduction Hospital “Malinov Athens, Greece, 3NEOSCREEN LTD, ATHENS, Greece, MD”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 4Department of Mental Health and Social Welfare, Hospital Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Soﬁa University Paidon “Agia Soﬁa”, ATHENS, Greece St Kliment Ohridski, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biology, Medical genetics and Microbiology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Introduction: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) provides the most comprehensive collection of an individual’s Introduction: The PAX3 gene encodes an important tran- genetic variations compared to the human reference gen- scriptionfactorregulatingtheexpressionofmanygenesand ome.WGScanbeausefuldiagnosticandresearchtool,asit playing a crucial role during foetal development. Patho- allows the detection of pathogenic and susceptibility var- genic mutations in this gene lead to autosomal dominant iants enabling the diagnosis of an associated syndrome as forms of Waardenburg syndrome and Craniofacial- wellastheidentiﬁcationofvariantsexplainingtheobserved deafness-hand syndrome. genetic diversity. Methods and Materials: A 29-year-old male diagnosed Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the with Waardenburg syndrome, who exhibited unilateral clinicalsigniﬁcanceofWGSinhealthypeopleregardingthe deafness, pigmentation changes and above-average detection of mutations associated with clinical disorders,566 J.delPicchia predisposition to various clinical conditions and response fractionofsmokers.Thereisgrowingevidencethatgenetic to drugs. variations in nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) Materials/Methods:50healthypeopleweresubjectedto subunits inﬂuence the risk of nicotine dependence and the WGS conducted on BGISEQ-500 sequencing platform ability to quit smoking. which offers high quality data with average coverage 30x. Materials and Methods: 337 smokers who underwent Thevcfﬁleswereﬁltered basedonthefollowingexclusive pharmacotherapy with varenicline, bupropion, nicotine criteria MAF≥1% and assignment by ClinVar as benign/ replacement therapy (NRT) alone, or NRT plus bupropion likely benign. were genotyped for 7 germline polymorphisms in genes Results: Several mutations with clinical implications encoding the nAChR subunits CHRNA4, CHRNA5, and were identiﬁed in all healthy participants. Table 1 depicts CHRNB2bypyrosequencing.Smokinghabitandabstention some of our ﬁndings. were assessed from the number of cigarettes smoked per day (CPD) and the exhaled CO (eCO), at four time TABLE 1: points (baseline, 1, 3 and 12 months). Statistical tests were carried out with PLINK software using sex, therapy, and SAMPLEID GENE/MUTATION eCO as covariates. Signiﬁcance was set at P < 0.05. 25008 CFTR:c.1521_1523delCTT Cysticﬁbrosis(INHERITED) Multiple testing was done using the Benjamini-Hochberg 25972 CYP4F2:c.1297G>A DRUGRELATED procedure. 25987 MEFV:c.2082G>A Mediterraniansyndrome (INHERITED) Results:Atbaseline,bothCPDandeCOwereassociated 30007 BCHE:c.1256G>T DRUGRELATED with polymorphisms in the CHRNA5 locus (rs503464, 30125 BRCA1:c.181T>G PREDISPOSITIONtocancer rs55853698, rs55781567 and rs16969968; P < 0.01). 30982 ΜΥΗ7:c.3645G>C PREDISPOSITIONtofamilial hypertrophiccardiomyopathy rs503464, a variant in the 5′-UTR of CHRNA5, was also 30999 DYSF:c.386G>A “Miyoshimyopathy” associatedwith1-,3-and12-monthresponsestotherapy(P (INHERITED) 32039 CFTR:c.489+1G>T Cysticﬁbrosis(INHERITED) = 0.011, P = 0.0043, P = 0.020, respectively), although 31033 GJB2:c.35delG Nonsyndromichearingloss after correction for multiple testing only the association at (INHERITED) the 3-month assessment remained signiﬁcant. 35000 HBB:c.93-21G>A Betathalassemia(INHERITED) Conclusions: These data support the role of individual 35022 BRCA2: PREDISPOSITIONtocancer c.3554_3563delCAGTTGAAAT genetic makeup in the ability to quit smoking. 31025 ABCA4:c.2690C>T Stargartmaculardegeneration In part supported by the 5x1000 contribution of (INHERITED) Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan. 35064 BRCA2:c.5722_5723delCT PREDISPOSITIONtocancer F.ColomboisrecipientofaFondazioneUmbertoVeronesi fellowship. Conclusions: WGS should be the method of choice not G. Pintarelli: None. A. Galvan: None. P. Pozzi: None. only in cases with designated phenotype but also in the S. Noci: None. G. Pasetti: None. F. Sala: None. U. context of carrier screening. Pastorino: None. R. Bofﬁ: None. F. Colombo: None. M. Chatzidaki: None. G. Thodi: None. Y. L. loukas: None. E. Molou: None. O. Triantaﬁlli: None. Y. Dotsikas: None. K. Schoulpis: None. P16 Omics/Bioinformatics P15.50B P16.01A Pharmacogenetic study of seven polymorphisms in three 3DIV : A 3D-genome Interaction Viewer and database nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits in smoking- cessation therapies I.Jang1,D.Yang2, I.Jung2,B. Lee1 G.Pintarelli1, A.Galvan2,P. Pozzi1,3,S. Noci1,G.Pasetti1,F. 1Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Sala1,U.Pastorino1,R.Bofﬁ1,F.Colombo1 Daejeon, Korea, Republic of, 2Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea, Republic of 1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy, 2Formerly Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei 3DIV: A 3D-genome Interaction Viewer and database Tumori, Milan, Italy, 3Azienda Sociosanitaria Territoriale Abstract: Three-dimensional (3D) chromatin structure is Lariana Sant’Antonio Abate Hospital, Cantù, Italy an emerging paradigm for understanding gene regulation mechanisms. Hi-C (high-throughput chromatin conforma- Introduction: Smoking-cessation therapy reduces the risk tion capture), a method to detect long-range chromatin of smoking-related diseases, but is successful only in a interactions,allowsextensivegenome-wideinvestigationofAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 567 3D chromatin structure. However, broad application of Hi- ground truths, Duplex Seq Adapters offered >30-50 fold C data have been hindered by the level of complexity in betterspeciﬁcitythanstandardadaptersatthesamelevelof processing Hi-C data and the large size of raw sequencing detection sensitivity, regardless of sample type. For exam- data.Inordertoovercometheselimitations,weconstructed ple,usingDuplexSeqAdapterspairedwithconsensusread a database named 3DIV (a 3D-genome Interaction Viewer construction, >90% detection sensitivity was achieved for and database) that provides a list of long-range chromatin genomic and cfDNA samples at 0.5% MAF with 0 false interaction partners for the queried locus with genomic and positives, resulting in 100% speciﬁcity and >40-fold error epigenomic annotations. 3DIV is the ﬁrst of its kind to suppression compared to standard adapters. Such advances collectallpubliclyavailablehumanHi-Cdatatoprovide66 in detection accuracy are key to reﬁning diagnostics and billion uniformly processed raw Hi-C read pairs obtained improving precision cancer care. from 80 different human cell/tissue types. In contrast to J.Wang:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; other databases, 3DIV uniquely provides normalized Integrated DNA Technologies. K. Lai: A. Employment chromatin interaction frequencies against genomic distance (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Integrated DNA Technolo- dependent background signals and a dynamic browsing gies. M. Light: A. Employment (full or part-time); visualization tool for the listed interactions, which could Signiﬁcant; Integrated DNA Technologies. W. Lee: A. greatlyadvancetheinterpretationofchromatininteractions. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Integrated ‘3DIV’ is available at http://kobic.kr/3div. DNA Technologies. K. Giorda: A. Employment (full or I. Jang: None. D. Yang: None. I. Jung: None. B. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Integrated DNA Technologies. M. Lee: None. Jarosz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Integrated DNA Technologies. Y. Bao: A. Employment P16.02B (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Integrated DNA Technolo- Improved accuracy of ultra-low frequency mutation gies. D. Kupec: A. Employment (full or part-time); detection by novel duplex sequencing adapters and Signiﬁcant; Integrated DNA Technologies. C. Walworth: consensus read reconstruction A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Integrated DNATechnologies.C.Chen:A.Employment(fullorpart- J.Wang,K.Lai,M.Light,W.Lee,K.Giorda,M.Jarosz,Y.Bao, time); Signiﬁcant; Integrated DNA Technologies. D.Kupec,C. Walworth, C.Chen P16.03C Integrated DNA Technologies, Redwood City, CA, United Comprehensive map of regulated cell death signalling States network: a powerful analytical tool for studying diseases Detection of low to ultra-low frequency mutations, enabled J.Ravel1,2,L.MonrazGomez3,4,5,E.Barillot3,4,5,A.Zinovyev3,4,5, by advances in next generation sequencing (NGS), is often I.Kuperstein3,4,5 confounded by errors introduced during standard NGS workﬂows, even those using unique-molecular-identiﬁers 1Laboratoire de génétique, Centre Régional Hospitalier (UMIs). We have developed xGen® Duplex Seq Adapters, Universitaire de Nancy, Nancy, France, 2INSERM UMR 954, which permit double-stranded DNA tagging and consensus Université de Lorraine, Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, France, read calling among duplicated sequences. These novel 3Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, Paris, France, 4PSL Research adapters are compatible with standard library preparation University, Paris, France, 5Mines Paris Tech, Fontainebleau, andenrichmentmethods,yetenableduplexsequencingand France enhanced error correction. Well-established genomes, or commercially acquired and individually genotyped FFPE Introduction: The Cell death process draws special atten- and cfDNA samples, were mixed to mimic low-frequency tion, due to frequent perturbations of its machinery in var- variant samples with MAF down to 0.1%. Libraries from ious diseases. It can be described into three highly these sample mixtures were prepared for deep sequencing interconnected steps: initiation, signaling and execution of using Duplex Seq Adapters and a 75 kb custom, target- death signals. capture panel. A bioinformatic tool suite was developed to Materials and Methods: We used a systems biology create UMI-aware consensus reads. Compared to standard approach to graphically represent biological processes in a libraries, libraries made using the Duplex Seq Adapters, seamless comprehensive map of signaling network that is with their unique tagging structure, had comparable or accessible for visualization, computational analysis and better yields and mean deduplicated sequencing depth for applications. allsampletypesandinputmassestested.Forvariantcalling Results:TheRegulatedCellDeath(RCD)mapisdivided accuracy,evaluatedagainstpublishedcell-lineorgenotyped into 27 functional modules that can be visualized568 J.delPicchia contextually in the whole map, or as individual diagrams. sensitively identify SNV and indel-deﬁned clones within Themapcontainsmorethan1200proteinsandgenes,2020 AML samples and assess their distribution at the time of biochemicalreactionsandisbasedon600scientiﬁcpapers. diagnosis, remission and relapse. We also used single cell ItisanopensourceplatformfacilitatedbytheNaviCellweb SNVs to monitor host and donor cell populations during tool for map navigation (https://navicell.curie.fr/pages/ma bone marrow transplantation (BMT), which allowed us to ps_rcd.html). The RCD map was used for functional accurately evaluate engraftment and disease relapse. Col- interpretation of the differences in cell death regulation lectively, our single-cell data indicates that clonal popula- between Alzheimer’s disease and lung cancer. These tions inferred from VAFs obtained from bulk sequencing diseases were demonstrated to have a reverse comorbidity. data may notfullyresolve theheterogeneitywithintumors; Interestingly,weobservedthatmetabolism-relatedmodules moreover,thesingle-cellnatureofourapproachenabledthe are deregulated in Alzheimer’s disease. Moreover, in lung unambiguous identiﬁcation of multiple co-occurring muta- cancer, these modules are disrupted in an opposite way. tions within subclones that is not possible with bulk mea- Conclusions: This approach will help study dynamic surements.Collectively,ourresultsshowagreaterdegreeof molecular mechanisms of diseases, especially cancers. A heterogeneity in AML tumor samples than is commonly comprehensive reconstruction of regulated cell death appreciated with traditional sequencing paradigms and signaling network will bring a better understanding of demonstrate the value of single-cell analysis for AML. regulatory circuits and, in a near future, can be applied for D.J. Eastburn: A. Employment (full or part-time); therapeutic target identiﬁcation and for treatment Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, approachesoptimization.Thiswillalsobeusefultomedical stock options, patent or other intellectual property); geneticists, both researchers and clinicians, who are Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. M. Pellegrino: E. Ownership constantly dealing with a great variety of new genes. Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual J. Ravel: None. L. Monraz Gomez: None. E. Barillot: property); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. A. Sciambi: A. None. A. Zinovyev: None. I. Kuperstein: None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other P16.04D intellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;MissionBio.S.Treusch: Single-cell analysis of mutational heterogeneity in acute A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Mission myeloid leukemia tumors with high-throughput droplet Bio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or microﬂuidics other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. L. Xu: None. R. Durruthy-Durruthy: A. Employment (full D.J.Eastburn1, M.Pellegrino1,A. Sciambi1,S. Treusch1,L. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. E. Ownership Xu2,R. Durruthy-Durruthy1,K. Gokhale1, J.Jacob1,T.X. Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual Chen1, W.Oldham1,J. Matthews3, H.Kantarjian3,A. Futreal3, property); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. K. Gokhale: A. K. Patel3, J.Zehnder2,K. Jones1, K.Takahashi3 Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other 1Mission Bio, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States, intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. J. Jacob: 2Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Mission 3MD Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston, Bio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or TX, United States other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. T.X. Chen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; To make possible the routine characterization of genetic Mission Bio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, diversity within cancer cell populations, we developed a patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Mission novel two-step microﬂuidic droplet workﬂow that enables Bio. W. Oldham: A. Employment (full or part-time); efﬁcient and massively-parallel single-cell PCR-based Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. J. Matthews: None. H. Kantar- genomic barcoding for single-cell DNA sequencing appli- jian: None. A. Futreal: None. K. Patel: None. J. cations. We demonstrate that the two-step microﬂuidic Zehnder: None. K. Jones: A. Employment (full or part- approach is required for robust DNA ampliﬁcation on time); Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. E. Ownership Interest thousands of individual cells per run with high coverage (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); uniformityandlowallelicdropoutoftargetedgenomicloci. Signiﬁcant; Mission Bio. K. Takahashi: None. To apply our single-cell sequencing technology to human tumor samples, we developed a targeted panel to partially P16.05A sequence 26 genes frequently mutated in acute myeloid Phenopolis:anopenplatformforharmonisationofgenetic leukemia(AML) including TP53, DNMT3A, FLT3, NPM1, and phenotypic data NRAS, IDH1 and IDH2. Using this panel, we were able toAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 569 N.Pontikos1,2,I.Moghul3,J.Yu4,A.Fiorentino1,G.Arno1,2,A. M.Asif1,2,3,H.Martiniano1,3,C.Rasga2,3,A.R.Marques2,3,J.X. J.Hardcastle1,A.R. Webster1,2,V.Plagnol5 Santos2,3,G.Oliveira4,5,F. M.Couto1,A. M.Vicente2,3,6 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 1Departamento de Informática, Faculdade de Ciências da 2Moorﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3UCL Universidade deLisboa, Lisbon,Portugal, 2Instituto Nacional Cancer Institute, London, United Kingdom, 4Nufﬁeld de Saúde Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, Portugal, 3BioISI - Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Biosystems & Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de Oxford, United Kingdom, 5UCL Genetics Institute, London, Ciências, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, United Kingdom 4Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Centro de Investigação e Formação Introduction: The molecular diagnosis of rare genetic Clinica do HP-CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Instituto diseases requires detailed clinical phenotypes and proces- Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Lisbon, Portugal singoflargeamountsofgeneticdata.Thismotivateslarge- scale collaborations between clinicians, geneticists and AutismSpectrumDisorder(ASD)ischaracterizedbyhighly bioinformaticians across multiple sites where patient data heterogeneous clinical phenotypes and complex genetic are pooled together to boost the chances of solving rare architecture, rendering early diagnosis and prognosis difﬁ- cases, and validating novel genes. This motivated the cult. CNVs in many genes have been implicated in ASD, developmentofPhenopolis,aplatformforharmonisationof disrupting speciﬁc Biological Processes (BP) eventually genetic and phenotypic data. associatedwithdistinctclinicalphenotypes.Herewesought Methods: Using Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) to identify and predict clinical patterns associated with BP encoded phenotypes, Phenopolis is able to prioritise disrupted by speciﬁc brain gene CNVs, using a machine causative genes using different sources of evidence, such learning-based integrative approach. Firstly, clustering asliteraturesearchandmodelorganismphenotypeontology analysis of clinical records from 2446 ASD patients from analysis. Additionally, Phenopolis uncovers gene- the Autism Genome Project identiﬁed two consistent and phenotype relationships within the stored patient data highly stable clusters, differing in ASD severity, adaptive through variant ﬁltering and statistical enrichment of HPO behaviour and cognitive ability. Secondly, functional terms. The database isimplemented using a graph database enrichment analysis of rare CNVs, disrupting brain- forscalabilitywhichallowsefﬁcientlinkingofHPO,genes expressed genes in these ASD subjects, identiﬁed 15 sig- and variants. niﬁcant BPs, including nervous system development, cog- Results: Phenopolis is an open-source web server nition, and protein polyubiquitination. Random Forest providing an intuitive interface to genetic and phenotypic feature importance analysis showed that all these BP con- databases.Phenopolisisalsoanidealplatform forstudying tributed positively to the classiﬁcation of ASD severity, as the pleiotropy of genes. The online version available at deﬁned by the identiﬁed clusters. Finally, a Naive Bayes www.phenopolis.org, includes four example patients with classiﬁerwastrainedusingclusterandBPinformationfrom inherited retinal dystrophies, to illustrate our methods. a subset of data, comprising the 325 individuals with Discussion: The Phenopolis platform accelerates clinical highestBPinformationcontentscores.Astratiﬁedﬁve-fold diagnosis,genediscoveryandencourageswideradoptionof cross validated model predicted the severity of ASD phe- the HPO in the study of rare genetic diseases. We plan on notype from BPs,with precision of 0.82and recall of0.39. extending Phenopolis to interface with the Genomics This study thus shows that severity predictions can be England GenePanel app to retrieve relevant genes and attainedfromBPputativelydisruptedbybrain-geneCNVs. contribute novel disease genes. However, precise predictions are only achieved in sub- N. Pontikos: None. I. Moghul: None. J. Yu: None. A. groups with high BP information content, and speciﬁcity is Fiorentino:None.G.Arno:None.A.J.Hardcastle:None. generally low. A clinical application will thus require fur- A.R. Webster: None. V. Plagnol: A. Employment (full or ther analysis, in much larger datasets that include detailed part-time); Signiﬁcant; Inivata. E. Ownership Interest phenotypic information. FCT-Portugal (SFRH/BD/52485/ (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); 2014) Signiﬁcant; Inivata. M. Asif: None. H. Martiniano: None. C. Rasga: None. A.R. Marques: None. J.X. Santos: None. G. Oliveira: P16.06B None. F.M. Couto: None. A.M. Vicente: None. An integrative approach to correlate clinical presentation patterns in Autism Spectrum Disorder with biological P16.07C processes disrupted by Copy Number Variants (CNV) in BEA: a web tool for BioMark gene expression analysis brain genes570 J.delPicchia B. Cadenas1,2,3,I.Cebrián2,4, E.Sánchez1,M.Calle3,C. N.DiNanni1,2, V.Appierto3,C. DeMarco3,E. Ortolan3,L. Tornador2,5,4,M. Sánchez1,6,5 Milanesi1, M.Daidone3,E. Mosca1 1Iron Metabolism: Regulation and Diseases Group, Josep 1Institute of Biomedical Technologies, CNR, Milano, Italy, Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC), Badalona, 2Dipartimento di Informatica e Sistemistica, University of Spain, 2Whole Genix S.L, Barcelona, Spain, 3Universitat de Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3IRCSS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Vic-Universitat Central de Catalunya, Vic, Spain, 4Fundación Milano, Italy Teresa Moretó, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, 5BloodGeneticsS.L.,EspluguesdeLlobregat,Spain,6Program Introduction: The generation of multiple omics from the ofProgramofPredictiveandPersonalizedMedicineofCancer same biological system poses challenges in data analysis (PMPPC), Institutd'Investigació Germans TriasiPujol (IGTP), and interpretation. We propose a network-based approach Badalona, Spain that prioritizesgenes considering theirnetwork(functional) proximity to altered genes, according to different types of Biomark HD system is a high-throughput technology that experimental evidence. We compare our multi-omics gene performsmorethanninethousandsofreal-timequantitative score with those of single omics analyses, using breast PCR(qPCR)reactionssimultaneously.Althoughnumerous cancer(BRCA)somaticmutationandgeneexpressionfrom statistical tools are available in the public domain for the TCGA. We also identify functionally related genes ana- analysis of conventional qPCR experiments, this is not the lysing somatic mutations in primary tumors (PT) and PT- case when many qPCR dataset from high-throughput derived BRCA initiating cells (BCICs). experiments have to be analysed. Therefore, there is a Materials and Methods: TCGA data (49 subjects) were need to provide a user-friendly software able to analyze collected using TCGAbiolinks. Fresh-frozen PTs and non- Biomark output data. tumoral specimens from blood were collected from 8 To meet this need, we are developing BEA, Biomark patients at IRCCS-INT; BCICs were isolated at early Expression Analysis, a web tool designed to analyse Real in vitro passages; the resulting samples (PTs, BCICs and TimeqPCRdatafromBiomarkHDSystemacrossmultiple blood) were whole-exome sequenced; mutations detected conditionsandreplicates.Analysisincludesrelativequanti- by at least two variant callers were considered. Functional ﬁcation using normalization against a reference gene (ΔΔ interactions were collected from STRING. The network CT method), and appropriate statistical testing to identify proximity of altered genes was calculated by network differential expressed genes between tested groups, taking diffusion. BRCA genes were collected from COSMIC, into account test of normality and number of groups. The OMIM, INTOGEN and DOCM. web application is written in R using the Shiny platform. Results: The network-based analysis increased the over- BEA has been tested using Bimark 96.96 dynamic array lap between the signiﬁcant genes associated with each data from myelodisplastic syndrome patients. omics. The proposed multi-omics gene score prioritized a BEA will help scientists perform gene expression higher number of BRCA genes than the analysis of each analyses by interactively visualizing each step with omics on its own. The score underlined potential members customizable options and intuitive graphical user interface. ofpathwaysthatsuggestfunctionallinksbetweenmutations The program provide comprehensive results visualization, in BCICs and PTs. downloadableplotsandasummarizingreport,anditwould Conclusions: Network diffusion-based integrative analy- not require programming knowledge. BEA will be an open sis underlines links among different types of evidences, source software freely available online. prioritizing omics-speciﬁc and common players within the This research was supported by grant SAF2015-70412-R human interactome. (MINECO), DJCLS R14/04 from Deutsche José Carreras Funding: MIUR (INTEROMICS PB05, PRIN 2015 leukämie Stiftung, 2017 SGR 288 GRC (GRE) Generalitat 20157ATSLF); FRRB (LYRA 2015-0010). de Catalunya and from Fundació Internacional Josep N. Di Nanni: None. V. Appierto: None. C. De Marco: Carreras and Obra Social “la Caixa” Spain to M.S. None.E.Ortolan:None.L.Milanesi:None.M.Daidone: B. Cadenas: None. I. Cebrián: None. E. Sánchez: None. E. Mosca: None. None. M. Calle: None. C. Tornador: None. M. Sánchez: None. P16.09A Increased BRCA1/2 classiﬁcation conﬁdence: comparison P16.08D of ACMG to public database classiﬁcation - call for Network diffusion for the integrative analysis of multiple systematic molecular proﬁling “-omics”: case studies on breast cancerAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 571 S. Kaduthanam,U.Schmidt-Edelkraut, S. Santiago-Mozos, M. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Molecular Health. M. Weber: F. Hartenfeller,R.Narang,J.Hermanns,M.Stein,D.Jackson,M. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; BRIDGES Con- Weber, S.Hettich, S. Brock, T. Soldatos sulting Group. S. Hettich: A. Employment (full or part- time);Signiﬁcant;MolecularHealth.S.Brock:A.Employ- Molecular Health, Heidelberg, Germany ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Molecular Health. T. Soldatos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Introduction: Detection of certain BRCA1/2 mutations Molecular Health. may be indicative of risk for breast or ovarian cancer. Conﬁdent determination of the clinical signiﬁcance of P16.10B BRCA1/2 variants is therefore critical to geneticists, Generation of the Cancer Pathway Prototype - a platform patients, and medical socioeconomics. Lack of molecular for predictive cancer pathway modeling characterizationformanyvariantsandunknownassociation to disease complicate genetic test reporting. One approach T. Sorg1,Y. Herault1,J.Jonkers2,A. Ploubidou3,L. Frappart3, to interpret germline variants is provided by ACMG J.Hasenauer4,J.Banga5,O.Rinner6,V.Naumova7,D.Koubi8, guidelines based on ﬁve-class clinical categorization. B. Lange9 Methods: We investigated the ACMG classiﬁcation of a breast and ovarian cancer study with respect to criteria that 1Phenomin-ICS, Illkirch, France, 2Netherlands Cancer affect ACMG-interpretation. We (a) compared variant- Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Leibniz Institute on Aging annotations from public databases, (b) assessed the -Fritz-LipmannInstitute,Jena,Germany,4HelmholtzZentrum contribution of expert-validated publications, and (c) München, Munchen, Germany, 5Spanish National Research calculated an independent ACMG-classiﬁcation. Council, CSIC, Vigo, Spain, 6Biognosys, Schlieren, Results: Combined assessment of variant pathogenicity Switzerland,7SimulaResearchLaboratory, Fornebu,Norway, derived from public database annotations requires caution. 8Finovatis, Lyon, France, 9Alacris Theranostics, Berlin, Pairwise comparison of public database content showed up Germany to 15 and 22% discrepancy among BRCA1/2 variant- annotations, respectively. While public database consensus CanPathPro is developing a bioinformatics concept and the was comparable to the ACMG-classiﬁcation of the associated computational tools required for the translation investigated study, incorporation of additional information of highly complex and heterogeneous omics data into pre- from published functional studies further ascertained dictive modelling of cancer signaling. The approach is uti- conﬁdence. Incorporation of our curated content to ACMG lizing existing data and databases relevant to cancer guidelines revealed up to 84 % and 78 % less ‘likely- signaling as well as CanPathPro-generated mouse omics benign’ or ‘likely-pathogenic’ BRCA1/2 classiﬁcations, data obtained from mouse cancer models, for practical respectively. testing and validation of the system. These data are inte- Conclusions: Our results invite initiating prospective grated by an existing modelling computational platform, to studies that characterize the observed conﬁdence improve- identify signaling networks critical for breast and lung ment. Overall, consolidated standards with harmonized cancerdevelopment.Theinsilico-generatedpredictionsare BRCA1/2variant-annotationsareessentialforadeptclinical validatedusing(i)organotypicsystemsrecapitulatingbreast classiﬁcation.Whilepatientinformationisakey-parameter, and lung lesions, (ii) well-phenotyped, existing and one other challenge is supporting the geneticist’s expertise CanPathPro-generated mouse models. with curated evidence. We anticipate that tools reliably Thevalidatedbioinformaticsconceptwillbebuiltintothe combining these factors will systematically augment CanPathProprototype:Atripartitetoolforthe(i)generation rational management of associated medical treatment- and and (ii) integration of quantitative mouse omics data, cost-options by further ascertaining decision-making. followed by (iii) predictive in silico modelling of cancer S. Kaduthanam: A. Employment (full or part-time); signaling pathways and networks in mouse models. Signiﬁcant; Molecular Health. U. Schmidt-Edelkraut: CanPathPro has made good progress towards expanding None. S. Santiago-Mozos: A. Employment (full or part- and building a bioinformatics modelling platform. Well time); Signiﬁcant; Molecular Health. M. Hartenfeller: A. deﬁned mouse models were ampliﬁed and omics analysis Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Molecular was carried out of mouse models, mouse model derived Health. R. Narang: A. Employment (full or part-time); cells and organoid models for validation of the predictive Signiﬁcant; Molecular Health. J. Hermanns: A. Employ- modelling platform. The combined experimental- & ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Molecular Health. M. systems biology validation platform, will be utilized in Stein: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; generating and testing cancer signaling hypotheses in Molecular Health. D. Jackson: A. Employment (full or biomedical research.572 J.delPicchia The innovative approach taken by CanPathPro is set to algorithm in the dialog mode ensures the elimination of have broad and signiﬁcant impact on diverse areas, from syndromes and brings the user to the ﬁnal diagnosis. cancer research and personalized medicine to drug dis- Conclusion: The using of CDSS can signiﬁcantly covery and development, and ultimately improving out- optimize the work of the doctor, simplifying differential comes for cancer patients. diagnosis and, therefore, improve the effectiveness of T.Sorg:None.Y.Herault:None.J.Jonkers:None.A. medicalandgeneticcounseling ofpatients withmonogenic Ploubidou: None. L. Frappart: None. J. Hasenauer: syndromes and chromosome aberrations. None. J. Banga: None. O. Rinner: None. V. Naumova: I. Ugarov: None. V. Chernykh: None. I. Sharkova: None. D. Koubi: None. B. Lange: None. None. O. Novoselova: None. A. Sharkov: None. N. Ivanov: None. P16.11C Clinical decision support system for differential diagnosis P16.12D of monogenic syndromes and microdeletion and The role of cell-free mitochondrial DNA in microduplication syndromes neurodegenerative disease I.Ugarov1,2,V.Chernykh3,2,I.Sharkova3,2,O.Novoselova4,2,A. H.Lowes, M.Kurzawa-Akanbi, A. Pyle, G.Hudson Sharkov5,2,N.Ivanov2 Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle, United Kingdom 1MSMSU, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2xGen Cybernetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Federal state scientiﬁc Introduction:Previousresearch hasindicatedthatcell-free budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical mitochondrial DNA (ccf-mtDNA) copy number (CN) is Genetics»,, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Filatov Children's signiﬁcantly depleted in PD and AD CSF versus controls, clinical hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Ministry of suggesting this may serve as a viable biomarker of broad Health of Russian Federation, Separated Structural Unit neurodegeneration. Therefore further study, broadening the “ClinicalResearchInstituteofPediatrics”atPirogovRussian clinical spectrum are warranted. To address this we inves- National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian tigated the role and integrity of ccf-mtDNA in the devel- Federation opment and progression of several neurodegenerative diseases (NDD) including; PD, DLB, AD and MS. Introduction: The existence of many forms of rare mono- Methods: We have used quantitative PCR to measure genic syndromes and unbalanced chromosome aberrations ccf-mtDNA CN in ventricular and lumbar CSF samples with similar phenotypes create difﬁculties in diagnosis and fromvariousNDD,toassesstheviabilityofccf-mtDNAas require the development of tools for differential diagnosis a disease biomarker. Secondly, we have investigated both before the appointment of genetic testing to conﬁrm the mitochondrial and cell-death marker protein levels of these ﬁnal diagnosis. samples using western blotting and ELISA, correlating Materials and Methods: Available public INTERNET these to ccf-mtDNA, to determine the origin and effect of sourceswereusedtoﬁlltheknowledgebaseofthedecision ccf-mtDNA. Finally we have assessed the integrity of ccf- support system. For the formation of the catalogs of mtDNA using NGS, comparing ccf-mtDNA to reference monogenic forms the information from OMIM, ORPHA- tissue samples. NET was analyzed. Description of the clinical picture Results: Our results support our hypothesis that low ccf- according to the literature data was carried out on the basis mtDNA is a biomarker for neurodegeneration, particularly of modiﬁed and extended ontology HPO. The catalog of in PD. However, we found no correlation to ccf-mtDNA chromosomeaberrationswasformedonthebasisofdbVar, and mitochondrial or neuronal protein levels, despite OMIM and ISCA. The program was implemented on the signiﬁcantly reduced levels in PD versus controls. Further- basis of the platform xGEN IDS and xGenCloud service. more,Braakstageanddementiaseveritydidnotcorrelateto Results:Wedevelopedaclinicaldecisionsupportsystem ccf-mtDNA. (CDSS),including10934monogenicsyndromesand17713 Conclusions:LowCSFccf-mtDNAisaviablebiomarker aberrations with clinical picture. For each symptom for neurodegeneration, raising the potential that this could describedtheclinical picture ofthesyndrome, thepresence be used as a diagnostic predictor of disease onset and information indicates the frequency of occurrence among progression, however more work is needed to validate this. the patients in ﬁve categories (obligatory, very frequent, Inaddition,ourworkshedslightonpotentialpathomechan- frequent, rare, very rare), type of symptom in the isms of disease development of age-related neurodegenera- manifestation of symptoms (congenital, acquired), the time tive disorders. of occurrence of the symptom. The differential diagnosticAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 573 H. Lowes: None. M. Kurzawa-Akanbi: None. A. Pyle: signiﬁcantCNVs.Itcanbeadvantageousfortheassessment None. G. Hudson: None. of the functional effect and clinical signiﬁcance of CNVs. A. Giovannetti: None. A. Traversa: None. S. Castel- P16.13A lana: None. M. Truglio: None. C. Fusilli: None. M. InCAS: an integrative annotator of human copy number Goldoni: None. M.L. Genovesi: None. N. Panzironi: variants using functional genomic features None.G.Napoli:None.P. Palumbo: None.O.Palumbo: None.L.Bernardini:None.A.Pizzuti:None.M.Carella: A. Giovannetti1,A. Traversa2,S. Castellana3,M.Truglio3,C. None. V. Caputo: None. T. Mazza: None. Fusilli3,M. Goldoni4,M.L. Genovesi1,N.Panzironi1,G. Napoli1,P.Palumbo5,O.Palumbo5,L.Bernardini4,A.Pizzuti1, P16.14B M.Carella5,V. Caputo1,T. Mazza3 ComparisonofclinicalyieldbetweenasingleNGSassayvs. combined array and NGS approach for clinical testing 1DepartmentofExperimentalMedicine,SapienzaUniversityof Rome, Rome, Italy, 2Clinical Genomics Unit, IRCCS Casa I.Simonic1,S. Verma2, S.Shams2 Sollievo della Sofferenza, Rome, Italy, 3Bioinformatics Unit, IRCCSCasaSollievodellaSofferenza,SanGiovanniRotondo, 1Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Italy, 4Cytogenetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della 2BioDiscovery, Inc., El Segundo, CA, United States Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 5Medical Genetics, IRCCSCasaSollievodellaSofferenza,SanGiovanniRotondo, We present an approach that utilizes NGS technology to Italy effectively and simultaneously extract CNV, AOH and SNVdatausingasingleassayandintegrate thisdataintoa Introduction: Copy Number Variants (CNVs) are deﬁned single analysis pipeline. This approach is contrasted with as deletions or duplications of stretches of contiguous the more traditional way of using Chromosomal Micro- nucleotides typically larger than 1,000 base pairs. Human Arrays(CMAs)forCNVandAOHdetectionandtheuseof CNVsareknowntobeinvolvedinseveraldiseasessuchas NGS technology for detection of Sequence Variants. We intellectual disability, autism, schizophrenia and congenital have demonstrated the utility of such an integrated ﬁltering anomalies,generallyduetothepresenceofdosage-sensitive andvisualizationframeworkonasetofanonymizedclinical genes. However, CNVs frequently do not target protein- samples referred for various constitutional conditions. coding genes, thereby hitting interspersed functional DNA These samples have been processed for molecular testing regions, with clinical signiﬁcance that need to be largely using the Illumina TruSight One panel with targeted cov- explored. erage across ~ 4800 genes. The established laboratory Materials and Methods: InCAS is an annotation tool informatics pipeline is used for sequence alignment and that draws information on gene and functional DNA variantcallingfollowedbyidentiﬁcationofCNVandAOH elements as well as of known and clinically signiﬁcant regions via the BAM MultiScale Reference (MSR) algo- CNVsfromseveralthird-partydatabases.Geneannotations rithm. Results of CNV analysis when compared with are obtained from RefSeq and GENCODE databases. Non- Affymetrix 750k array data for the same samples has gen- coding genes (microRNAs and lnRNAs) annotations are erated over 80% concordance with the remaining 20% retrieved from miRBase and lncRNAdb. Functional ele- being attributedtothedifferences inprobe coverageand/or ments (e.g. conserved transcription factor-binding sites, targeted sequencing read-depth. The whole genome CNV microRNA regulatory sites, ultraconserved region, promo- and AOH analysis has been combined with HPO directed ter and enhancer predictions) are annotated through SNV analysis and compared with the lab’s existing gene- different other sources of annotations. Polymorphic CNVs panel testing pipeline. The results of this analysis show an are retrieved from the Database of Genomic Variants overall increase in clinical yield of over 10% over the tra- (DGV).CNV-relatedclinicallysigniﬁcantdataareobtained ditional approach. A detailed comparison of the two from OMIM, Deciphering Developmental Disorders approaches will be presented. (DECIPHER) and ClinVar databases. The whole frame- I. Simonic: None. S. Verma: A. Employment (full or workisimplementedinPythonandFlaskanddeployedtoa part-time);Signiﬁcant;BioDiscovery,Inc.S.Shams:None. running instance of Nginx. Data are stored in MongoDB andaccessiblethroughbothamobile-ﬁrstwebinterfaceand P16.15C a RESTful interface for programmatic access. Validation of an ultra-fast CNV calling tool for Next Results: InCAS allows to comprehensively annotate Generation Sequencing data using MLPA-veriﬁed copy CNVs using continuously updated information of protein- number alterations coding and non-coding elements as well as of clinically574 J.delPicchia B. Tolhuis, H.Karten not necessarily the most important. With this in mind, we pursue the identiﬁcation of secondary networks. We focus GENALICE BV, Nijkerk, Netherlands on secondary cell type-speciﬁc networks since CE (WGCNA-based) networks are highly driven by cell type DNACopyNumberVariations(CNVs)areoftenassociated andweknowthatgenesvaryconsiderablyintermsoftheir with human disease and, as such, important for clinical cellular speciﬁcity. We understand gene expression as an diagnostics using genetic testing. Next Generation additive model of eigengenes that we use for regression- Sequencing(NGS)hascausedamassiveincreaseingenetic based cell type-speciﬁc signal correction. We create a co- testing, but accurate calling of CNVs has remained chal- expression network from GTExV6 frontal cortex samples lenging. Mahamdallie et al (2017) has published high anduseitseigengenesto“clean”geneexpressionandcreate quality sequencing data from a targeted NGS assay (Tru- a new network for each cell type. Using this approach Sight Cancer Panel) together with Multiplex Ligation- secondarycelltypeassociationswereidentiﬁedforneurons dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation (MLPA) validated positive (403 genes), astrocytes (205 genes), oligodendrocytes (190 and negative CNV results for 96 independent samples genes) andmicroglia (115genes) togenerate a2.8-11.0% (ICR96). This is a highly reliable resource to evaluate the increase in the predicted cell type-speciﬁc gene sets. We accuracy of NGS CNV calling tools. We validated the assess whether these secondary gene assignments were GENALICE MAP CNV calling tool with this ICR96 signiﬁcantlyenrichedfortruecelltype-speciﬁcassociations benchmarkdataset.OurresultsshowthatGENALICEMAP using public transcriptomic data generated by immuno- has high sensitivity and detected 65 out of 68 MLPA- panning of human frontal cortex (http://web.stanford.edu/ veriﬁedCNVs.TheveriﬁedCNVsoccurin66samplesand group/barres_lab/).Wedetectsigniﬁcantenrichmentsincell include 20 cancer predisposition genes, such as BRCA1, type-speciﬁc gene expression for genes newly assigned to BRCA2, TP53, PTEN and others. We also assessed its astrocyte, neuron, microglia and oligodendrocyte-speciﬁc speciﬁcity by examining 26 genes with normal copy num- modules, with amongst the most signiﬁcant enrichments bers across 69 samples. Compared to other CNV calling detected for the reassignment of astrocytic genes to the tools, GENALICE MAP CNV calling isexceptionally fast. neuronal set (empirical p-value <9.9 x 10-5). Thus, we We observed turnaround times of less than 10 seconds per demonstratetheutilityofsecondaryco-expressionnetworks sample. Processing exome and full genome samples takes for identifying additional and potentially important novel less than 10 seconds and 2 minutes respectively. In con- gene clusters. clusion, GENALICE MAP CNV calling provides highly J.A. Sánchez: None. R.H. Reynolds: None. J. Hardy: accurate results in almost real time. None. M. Ryten: None. J.A. Botía: None. Mahamdallie et al. Wellcome Open Research 2017, 2:35 (https://doi.org/10.12688/wellcomeopenres.11689.1) P16.17A B. Tolhuis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Advances in computer-assisted syndrome recognition by niﬁcant; Genalice Core BV. H. Karten: A. Employment the example of inborn errors of metabolism (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genalice Core BV. J.T.Pantel1,2,M.Zhao1,M.A.Mensah1,2,N.Hajjir1,T.Hsieh3, P16.16D Y. Hanani4,N.Fleischer4,T. Kamphans5,S. Mundlos1,Y. Secondary co-expression networks for the study of gene Gurovich4,P. M.Krawitz3,5 roles in multiple cell types 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, J.A. Sánchez1,R.H. Reynolds2,J.Hardy2,M.Ryten2, J.A. Germany, 2Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany, Botía1,2 3Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, Germany, 4FDNA, Boston, MA, United States, 5GeneTalk, 1Departamento de Ingeniería de la Información y las Bonn, Germany Comunicaciones. Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain, 2Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Signiﬁcantimprovementsinautomatedimageanalysishave Neurology, University College London, London, United been achieved over the recent years and tools are now Kingdom increasingly being used in computer-assisted syndromol- ogy. However, the ability to recognize a syndromic facial Gene co-expression (CE) network analysis is an effective gestalt might depend on the syndrome and may also be approach for discovering gene clusters of functional sig- confounded by severity of phenotype, size of available niﬁcance. Normally, CE assumes a gene has a single set of training sets, ethnicity, age, and sex. Therefore, “co-relationships”,andcapturesthemostevidentclustering,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 575 benchmarking and comparing the performance of deep- enriching the data through mapping it to relevant biome- learned classiﬁcation processes is inherently difﬁcult. dical ontologies, such as SNOMED CT and Human For a systematic analysis of these inﬂuencing factors we Phenotype Ontology. Efﬁcient ontology encoding of data, chose thelysosomalstoragediseases Mucolipidosis aswell in turn, is key to e.g. recentlydeveloped methods for using as Mucopolysaccharidosis type I and II, that are known for hierarchical structure between phenotypes in genetic their wide and overlapping phenotypic spectra. For a association analyses. dysmorphic comparison we used Smith-Lemli-Opitz syn- To solve the most common issues in clinical and drome as another inborn error of metabolism and phenotypic data curation, we have developed the Accurate Nicolaides-Baraitsersyndrome.Aclassiﬁerthatwastrained (TM) data curation and ontology mapping solution. We on these ﬁve cohorts, comprising 288 patients in total, present results on preliminary benchmarking of the achieved a mean accuracy of 62%. narrative text analytics on the MIMIC III data set to Wealsodevelopedasimulationframeworktoanalyzethe suggest good speciﬁcity and sensitivity for identiﬁcation of effect of potential confounders, such as cohort size, age, biomedically relevant concepts. Additionally, we present sex, or ethnic background on the distinguishability of results for benchmarking our ontology mapping approach phenotypes. We found that the true positive rate increases for structured data, illustrating the large gains achieved in forallanalyzeddisordersforgrowingcohorts(n=[10...40]) ontology mapping efﬁciency. while ethnicity and sex have no signiﬁcant inﬂuence. In summary, we here present an intuitive and highly The dynamics of the accuracies strongly suggest that the efﬁcient solution for curating clinical and phenotypic data, maximum distinguishability is a phenotype-speciﬁc value, emphasizingenrichingitthroughontologymappingofboth thathasn’tbeenreachedyetforanyofthestudieddisorders. structured data and narrative text. This should also be a motivation to further intensify data H. Edgren: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- sharing efforts, as computer-assisted syndrome classiﬁca- niﬁcant; MediSapiens Ltd. E. Ownership Interest (stock, tion can still be improved by enlarging the available stock options, patent or other intellectual property); training sets. Signiﬁcant; MediSapiens Ltd. B. Mano: A. Employment J.T. Pantel: None. M. Zhao: None. M.A. Mensah: (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; MediSapiens Ltd. M. None. N. Hajjir: None. T. Hsieh: None. Y. Hanani: A. Laaksonen:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA. N. MediSapiens Ltd. M. Roccato: A. Employment (full or Fleischer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; part-time); Signiﬁcant; MediSapiens Ltd. H. Lodenius: A. FDNA. T. Kamphans: None. S. Mundlos: None. Y. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gurovich: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; MediSapiens Ltd. FDNA. P.M. Krawitz: None. P16.19C P16.18B Zenome as a new blockchain solution for storing, Efﬁcient curation and ontology mapping of clinical and processing and exchanging of genetic data phenotypic data N.Kulemin1,2,A. Gorbachev2,V. Naumov2,A. Gubina2, S. H.Edgren,B. Mano, M.Laaksonen, M.Roccato, H.Lodenius Popov2 Medisapiens Ltd, Helsinki, Finland 1Federal Research Clinical Center for Physical-Chemical MedicineFMBA,Moscow,RussianFederation,2Zenome.ioltd, Heterogeneitywithinandbetweendatasourcesisoneofthe Moscow, Russian Federation primary impediments to assembling rich sets of phenotypic and clinical data. Such heterogeneity can arise from multi- The main problem faced by researchers in the ﬁeld of ple sources: data collection practices evolve over time, human genetics is the accession to the structured genomic standards for data encoding may be missing, or the data and related data. In addition, most of the analyzed para- (e.g. EHR data) may simply originally have been collected metersaremedical,andaccesstothemisregulatedbylocal for another purpose. Additionally, narrative text, such as rules. But, although the banks of genomic data are already medical statements, are inherently unstructured and require actively developing, until there is no network with the real curation before analysis. time feedback operation.In order to solve the tasks and Irrespectiveofwhereheterogeneityderivesfrom,curation signiﬁcantly simplify the work with the data, a Zenome of the data is necessary for efﬁcient, accurate and project was created. reproducible data analysis. In addition to correcting errors It is a decentralized p2p network in which everyone can and inconsistencies in the data, curation extends into place their data and update information about themselves,576 J.delPicchia andthosewhowishtousethisdatacanrequestpermission. those mutations which can be edited without conversion of The technical basis of the network is the DHT Kademlia nearbynucleotides.Intotal220T(A)>C(G)and2002C(G) decentralized data storage protocol, and the protocol of >T(A) mutations can be targeted by dCas9-deaminase for blocking is used to ﬁx the interaction. Also, the network single nucleotide editing. will use a token-based incentive system in which research- Conclusion:Thelistof2222ClinVarmutationsprovides ers will pay for access to the data, while the user who a valuable tool for the search of perspective targets for provided the data will receive funds for their provision. To targeted direct DNA editing with dCas9-deaminase tools. defeatuser'sprivacy,aself-developedalgorithmforstoring A.V. Lavrov: None. G.G. Varenikov: None. M.Y. open statements signed with identiﬁers is used. In such a Skoblov: None. network, everyone can get information about the presence of participants with a particular mutation or with one or P16.21A anotherresponse,butonlytheownerknowstheconnection Abioinformaticsframeworktoidentifycellsubpopulations betweenthestatements.Ourservicewillmakethecostsfor from bulk gene expression data of cancer samples GWAS and family genetic tests signiﬁcantly lower. N. Kulemin: None. A. Gorbachev: None. V. Naumov: A. Grilli1,2,C. Battaglia3,S. Bicciato1 None. A. Gubina: None. S. Popov: None. 1Department of Life Sciences, Center for Genome Research, P16.20D UniversityofModenaandReggioEmilia,Modena,Italy,2PhD Targeted single nucleotide editing allows correction of Program of Molecular and Translational Medicine, hundreds of pathogenic variants in hereditary diseases Department of medical Biotechnology and Traslational Medicine, University of Milan, Segrate (MI), Italy, A. V.Lavrov1,2,G.G.Varenikov3,M.Y. Skoblov1,3 3Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine (BIOMETRA), University of Milan, Milano, Italy 1Research Center of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2The Russian National Research Medical The expression levels of biological samples are affected by University Named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow, Russian the intrinsically heterogeneous cell and tissue composition. Federation, 3Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology Nevertheless, when analyzing transcriptional proﬁles, each (State University), Moscow, Russian Federation sample is generally evaluated in bulk without considering the presence of multiple subpopulations. This limitation Introduction:RecentlynewCRISPR/Cas9toolshavebeen mightbeextremelycriticalwhenanalyzinggeneexpression developed. Brieﬂy nucleotide deaminases (ND) fused to proﬁles from cancer samples, where dissecting the mixed dCas9 allow targeted direct conversion from C(G) to T(A) cell population could shed light on the intratumoral het- and from T(A) to C(G) without double-stranded brakes. It erogeneity and on the molecular mechanisms shaping dif- means that in total four types of mutations in hereditary ferent cancer behaviors. diseasescanbecorrected:T>C,A>G,C>T,G>A.However WebuiltonCibersort,arecentlypublisheddeconvolution ND are active in a window of several nucleotides which algorithm(Newmanetal.,2015),todesignaframeworkfor limits their potential usage. theidentiﬁcationofcellular subpopulations from bulk gene Methods:ClinVardatabasewasusedtoextractallknown expression of cancer samples. After testing the efﬁcacy of pathogenic mutations. Nucleotide surrounding of each theapproachonmousegeneexpressiondata,weappliedthe mutation was analyzed for the available PAM sequence framework to a set of clinically-deﬁned Triple Negative and for the absence of other nucleotides which can be Breast Cancer (TNBC). Speciﬁcally, we deﬁned a novel nonspeciﬁcally changed by ND. gene signature starting from 55 samples characterized as Results: We performed analysis of all variants registered LuminalA,LuminalB,Her2,andTNBCsubtypesbyIHC. in ClinVar and found that 54957 T(A)>C(G) substitutions Afterward, we applied the gene signature to quantify the constitute 18.2% of all records and 112740 C(G)>T(A) fractions of each subtype in a set of 357 TNBC samples. other 37.4%. 7084 (12.9%) and 18702 (16.6%) of them Results conﬁrmed that 71.4% of samples was indeed respectively were classiﬁed as pathogenic and likely enriched in the TNBC-like cell subpopulation, but also pathogenic variants. For 3744 T(A)>C(G) and 5550 C(G) evidenced that the remaining 28.6% of samples were not >T(A) mutations PAM sequence for Cas9 (NGG) was TNBC-like. We are currently evaluating the correlation foundin11-23nucleotidesupordownstreamwhichenables between the detected subpopulation heterogeneity and the theirconversionbyNDfusedtodCas9.Sincedeaminaseis clinical outcome reported for this cohort of TNBCs. active in the window of 12 nucleotides for T>C and 6 A. Grilli: None. C. Battaglia: None. S. Bicciato: None. nucleotides for C>T mutations it’s important to select onlyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 577 P16.22B same consortium. In an effort to solve this problem, we Identiﬁcation of Disease Causal Variant using Artiﬁcial developed TFC (Trusted Friend Computing), an extension Intelligence to the POP-Java programming language, enabling devel- opers to create applications that can share data and com- W.Li puting power in a secure way. We integrated this technology into GensearchNGS, an existing NGS data Breakthrough Genomics, Arcadia, CA, United States analysissoftwaredevelopedbyPhenosystemsSA,toenable users to share variant data in an easy and secure way. Genomic sequencing is important for diagnosing rare Methods: We extended the open source POP-Java genetic diseases or cancer. Typically, a patient carries language to include the features needed to implement hundreds of thousands of genetic variants in the protein TFC.Thoseincludetheabilitytocreateafriendnetwork(in codingregionsinthegenome.Sincevariantclassiﬁcationis which computing resources can be shared) as well as the thebasisforclinicaldiagnosis,itisoftenthebottleneckfor integrationofencryptedcommunications.Wealsomodiﬁed patients’ genomic data analysis, and for clinical reporting. GensearchNGS to make use of those features to let Inordertospeedupthevariantclassiﬁcationprocess,weset laboratories share both summary variant statistics (e.g is a out to see if it is possible to use artiﬁcial intelligence/ variant known by a certain laboratory) as well share machine learning method to ﬁnd disease causal variants computing power through distributed sequence alignment. with satisfactory precision. Three sets of variants are iden- Results:WeproducedaversionofGensearchNGSwhich tiﬁed with known labels, namely pathogenic, unknown lets users share their data and computing power with a signiﬁcance and benign, respectively. Feature engineering selected list of friends. The underlying technology, POP- techniquesareusedtoﬁgureoutthebestfeaturesettofeed Java, has been released as open-source software. Grants: intothemodel.Totalelevenselectedtypeofvariantfeature CTI no. 18781.1 PFES-ES families including 200 features are fed into the model for B. Wolf: None. P. Kuonen: F. Consultant/Advisory training. Proprietary machine learning algorithm based on Board;Modest;PhenosystemsSA.D.Mazzoleni:None.J. random forest is used to learn a multi-label classiﬁcation Stoppani: None. D. Atlan: A. Employment (full or part- model. The learned model achieves 72.0% accuray on the time); Signiﬁcant; Phenosystems SA. held-out 20% dataset (48,211 variants) across all three labels. Particularly for pathogenic variants, we achieve P16.24D 74.9% precision and 64.3% recall (F-measure 69.2%). The Identiﬁcation and characterization of 3ʹUTR mutations features that can dramatically increase F-measure for affecting NFKBIZ in non-Hodgkin lymphoma pathogenic variant classiﬁcation will be presented. In con- clusion, machine learning method can take into account of S.Arthur1,B.Grande1,A.Jiang1,R.Cojocaru1,M.Alcaide1,C. tens or hundreds of variant features for the variant classi- Rushton1,P.K.Lat1,D.Ennishi2,S.Jessa1,P.Pararajalingam1, ﬁcation process, which is labor intensive if it is done L. Chong2,M. Boyle2,B. Meissner2,A. Mottok2,L. Sehn2,P. manually. A well-trained model will speed up the causal Farinha2,A. Mungall1,R. Gascoyne2,M.Marra2, D.Sen1,J. variant identiﬁcation and clinical diagnosis. The lessons Connors2, T.Audas1, P.Unrau1,D.W.Scott2,R. D.Morin1 learned and the future direction will be discussed. W. Li: None. 1SimonFraserUniversity,Burnaby,BC,Canada,2BCCancer, Vancouver, BC, Canada P16.23C Trusted Friend Computing: Securely share OMICs data Introduction: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is anaggressive cancer originatingfrom mature B-cells. Most B. Wolf1,P. Kuonen1,D.Mazzoleni1, J.Stoppani1,D.Atlan2 somatic driver mutations characterized to date affect the coding sequence of proteins or induce loss of function or 1University of applied sciences and arts western switzerland, deregulated expression through deletion, translocation or Fribourg, Switzerland, 2Phenosystems SA, Wallonia, Belgium ampliﬁcation. DLBCL has two molecular subgroups with distinct genetic features and prognosis. A relative lack of Introduction: Sharing OMICs data is becoming increas- drivers unique to the activated B-cell (ABC) subgroup, inglyessential whenanalysingpatientdata.Yetmanylegal which suggests incomplete understanding of its molecular and ethical constraints slow down or make it impossible to aetiology. share the data. This leads to a situation where many Materials and Methods: Using a combination of data laboratoriesstoretheirvaluablepatientdataonlyininternal modalities including RNA-seq, copy number arrays, whole databases,unabletosharethemevenwithevenothersinthe genome sequencing and targeted sequencing of over 700578 J.delPicchia cases,wesearchedforpatternsofnoncodingmutationsthat individual feature is a combined interaction evidence score may affect geneexpression ormRNAstructure inDLBCL. ranging from 0 for lowest interaction evidence to 0.999 for We implemented a new algorithm to identify discrete loci highest. Different types of support vector machine algo- enriched for somatic noncoding single nucleotide variants rithms(SVMs)builtwithPython3.5andscikit-learnlibrary (SNVs) genome-wide. were used to classify proteins based on interaction data as Results: This analysis identiﬁed numerous genes and either epilepsy related or not. 1665 randomly selected non-coding loci that are commonly mutated in DLBCL, protein interaction data was used for training and 331 for with many of these attributable to aberrant somatic testing. hypermutation. Of particular interest were recurrent muta- Results: C-Support Vector Classiﬁcation algorithm tions in the 3′UTR of NFKBIZ. We found these to cause showed best performance on the testing set with an area elevated mRNA and protein levels in lymphoma samples. under curve (AUC) of 0.88, speciﬁcity of 0.84 and Usingacombinationoftechniques,wedemonstratethatthe sensitivity of 0.93. Similar performance was observed with most commonly observed variants affect a conserved Nu-Support Vector Classiﬁcation (AUC 0.86, speciﬁcity structure in the mRNA. Moreover, we show that these 0.79, sensitivity 0.92) and Linear Support Vector Classiﬁ- changes increase mRNA abundance by reducing its cation (AUC 0.84, speciﬁcity 0.87, sensitivity 0.79) cleavage by the RNAse MCPIP1. algorithms. Conclusions: Our results inform on mechanisms of NF- Conclusions: SVMs show a good performance on κBpathwayactivationinABCDLBCLanddemonstratethe epilepsy associated protein detection. Machine learning importance of noncoding mutations in contributing to approaches can be useful in novel epilepsy causing protein oncogene over-expression in this cancer. discovery. S.Arthur:None.B.Grande:None.A.Jiang:None.R. K. ablauskas: None. B. Tumienė: None. A. Cojocaru:None.M.Alcaide:None.C.Rushton:None.P. Utkus: None. K. Lat: None. D. Ennishi: None. S. Jessa: None. P. Pararajalingam:None.L.Chong:None.M.Boyle:None. P16.26B B. Meissner: None. A. Mottok: None. L. Sehn: None. P. Reference-free eQTL analysis reveals the importance of Farinha: None. A. Mungall: None. R. Gascoyne: None. unannotated transcribed regions in neurological and M. Marra: None. D. Sen: None. J. Connors: None. T. neuropsychiatric disorders Audas: None. P. Unrau: None. D.W. Scott: None. R.D. Morin: None. S.Guelﬁ1,D.Zhang1,K.D'Sa1,R.H.Reynolds1,J.A.Botia1,2, UKBEC consortium, J.Hardy1, M.E.Weale3,M. Ryten1 P16.25A Machine learning approach for detecting epilepsy causing 1Institute of Neurology (UCL), London, United Kingdom, proteins using protein interaction data 2Departamento de Ingeniería de la Información y las Comunicaciones, Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain, K. Šablauskas1,B.Tumienė2,A. Utkus2 Murcia,Spain,3DepartmentofMedical&MolecularGenetics, King's College London, London, United Kingdom 1Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2InstituteofBiomedicalSciences,FacultyofMedicine,Vilnius Accurate gene annotation is required for the interpretation University, Vilnius, Lithuania of risk loci identiﬁed by genome-wide association studies (GWAS). However, the complexity of splicing in the Introduction: Genetic factors play a role in more than half human brain has made annotation of brain-expressed genes of all epilepsies. Proteins expressed by epilepsy associated a non-trivial task, and this may contribute to why the genes are known to be clustered in speciﬁc biochemical majority of risk loci for neurological disorders remain pathways. This knowledge can be applied to ﬁnd similar poorly characterised, even when relevant eQTL data exist. proteins and genes that are part of these pathways. Toaddressthisissue,weusedeQTLanalysisinareference- Materials and Methods: 998 expert reviewed epilepsy free manner toimprove GWAS interpretation. We usedthe genes and 998 random non-epilepsy genes expressed in R package derﬁnder to identify and quantify transcribed fetal temporal tissue (ENCODE accession number: regions from RNA-sequencing data generated from human ENCDO064AAA) were selected. Protein interaction data non-diseased post-mortem brain tissue (hippocampus, expressed by the selected genes was accessed from putamen and substantia nigra). After stringent quality con- STRING database with a minimal interaction score of trol, cis-eQTL analysis was conducted on ~460,000 tran- 0.151. Each protein was assigned 998 features based on scribedregions.Strikingly,weidentiﬁeda2.1-foldincrease interaction data with 998 epilepsy related proteins. Each in eQTL detection as compared to an equivalent analysisAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 579 performedonannotatedregionsofthegenomealone.Using genotyped in a total of 1515 samples (TOLEDO and AMI our own R package annotatER, which leverages reads cohorts) and expression analysis of candidate genes was spanning exon-exon junctions, we found that a signiﬁcant performedin819samples(TOLEDOcohort).Resultswere proportion of unannotated transcribed regions were spliced harmonized using a minimal model to identify and select to known genes. Combining eQTLs with GWAS hits from signiﬁcant biomarkers. the NHGRI-EBI catalogue demonstrated a signiﬁcant Results: From the exploratory phase, 4 SNPs enrichmentofriskSNPsforneurologicaldisordersamongst (rs17286758, rs2067051, rs6657616, rs2568958) and 5 eQTLstaggingunannotatedtranscribedregions.Wefurther candidate genes (NFE2L2, TP53, TXNRD1, HMOX2, characterised these ﬁndings with eQTL-GWAS co-locali- HIF1A) statistically signiﬁcant associated to frailty were sation analyses, and identiﬁed several eQTLs tagging selected to be tested in the validation phase in a second unannotated regions and co-localising with GWAS hits for independent series formed by a total of 1000 samples from neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders. Our ﬁndings ENRICA, EXERNET, TOLEDO cohorts for genotyping conﬁrm the utility of performing eQTL analyses in a and700samplesfromEXERNETandMAPTCohortsfrom reference-free manner and demonstrate that unexplored expression analysis. The results are currently being regions of the genome can be crucial for the understanding analysed. of complex diseases. Conclusion: The results obtained in this set of genetic S.Guelﬁ:None.D.Zhang:None.K.D'Sa:None.R.H. testing would enable the performance of a close following- Reynolds:None.J.A.Botia:None.J.Hardy:None.M.E. upofthesepatients,orevenpreventpossiblehealth-related Weale: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; problems conditions, thus increasing its quality of life, Genomics plc. M. Ryten: None. while reducing direct and indirect derived cost of the national health care system. P16.27C Founded by: FP7-HEALTH-2012-INNOVATION-1 Frailomic Project: Genetics in frailty L. Bernad Palomares: None. B. Cortina Gil: None. D. ValeroHervas:None.C.Moya:None.F.GarciaGarcia: L. BernadPalomares1, B.Cortina Gil1,D.ValeroHervas1,C. None. K. Peres-Bouchet: None. L. Rodriguez Mañas: Moya2,F. GarciaGarcia3,K. Peres-Bouchet4, L.Rodriguez None. B. Herraez: None. G. Pita: None. G. Olaso Mañas5,B. Herraez6,G.Pita6,G.OlasoGonzález7, J.Gambini González: None. J. Gambini Buchón: None. D. Gomez Buchón7,D.GomezCabrero8, F.Rodriguez Artalejo9,M. Cabrero:None.F.RodriguezArtalejo:None.M.Cesari: Cesari10,I.Ara Royo11,R. Miñambres Herraiz1 None.I.AraRoyo:None.R.MiñambresHerraiz:None. 1Sistemas Genomicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Sistemas Genomicos, P16.28D Valencia, Spain, 3Geriatrics department. Toledo Hospital Bioinformaticpipelinevalidationfortheapplicationofnext Complex, Toledo, Spain, 4Bordeaux Health Research Center. generation sequencing in genetic testing Bordeaux University, Bordeaux, France, 5Geriatric department. Getafe University Hospital, Getafe, Spain, S. Merella1,S. Benedetti1,C. DiResta2,3, G.Pipitone1,M. 6CEGEN, Madrid, Spain, 7Physiology department. Valencia Ferrari1,2,3,P. Carrera1,2 University, Valencia, Spain, 8YouHealth, Stockholm, Sweden, 9Universidad Automoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 1IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Clinical Molecular 10University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 11Castilla La Biology Laboratory, Milan, Italy, 2IRCCS San Raffaele Mancha University, Toledo, Spain Scientiﬁc Institute, Unit of Genomics for human disease diagnosis, Milan, Italy, 3University of Vita San Salute San Introduction: The forecasted increase in the number of Raffaele, Milan, Italy older people will be accompanied by an increase of those withdisabilities.Disabilityisprecededbyfrailty,adisorder OSR Hospital introduced NGS for genetic testing but thatencompasseschangesassociatedwithageing,lifestyle. accurateidentiﬁcationofgenomicvariantsisacriticalfactor Objective: Characterize clinical and omics-based labora- which may affect sensitivity and speciﬁcity.We present the tory biomarkers related with frailty to diagnosis, prognosis validation of a bioinformatic pipeline to detect germline and monitoring of frailty. variantsininheriteddiseases.Thepipelinewasﬁrstapplied Material and Methods: A two-phase study was to 66 patients with known genotype sequenced with 4 dif- designed: Exploratory and Validation phase in a well- ferentIlluminapanelsusingIlluminaplatforms.Wefocused established prospective cohort of elderly people. 256 SNPs our attention to genes speciﬁc for the patient disease con- and 20 candidates genes were selected taking into account sidering a total of 9 different disorders. The pipeline per- publishedliteraturerelatedwithfrailty.SelectedSNPswere formsallthestepsnecessarytogenerateadiagnosticreport:580 J.delPicchia alignment,variant calling,ﬁlteringfor highquality variants database.Nevertheless,alargenumberofvariantsarebeing and high resolution evaluation of coverage statistics. The described in massive genome projects, many of which are pipeline is able to detect very small regions (<20 bp) with found in dbSNP, but lack functional implications and/or mean coverage <20X. We tested different variant callers their phenotypic effect. In this work, we gathered a total of andwehighlighteddifferencesincalledvariants.Intheend 1,340GVsintheCYP21A2gene,fromwhich899variants we decided to include 3 different callers in our pipeline: were unique and 230 have an effect on human health, and Freebayes, GATK HaplotypeCaller and Illumina commer- compiledall this informationin an integrated database. We cial software. We obtained a speciﬁcity ≥ 94% and a sen- also connected CYP21A2 sequence information to pheno- sitivity ≥99% with differences between variant caller and typic effects for all available mutations, including double sequencing panels. In particular Illumina pipeline performs mutants in cis. Data compiled in the present work could better in SNV detection while HaplotypeCaller and Free- help physicians in the genetic counseling of families bayes in INDELs (up to 40 bp). Combining the results of affected with 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency. these three softwares we were able to detect all the 427 C.D. Bruque: None. L. Simonetti: None. C.S. Fernan- known variants in our dataset. Moreover, 4 samples were dez: None. B. Belen: None. D. Marisol: None. J.E. previously sequencedwithadifferent NGS method andwe Kolomenski:None.L.D.Espeche:None.N.D.Buzzalino: hadahighconﬁdenceSNVdatasetwith100%concordance None. A.D. Nadra: None. L. Dain: None. with previous results.Overall our pipeline allows high conﬁdence in variant detection with a low probability of P16.30B mutations loss. Genomic Feature Prediction Models S. Merella: None. S. Benedetti: None. C. Di Resta: None. G. Pipitone: None. M. Ferrari: None. P. P. DuunRohde,I.Sørensen, P. Sørensen Carrera: None. Aarhus University, Tjele, Denmark P16.29A CYP21A2 mutation update: Comprehensive analysis of We have developed predictive models that use prior biolo- databases and published genetic variants gical information on genomic features that more accurately predictgeneticpredisposition.Genomicfeatures,consisting C. D.Bruque1,2,L. Simonetti3, C.S. Fernandez1, B.Belen1,D. of a set of genetic markers, are regions of the genome that Marisol1,J. E.Kolomenski2,L. D.Espeche1,N.D.Buzzalino1, are linked to some external information (e.g. prior QTL A. D.Nadra4,5,L. Dain1,2,5 information, genes, biological pathways, gene ontologies, sequence annotation). The main idea underlying this mod- 1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica - ANLIS-Malbrán, eling approach is that these regions are enriched for causal CABA, Argentina, 2Instituto de Biología y Medicina variants affecting a speciﬁc trait. This is accounted for in Experimental, CONICET., Caba, Argentina, 3Uppsala our model by using prior information on the relative con- Universit - Department of Chemistry - BMC, Biochemistry, tribution of different genome regions to the overall trait Uppsala, Sweden, 4Departamento de Química Biológica, heritability. This information is used for differential Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de shrinkage of single marker effects allowing markers to Buenos Aires, IQUIBICEN-CONICET.., CABA, Argentina, contribute differently to the overall genetic predisposition 5Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular, which in turn leads to more accurate predictions. The pre- Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de dictionsarebasedonagenomicfeaturebestlinearunbiased Buenos Aires., Caba, Argentina prediction (GFBLUP) model implemented using a Gauss Seidel(GS)method.Inordertohandleverylargegenotype- Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of auto- phenotype data sets (e.g. UK Biobank) a matrix-free GS somal recessive disorders of adrenal steroidogenesis. Dis- method based on adjustment of residuals was used for orders in steroid 21-hydroxylation account for over95%of solving the linear equation systems. Our simulation studies patients with CAH. Clinically, the 21-hydroxylase deﬁ- show that it is possible to further increase the accuracy of ciency has been classiﬁed in a broad spectrum of clinical genomic prediction for complex traits using this model, forms,rangingfromsevereorclassical,tomildlateonsetor provided the genomic features are enriched for causal var- non-classical. Known allelic variants in the disease causing iants. Our GFBLUP model using prior information on CYP21A2 gene are spread among different sources. Until genomic features enriched for causal variants can increase recently, most variants reported have been identiﬁed in the the accuracy of genomic predictions in populations of clinicalsetting,whichpresumablybiasdescribedvariantsto unrelated individuals and provides a formal statistical fra- pathogenic ones, as those found in the CYPAlleles mework for leveraging and evaluating information acrossAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 581 multiple experimental studies to provide more accurate members of signaling pathways related to carcinogenesis predictions. process. P. Duun Rohde: None. I. Sørensen: None. P. Conclusion: This genomic predictive model for recur- Sørensen: None. rence and metastasis development may help in a more practical and individualized patient management and, P16.31C eventually contribute to a more targeted drug design. Predictivemodelformetastasisandrecurrenceinheadand I.P. Ribeiro: None. L. Esteves: None. F. Marques: neck cancer using ampliﬁed genes of tumor samples None. L. Barroso: None. I.P. Baptista: None. F. Caramelo: None. J.B. Melo: None. I.M. Carreira: None. I.P. Ribeiro1,2,L. Esteves1,F.Marques3,2,L. Barroso4,2,I.P. Baptista3,2, F.Caramelo5,J.B. Melo1,2, I.M.Carreira1,2 P16.32D Dante-genotypingofcomplexandexpandedshorttandem 1CytogeneticsandGenomicsLaboratory,FacultyofMedicine, repetitions University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2iCBR-CIMAGO - Center of Investigation on Environment Genetics and J.Budiš1,2,3,M. Kucharík4,F. Ďuri2,3,J.Gazdarica2,5, M. Oncobiology - Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Zrubcová5,A.Ficek5,T.Szemes2,5,6,B.Brejová1,M.Lichvár2,R. Coimbra, Portugal, 3Department of Dentistry, Faculty of Hekel2,3, J.Radvanszky2,5,7 Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Maxillofacial Surgery Department, Coimbra Hospital and 1Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Mathematics, University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava, 5Laboratory of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, iCBR - Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Slovak Centre Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia, Portugal 4Medirex a.s.,Bratislava,Slovakia,5DepartmentofMolecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Introduction: There is an urgent need to develop effective Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Comenius University Science Park, diagnostic and prognostic approaches for head and neck Bratislava, Slovakia, 7Institute for Clinical and Translational squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). This study aimed to Research, Biomedical Research Centre, Slovak Academy of implement a model of prediction of recurrence and metas- Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia tasis using a genome-wide characterization of HNSCC samples. Introduction: Short tandem repeats (STRs) are DNA MaterialandMethods:Thegenomiccharacterizationof stretches in which short sequences (2-6 nucleotides) are tumor samples in a 102 HNSCC patients’ cohort was repeated several times. Since STRs have many important performed using array comparative genomic hybridization biologicalrolesandbelongtothemostpolymorphicpartsof technique, Agilent 4x180K. We identiﬁed the most the human genome, they became utilized in several statisticallysigniﬁcantsignallingpathwaysforampliﬁcation molecular-genetic applications. Genotyping of STR alleles, and deletion and the respective altered genes, using the therefore, was of high relevance during the last decades. Homo.sapiens package in R and the overrepresented Despitethis,massivelyparallelsequencing(MPS)stilllacks pathways were determined, using the limma package. A theanalysismethodstofullyutilizetheinformationvalueof genomic signature that distinguishes between patients with STRs in genome scale assays. metastasis/recurrence from those without, was determined Materials and Methods: We propose an alignment-free using the LASSO regression analysis. The selected genes algorithm for genotyping and characterizing STR alleles were then used to calculate the model’s performance and based on sequence reads originating from STR loci of prediction accuracy in a logistic regression classiﬁer with interest. The method accounts for natural deviations from balancedtraining and testsets.This genomicsignature was theexpectedsequence,suchasvariationintherepeatcount, validatedinanindependentcohortof176patientsfromthe sequencing errors, ambiguous bases, and complex loci TCGA database. containing several different motifs. We implemented a Results: The developed predictive model using 17 correction for copy number defects caused by the ampliﬁed genes showed a good accuracy (78%, CI95% polymerase induced stutter effect and prediction of STR [54;88]%)andwasvalidatedinanindependentpopulation expansionsthat,accordingtotheconventionalview,cannot (TCGA) (66%, CI95% [50; 80.3] %). This genomic be fully captured by inherently short MPS reads. predictive model comprises regions from chromosomes 4, Results: We tested Dante on simulated data sets and on 5,7,8,10,11,16,17,18and22,wherearemappedseveral datasetsobtained bytargetedsequencingofproteincoding parts of thousands of selected clinically relevant genes. In582 J.delPicchia both these data sets, Dante outperformed HipSTR and data,suchasthemethodoffaecalDNApuriﬁcationandthe GATK genotyping tools. Furthermore, Dante was able to selected 16S gene variable region, and conﬁrmed that this predict allele expansions in all tested clinical cases. pipeline successfully reduced the technical biases between The presented work was supported by the “REVOGENE the cohorts. A preliminary analysis on ten most abundant - Research centre for molecular genetics” project (ITMS bacterial genera successfully replicated well-established 26240220067) supported by the Operational Programme microbe-SNP associations, such as the functional LCT- Research and Development funded by the ERDF. Biﬁdobacterium linkage, and identiﬁed ﬁve novel genome- J. Budiš: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; wide associations. To our knowledge, this is the largest Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. M. Kucharík: A. consortium devoted to microbiome GWAS, and we aim to Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Medirex a.s., bring new knowledge to the rapidly expanding ﬁeld of Bratislava,Slovakia.F.Ďuri:A.Employment(fullorpart- microbiome research. time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. J. A. Kurilshikov: None. J. Wang: None. D. Radjabza- Gazdarica:A.Employment (fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant; deh: None. L. Franke: None. J. Raes: None. R. Kraaij: Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. M. Zrubcová: None. None. A. Zhernakova: None. A. Ficek: None. T. Szemes: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. B. P16.34B Brejová: None. M. Lichvár: A. Employment (full or part- Expanding the scope of the GWAS Catalog to improve time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. R. drug target identiﬁcation and prioritisation Hekel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. J. Radvanszky: A. A.Buniello1,2,O.Vrousgou1,2,M.Ghoussaini2,L.J.W.Harris1, Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd., J.A. L. MacArthur1,T. Burdett1,H.Parkinson1,F. Bratislava, Slovakia. Cunningham1,I.Dunham2, J.Barrett2 P16.33A 1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European MiBioGen: a new consortium for meta-analysis of human Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United genome-microbiome association Kingdom, 2Open Targets, an academic-industrial collaboration between the Wellcome Sanger Institute, A. Kurilshikov1,J.Wang2,D.Radjabzadeh3, MiBioGen European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Consortium Initiative, L. Franke1, J.Raes2,R. Kraaij3,A. GlaxoSmithKline plc., Biogen Inc. and Takeda Zhernakova1 Pharmaceuticals, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2KU Leuven–University of Leuven, Leuven, The identiﬁcation of disease-associated genetic loci and Belgium, 3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands validation of drug targets are overarching drivers of scien- tiﬁc research. Open Targets provides robust integration of Increasingevidence that thegutmicrobiomeplays a role in evidence from different public data sources to associate humanhealthcallsforfurtherinvestigationsintothefactors genes,proteinsandpathwayswithdiseases,withtheaimof that determine the structure of the symbiotic relation prioritising targets for drug discovery. A major source of between host and microbes. As demonstrated by the initial genetic evidence is the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog, a genome-wide association studies on microbiome composi- manually curated open resource repository of all published tion published in recent years, the host genome is clearly GWAS results. As of January 2018, the GWAS Catalog one of these factors. Even so, high inter-individual varia- contains 4,847 studies and 56,935 unique SNP-trait asso- bility in the gut microbiome and its capacity to respond to ciations from 3,280 publications. environmental exposures requires large, multi-ethnic, To date, curation has been limited to array-based GWAS population-based study designs to ensure sufﬁcient statis- including association analysis of >100,000 SNPs with ticalpowerfordetectinggenotype-microbeassociations.To genome-widecoverageandSNP-traitassociationswithap- this end, we have established a collaborative initiative, value<1x10-5.TogetherwithOpenTargets,weareworking MiBioGen, that joins 18 population-based cohorts com- on expanding the scope of the Catalog to: prising more than 20,000 samples for which both genetic 1) include association studies carried out using targeted (genome-widegenotypingplatforms)andmicrobiome(16S arrays (such as MetaboChip, ImmunoChip and exome rRNA gene taxonomic proﬁling) are available. We devel- arrays) to increase the number of causal variants that focus oped a standardized pipeline to harmonize the different onimmunologic, metabolicandoncologicphenotypes(key platforms and methods used to generate the microbiome therapeutic areas for Open Targets). Curation of ﬁfty-ﬁveAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 583 targeted array publications for inclusion in the GWAS high accuracies, making the use of this dataset for future Catalog is ongoing. research promising. 2) develop a comprehensive database of all available F. Degenhardt: None. M. Wendorff: None. M. Wittig: GWAS summary statistics (with no p-value cut-off) None. A. Franke: None. harmonised across studies to enable easy comparison and downstream analysis. These data will be made publicly P16.38B availableviatheGWASCatalogwebsiteand,inthefuture, On the length, weight and GC content of the human through an application programming interface (API). genome This collaboration aims to vastly increase the number of available disease associations, ultimately leading to A. Piovesan,M.C. Pelleri,F. Antonaros,P. Strippoli, M. improved target identiﬁcation and disease prognosis. Caracausi, L. Vitale Grant reference: 40237 OTAR034-02 A.Buniello:None.O.Vrousgou:None.M.Ghoussaini: Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty None.L.J.W.Harris:None.J.A.L.MacArthur:None.T. Medicine (DIMES), Bologna, Italy Burdett: None. H. Parkinson: None. F. Cunningham: None. I. Dunham: None. J. Barrett: None. Introduction:Basicparameterscommonlyusedtodescribe genomes including length, weight and relative guanine- P16.37A cytosine (GC) content are widely cited in absence of a Construction of a multiethnic HLA-imputation reference primary source. panel Materials and Methods: By using updated data and original software we determined these values to the best of F. Degenhardt,M. Wendorff, M.Wittig,TE HLA Working our knowledge as standard reference for the whole human Group of theIBDGC,A. Franke nuclear genome, for each chromosome and for mitochon- drial DNA. We also devised a method to calculate the Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel, Germany relativeGCcontentinthewholemessengerRNAsequence set and in transcriptomes by multiplying the GC content of Genotype imputation of the Human Leukocyte Antigen each gene by its mean expression level. region (HLA), has become increasingly popular in the last Results: The male nuclear diploid genome extends for years. In the research setting, imputation helps avoid costs 6.27Gigabasepairs(Gbp),is205.00centimeters(cm)long for wetlab-based HLA typingand thus renderslarge-cohort and weighs 6.41 picograms (pg). Female values are 6.37 analyses of the HLA feasible. Here, we present a high- Gbp,208.23cm,6.51pg.Theindividualvariabilityandthe quality multiethnic reference dataset based on genotypes implication for the DNA informational density in terms of measured with the Illumina Immunochip genotyping array bits/volume were discussed. The genomic GC content is including samples from Europe, China, India, Iran, Japan, 40.9%. Following analysis in different transcriptomes and Korea and Malta and an admixed African American (AA) species,weshowedthatthegreatestdeviationwasobserved dataset.Wetypedmorethan 1,300samplesfromtheafore- inthepathologicalconditionanalysed(trisomy21leukemic mentioned eight different ethnic backgrounds using an in- cells) and in Caenorhabditis elegans. house high-resolution NGS-based approach and our allele- Conclusions: Our results may represent a solid basis for calling tool HLAssign (Wittig et al., 2015). Manually further investigations on human structural and functional curated 4 digit-level alleles for the classical class I and II genomics while also providing a framework for other loci were included in the reference panel. Using extensive genome comparative analysis. cross validation and different combinations of reference A. Piovesan: None. M.C. Pelleri: None. F. Antonaros: datasets,weanalysedimputationoutputsofHIBAG(Zheng None. P. Strippoli: None. M. Caracausi: None. L. et al. 2014) and Beagle (Browning et al., 2016). While Vitale: None. HIBAG had a mean imputation accuracy across all loci of 0.96 ±0.03 for the AA, 0.99 ±0.02 for Malta and Europe P16.39C and 0.98 ±0.2 to 0.4 for the remaining cohorts, Beagle had Investigating the genetic architecture of hypertension an accuracy 0.97 ±0.02 for the AA, 0.99 ± 0.02 and through combined analysis of genome-wide association 0.98 ±0.02 to 0.03 for the other cohorts. While median studies (GWAS) data and the human protein interaction accuracies across the loci are higher for HIBAG than for network Beagle, mean accuracies are slightly higher for Beagle using our in-house dataset only. In summary, both Beagle E. Tsare1,2,A.Gioutlakis1,2,M. I.Klapa2, N.K.Moschonas1,2 andHIBAGareabletoimputeourmultiethnicdatasetwith584 J.delPicchia 1Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Greece, 2Institute Fleischer5,H.David-Eden4,Y. Hanani4, T.Kamphans6,D. of Chemical Engineering Sciences, Foundation for Research Horn2, S.Mundlos2,P. Krawitz1 and Technology – Hellas (FORTH/ICE-HT), Patras, Greece 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, Introduction: Hypertension is a major cardiovascular dis- Germany, 2Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, ease and stroke risk factor. To-date, many genes have been Germany, 3Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany, suggested as associated to blood pressure regulation 4FDNA,Boston,MA,UnitedStates,5FDNA,Bonn,MA,United through polycentric GWAS. These ﬁndings can be vali- States, 6GeneTalk, Bonn, Germany datedandextended,ifanalyzedinthecontextoftheprotein interaction network where proteins encoded by disease- Introduction: Recent advances in computer vision and associated genes may form functional subnetworks. Our machine learning resulted in the next-generation pheno- objective is to combine hypertension GWAS with relevant typing (NGP) tools for syndromology. Deep convolutional protein interactοme data for the elucidation of blood pres- neural networks such as DeepGestalt in Face2Gene have sure regulation mechanisms and prioritization of hyperten- beentrainedonthousandsofpatientphotoswithconﬁrmed sion predisposing genes. molecular diagnoses and learned phenotype representations Materials and Methods: Primary hypertension GWAS ofmultipledisorders.Thesesystemsofartiﬁcialintelligence datawereretrievedfromrecentstudiesreferringcollectively support clinicians in the diagnostic workup of patients and to approximately 1,200,000 samples. The hypertension- evenexcelhumanexpertsincertainclassiﬁcationtasks.We related protein interactome was reconstructed using the therefore wondered whether this unprecedented sensitivity PICKLE meta-database (www.pickle.gr) and analyzed to detect mutation-speciﬁc patterns in the facial gestalt using the Cytoscape software. Gene clustering and func- could also be used to reveal information about gene tional annotation was performed using the DAVID function. platform. Materials and Methods: We designed the knowledge Results: About 350 hypertension-associated genes were base Deep Phenotyping for Deep Learning (DPDL) as a retrievedfromGWAS.Thehypertension-associatedprotein publicresourcetocompilesimilarityscoresfromNGPtools interactome analysis revealed a subnetwork of 81 inter- and performed a cluster analysis on currently 1216 cases connected proteins; some, e.g. NPR1, GJA1, MME, are with monogenic disorders. known anti-hypertension drug targets. Topological & Results: A prominent cluster was formed by BRAF, functional analysis of this subnetwork revealed four path- PTPN11, NRAS and other genes of the MAPKinase ways connected through a core of 10 proteins including pathway that result in phenotypes such as Noonan, NOS3 and CRK. These pathways contribute to the: (i) LEOPARD or cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome and which regulation of myocardial contraction, (ii) blood circulation, are considered similar. Likewise, many genes linked to (iii) cardiac tissue morphogenesis and (iv) pressure- inborn errors of metabolism also clustered, mirroring a natriuresis mechanism. higher-level feature that is referred to by clinicians as Conclusions: This study furthers our understanding on ‘coarse facies’. Furthermore, we also found genes involved the molecular architecture of hypertension, elucidates in chromatin remodeling to be near neighbors, even if no disease modules with a central role in abnormal blood superordinate joint feature exists in medical terminology to pressure regulation and prioritizes hypertension predispos- describe the associated diseases. inggenes. Supportedby:HellenicFoundationfor Research Conclusion: We were able to reproduce molecular andInnovation(HFRI)PhDscholarshipgrant;NSRF2014- interactions by information encoded in the facial gestalt 2020 ELIXIR-GR (MIS 5002780) and BITAD (MIS byusingNGPtools.Thus,thephenotypespaceexploration 5002469) projects. is a promising subject in the characterization of gene E. Tsare: None. A. Gioutlakis: None. M.I. Klapa: function. None. N.K. Moschonas: None. T.Hsieh:None.N.Hajjir:None.J.T.Pantel:None.M. Mensah: None. M. Zhao: None. J. Hertzberg: None. M. P16.40D Schubach: None. S. Köhler: None. Y. Gurovich: A. Exploring molecular interactions by clustering analysis of Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA. N. similarity scores from next-generation phenotyping Fleischer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; approaches FDNA.H.David-Eden:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA. Y. Hanani: A. Employment (full or T. Hsieh1,N.Hajjir2,J. T.Pantel2, M.Mensah2,M.Zhao2,J. part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA. T. Kamphans: None. D. Hertzberg2, M.Schubach3,S. Köhler2,Y. Gurovich4, N. Horn: None. S. Mundlos: None. P. Krawitz: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 585 P16.41A J.Halvardson,M.Danielsson,H.Davies,B.TorabiMoghadam, reduSNP: used for linkage disequilibrium-pruning J.Dumanski, L.A. Forsberg M.Munoz Venegas1,2,3,M.Munz1,2,3,4,J. Erdmann1,2,3 DepartmentofImmunology,GeneticsandPathology,Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden 1Institute for Cardiogenetics, Lübeck, Germany, 2DZHK (German Research Center for Cardiovascular Research), Men live shorter lives than women however the factors partner site Hamburg-Lübeck-Kiel, Lübeck, Germany, contributing to this difference remains elusive. Recent 3UniversityHeartCenterLübeck,Lübeck,Germany,4Charité- researchindicatesthatthelossoftheYchromosome(LOY) University Medicine Berlin, corporate member of Freie inbloodcanexplainpartsofthisdifference,asithavebeen UniversitätBerlin,Humboldt-UniversitätzuBerlin,andBerlin associatedbothtocancermortalityandAlzheimer'sdisease. Institute of Health, Institute for Dental and Craniofacial In order to investigate the effect of losing the Y Sciences,Dept.PeriodontologyandSynopticDentistry,Berlin, chromosome we have performed single cell sequencing of Germany 12 elderly males using the 10X genomics chromium system. Using the transcriptomes of each sequenced single Ascohortsizeskeepincreasing(>500,000),ithasbecome cellweareabletouseclusteringtechniquestogetherwitht- vital to avoid data redundancy, data duplication, reduce Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (tSNE) to the inﬂuence chromosomal artifacts, and facilitate repli- determine the fraction of LOY cells in each major PBMC cation. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) pruning is used to type. We can show that the results from this analysis decreaseaninitialvariantlisttoafewrepresentativesand compares well with the results from the Illumina Inﬁnium can also be leveraged to ﬁnd variants that were not gen- QC Array-24 kit on FACS sorted cell fractions from the otyped.A limited number of software tools perform LD- same individuals. pruning, however, of those available we were unable to Wehavesofarsequencedapproximately37000cellsand ﬁnd a tool that did not require one or more of the fol- have assigned cell-type and LOY status to each of these. lowing steps: [i] prior ranking of SNPs according to most This allows us to use the information from a large amount signiﬁcant p-value; [ii] need to provide the actual geno- of sequenced single cells to ﬁnd genes which have altered typedatasetorreferencepanel;[iii]performmultipleLD- gene expression in LOY cells in speciﬁc PBMC pruning analysis with different correlation coefﬁcient populations. values; [iv] require either chromosome number and/or The work presented here shows that single cell RNA position and if absent, then have to create a dummy sequencingcanbeusedasaviabletechniquetoidentifythe variable; and [v] must require variants to be on the same fractionofLOYinthePBMCpopulationsofanindividual. chromosome. Furthermore it gives insight into the genes and pathways We introduce reduSNP a lightweight, stand-alone, freely affected when losing the Y chromosome in blood. available command line tool that responds to each of the The project is funded by an ERC-StG as well as other aforementioned “shortcomings” with the highlight on sources minimum to no pre-processing of input information. J.Halvardson:None.M.Danielsson:None.H.Davies: It prunes SNPs and short (insertions/deletions) InDels None. B. Torabi Moghadam: None. J. Dumanski: E. based on the European ancestry 1000Genomes Project Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Phase3 LDvalues.ToexecutereduSNPthroughaseriesof intellectual property); Modest; CRAY Innovation. L.A. automatedstepsaminimumoftwoparametersarerequired Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, namely a list of non-ordered variants; and (multiple) patent or other intellectual property); Modest; CRAY normalizedcoefﬁcientofLD(D’)orcorrelationcoefﬁcients Innovation. (r2). All output results are then comprehensively logged featuring suggested reasons to why variants could not be P16.43C mapped. Gene interaction discovery in myelodysplastic syndromes M. Munoz Venegas: None. M. Munz: None. J. Erdmann: None. A. Demartini1, F.Vitali2, E.Sauta3,M. G.DellaPorta4,R. Bellazzi1, S.Marini5 P16.42B Functional effects from loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in 1University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2University of Arizona, single cells estimated by genome-wide transcriptional Tucson, AZ, United States, 3University of Michigan, Ann analyses using the 10X Chromium platform Arbor, MI, United States, 4Humanitas University, Milano, Italy, 5Department of Computational Medicine and586 J.delPicchia Bioinformatics,UniversityofMichigan,AnnArbor,MI,United standard method for germline variant interpretation has States been proposed by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) with the Association for The characterization of genetic interactions underlying Molecular Pathology (AMP) (PMID 25741868). Actual myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) pathology is the key to implementation of such guidelines in clinical routine understanditsmolecularmachineryand,asconsequence,to requires the development of automated systems solving designviabletreatments.Manystudieshavebeencarriedon both complexity and reproducibility issues. in this direction, including MDS expression proﬁling and Materials and Methods: We have developed eVAI analysisof somatic mutationsaffectingMDS stems cells.In (enGenome VAriant Interpreter), an automatic variant this study we underpin MDS-speciﬁc gene-gene interac- interpretation system based on ACMG/AMP guidelines. tions,i.e.,geneinteractionscharacterizingMDScells,either Seventeen out of twenty-eight ACMG/AMP criteria are becausetheyareabsentishealthycells,orbecausethegene implementedintegratingdatafromdifferentomic-resources. coexpression is signiﬁcantly altered in MDS. We applied a We tested eVAI performance on CLINVITAE, a matrix factorization-based, multi-omic, data-agnostic collection of clinically-observed benign and pathogenic approach to predict MDS-related gene-gene interactions, variants related to a broad set of disorders. We also integrating MDS somatic mutation data from TCGA, validated our system on 60 MYH7-related variants from KEGG pathways, BioGRID gene-gene interactions, Dis- ClinGen’s Inherited Cardiomyopathy Panel (PMID GeNET gene-disease relations, and Disease Ontology 29300372). disease-disease similarity. Our method unveiled 320 MDS- Results: In CLINVITAE, eVAI achieved a concordance speciﬁc gene-gene interactions as output. To validate these of76.2%(4310/5651)onpathogenicvariantsandof88.5% results, we (a) assessed if our predicted gene-gene interac- (7499/8462) on benign variants. On the same data we tions were conﬁrmed at the protein level by using the comparedeVAItoInterVar,anothersimilartool,showinga STRING repository, and (b) veriﬁed if the predicted inter- reduction of VUS of about 45.3%. eVAI concordance was actions were reﬂected in gene co-expression on external about 85.38% (289/299) and of 96.66% (168/200) on MDS cohorts. We found 173 (54%) of our predictions pathogenic and benign cardiovascular-related variants in conﬁrmed as protein-protein interactions in STRING. Even CLINVITAE. Compared to CardioClassiﬁer, a tool more interestingly, more than half of them (98/173) have a designed speciﬁcally for variants interpretation in cardio- combined score greater than 0.7, which is the level indi- vascular diseases, eVAI showed a VUS reduction of 64%. catedbytheSTRINGcuratorsashighconﬁdence.Next,by Finally, 44/60 MYH7 validated variants were correctly combining four MDS cohorts from Gene Expression interpreted. Omnibus data, we calculated the paired co-expression dis- Conclusions: Complexity of standard guidelines and the tribution of thepredicted interactions in cases and controls. ever-growingnumberofvariantsdetectedfromsequencing- A Wilcoxon signed rank test found a signiﬁcant difference based analysis hampers manual pathogenicity assessment. (p-value 4.1*10-18). eVAI represents an automated support in guidelines-based A. Demartini: None. F. Vitali: None. E. Sauta: None. variant interpretation in clinical practice. M.G. Della Porta: None. R. Bellazzi: None. S. G.Nicora:None.I.Limongelli:A.Employment(fullor Marini: None. part-time);Signiﬁcant;enGenomeS.r.l.P.Gambelli:None. M. Memmi: None. C. Napolitano: None. A. Malovini: P16.44D None.A.Mazzanti:None.S.Priori:None.R.Bellazzi:E. An automatic implementation of ACMG/AMP variant Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other interpretation guidelines intellectualproperty);Modest;enGenomeS.r.l,BiomerisS. r.l. G.Nicora1,I.Limongelli2,P. Gambelli3,M.Memmi3,C. Napolitano3,A.Malovini4,A.Mazzanti3,S.Priori3,R.Bellazzi1 P16.45A Airways microbial metagenomes of individuals with 1Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering, immune deﬁciency, asthma, cystic ﬁbrosis or COPD UniversityofPavia,Pavia,Italy,2enGenomeS.r.l,Pavia,Italy, 3MolecularCardiology,IRCCSIstitutiCliniciMaugeri,Pavia, L. Wiehlmann1,K. Pienkowska2, M.Gessner2, M.Dorda1,S. Italy, 4Laboratory of Informatics and Systems Engineering, Hedtfeld2, T.Scheithauer1,C. Davenport1,B.Tümmler2 University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy 1RCU Genomics, Hannover, Germany, 2Pediatric Introduction: Variant pathogenicity assessment in the Pneumology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany diagnosis of genetic diseases is a complex process. AAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 587 Airway infections cause exacerbations of the underlying reinforces the semantic acquisition, annotation, integration disease in patients with immune deﬁciency (ID), asthma or and display of phenotype and disease model information, COPD and determine course and prognosis in most indi- and facilitates comparison of disease-related data across all viduals with cystic ﬁbrosis. To identify the composition of model organism databases of the Alliance of Genome the upper and lower airway metagenomes in these patient Resources (AGR). Recent enhancements include a new groups during clinically stable condition, nasal lavage, MGIHumanPhenotypeOntologybrowser,incorporationof throat swabs and sputa were collected from 142 CF, 35 human disease-phenotyperelationships from Orphanet, and asthma, 11 COPD and 10 ID patients. Genomic DNA was new mouse embryonic lethal phenotype data from the extractedandsequencedonSOLiDandIlluminaplatforms. DMDD consortium. Importantly, MGI has adopted the In an automated pipeline, raw data were ﬁltered, mapped Disease Ontology (DO), a hierarchical classiﬁcation of onto a microbial pangenome (1,892 bacteria, 4,193 fungi/ standardized disease concepts with cross-references to moulds and 1,153 DNA viruses) and normalized (GC-bias, OMIM,MeSH,SNOMEDandotherclinicalterminologies. genome size, human DNA). The data were analyzed for MGI disease model annotations have been translated from phylogeny, taxonomic classiﬁcation, diversity and correla- OMIM terms to DO terms to optimize searches, and tions. Disease-associated bacterial metagenomes were seen grouping and display of disease classes in relevant detail inpatientswithCForID,butnotinpatientswithasthmaor pages.TheMGIQuickSearchtool,Human-MouseDisease COPD. The prevalent phyla in human airways are Actino- Connection (HMDC), and advanced query forms now bacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Proteobacteria support searches by DO terms or IDs. Furthermore, the which make up more than 90% of the metagenome. COPD HMDCgridgroupsphenotypeanddiseasedatabytop-level patients exhibited an airway metagenome dominated by terms to enhance visualization of these data. Finally, an Streptococci, Rothia and Prevotella similar to healthy improvedDOBrowserallowsuserstotraversetheontology smokers and non-smokers. Pre-school wheezers were treeorgraphicalview,examineaselectedterm’sdeﬁnition, mainly carrying a normal, but low-diversity microbial ﬂora IDs and hierarchical relationships, identify all genes and with Rothia mucilaginosa as prime and Actinomyces as mouse models annotated to that disease or any of its sub- diagnostic organisms. Besides numerous aerobes and types,andaccesstheuniﬁedAGRdiseasereport.Supported anaerobes,patientswithIDwereharbouringMoraxellaand by NIH grant HG000330. Haemophilus as major pathogens CF patients exhibited a S.M. Bello: None. A.V. Anagnostopoulos: None. C.L. disease-speciﬁc ﬂora, primarily Firmicutes (Staphylococcus Smith: None. spp.),alpha-andgamma-Proteobacteria(P.aeruginosa,H. inﬂuenzae). PCA uncovered clusters of species associated P16.47C with severity and chronicity of CF lung disease. The IMPC: mouse high-throughput phenotyping L. Wiehlmann: None. K. Pienkowska: None. M. contributes to understanding the role of genes in human Gessner: None. M. Dorda: None. S. Hedtfeld: None. T. disease Scheithauer: None. C. Davenport: None. B. Tümmler: None. V.MunozFuentes1,T.Meehan1,A.Mallon2,H.Parkinson1,D. Smedley3,onbehalfof theIMPC consortium P16.46B The Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) resource: new 1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European featuresfacilitatingaccessibilityandpresentationofmouse Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Cambridge, United models of human disease Kingdom, 2Medical Research Council Harwell (Mammalian Genetics Unit and Mary Lyon Centre), Oxford, United S.M.Bello,A.V.Anagnostopoulos,C.L.Smith,TheMGIStaff Kingdom,3QueenMary,UniversityofLondon,London,United andSoftware Team Kingdom The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States Introduction: The International Mouse Phenotyping Con- sortium (IMPC) is a world-wide initiative that has so far Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) is the premier commu- characterized over 4,000 knockout mouse lines, many for nity knowledgebase for the laboratory mouse. MGI inte- poorly understood genes (the ignorome), to better under- gratesmousegenotype-phenotypedatasetsfrombiomedical stand mammalian gene function and human disease. publications and large-scale projects with genomic, muta- Materials and Methods: Dedicated phenotyping, statis- tion, expression, functional and human disease model data tical and bioinformatic pipelines are collecting, analyzing to accelerate correlative discoveries and inform genetic and displaying data from more than 250 phenotypic disease etiology and therapeutics. New MGI functionality parameters of embryos, young adult and aged mice.588 J.delPicchia ResultsandConclusions:Wewillpresenthowthelatest sequencing data (30X coverage) in 185 women, who have data are contributing to previously observed biological the extreme scores neuroticism (≤10th percentile and ≥90th insights and discovering new ones. First, we continue to percentile). All sequenced DNA reads were mapped to the observe a wide-ranging prevalence of sexual dimorphism, human genome reference (hg19) and SNV and indel VCFs highlighting the importance of including both males and were create by multi-sample joint aggregation using the femalesinbiomedicalresearch.Anembryonicphenotyping gVCFs. Targeted analysis was focused on the olfactory pipeline continues ﬁnding that approximately one-third of receptor genes, neuroinﬂammation, inﬂammasome-, mammaliangenesareessentialforlife,andthesearehighly PAMP-, and DAMP-related genes. correlatedwithhumandiseasegenes.Further,theoverlapof Results: Following GATK best practices and VQSR adult mouse phenotypes with human clinical features has ﬁltering, 17,843,140 SNVs, 2,246,819 Ins and 2,662,425 identiﬁedover400newdiseasemodels.Specializedstudies Dels were retained. In allelic model and trend model, we have led to the identiﬁcation of 52 genes associated to foundtheassociatedvariantsin13olfactoryreceptorgenes deafness for the ﬁrst time, and a separate study found 974 and 5 genes related with DAMP which have high and genes associated to the glucose and lipid metabolism, moderate impact in low and high Neuroticism groups. including 23 genes associated with human diabetes via Conclusions: This study provide insights for GWAS. These models ﬁll the gap between GWAS and Neuroticism-linking genetic variations of sensory and functional validation of complex traits, and shared regula- immune system. tory features may potentially allow functional predictions This research was supported by the National Research for other metabolic genes via co-regulation networks. In Foundation of Korea, funded by the Ministry of Education addition, over 1500 publications indicate that IMPC mouse (NRF-2016R1A6A3A11932719 and NRF- models or data are being widely used by the research 2017R1D1A1B03035501). community,forinstanceincholesterol,boneformation,and H. Kim: None. Y. Yun: None. E. Lee: None. E. Park: halitosis research. None. Y. Chang: None. S. Ryu: None. H. Kim: None. V. Munoz Fuentes: None. T. Meehan: None. A. Mallon: None. H. Parkinson: None. D. Smedley: None. P16.50B MIDAS GPMS- A ﬂexible gene panel management system P16.48D Targeted analysis of whole genome sequence data to E. BoundaNdinga,R.Brumm, M.Schmuck, D.Schmitz,H. identify the link between sensory-immune system and Klein, S.H.Eck Neuroticism Center for human genetics, Munich, Germany H.Kim1,Y.Yun1,E.Lee1,E.Park1,Y.Chang2,S.Ryu2,H.Kim1 The implementation of Next-Generation Sequencing in a 1Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Ewha clinical diagnostic setting opens vast opportunities through Womans University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Center for theabilitytosimultaneouslysequenceallgenescontributing Cohort Studies, Total Healthcare Center, Kangbuk Samsung to a certain indication. However, this approach remains Hospital, School of Medicine, Sungkyunkwan University, challengingandrequirescomplexalgorithmsandsigniﬁcant Seoul, Korea, Republic of computationalresourcestoannotate,classifyandstoredata. Furthermore,theneedofacomprehensivesystemmanaging Introduction: Neuroticism is a personality trait character- patient information, gene panels, samples, sequencing data ized by a tendency toward various negative emotions and diagnostic reports becomes crucial. including anxiety, depression, and anger. Accordingly, this To solve these issues we develop MIDAS (Multiple trait has been associated with several psychiatric disorders, Integration of Data Annotation Software) a desktop based andconsidered oneoftheriskfactorsfordeveloping major and modular constructed javafx application for data depression and anxiety disorders. According to the theory, integration. neurotic tendencies derive from an innate predisposition MIDAS consists of many independent modules, here we toward low-threshold, high-intensity, and long-lasting introduce the gene-panel-management-system (GPMS) autonomic activation in response to sensory stimuli. module. The GPMS allows the user through a graphical Recently, we found that Neuroticism was associated with user interface (GUI) to perform “CRUD-operations” the olfactory receptor genes and gut microbiota in our (Create,Read,UpdateandDelete)ongenepanelsandtheir previous study. contentbyrespectingalldatabaseconstraints.Consideringa Materials: This research was performed using the gene panel may consist of many subpanels whose content Revised NEO Personality Inventory and thewhole genomeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 589 can overlap and a gene can belong to different panels, (rs7590268) is located within an enhancer that is active in performing such operation become a non-trivial task. CS15/17, while being non-active in the earlier CS13/14. Furthermore,theGPMSprovidesmeta-informationabout This correlates with a speciﬁcally strong expression of the all panels such as gene-, exon-, CDS- and base-count, adjacent THADA gene in CS15, potentially reﬂecting a department and the panel status. contributionoftheapoptosis-relatedTHADAgeneinfusion SincePaneldiagnosticsrelyontargetenrichment,GPMS processes in facial development. can also provide information about all enriched and not Our“functionalgenomics”approachwillhelptoclosethe enriched genes of the selected panel version. gap in the functional understanding of genetic risk loci for MIDASaimstoaidmoleculardiagnosticsbysimplifying nsCL/P and other complex traits. andacceleratingdataanalysisandinterpretation,improving J. Welzenbach: None. E. Mangold: None. M. Knapp: patient care. MIDAS is a part of a prospective multicentric None. K. Ludwig: None. study including clinical, diagnostic and software develop- ment partners and is funded by a grant by the Bavarian P16.54B Ministry of Economy. PDX Finder: An Open and Global Catalogue of Patient E. Bounda Ndinga: None. R. Brumm: None. M. Tumor Derived Xenograft Models Schmuck: None. D. Schmitz: None. H. Klein: None. S. H. Eck: None. N.Conte1,T.Meehan1,J.Mason1,C.Halmagyi1,A.Mosaku1,S. Neuhauser2,D.Krupke2,D.Begley2,H.Parkinson1,C.Bult2 P16.51C Integration of large-scale genetic and functional datasets 1European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, enable mechanistic insights into craniofacial development United Kingdom, 2The Jackson Laboratory Mouse Genome and disease Informatics, Bar Harbor, ME, United States J.Welzenbach1,2,E.Mangold1,M. Knapp3,K. Ludwig1,2 Introduction: Patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX) mouse models are an important research platform to study 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,Bonn,Germany,2Departmentof tumor evolution, drug response and for tailoring che- Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, motherapeutic approaches to individual patients. PDX Germany, 3Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and models are produced and made available in repositories Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany managed by academic labs, large research consortia and contract research organizations. The heterogeneous nature GWAS for nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft of PDX repositories makes ﬁnding relevant models of palate (nsCL/P) have identiﬁed 40 risk loci, mostly in non- interest challenging. coding regions. The functional effects of these associations Methods: To address this issue, The Jackson Laboratory remain largely unclear. Here, we applied comprehensive and EMBL-EBI have co-developed the PDX Finder, a data integration approaches of genetic and epigenetic data comprehensive open global catalogue of PDX models and sets to 1) identify potential regulatory effects of risk var- their associated data. In support this initiative, we iants, 2) characterize potential novel variants located in coordinated the community initiative to develop the PDX functional candidate regions, and 3) to specify the manner models Minimal Information standard (PDX-MI) that and timing of regulatory processes affected by known deﬁnes the information necessary for describing key variants. elements of a PDX model including the clinical attributes We used relevant published ChIP-seq datasets from of a patient’s tumor, host strain, implantation and model different stages of craniofacial development, i.e., human validation methods. PDX-MI is the basis for PDX Finder’s embryonic craniofacial tissue (Carnegie stages (CS) 13-17) search and ﬁltering options (e.g., tumor histology, mole- / neural crest cells, and in-house nsCL/P GWAS summary cular variant, drug response). Within PDX Finder, model statistics. After epigenetic imputation of histone marks, a attributes are integrated into a cohesive ontological data joint bioinformatics pipeline (QC, peak calling) was model that supports consistent searching across various applied, and chromatin segmentation procedures were resources. From PDX Finder, direct links to the relevant performed. This provided insights into the particular institution are provided for further collaboration. PDX involvement of different activity states at different stages Finder is collaborating with several worldwide consortia andcouldhelptodifferentiatewhichmolecularprocessesof including PDXnet and EurOPDX to increase “ﬁndability” facial development (e.g, cell migration/fusion, or tissue of PDX models and to advance cancer research and drug formation) might be inﬂuenced by which genetic risk loci. discovery. As one preliminary example, the lead SNP at 2p21590 J.delPicchia Results/conclusion: PDX Finder is currently displaying P16.57A over1800PDXmodelsforawidevarietyofcancersandis Genome-wide association study of 1,124 protein levels in actively recruiting more models.The community is invited pulmonary arterial hypertension patients identiﬁes a novel to explore and provide feedback on our portal at: www. trans-pQTL at ELK2AP for Death Receptor 3 pdxﬁnder.org. N.Conte:None.T.Meehan:None.J.Mason:None.C. M.Kaakinen1,C. J.Rhodes1,NIHR Bioresource for Rare Halmagyi:None.A.Mosaku:None.S.Neuhauser:None. Diseases, M.Humbert2,I.Prokopenko1,M.Wilkins1 D.Krupke:None.D.Begley:None.H.Parkinson:None. C. Bult: None. 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Université Paris-Sud, Paris, France P16.55C Who am I? The Personal Genome Project UK Recent genome-wide associationstudies(GWAS)onblood plasma proteome in healthy individuals have identiﬁed L. Marks1,N.Pontikos2,A. Webster3, thePGP-UKConsortium hundreds of protein quantitative trait loci, pQTLs, both in cisandintrans.Dissectingthemechanismsofproteinlevel 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2UCL variabilityinunhealthyindividualsmayhelptorevealnovel Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, disease-speciﬁcpathways.Pulmonaryarterial hypertension, London, United Kingdom, 3UCL Cancer Institute, University PAH, is a rare disease leading to premature death. We College London, London, United Kingdom conducted a GWAS using whole-genome sequencing data and 1,124 blood plasma protein levels measured with the Background: The Personal Genome Project UK (PGP- SOMAscan platform in 128 British (discovery) and 79 UK), part of the global PGP network, creates freely avail- French (replication) PAH patients. Each protein level was able genetic, epigenetic, phenotypic, health and associated natural logarithm transformed, adjusted for age, sex and trait data from volunteer participants. four principal components, and the resulting residuals were Methods: By using a multi-omics approach combined furtherinverse-normaltransformedtoassurenormality.We with a robust recruitment process based on open consent, discovered 21 cis and 6 trans-pQTLs at genome-wide sig- we provide whole genome, methylome and transcriptome niﬁcancecorrectedformultipletesting(P<4.45×10-11)that data as an open-access resource. Alongside raw data, PGP- replicated with nominal signiﬁcance and directional con- UK provides individual variant reports for each donated sistency. These contain four novel trans-pQTLs at/near genomebasedonmulti-omicanalyses.Thegenomicvariant ELK2AP for death receptor 3 (DR3); MIR4435−1 for reports include information about ancestry, alongside Complementcomponent1subcomponentr(C1r);RETNLB genetic risk for various diseases and traits. For the ﬁrst for Hepatocyte growth factor activator (HGFA); and time,wehavereportedepigeneticvariantstoparticipantsin TMEM215forProperdin.AnimalstudieshaveshownDR3, reports including prediction of epigenetic age and smoking a cell surface receptor of the tumor necrosis factor receptor status based on DNA methylation markers. superfamily (TNFRSF), to emerge as a major regulator of Results: The PGP-UK pilot study focused on ten inﬂammatory and autoimmune disease, and therapeutic volunteer participants as the ﬁrst collaborative citizen agonists of TNFRSF25 can be used to simulate Treg scientists. Alongside these, the unique genome donation expansion. ELK2AP is on the border of immunoglobulin framework was developed and trialed on three participants. heavylocus,furthersuggestingtheroleofthisnovelpQTL In an additional demonstration of citizen science, a to be inﬂammation and immunity related. Our results pro- biomedical postgraduate student has become the ﬁrst to vide support for previous research suggesting that inﬂam- analyse their own genome and epigenome as part of PGP- mation and altered immune processes underlie the UK. Results from all three project areas will be presented. development of PAH. Discussion:PGP-UKdemonstratesthatcitizenscienceis M.Kaakinen:None.C.J.Rhodes:None.M.Humbert: possible,andisakeytoadvancingpublicunderstandingof None. I. Prokopenko: None. M. Wilkins: None. personalgenomicsandhealth.Theprojecthasdemonstrated the importance of data sharing and public collaboration in P16.58B the scientiﬁc process. We conclude that the PGP-UK Qtlizer: Comprehensive QTL annotation of GWAS results process and citizen science collaborative approach to genomic data creation is critical in the advancement of M.Munz1,2,A. Schäfer2,J. Erdmann1 genomics as a tool in personalised medicine, and in public perception of personal genomics. 1UniversityofLübeck,Lübeck,Germany,2Charité-University L.Marks:None.N.Pontikos:None.A.Webster:None. Medicine Berlin, Berlin, GermanyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 591 Explorationofgeneticvarianttogenerelationshipscanhelp sequencing of messenger RNA (RNA-seq) extracted from to identify candidate causal variants and genes in Post- available patients’ tissues, blood and ﬁbroblasts, to search GWASanalyses.Inthiswork,weintroduceQtlizer,anovel for pathogenic variants. Eight patients with known muta- web-basedtooltoannotatecommonvariantsinhumanwith tions, affecting splicing or leading to the loss of expression associated changes in gene expression using the, to-date, of one allele (heterozygote deletion, nonsense mRNA mostcomprehensivedatabaseofpublishedquantitativetrait decay,etc)wereincluded,aswellastenpatientswithIDor loci (QTL). RP without diagnosis after TS or WES. We performed a More precisely, we integrated 169 tissue-speciﬁc QTL combined analysis of RNAseq data including 1) a variant datasets (one response expression QTLs, one protein detection comparison between RNASeq and DNAseq data abundance QTLs, all other expression QTLs) from the using VaRank 2) the detection of splicing alterations using publicdomainandfurtherincludedtwoinhousedatasetson three different programs (rMATS, JunctionSeq and Leaf- monocytes and macrophages from the Cardiogenics Cutter)3)adifferentialexpressionstudyusingDEseq.This Consortium. 3-way analysis allowed us to retrieve the known mutations The QTL table resulting from up to 100 inputted rsIDs in 8/10 cases and identiﬁed interesting candidate variations (optionally, LD variants can be included) consists of insomeoftheotherpatients.Asigniﬁcantnumberofgenes columns for variant, gene, type of QTL, distance in base involvedinIDandRPareexpressedeitherinﬁbroblastsor pairs, tissue, effect size, signiﬁcance information, and blood. We therefore conﬁrm that RNAseq from patient’s origin. Additionally, we added three more attributes: (1) skin or blood cells can be a useful approach to identify Co-localization: instead of deﬁning ﬁxed size of e.g. one pathogenic variants in coding and noncoding regions. sup- mega base pair, we utilized the TAD boundaries to ported by Fondation Maladies Rares, Fondation Jérome categorize QTLs into cis (i.e. variant and gene remain in Lejeune the same TAD) and trans (2) Relevance ﬂags and counts: F. MAttioli: None. C. Stoezel: None. D. Plassard: thesewereaddedtoeachQTLtodrawconclusionsaboutits None. H. Dollfus: None. J. Mandel: None. C. Keime: reproducibility across tissues and studies as well as its None. J. Muller: None. A. Piton: None. causality(3)GWASCatalog:variantsandgenesaremarked if listed in the catalog. P16.60D In summary, Qtlizer provides a web-based solution for Seekmer: fast and accurate transcript level quantiﬁcation annotating lists of genetic variants with QTLs from a large at low sequencing depth number of published datasets as well as from two recently released eQTL datasets. Our tool is freely available at Y. Wang,H. Zhang,R. E.Mills, Y. Guan http://www.genehopper.de/qtlizer. M.Munz:None.A.Schäfer:None.J.Erdmann:None. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States P16.59C Seekmer: fast and accurate transcript-level quantiﬁca- Use of RNA sequencing for the diagnosis of heterogenous tion at low sequencing depth genetic diseases Hongjiu Zhang1†, Yifan Wang 1,2, †, Ebrahim Azizi, Gilbert S. Omenn 1,2,3, Ryan E. Mills1,2,*, Yuanfang F. MAttioli1,C.Stoezel2,D.Plassard1,H.Dollfus2,J. Mandel1, Guan1,3,4,* C. Keime1, J.Muller2, A.Piton1 1 Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinfor- matics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2INSERM U1112, Strasbourg, USA 48109 France 2 Department of Human Genetics, University of Michi- gan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 48109 Use of DNA high throughput sequencing (Whole‐exome 3 Department of Internal Medicine, University of sequencing, WES or targeted sequencing, TS) in clinical Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA 48109 practices have greatly improved molecular diagnosis of 4 Department of Electronic Engineering and Computer genetically heterogenous diseases, such as Intellectual Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, Disability (ID) or Retinitis pigmentosa (RP). However, an USA 48109 importantportionofthepatients remains undiagnosed after † Zhang and Wang equally contributed to the work. the exploration of genomic coding regions. To identify * To whom correspondence should be addressed: additional variants not seen by WES, whole genome Yuanfang Guan <gyuanfan@umich.edu> and Ryan E. sequencing (WGS) is a straightforward strategy but still Mills <remills@umich.edu> remains heavy and expensive. Thus, we used paired-end Abstract592 J.delPicchia Achieving both fast and accurate quantiﬁcation of which reﬂect the levels in isolated T Cells (R2=0.62). transcript abundance in RNA-Seq experiments remains an Furthermore, LRRN3 LS-TA measured in Whole Blood elusive goal, with trade-offs between the high accuracy of samples differentiated patients on immunosuppressant alignment-based methods and the short runtime of therapy from healthy controls (sensitivity >85%). There- alignment-free approaches for estimating the abundance of fore, it is feasible to translate this direct LS-TA assay on individual transcripts. We present Seekmer, a highly Whole Blood Samples in routine hospital applications. efﬁcient quantiﬁcation tool that leverages the relative N.L. Tang: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, advantages of each approach without their corresponding patent or other intellectual property); Modest; patent shortcomings. Seekmer incorporates a modiﬁed de Bruijn prosecution. C. Szeto: None. approach for quick sequence assignments into an alignment-free mapping, resulting in a 95% increase in P16.62B speed over alignment-based tools while retaining a high Sparse discrete data analytics for single-cell genomics and accuracyascomparedtobothmolecularandsimulateddata applications to spermatogenesis sets. We further show increased transcriptdiscriminationat lowerexpressionlevels,thusenablingtheanalysisofsubtle A. C.Gilbert, C. Green,Q.Ma,X. Zheng,S. S. Hammoud, changes between different cellular systems as well as MichiganCenter for Single-Cell Genomic DataAnalytics, J.Z. individual cells. Seekmer thus provides scalable and robust Li transcript quantiﬁcation for current full-length bulk and single-cell RNA sequencing methods. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States Y.Wang:None.H.Zhang:None.R.E.Mills:None.Y. Guan: None. Our study tackles three challenges facing high-dimensional sparse counts data: mathematical theory, algorithmic P16.61A development, and applications. With single-cell RNA Determination of CD3 subpopulation speciﬁc gene sequencing, the transcript counts contain low integers and expression from whole blood samples and its applications very high rates of 0's due to shallow sampling and “drop- outs”. Since cell number (100's-1000's) is usually smaller N.L. Tang,C. Szeto than gene number (20,000-40,000), statistical inference tends to be under-determined; yet much information is The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong conveyed by subsets of genes. Most current theories on statistical learning assume real-valued measurements in Traditionalapproachtodeterminetranscriptabundance(TA) well-behaved distributions. We developed new theoretical of one cell type in cell-mixture samples (e.g. Whole blood) support for the unique distribution properties of “double- requirecell-isolation,likemagneticcell-sortingtosingleout sparse” data, with (1) low-rank structure and (2) low inte- target cell-types for quantiﬁcation of TA. The cell-sorting gers with zero-inﬂation. One recent effort is to adopt the procedure is labour-intense and/or expensive (e.g. single Gini Index to assess if a cell devotes most of its transcripts cellRNA-seq).Anin-vitrodiagnosticsthatcanreportTAof on a small spectrum of genes, or spread them over many single cell-type without cell-sorting is needed for routine regulatory programs. Yet the Gini varies with the cell's hospitallaboratoryoperation.Inthisexample,weusedCD3 sequencing depth; in fact, both the alpha and beta diversity T-cell as the target leukocyte subpopulation in which tran- measures exhibit dependencies with abundance and dis- script abundance was determined in Whole Blood samples. persion properties of the counts data. We modify classic A list of T-cells cell-type speciﬁc genes were deﬁned as distancemeasuresandcriticallyreassessexistingalgorithms genes whose transcripts in the Whole Blood were forclustering,imputation,markerselection,andbenchmark predominantly contributed from T-cells (over 50%). From them in reusable, extendable, truth-known simulations. We suchTcellscell-typespeciﬁcgenelist,afunctionalreporter apply our workﬂow to analyze >36K single cells from the gene of interest was chosen as a target gene. Another cell- mouse testis, ﬁnding that the transition from spermatocytes type speciﬁc gene with low biological variation and not tomaturespermsfollowasmoothtransition;fouridentiﬁed affected by the disease condition was chosen as reference spermatogonia subtypes map to known differentiation pro- gene. We used real time PCR to quantify the 2 genes in cesses; and nine subtypes of Sertoli cells are interspersed WholeBloodSamplesandddCTratioofthemprovidedan with spatially deﬁned histological stages. Our experience index of the target gene expression level in T Cells. highlights the value of iterative discovery cycles through LRRN3 was T cells cell-type speciﬁc gene. Using theory-methods-applications. (Funding: 1R21HD090371- PRKCQ as the T cells cell-type speciﬁc reference gene, 01A1, 1DP2HD091949-01, Michigan Institute for Data LRRN3 LS-TA was determined in Whole Blood samples Science.)Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 593 A.C. Gilbert: None. C. Green: None. Q. Ma: None. X. M. Grant SAF2015-68472-C2-2-R from Mineco (Spain) Zheng: None. S.S. Hammoud: None. J.Z. Li: None. and FEDER to FC. M. Solis-Moruno: None. A. Mensa-Vilaro: None. L. P16.63C Batlle-Maso: None. T. Marques-Bonet: None. J. Aroste- EvaluationoftheperformanceofNGSbioinformaticstools gui: None. F. Casals: None. forthedetectionofsomaticmutationsinautoinﬂammatory diseases P16.64D Somatic Mutation detection using deep Whole Exome M.Solis-Moruno1,A. Mensa-Vilaro2,L. Batlle-Maso1,T. Sequencing on post-mortem brain tissue Marques-Bonet1,J.Arostegui2,F. Casals3 J.vanRooij,S.Melhem,D.Salkovic,P.Arp,A.Uitterlinden,H. 1Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF), Departament de Seelaar, J.vanMeurs, J.van Swieten Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Univ, Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Immunology, Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands Barcelona, Spain / Functional Unit of Clinical Immunology HospitalSantJoandeDéu-HospitalClínic,Barcelona,Spain., Introduction: Research into the contribution of somatic Barcelona, Spain, 3Genomics Core Facility, Departament de mutations to human diseases has been mostly conﬁned to Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu cancer genetics. Recently, studies have emerged regarding Fabra, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, 08003 somatic mutations in neurological diseases. Most use can- Barcelona, Spain., Barcelona, Spain didate gene panel sequencing or sequencing of single cells. These methods are either limited to a subset of genes or a Introduction: Autoinﬂammatory diseases represent a pri- subset of cells. We measured all coding somatic mutations vilegedscenariotothestudyofthesomaticvariation.First, intwospeciﬁcbrainregionsofsixSemanticDementia(SD) somatic mutations are suspected to cause autoinﬂammatory patients and report affected genes. diseasesinaconsiderablefractionofpatients.Second,DNA Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing on from blood is easily obtained. And third, separating dif- dentategyrus(meancoverage250x),middletemporalgyrus ferent cell populations is also possible with standard ﬂow (500x) and blood (120x) of six SD patients. Using Mutect cytometry procedures. However, the detection of somatic and GATK’s Uniﬁed Genotyper, we extracted a total of mutations from NGS presents some difﬁculties. Low fre- 193.250 candidate mutation sites. Through a custom quency somatic mutations are at risk of being undetected ﬁltering pipeline, we retained 2.312 somatic mutations. with standard procedures. Also, most of the algorithms for Each mutation has a CADD score of at least 10 and is somaticmutationanalysesareoptimizedforcancerstudies, completely absent from the ExAC database. whereatumoursampleiscomparedwiththehealthytissue. Results:Of2.312somaticmutations,736aredetectedin Thus, higher coverages and the modiﬁcation of experi- dentate gyrus, 1.571 in middle temporal gyrus and 5 in mental designs and pipelines are needed to detect these both. Between 24 and 479 somatic mutations were found variants. pertissueperpatient. Intotal2.033 genes were affected by Materials and Methods: We sequenced the whole somatic mutations. 254 genes were affected in multiple exomes from blood samples of ﬁve patients with known tissues or samples. The most affected gene was TTN, somatic variants with a mean coverage 260X. We used carrying seven unique somatic mutations in six tissues of somaticvariantcallers,VarScar2,MuTect2andVarDict,to ﬁve patients. generate a list of possible somatic mutations. For two Conclusions: Deep WES allows measuring a wide range patients,wealsoseparatedbloodcellpopulationsinorderto of coding somatic mutations within a selected tissue. Large establish their frequencies. CNV analysis was performed variation exist in the number of potentially damaging using CoNIFER and XHMM software. mutations per patient and tissue. We identiﬁed 254 genes Results: We found 4 out of 5 variants, all but the one at with mutations in multiple patients or tissues. lower frequency (2.8%). All others (ranging from 7.7%- J. van Rooij: None. S. Melhem: None. D. Salkovic: 31.3%) were detected by, at least, VarScan2. Estimated None. P. Arp: None. A. Uitterlinden: None. H. Seelaar: frequencies by experimental methods and by the NGS None. J. van Meurs: None. J. van Swieten: None. approach were similar in general. Conclusion: Next generation sequencing is a tool with P16.65A potential application to detect somatic mutations in autoin- Graph methods for validating complex variants in ﬂammatorydiseases.MDM-2014-0370-16-3granttoM.S.- pedigrees and large sample cohorts594 J.delPicchia P. Krusche1, S.Chen2,E. Dolzhenko2,B. L. Moore1, M.A. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Bekritsky1,A. Gross2, D.R.Bentley1, M.A. Eberle2 Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. D.R. Bentley: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina Cambridge Ltd.. E. 1Illumina Cambridge Ltd., Saffron Walden, United Kingdom, Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other 2Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, United States intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. M.A. Eberle: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Accuratedetectionandannotationofcomplexvariants(e.g. Illumina Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, paralogs and SVs) is a critical part of the clinical variant patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; callingprocess.AchallengewithSVcallingisthatthesame Illumina Inc. event is often represented differently between samples. Nearby variants and sequence instability around the P16.66B breakpoints can further complicate these issues. Thus, Population-scale discovery of structural variants with complex variants can be difﬁcult to aggregate across sam- PacBio SMRT sequencing ples leading to Mendelian conﬂicts, or underestimation of variant frequencies. A.Wenger,R.Vogelsang,B.Galvin,L.Hickey,Y.Li,P.Peluso, We have developed a joint genotyping method for J.Wilson, M.Sonnested complex variants based on realigning sequence reads overlapping variant locations or breakpoints to a variant Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States graph. This method enables us to ﬁnd a canonical variant representation and use it to consistently genotype a variant Most of the base pairs that differ between human genomes across many samples. Once a set of variants is consistently are in structural variants (differences ≥50 bp), which are representedandgenotypedacrossalargecohortofsamples, broadlymissingfromvariantdatabasesbuiltwithshort-read we validate it using Mendelian inheritance, Hardy Wein- DNA sequencing. To support use of structural variants in berg statistics and other approaches. The resulting sets of rare disease and common trait association studies, it is high-quality variant annotations are essential for clinical necessary to perform population-scale surveys with a applications where the variant calling is performed on one technologyeffectiveatdetectingstructuralvariants,suchas or few samples. PacBio SMRT sequencing. After sample collection, the Our methods and visualisation tools will be made challenges to constructing population-scale structural var- available as a part of our graph-based toolset for structural iant databases are: 1. library preparation; 2. data collection; variant calling (https://github.com/illumina/paragraph). The and 3. data processing. For library preparation, we devel- validated calls and raw sequence data will be made oped SMRTbell Express Template Preparation, a 3-hour available publicly for over 210 samples that have been single-tube protocol. For data collection, prior studies have sequenced to at least 30x depth as part of the Platinum demonstrated that low coverage per sample (~5-fold) is Genomes (https://github.com/illumina/platinumgenomes) sufﬁcient for surveys of variation. The PacBio Sequel and Polaris (https://github.com/illumina/polaris) resources. System generates low-coverage for a single sample in one P. Krusche: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- day. For data processing, we developed pbsv, the ﬁrst joint niﬁcant; Illumina Cambridge Ltd.. E. Ownership Interest structuralvariantcallerwhichcombinesreadsfrommultiple (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); individuals to identify variants. We ﬁrst applied these tools Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. S. Chen: A. Employment (full or toevaluateahumantrio.At5-foldcoveragepersample,we part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. E. Ownership Interest discover most of the variants found by high coverage (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); sequencing, with a 25% increase in sensitivity from joint Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. E. Dolzhenko: A. Employment variant calling. We further applied joint variant calling to a (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. E. Ownership Mendeliandiseasecaseandidentiﬁedapathogenic,denovo Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual structural variant. Finally, we developed a mathematical property); Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. B.L. Moore: A. model to suggest how to power studies that apply 5-fold Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina Cam- coverage to discover structural variants at a desired popu- bridge Ltd.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, lation frequency.Together, the tools and model support the patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Illumina creation of the ﬁrst population-scale database of human Inc. M.A. Bekritsky: A. Employment (full or part-time); structural variation. Signiﬁcant;IlluminaCambridgeLtd..E.OwnershipInterest A. Wenger: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); niﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, Signiﬁcant;IlluminaInc.A.Gross:A.Employment(fullor stock options, patent or other intellectual property); part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina Inc. E. Ownership Interest Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. R. Vogelsang: A.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 595 Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Bios- pregnancy, a difﬁcult issue of prognosis due to the risk of ciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent intellectualdisability.Theadvent ofnewtechnologiessuch or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Bios- as Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) makes it possible to ciences. B. Galvin: A. Employment (full or part-time); considerthedetectionandcharacterizationofSVs.Thegoal Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest is to use the WGS to identify and characterize SVs, and to (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); secondarily improve our pipeline. A short-reads WGS was Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. L. Hickey: A. Employ- performed in 19 patients with de novo SVs (8 transloca- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. tions, 7 complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCRs) and Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other 4 sSMCs) that had been found inpostnatal (11/19 patients) intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. Y. orprenatal(8/19patients)periods.Bioinformaticanalysisof Li: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc the raw data was performed with Lumpy algorithms for Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, translocations and inversions, and ControlFreec for CNVs. patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc The analyses identiﬁed 7/8 translocations, one of which Biosciences. P. Peluso: A. Employment (full or part-time); interruptstheGRIN2Bgeneatabreakpointcompatiblewith Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest the patient’s phenotype. The undetected translocation (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); involves pericentromeric breakpoints. The 7 CCRs were Signiﬁcant;PaciﬁcBiosciences.J.Wilson:A.Employment also identiﬁed with, sometimes, the discovery of more than (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. 10 breakpoints, in favor of a chromothrypsis type Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other mechanism. Of the 4 sSMCs, the 2 with euchromatin were intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. M. detected since the 2 with heterochromatin were not. This Sonnested: None. project allowed us to improve our WGS pipeline and identify SVs. It so demonstrates that short-reads WGS is P16.67C particularly effective in characterizing the breakpoints of Prenatal and postnatal molecular characterization by SVs (16/19) in both prenatal and postnatal periods. Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) of de novo structural N. Marle: None. A. Vitobello: None. J. Puechberty: variations (SVs) None. J. Thevenon: None. E. Tisserant: None. A. Guerrot: None. P. Chambon: None. G. Joly-Hélas: N.Marle1,A. Vitobello1, J.Puechberty2,J. Thevenon1,E. None. A. Guichet: None. B. Keren: None. S. Brisset: Tisserant1,A. Guerrot3,P. Chambon4, G.Joly-Hélas4,A. None. L. Van Maldergem: None. P. Khau Van Kien: Guichet5,B.Keren6,S. Brisset7,L. VanMaldergem8,P. Khau None. M. Doco: None. E. Pipiras: None. C. Beneteau: VanKien9,M.Doco10,E.Pipiras11,C.Beneteau12,J.Deleuze13, None. J. Deleuze: None. R. Olaso: None. A. Boland: R. Olaso13,A. Boland13,M. Poulleau1,T. Jouan1,C. Poe1,C. None.M.Poulleau:None.T.Jouan:None.C.Poe:None. Thauvin-Robinet1,l.Faivre1,Y. Duffourd1,P. Callier1 C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None. Y. Duf- fourd: None. P. Callier: None. 1CHU le Bocage, DIJON, France, 2Service de Génétique Médicale, Montpellier, France,3Service deGénétique, Rouen, P16.68D France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Rouen, France, Open Targets: Integrating genetics and functional biology 5Service de Génétique, Angers, France, 6Département de to identify and prioritise gene targets for disease Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7Service d’Histologie Embryologie Cytogénétique, Clamart, France, E. M.Schmidt1,2 8CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,Besançon,France,9Centrede Génétique Médicale et Cytogénétique, Nimes, France, 1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United 10Service de Génétique Médicale, Reims, France, Kingdom, 2Open Targets, an academic-industrial 11Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, AP-HP, Hôpital Robert collaboration between the Wellcome Sanger Institute, Debré, Paris, France, 12Service de Génétique Médicale, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Nantes, France, 13Centre National de Recherche en GlaxoSmithKline plc., Biogen Inc. and Takeda Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Evry, France Pharmaceuticals, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom Inthepre-andpostnatalperiods,denovostructuralvariants Overthepastdecade, thegenetic aetiology ofmanyhuman (SVs), such as supernumerary chromosomal markers diseases and complex phenotypes has been deeply char- (sSMCs) and apparently balanced translocations and acterised. However, attributing causal genes to genetic inversions, are usually evidenced by standard karyotype. associations and developing effective therapeutics remains The presence of these SVs raises, especially during challenging.596 J.delPicchia In Open Targets, we integrate large-scale genetics and are still unclear, making it difﬁcult to link a non-coding genomics with drug information to inﬂuence the way drug mutation with the patient's phenotype. targets are identiﬁed and prioritised. We also generate new We propose here a supervised machine learning strategy data using human cell models (e.g. organoids, iPSCs) and using random forests, adapted to complex and heteroge- genome editing (CRISPR/Cas9) to identify drug targets for neous datasets, to classify and select non-coding mutations three main therapeutic areas: oncology, immunology, and potentiallyinvolvedinthederegulationofdiseasegenes.A neurodegeneration. The Open Targets Platform enables notable innovation of our approach is to take into account users to identify and investigate links between genes, association data between non-coding regions and pathways, and diseases, and can be accessed via a web target genes. interfaceorREST-API.Wecompute,scoreandranktarget- We apply 3 classiﬁers, trained on different sets of to-disease associations using biological evidence integrated experimentally predicted regulatory regions, on more than from the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog, Genomics England, 40,000 non-coding mutations in 48 patients affected with PheWAS, ClinVar, expression and eQTL resources, Uni- X-linked intellectual disabilities from the FP7-funded Prot, ChEMBL, and many others. We have recently project "NeuroXsys". Selected mutations were shown to developed POSTGAP, a pipeline which merges common segregate with the disease in affected families, and to genetic associations curated from literature with functional deregulate the predicted target gene in animal models. We genomics, epigenetic and expression data to resolve the discusstheresultsinlightoftheirgenome-wideapplication association signals at each trait-associated locus and link to larger cohorts of patients. each variant to its target gene(s). Functional evidence from L. Moyon: None. C. Berthelot: None. H. Roest multiplesourcesincludingGTExdata,promotercaptureHi- Crollius: None. C data, DNase hypersensitivity sites, and FANTOM5 is incorporated into an evidence score, providing a single P16.70B point of reference to explore the underlying biology of ExpansionHunter: A software tool to detect long repeat conditions and prioritise potential targets. expansions from PCR-free whole-genome sequence data Aggregation and integration of functional data and annotation from multiple heterogeneous sources in Open M.A.Eberle1,E.Dolzhenko1,J.J.F.A.vanVugt2,G.Narzisi3, Targets offers a robust solution to prioritising genes, J.H.Veldink2, D.A.Bentley4 quantifyingtheirbiologicalsigniﬁcance,andassessingtheir potential as pharmaceutical targets. 1Illumina, Inc, San Diego, CA, United States, 2University E.M. Schmidt: None. Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3New York Genome Center, New York, NY, United States, 4Illumina P16.69A Cambridge Ltd, Little Chesterford, United Kingdom Context-speciﬁc prioritization of non-coding variants implicated in human diseases Introduction: Identifying large repeat expansions such as those that cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and L. Moyon, C.Berthelot, H.RoestCrollius fragile X syndrome (FXS) is challenging for short-read (100-150 bp) whole genome sequencing (WGS) data. A Institut de Biologie de l'École Normale Supérieure, CNRS, solution to this problem is an important step towards inte- INSERM, PSL Research University, Paris, France grating WGS into precision medicine. To this end, we developed a software tool called ExpansionHunter that, Whole genome sequencing is increasingly being used for usingPCR-freeWGSshort-read data,cangenotyperepeats patients with rare genetic diseases as a diagnostic tool. at a locus of interest even if the expanded repeat is larger However, for a large proportion of sequenced patients, no than the read length. coding mutation is found in a gene associated with the Materials and Methods: We applied ExpansionHunter phenotype.Inthesecases,anon-codingmutation,locatedin to a set of 144 samples harboring repeat expansions acis-regulatoryregion,mayaffect theexpressionofagene associated with Huntington’s disease, fragile X syndrome, involved in the disease. Despite the existence of methods Friedreich’s ataxia and ﬁve other genetic disorders. In for annotating and predicting regulatory sequences on the addition, we tested the C9orf72 repeat in a cohort of 3,001 basis of biochemical and epigenetic properties, deﬁning ALSsamplesandcomparedourcallswithRP-PCRresults. objective criteria remains difﬁcult to effectively select Results: All but one of the repeat expansions in the candidates among the millions of non-coding mutations Coriell samples were detected by our method even though presentineachpatient.Moreover,themechanismsofaction many of the repeats were signiﬁcantly longer than the read andinteractionbetweenregulatoryregionsandtargetgenes lengths. In the ALS cohort, ExpansionHunter correctlyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 597 classiﬁed all (212/212) of the expanded samples as either to complexity/severity of the disease to the patient’s age. expansions (208) or potential expansions (4). Additionally, The estimated cost of each year of diagnostic delay was 99.9% (2,786/2,789) of the wild type samples were 2146 € (range 48 – 18,320 €). correctly classiﬁed as wild type by our method with the Conclusions: While a subset of individuals affected by remaining three identiﬁed as possible expansions. raregeneticdiseasesreceivesadiagnosisattheﬁrstclinical Conclusions: ExpansionHunter now enables researchers evaluation,asigniﬁcantnumberremainsundiagnosed.This toidentifymanyknownpathogenicrepeatexpansionsfrom study substantiates the cost-effectiveness of WES as a ﬁrst whole genome sequencing data. line diagnostic tool in these patients. M.A. Eberle: A. Employment (full or part-time); F.Radio:None.A.Bartuli:None.A.Novelli:None.M. Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, Tartaglia: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. E. Dolzhenko: A. Employment P16.72D (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. E. Ownership Orthogonal assessment of GENALICE MAP population Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual calling accuracy using a cohort of 142 whole exome property); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. J.J.F.A. van Vugt: sequencing samples None. G. Narzisi: None. J.H. Veldink: None. D.A. Bentley: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; L. Baarspul, B.Tolhuis, H.Karten Illumina, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; GENALICE Core BV, Nijkerk, Netherlands Illumina, Inc. With a growing use of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) P16.71C in human genetics it is evermore important to benchmark Cost-effectiveness of whole exome sequencing to solve the data analysis pipelines. Benchmark datasets exist, such as unsolved: an Italian pilot study NIST-GIAB and Illumina’s Platinum Genomes, holding “truth” variants to determine sensitivity and speciﬁcity of F. Radio,A. Bartuli,A. Novelli, M.Tartaglia, B.Dallapiccola NGS analysis pipelines. Although highly valuable, those benchmarkshavedrawbacksasNGSdataanalysispipelines Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, determinedtheirtruthcalls.Inaddition,theyincludeonlya Rome, Italy few individual samples that could lead to overﬁtting throughtraining sets.Such drawbacks introducebiases that Introduction: Rare, ultrarare and orphan diseases are het- shouldbeavoidedinbenchmarkstudies.Ruarketal(2016) erogeneous disorders with a prevalence of less than 1/2000 have developed high quality whole exome sequencing data persons, affecting some hundred millions of people world- from 142 samples together with Sanger sequencing data at wide. The needs of these patients and their families repre- 730 loci (ICR142). This dataset allows NGS pipeline eva- sentamedical,economicalandsocietalchallenge.Thewide luation with orthogonal veriﬁed truth variants across a application of next generation sequencing has allowed a cohort of unrelated samples and avoids biases associated dramaticincreaseinthespeedofgenomesequencingwitha with other benchmark sets. We used the ICR142 dataset to direct impact in terms of diagnostic rate and a decrease validate the GENALICE MAP population calling tool. We in cost. observedcorrectcallingofall123trueSNPsand260outof Materials & Methods: 300 patients were enrolled 268 true INDELs. In addition, it called 6 SNPs and 18 between 2014 and 2017 in the Undiagnosed Patients INDELs at the remaining Sanger negative loci. We com- Program at Bambino Gesù Children Hospital (OPBG) in pared the results to those obtained with the bcbio platform Rome. Each subject was suspected to have a mendelian (https://github.com/bcbio/icr142-validation) and observed disorder and remained undiagnosed despite extensive that GENALICE MAP produces the lowest numbers of multidisciplinary clinical and instrumental evaluation, and false negative and false positive calls. This makes GENA- targetedgenetictesting.Thecost-effectivenessanalysiswas LICEMAPbestinclassnexttobeingextraordinarilyfast:it performed on 211 patients, aged between 1 months and 43 took less than 3 minutes per sample to go from FASTQ years, w/wo a conclusive diagnosis following mendeliome/ to VCF. WES analysis. The total costs and costs for each year of Ruark et al. F1000Research 2016, 5:386 (https://doi.org/ diagnostic delay for the National Health System were 10.12688/f1000research.8219.1) compared with the cost of mendeliome/WES analysis. L. Baarspul: A. Employment (full or part-time); Results: The average total cost for each undiagnosed Signiﬁcant;GenaliceCoreBV.B.Tolhuis:A.Employment patientwas11,572€(range160–75,840€)andwasrelated (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genalice Core BV. H.598 J.delPicchia Karten: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; 1Dep. of Molecular and Translaional Medicine, University of Genalice Core BV. Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 2Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico 'Carlo Besta', Milan, P16.73A Italy QIAGEN Clinical Insight - Interpret (QCI-I) drives rapid identiﬁcation and interpretation of candidate causal Motivation: Exome sequencing approach is extensively variants in two Personal Genome Project cases used in research and diagnostic laboratories to discover pathological variants and study genetic architecture of J.L. Poitras human diseases. Even if present platforms produce high quality sequencing data, false positives variants remain an QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA, United States issue and can confound subsequent analysis and results interpretation. Here, we propose a new tool named Introduction: Gathering the most current and accurate GARFIELD-NGS (Genomic vARiants FIltering by dEep information is critical to variant interpretation and classiﬁ- LearningmoDelsinNGS),whichisbasedondeeplearning cation. The QIAGEN knowledgebase includes the most models to dissect false and true variants in single sample comprehensive database of variant speciﬁc publications, exome sequencing experiments performed with Illumina or and data from public and proprietary databases. This ION platforms. resource is the cornerstone of QIAGEN Clinical Insight – Results: GARFIELD-NGS consists of 4 distinct models Interpret (QCI-I), which facilitates rapid variant ﬁltering, tested on NA12878 gold-standard exome variants dataset interpretation, and reporting. Here, QCI-I quickly identiﬁes (NIST v.3.3.2): Illumina INS/DELs, Illumina SNVs, ION candidate causal variants in two cases from the Harvard INS/DELs, and ION SNVs. AUROC values for each Personal Genome Project (PGP). variants category are 0.9269, 0.7998, 0.9464, and 0.9757, Materials and Methods: Health recordsand VCFs were respectively. GARFIELD-NGS is robust on low coverage obtained from PGP (https://my.pgp-hms.org/users). Case 1 datadownto30XandonIlluminatwo-colourdata,aswell. presentedwithdilatedcardiomyopathyandcase2exhibited Our tool outperforms previous hard-ﬁlters, and calculates autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss. Filtering foreachvariantascorefrom0.0to1.0,allowingapplication was performed in QCI-I to exclude poor quality bases, of different thresholds based on desired level of sensitivity common variants, and those classiﬁed as benign or likely and speciﬁcity. GARFIELD-NGS processes standard VCF benign. VCFs were uploaded to QCI-I and respective ﬁleinputusingPerlandJavascriptsandproducesaregular phenotypes were entered. VCF output. Thus, it can be easily integrated in existing Results: Case 1 harbored a single candidate causal analysis pipeline. variantinLMNA(c.176T>G),whichwasclassiﬁedaslikely Availability: GARFIELD-NGS available at https:// pathogenic based on several lines of evidence in the github.com/gedoardo83/GARFIELD-NGS QIAGEN knowledgebase. Review of curated publications EG has been supported by “Fondazione Cariplo” and revealed that this LMNA variant is novel in the context of “Regione Lombardia”, Grant Emblematici Maggiori 2015- cardiomyopathy.Uponanalysisofcase2,QCI-Iidentiﬁeda 1080. compelling candidate causal variant in HOMER2 V.Ravasio:None.M.Ritelli:None.A.Legati:None.E. (c.587G>C). While this variant is classiﬁed as a variant of Giacopuzzi: None. uncertain signiﬁcance, HOMER2 has been mutated in autosomal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss P16.75C previously. WGS based workﬂow for identiﬁcation of disease causing Conclusions: Driven by content, QCI-I rapidly ﬁltered variants in rare diseases VCFs and identiﬁed candidate causal variants in two PGP cases in under an hour. This work also highlights the V. Wirta importance of collaborative research efforts like PGP in furthering our understanding of genetics and disease. Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden J.L. Poitras: None. Background: We have implemented a healthcare region- P16.74B wide strategy for diagnosing patients with rare genetic GARFIELD-NGS: Genomic vARiants FIltering by dEep disorders using WG (>3500 samples). This is result of Learning moDels in NGS collaboration between healthcare (Karolinska University Hospital)andacademicsettings,representedbySciencefor V. Ravasio1,M.Ritelli1,A. Legati2,E. Giacopuzzi1 Life Laboratory.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 599 Results: Approximately 100 samples are processed Materials and Methods: We created GeneHancer monthly. Turnaround time from DNA to results ready for (PMID:28605766), a novel regulatory element database clinical interpretation is 11 days (range 4 to 16). Using with >250,000 enhancers and promoters. Information is NIST samples, we estimate that SNV in known disease- amalgamated from six sources: ENCODE, Ensembl, causing genes are detected at >99.7% sensitivity and with FANTOM5,VISTA,dbSUPERandEPDnew.Targetgenes >99.6% PPV. Indel detection is at 94% sensitivity. are gleaned via GTEx expression QTLs, Capture Hi-C, Detection of CNV and other SV is achieved using multiple expression correlation between genes and FANTOM variant callers. An in-house established frequency database enhancer-transcribed ncRNAs, expression correlation of is used to ﬁlter out technical artifacts. genes to enhancer-contained transcription factors, and Variants are ranked according to their disease causing genomic distance. In parallel, >100,000 uniﬁed ncRNAs potential using a rank sum model considering various are consolidated from 21 general and specialized databases sources of annotation, including observed inheritance (PMID:23172862). pattern vs. expected pattern, CADD score, frequency, Results:Thewidely-usedGeneCardsSuitehasnowbeen quality, consequence, clinical signiﬁcance and other remodeled, creating an indispensable WGS disease inter- sources. pretation platform. This is based on the abovementioned AsuiteofinformaticssolutionsconsistingofChanjo(QC data and on >20,000 deeply annotated disease entries in tool), Genmod (variant prioritization), and Scout (GUI), MalaCards (PMID:27899610). This knowledgebase feeds enable clinical experts without in-depth bioinformatic the Suite’s NGS tools: VarElect, the phenotype interpreter, knowhow to evaluate the results. and TGex, the VCF-to-report analyzer (PMID:27357693), The workﬂow is quality assured using ISO17025. Data augmented to prioritize WGS variants with respect to sharing is being established through ClinVar and Beacon. diseases and phenotypes. Integration with multi-omic data is being evaluated for Conclusions: The GeneCards Suite provides a compre- assisting in functional interpretation of clinical signiﬁcance hensiveroutetoclinicalsigniﬁcanceofvariants,codingand of variants outside coding regions and linked canonical non-coding single nucleotide and structural genomic splice sites. variations, often elucidating unsolved cases. In summary, we have introduced at large scale a Support: LifeMap Sciences grant healthcareregionwideimplementationofWGSforpatients S. Fishilevich: None. R. Barshir: None. M. Twik: with rare genetic diseases. A key aspect has been the None. N. Rosen: None. T. Iny Stein: None. M. Safran: collaboration between academia and healthcare. None.D.Lancet:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator, V. Wirta: None. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; LifeMap Sciences P16.76D Inc., Marshﬁeld, MA 02050, USA. DiseaseinterpretationofvariantsintheWGSdarkmatter: enhancers and ncRNAs P16.77A YieldofClinicallyRelevantCandidatesinFamilyGenomes S. Fishilevich, R.Barshir, M.Twik,N.Rosen,T. InyStein, M. in the UK 100,000 Genomes Project Using the Fabric Safran,D.Lancet Genomics Platform Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel M.Babcock1,C.SonRigby1,M.Falcioni1,A.Guo1,J.Grigonis1, K. Hart1,M.Yandell2,M. Reese1 Introduction:Wholegenomesequencing(WGS)identiﬁes 50 times more variants than exome sequencing, most 1FabricGenomics,Oakland,CA,UnitedStates,2Universityof residing in the genomic non-coding “dark matter”. Three Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States classes of functional genomic elements that thus become amenable to variant analyses are promoters, enhancers and The 100,000 Genomes Project, spearheaded by Genomics ncRNAs, all central to tissue-related gene expression. England(GeL),isaUKNationalHealthServicesponsored Togethertheyamountto>20%ofthenewDNAterritories. study aimed at identifying disease-causing genetic variants Enhancers and some ncRNAs moderate spatiotemporal in patients and families with rare genetic diseases and orchestration of embryonic development and cell differ- cancer using a WGS approach. For this study, clinical his- entiation, with many underlying diseases. The WGS chal- tory was used to recruit patients into speciﬁc disease cate- lengeisdiseaseinterpretationofthisnewavalancheofdark gories, each of which were associated with gene panels matter variants. curated in the GeL PanelApp tool.600 J.delPicchia Fabric Genomics, a clinical interpretation partner for the performance of this approach. Probands where individuals 100,000 Genomes Project, has analyzed over 1220 clinical with rare genetic diseases that failed single-gene based cases using Opal Clinical. The variant ﬁltering and diagnosis. We identify the VAAST and Phevor score rank prioritization protocols utilized for case analysis include for 644 candidate causative variants ultimately selected by GeL’s variant tiering methodology, ClinVar, and Fabric clinical reporting. Reports were generated with Opal Clin- Genomics’ proprietary variant and gene ranking algorithms ical software, which provides a rich set of annotations and VAAST(Variant Annotation, AnalysisandSelectionTool) both ﬁltering widgets and VAAST and Phevor scores. We and Phevor (Phenotype Driven Variant Ontological Re- showthatcandidatecausativevariantsreportedresideinthe ranking Tool). We report results showing that by applying top 10 VAAST rank in 35% of cases, whereas they are VAASTandPhevorweincreasetheclinicalcandidateyield found in 70% of the cases when ranked by Phevor. When compared to using the GeL tiering system alone. We the candidate causative variant fell out of the top 20 rank, identiﬁed candidate causal genes/variants in 42.3% of the fewer and more ambiguous provided phenotypes are cases. In 23.3% of these cases (9.8% overall) candidates observed. In summary, the use of phenotype-driven variant were only obtained by using the VAAST/Phevor top 20 prioritization scores can reduce signiﬁcantly the interpreta- ranked genes/variants. tion turnaround time, ultimately reducing costs and In a small subset of ~300 cases, we reviewed the effects increasing diagnostic rates. of providing parental genomes in the analysis and return F.M. De La Vega: A. Employment (full or part-time); rate ofresults.Interestingly,there wasasmall difference in Signiﬁcant; Fabric Genomics Inc. E. Ownership Interest clinical candidate yield between solo cases and trios. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Further analysis will be carried out to see if this difference Signiﬁcant; Fabric Genomics, Inc. M. Babcock: A. is observed in a larger cohort. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fabric Geno- M. Babcock: None. C. Son Rigby: None. M. Falcioni: mics, Inc. E. Kiruluta: A. Employment (full or part-time); None. A. Guo: None. J. Grigonis: None. K. Hart: None. Signiﬁcant; Fabric Genomics, Inc. E. Ownership Interest M. Yandell: None. M. Reese: None. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Fabric Genomics, Inc. M. Yandell: E. Owner- P16.78B ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Phenotype-driven variant prioritization signiﬁcantly intellectual property); Modest; Fabric Genomics, Inc. F. improvesoverimpactandprevalencescoresinalarge-scale Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;FabricGenomics,Inc. analysis of1,963 cases ofMendelian disease diagnosticsby M. Reese: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; whole-genome sequencing Fabric Genomics, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; F.M.DeLaVega1,2,M.Babcock1,E.Kiruluta1,M.Yandell3,M. Fabric Genomics, Inc. Reese1 P16.79C 1Fabric Genomics, Oakland, CA, United States, 2Stanford variant interpreter and genetic analysis summary University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, generator 3University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States Z. Gormez1,2,I.Erserim1,D.Erdogan1 Next-generation sequencing of genomes or exomes is becomingpervasiveintheclinicaldiagnosticsofMendelian 1Gen Era Diagnostic, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Faculty of syndromes, idiopathic disease and fast diagnostics for Engineering, Istinye University, Istanbul, Turkey newborns. Pressures remain to demonstrate the clinical utility of WGS and to reduce the cost of the diagnostic We have developed a software that generates genetic ana- process. Traditionally, analysis consists in iteratively per- lysissummaryreportbyusingVCFﬁlesarestandardoutput forming ﬁltering steps using predicted impact and variant ﬁles of variant identiﬁcation programs. GenerAVI pro- populationprevalenceandreviewingliteratureforcandidate grammed by using java. It can be run on three must com- variants. We have previously developed probabilistic monoperatingsystems:Windows,Linux,Mac-OSX.There approaches to integrate variant impact and population pre- is no installation requirement. valence (VAAST), and in combination with patient phe- Thesoftwaregeneratesageneticanalysissummaryreport notype,leveragingtheHuPOhierarchy(Phevor),toprovide based on the evidence classiﬁcation of the article of scores to prioritize variants for review clinicians. Here we American College of Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) present a large-scale analysis of 1,963 reviewed clinical publishedforsequencedvariantsofclinicalinterpretationin WGS diagnostics cases allowing to quantify the 2015.Using28ofevidenceofACMG,itclassiﬁesvariantsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 601 into 5 groups as likely benign, benign, VUS, likely median.Forthegenes that haveatleastoneoutlier we ﬁnd pathogenic and pathogenic. We have used 11 automatable thatthereisanenrichmentofrarevariantswithintheoutlier evidences (PVS1, PM2, PP2, PP3, PP5, BA1, BS1, BS2, genes (p=2e-31) and known pathogenic variants (p=4e- BP1, BP4, BP6) and an inhouse variant database for 72). When looking at high impact variants we observe that Turkish population to provide a genetic analysis summary mendelian disease genes show stronger ASE effects in the report for MEFV, BRCA1, BRCA2 and CFTR genes. case of nonsense mutations (p=1.66e-74). We found that Thus unbiased and reliable results can be generated by when a sample has a nonsense mutation in a mendelian reducing the laborious time of variant curation to a disease gene this gene shows outlier ASE expression in minimum. Genetic analysis summary reports of 80 patients 11% of the cases. canbegeneratedandbereadyforreviewinafewminutes. The results of this study show that rare variants are more GenerAVIcanusethemanuallycuratedvariantdatabase. likely to have a high impact and cause extreme allelic Resources and data developed by Maxwell et al and by imbalance, underlining the importance of investigating expert panels mentioned in ClinVar were used as a allelic imbalance in the classiﬁcation of variants of referenceforvariantclassiﬁcation.Also,userscaninterpret unknown clinical signiﬁcance. andstoretheirvariants.Inaddition,theycanimportvariants N. de Klein: None. F. van Dijk: None. A. Claring- interpretation of an expert panel into their database. bould: None. P. Deelen: None. U. Võsa: None. J. GeneraAVI uses this variant database to generate genetic Verlouw: None. R. Monajemi: None. R. Sinke: None. analysis summary report automatically. M. Swertz: None. P.A.C. 't Hoen: None. L. Z. Gormez: None. I. Erserim: None. D. Franke: None. Erdogan: None. P17.03C DecreasedmethylationofthemitochondrialD-Loopregion P17 Epigenetics and Gene Regulation in peripheral blood DNA of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients P17.02B Allele speciﬁc expression identiﬁes rare variants as cause A.Stoccoro1,R.Gallo1,L.Mosca2,C.Tarlarini2,C.Lunetta2,A. for extreme allelic imbalance Marocchi2,V. Carnicelli1, L.Migliore1, F.Coppedè1 N.deKlein1,F. vanDijk1,2, A.Claringbould1, P.Deelen1,2,U. 1University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 2ASST Grande Ospedale Võsa1,J.Verlouw3,R.Monajemi4,R.Sinke1,M.Swertz1,2,P.A. Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, Italy C. 'tHoen5,L. Franke1,BIOS Consortium Several evidences suggest that aberrant epigenetic 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center mechanisms could be involved the etiology of amyo- Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, throphic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Particularly, methylation 2Genomics Coordination Center, University of Groningen, alterations in several nuclear genes have been detected in University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, whole blood and spinal cord DNA of ALS subjects. Netherlands, 3Dept. of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Recently it has been reported also an involvement of epi- Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Dept. of Human genetic deregulation in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, patients affected by neurodegenerative diseases, but evi- Netherlands, 5Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular dences in ALS is limited.In the current study we investi- Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, gated DNA methylation levels of the mitochondrial Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands displacement loop (D-loop) region, which regulates mito- chondrial DNA replication and transcription, in peripheral Large eQTL studies have mostly been used to map the blood DNA samples collected from 40 ALS patients with regulatory effects of common SNPs on gene expression. mutations in one of the ALS associated genes, including However,withcurrentsamplesizesitisdifﬁculttoidentify SOD1,FUS,TARDBPandC9ORF72,andfrom 60healthy eQTLs for rare variants. To address this we have used individuals, some of which carriers of the same mutation. RNA-sequencing to genotype 4,001 blood samples from D-loopmethylationlevelsweresigniﬁcantlylowerinblood BIOS, a large Dutch biobank consortium, and used this to DNAofALSpatientsthaninhealthyindividuals(P<0.05). measure Allele Speciﬁc Expression (ASE) to assess the Moreover a signiﬁcant inverse correlation between D-loop effects of rare variants on allelic imbalance. methylationlevelsandmtDNAcopynumber(r=-0.33;P< Pergenewedeﬁnedoutliersamplesasthosethatshowan 0.001),aswellasahigheramountofmtDNAcopynumber allelic imbalance that is 3 absolute deviations from the inALSpatientscomparedtohealthyindividuals(P<0.001)602 J.delPicchia were observed. Interestingly, when we considered methy- chromatin landscape leading to a generalized reduction in lation levels in relation to the mutations of ALS associated the number of peaks in actively transcribed (H3K36me3) genes, lower D-loop methylation levels were detected in and enhancer regions (H3K4me1 and H3K27ac). Particu- carriersofSOD1mutations,respecttocarriersofmutations larly, transcriptional initiation and elongation chromatin in the three other genes considered and non-carriers of states result the most signiﬁcantly affected, highlighting mutations (P<0.05).Present results indicate that mito- genes implicated in “mitotic nuclear division”, “cell cycle” chondrial D-loop region is hypomethylated in peripheral and “mRNA processing” as the major dysregulated targets blood DNA of ALS patients and in carriers of SOD1mu- following CHD8 suppression. Moreover, by overlaying tations, and that this epigenetic signature is related to histone marks data with CHD8 binding sites, we observe mitochondrial deregulation. that most chromatin changes seem to intervene in regions A.Stoccoro:None.R.Gallo:None.L.Mosca:None.C. not-boundbyCHD8, thussuggesting an‘indirect mode’of Tarlarini: None. C. Lunetta: None. A. Marocchi: None. chromatinremodeling.Insummary,ourresultspointtoward V. Carnicelli: None. L. Migliore: None. F. broad regulatory consequence of CHD8 suppression, pos- Coppedè: None. sibly implicating altered RNA processing, as well as asso- ciation with speciﬁc biological pathways of relevance to P17.04D ASD pathogenesis. CHD8 suppression in neuronal progenitors correlates with E. Kerschbamer: None. T. Tripathi: None. S. Erdin: alterations in chromatin landscape especially affecting None. F. Di Leva: None. M. Benelli: None. S. Piazza: transcriptional initiation and elongation None.J.F.Gusella:None.F.Ferrari: None.F. Demiche- lis: None. M.E. Talkowski: None. M. Biagioli: None. E. Kerschbamer1,T. Tripathi1,S. Erdin2,3, F.DiLeva1,M. Benelli4,S.Piazza5,J.F.Gusella2,3,F.Ferrari6,F.Demichelis7, P17.05A M.E. Talkowski2,3,M.Biagioli1 Female monozygotic twins phenotypically discordant for Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome sharing hypomethylation 1NeuroEpigeneticslaboratory,CentreforIntegrativeBiology, of IC2 University of Trento, Trento, Italy, 2Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, M.F. Bedeschi1, G.A. Cagnoli1,R. Villa1,V. G.C. Fergnani1, United States, 3Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical F. Lalatta1,S. Gangi2,F. Mosca2,N.Persico3,M.Porro4,L. School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Bioinformatics Unit, Fontana5,6, S.Tabano5,6, M.Miozzo5,6 Hospital of Prato, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Prato, Italy, 5Bioinformatic facility, Centre for Intergrative Biology, 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, University of Trento, Trento, Italy, 6Computational genomics Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2NICU, laboratory,IFOM,Milan,Italy,7LaboratoryofComputational Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, and Functional Oncology, Centre for Integrative Biology, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ University of Trento, Trento, Italy Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fondazione Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) is a collection of het- IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, erogeneousneurodevelopmentaldisordersdeﬁnedbysocial Italy, 4Pediatric Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation Unit, impairment and repetitive behaviors with signiﬁcant geno- Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore typic and phenotypic complexity. Mutations in several Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 5Department of Pathophysiology & hundred loci have been associated with the disease, but the Transplantation,UniversitàdegliStudidiMilano,Milan,Italy, chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 8 (CHD8) 6Division of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda represents a recurrent and independently validated ASD- Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy risk gene. All ASD mutations in CHD8 gene have been reported to be disruptive, leading to haploinsufﬁciency. Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome is an overgrowth Here we investigate how chromatin landscape reacts to imprinting syndrome characterized by pre- and post-natal CHD8 suppression by analyzing different histone mod- macrosomia, congenital abnormalities (such as macro- iﬁcations through Chromatin Immunoprecipitation and glossia, omphalocele or umbilical hernia, visceromegaly, Sequencing (ChIP-seq) in iPS-derived neural progenitors nephrourologic malformatios, ear anomalies) and tumor after CHD8 knock-down. We interrogated transcriptionally predisposition.Theprevalenceisabout1:10,500livebirths, active and repressed regions as well as active and poised with an equal incidence in males and females, except for enhancerstoexplorethepotentialimpactofloss-of-function monozygotic twins, for which a signiﬁcant female pre- mutations. CHD8 suppression mildly affects the overall ponderance is reported. BWS in caused by defects atAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 603 chromosome11p15.5includingLossofMethylation(LoM) showsthattheabsenceofKcnk9leadstoimpairedworking at the Imprintig Center 2 (IC2), Gain of Methylation at the memory, reduced acoustic startle response and abnormal Imprinting Center 1 (IC1), paternal uniparental disomy of sensorimotor gating. Investigations of circadian rhythms 11p15.5 region and maternally inherited pathogenic variant revealedselectivelyincreasedlocomotoractivityduringthe of CDKN1C. In about 30% of BWS, MLID (Multilocus dark phase in Kcnk9KOhom and, to a signiﬁcantly smaller Methylation Imprinting Disturbance) is also reported. We extent, in Kcnk9KOmat mice compared to controls. Using present a case of monozygotic, monochorionic and dia- Quantiﬁcation of Allele-Speciﬁc Expression by Pyrose- mniotic female twins discordant for BWS clinical mani- quencing (QUASEP) and Allele-Speciﬁc RT-qPCR in festations (only one twin presented with macrosomia, wildtype (C57BL/6xCast/Ei)F1 hybrid mice, biallelic macroglossia and nevus ﬂammeus). At birth, the phenoty- Kcnk9 expression from the repressed paternal allele (1- pically affected twin had IC2 LoM and MLID on both 17% of transcripts) was observed in all analyzed brain blood and buccal smear samples, whereas the unaffected regions and was particularly strong in the locus coeruleus one showed IC2 LoM, without MLID, only on blood (LC). Slice patch-clamp recordings revealed wildtype-like sample. Shared placental circulation and twin-to-twin pacemaker activity during the dark phase in LC neurons transfusion have been hypotesized to explain the presence from Kcnk9KOmat but not from Kcnk9KOhom mice, which ofepimutationsinbloodofthephenotypicallynormaltwin. dischargedatsigniﬁcantlyhigherfrequencies.Theneuronal A two years clinical follow-up conﬁrmed the complete data are in line with the locomotor phenotype and absence of BWS signs in the unaffected twin, despite the demonstrate the functional relevance of paternal Kcnk9 maintenance of IC2 LoM in blood. We are currently expression. investigating the methylation proﬁle of placenta (collected Through epigenetic manipulation with CI994, a speciﬁc atdelivery)inordertodeepentheinsightintotheepigenetic histone deacetylase inhibitor, we could induce a signiﬁcant constitution of the fetal/placental compartment. up-regulation of the paternal Kcnk9 allele in several M.F. Bedeschi: None. G.A. Cagnoli: None. R. Villa: analyzedbrainregionsafterinjectionsinKcnk9KOmatmice. None. V.G.C. Fergnani: None. F. Lalatta: None. S. Together with this we observed a signiﬁcant behavioral Gangi: None. F. Mosca: None. N. Persico: None. M. improvement of Kcnk9KOmat mice after CI994 treatment. Porro: None. L. Fontana: None. S. Tabano: None. M. This novel approach shall open new avenues for treatment Miozzo: None. ofcognitivedysfunctionsinBirk-Barelsyndromeandother imprinting disorders. P17.06B A.Cooper:None.S.Jagannath:None.T.Butto:None. Inhibition of histone deacetylation up-regulates the M.Linke:None.F.Lesage:None.K.Radyushkin:None. repressed paternal allele of the imprinted Kcnk9 gene and J.Roeper:None.S.Schweiger:None.U.Zechner:None. improves the behavioral phenotype of a mouse model of Birk-Barel syndrome P17.07C Urine microRNA proﬁling by next generation sequencing A.Cooper1,S.Jagannath2,T.Butto1,M.Linke1,F.Lesage3,K. and multiple mutations in urinary exfoliated cells in Radyushkin4,J.Roeper2, S.Schweiger1,U.Zechner1 bladder cancer 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, B. Pardini1,2, F.Cordero3, A.Naccarati1, R.Critelli1,C. JohannesGutenbergUniversity,Mainz,Germany,2Instituteof Viberti1,2, M.Oderda4,M. Allasia4,A. Allione1,2, C.Sacerdote5, Neurophysiology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany, P. Gontero4,P. Vineis6,G.Matullo1,2 32LabEx ICST, Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS and Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 1Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine (IIGM), Turin, Italy, Valbonne, France, 4Focus Program Translational 2Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Neuroscience, University Medical Center of the Johannes Italy, 3Department of Computer Science, University of Turin, Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany Turin, Italy, 4Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 5Center for Cancer Prevention (CPO- Kcnk9/KCNK9 is a maternally expressed imprinted gene, Piemonte), Turin, Italy, 6School of Public Health, Imperial whose mutations are causative for the maternally inherited College London, London, United Kingdom Birk-Barel mental retardation syndrome. It encodes a K2P- channel that controls resting membrane potential and Bladder cancer (BC) is one of the most aggressive malig- excitability of neurons. nancies of the urinary tract. Because of the high rate of ByanalyzingWT,Kcnk9KOmatandKcnk9KOhommicein recurrences requiring continuous surveillance, BC is the a behavioral test battery during the light phase, our data most expensive cancer for the health system.The604 J.delPicchia identiﬁcation of new biomarkers for early BC detection, Materials and Methods: We analyzed methylation status recurrence/progression is urgently needed to both improve of 12 laminin-encoding genes (LAMA1, LAMA2, LAMA3A, patient outcomes and decrease health care costs. Micro- LAMA3B, LAMA4, LAMA5, LAMB1, LAMB2, LAMB3, RNAs (miRNAs) are aberrantly expressed in BC, and may LAMC1, LAMC2, LAMC3), 8 integrins (ITGA1, ITGA2, be isolated from various biological specimens, including ITGA3, ITGA4, ITGA6, ITGA7, ITGA9, ITGB1), 2 nidogens urine. We performed a miRNA proﬁling in urine samples (NID1,NID2), 2 cadherins (CDH2,CDH3), the dystroglycan from 66BC malepatients (10muscle invasiveBC (MIBC) geneDAG1and11matrixmetalloproteinases-encodinggenes and 56 non-muscle invasive BC (NMIBC)) and 48 healthy (MMP2, MMP11, MMP14, MMP15, MMP16, MMP17, controlsusingaNextGenerationSequencingapproachthat MMP21,MMP23B,MMP24,MMP25,MMP28)and4tissue couldaccuratelydistinguishBCpatientsandpredictdisease inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases genes (TIMP1, outcome. Speciﬁc urinary miRNA signatures could distin- TIMP2, TIMP3, TIMP4) in 206 breast cancer samples, 206 guish the different types of BC patients from healthy con- paired adjacent nonmalignant samples, 6 samples of normal trols in one of the best and closest surrogate tissue for BC. mammaryglandfromautopsyand6samplesofbreastcancer Twenty-threemiRNAs(21targetand2referencemiRNAs) cell lines by MSRE PCR and bisulﬁte sequencing. werevalidatedbyqPCRon177urinesamplesfrom113BC Results: Promoters of 17 genes (LAMA1, LAMA2, case and 64 controls . MiRNA signatures were also eval- LAMB1, LAMC1 NID1, NID2, ITGA1, ITGA4, ITGA7, uated in concomitance with the presence of a panel of ITGA9,CDH2,CDH3,MMP2,MMP23B,MMP24,MMP25, mutations in DNA from exfoliated urinary cells from the MMP28) have shown abnormal methylation in 3,4% to same samples. Forty-one mutations in TERT, FGFR3, 41,5% samples of breast cancer and adjacent tissues. PIK3CA, and RAS were analyzed in relation to clinical Further statistical analysis with additional data have outcome. We will present the results on the possibility to demonstrated,thatmethylationof15gensLAMA1,LAMA2, use urinary miRNAs and exfoliated urinary cell mutational LAMB1, NID1, NID2, ITGA1, ITGA4, ITGA7, ITGA9, status as diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers CDH2,CDH3, MMP2, MMP24, MMP25, MMP28 was for BC. strongly associated with highly methylated breast cancer Acknowledgements: Fondazione Umberto Veronesi type. Based on this information we designed a system of (FUV) “Post-doctoral fellowship Years 2014-2017”, FUV markers which discriminate hyper- and hypomethylated Grant 2013, AIRC-IG 17464. subtypes of breast cancer with sensitivity and speciﬁcity of B. Pardini: None. F. Cordero: None. A. Naccarati: 0,79 and 0,78, respectively; AUC=0,83. None. R. Critelli: None. C. Viberti: None. M. Oderda: None. M. Allasia: None. A. Allione: None. C. Sacerdote: Methylationin Methylation Presence(+)/absence(-)of Associationwith None. P. Gontero: None. P. Vineis: None. G. breastcancer innormal methylationinbreastcancer clinicopathological and/oradjacent mammary celllines features Matullo: None. nonmalignant glandfrom samples(%) autopsy(%) ZR MCF7 T47D BT HBL HS P17.08D LAMA1 29,4 0 + + + + + - - Breastcancerepigenetics:abnormalpromotermethylation LAMA2 27 0 + + + + + - HER2=3+ LuminalBtype of matrix and transmembrane proteins encoding genes LAMB1 26 0 + + + + - - HER2=3+ LuminalBtype ITGA1 15,2 0 - - - - - - - O.A. Simonova1,E.B. Kuznetsova1,2,V.V. Rudenco1,E.V. ITGA4 30 0 + + + + - - HER2=3+ Poddubskaya3,R. A.Kerimov3,A. S.Tanas1,4,V.V. ITGA7 3,4 0 - - - + - - - Strelnikov1,4,D.V. Zaletaev1,2 ITGA9 41,3 0 + + + + + - Unmethylated statusassociated withtriple-negative type,lackofER 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian NID1 38,7 0 + + + - - + Unmethylated Federation,2SechenovFirstMoscowStateMedicalUniversity, swtaitthustraipssleo-ciated Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Blokhin Russian Research negativetype NID2 41,2 0 - + + + - - - Center for Oncology (FSBI N.N.Blokhin), Moscow, Russian CDH2 8,8 0 - - - - - - - Federation, 4Pirogov Russian National Research Medical CDH3 41,5 0 + + + + + - LackofER University, Moscow, Russian Federation MMP2 7,7 0 + + + - - - - MMP23B 17 0 + + + - + + LackofER,PR HER2=3+ HER2-positivetype Extracellular matrix molecules and transmembrane recep- MMP24 12 0 - - - + + - - tors organize tissue structure and provide its adequate MMP25 15,4 0 - + + - + - - function. During cancer progression both these features MMP28 4,9 0 + + + + + - - suffer disruption.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 605 O.A. Simonova: None. E.B. Kuznetsova: None. V.V. None.S.Konovalov:None.R.Brugada:None.I.Garcia- Rudenco: None. E.V. Poddubskaya: None. R.A. Keri- Bassets: None. S. Pagans: None. mov:None.A.S.Tanas:None.V.V.Strelnikov:None.D. V. Zaletaev: None. P17.10B Eye-speciﬁc transcription factor PAX6 and CRX regulate P17.09A the expression of a de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis gene Genetic variation on transcription factor binding sites Cad nearby human genes associated with Brugada syndrome H.Liang-shuan1,L.Cheng-der1,C.Jia-ying2,C.Chi-shuan1,H. M.Pinsach-Abuin1,2,3,B.delOlmo1,2,J.Mates1,2,A.Pérez1,2,D. Shun-ping1,C. Yung-hao1 Merkurjev3,C. Allegue1,2,S. Konovalov3,R. Brugada1,2,I. Garcia-Bassets3, S.Pagans1,2 1Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan, 2National Tsinghua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 1Department of Medical Sciences. University of Girona, Girona, Spain, 2Biomedical Research Institute of Girona Introduction:CADisatri-functionalenzymecomprisethe (IDIBGI), Salt, Spain, 3Department of Medicine, University of ﬁrst three steps of total six steps of de novo pyrimidine California, San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA, United States biosynthesis with unknown role during mammalian devel- opment.Zebraﬁsh Cad mutants exhibitedreduced eye size, Genetic variation within transcription factor binding sites growth,tectum,jaw,andpectoralﬁnsabnormalitiesandthe (TFBS) generates diversity in gene expression regulation, gene is highly expressed the in the retina. Through a three- and may lead to increased or decreased risk for human generation ENU program, two mouse Cad mutant families disease. Here, we aim to characterize genetic variation at were generated: the L5Jcs24 (missense mutation) and the genomic locations candidate to host TFBS nearby genes L5Jcs27 (nonsense mutation). Homozygotes were embryo- associated with Brugada Syndrome (BrS). BrS is an nic lethal, and heterozygotes exhibiting small eyes with arrhythmogenicdiseasethathasbeenextensivelyassociated degenerated retina. Due to the phenotypic similarities with genetic variations in genes encoding cardiac ion between well-studied eye-speciﬁc transcription factors, channels(25-30%),butthecontributionofgeneticvariation Pax6 and Crx, we speculated that these genes might func- at nearby TFBS remains unknown. We integrated tioninthesamepathwayincontrollingoculardevelopment. ENCODE data of topological organization, chromatin In silico transcription factor binding site analysis predicted accessibility,histonemarks,andtranscriptionfactorbinding multiple potential binding sites for both PAX6 and CRX. in human cardiac cells and annotated 1,300 genomic loci Materials and Methods: Luciferase assay were used to thatpotentiallyhostTFBSnearbyBrS-associatedgenes.To evaluate whether Cad promoter is under transcriptional characterize genetic variation in these regions, we selec- control of PAX6 or CRX. We also use shRNA knockdown tively captured and sequenced in depth (x100) this set of combined with Western blotting and qRT-PCR, to further 1,300 loci in a cohort of 89 BrS cases (BrS cohort), and evaluate our hypothesized that PAX6 and CRX might be compared them with genetic variations in the Wellderly involved in the regulation of Cad gene expression. cohort (healthy-aging individuals). In the BrS cohort, we Results: The luciferase activities of Cad promoter were identiﬁed 5,382 single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) and 737 up-regulated by PAX6 and CRX for six-fold when insertions and deletions (Indels). We observe 4,231 SNVs transfected alone, and the promoter activities were up- in common between both cohorts, while the remaining regulated for 14 times when PAX6 and CRX were co- 1,888 SNVs are BrS patient-speciﬁc. Our current analyses transfected to the Cad promoter. arefocusedontheintegrationofthesedatatodeterminethe Conclusions: We have conﬁrmed that PAX6 and CRX potentialsimultaneouscontributionofmultipleTFBStothe bind to the promoter of Cad region and up-regulated gene disease.To investigate thepotentialfunctional relevanceof expression in additive fashion. our ﬁndings, we also integrate data of experimentally vali- H. Liang-shuan: None. L. Cheng-der: None. C. Jia- datedCTCF-TFBS,andmachinelearning-basedpredictions ying:None.C.Chi-shuan:None.H.Shun-ping:None.C. of TFBS for cardiac transcription factors. Collectively, our Yung-hao: None. study represents the most exhaustive analysis up-to-date of genetic variation associated with BrS. P17.11C Funding: SAF2015-70823-R (MINECO/FEDER-UE) Developing CAR-T cells therapies : Is the European law M.Pinsach-Abuin:None.B.delOlmo:None.J.Mates: adequate ? None. A. Pérez: None. D. Merkurjev: None. C. Allegue: D.Pichereau1,C. Chabannon2,E. Rial-Sebbag1606 J.delPicchia 1INSERM UMR 1027, Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, pathogenesis of neuroblastomas, and heterozygous France, 2Centre d'Investigations Cliniques en Biothérapies, PHOX2B mutations cause Congenital Central Hypoventi- Aix-Marseille University, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, AP-HM, lation Syndrome (CCHS), a life-threatening neurocristo- INSERM CBT-1409, Marseille, France pathy characterised by failure of autonomic respiratory control.Apartialrecoveryofventilationhasbeenobserved InDecember2017,attheAmericanSocietyofHematology, in some CCHS patients using the potent contraceptive the successful use of CAR-T cells in several specialized progestin desogestrel. Moreover, previous ﬁndings have worldwide centres was presented. This therapy consists in shown that progesterone suppressed the growth of neuro- the development of T cells (type of immune cells) in blastoma in vitro and in vivo. laboratory, inserting into them, the gene of a special Materials and Methods: To investigate the effects of receptor called chimeric antigen receptor (CAR). This desogestrel on the expression of PHOX2B and its target manipulation will modify the immune cells, so that they genes, we generated a progesterone-responsive neuroblas- carry the same target of cancer cells, that will be attacked. toma cell line. This method requires rigorous organisation since it should Results: Our ﬁndings demonstrate that, through proges- implyserioussideeffects.Thus,itisrelevanttoanalysethe terone nuclear receptor PR-B, desogestrel down-regulates framework of this revolutionary method of treatment ﬁrst PHOX2B gene expression, by a post-transcriptional concerning their legal qualiﬁcation which deﬁnes the reg- mechanism, and its target genes, thus reinforcing the role ulatory pathway to seek for marketing authorization and that PHOX2B has in the pathogenesis of CCHS and in second the bioethical principles this innovation could therapyresponse.Theyalsofurthersupporttheviewthatthe challenge. According to the innovative characteristics of drugs and molecules that are effective in counteracting CAR-T cells, EU strictly regulates their use by considering neuroblastoma cell growth act through thedown-regulation them like gene therapy and the Committee for Advanced of PHOX2B gene expression, and open up the possibility Therapies has provided speciﬁc guidance for their devel- that this mechanism may contribute to the positive effects opment. So professionals, using CAR-T cells should observed in some CCHS patients. implement speciﬁc safety rules for the use of cells and for Conclusions: These ﬁndings have a strong proof of patientsfromsamplingtotheinfusionofthemodiﬁedcells. concept value, in the perspective of a pharmacological Moreover, professionals and medical establishments will intervention in CCHS, at least for ameliorating respiratory havetoadapttheirfacilitiesandtodevelopspeciﬁcmedical symptoms. expertise to implement the technique in practice. Finally, Fundings: Telethon Foundation [Grant No. GGP13055]; beyond these technical aspects, the transformation of cells Associazione Italiana per la Sindrome da Ipoventilazione into a drug questions the bioethical principles beyond the Centrale Congenita (A.I.S.I.C.C.). use of the elements of the human body such as property, S. Cardani: None. S. Di Lascio: None. D. Belperio: autonomyorjusticeThelatterisofmajorimportancedueto None. E. Di Biase: None. I. Ceccherini: None. R. the high cost of the treatments. Benfante: None. D. Fornasari: None. D. Pichereau: None. C. Chabannon: None. E. Rial- Sebbag: None. P17.13A Where SNPs, coexpression and TADs intersect: new P17.12D insights in the regulation of coexpression in celiac disease Molecular bases of desogestrel effects in congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) I.Romero-Garmendia1,N.Fernandez-Jimenez1, K.Garcia- Etxebarria2,A. Jauregi-Miguel1,A.Olazagoitia-Garmendia1,I. S. Cardani1,S.DiLascio1, D.Belperio1, E.DiBiase1,I. Santin1,A. Castellanos-Rubio1, J.Bilbao1 Ceccherini2,R. Benfante1,3,D.Fornasari1,3 1UPV/EHU-Biocruces-CIBERDEM, Leioa, Spain, 1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational 2Biodonostia, Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain Medicine,UniversitàdegliStudidiMilano,Milan,Italy,2UOC Genetica Medica, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, Introduction: Alterations in expression and coexpression 3CNR- Neuroscience Institute, Milan, Italy patterns have been shown in celiac disease (CD), but the mechanisms behind those changes remain unclear. Topo- Introduction: The paired-like homeobox 2B gene logically Associating Domains (TADs) are functional (PHOX2B) encodes a key transcription factor that plays a domainsofgeneexpressioncoordinationandcouldexplain role in the development of the autonomic nervous system. those changes. Thus, the aim of this study is to identify In humans, its over-expression is associated with the SNPs that could be altering TAD structures and thusAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 607 deregulate (co)expression in CD, using data from coex- ofCagliari,Cagliari,Italy,8IndependentResearcher,Machine pression experiments, location of TADs and CD- Learning, Lucca, Italy, 9Unit of Hereditary Cancer, IRCCS associated SNPs. AOU San Martino-IST, Genova, Italy, 10Department of MaterialsandMethods:WeusedRNAseqdatafromthe Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Sassari, epithelial fractions of intestinal biopsies from 10 CD Sassari, Italy patients and 12 control individuals to build coexpression matrixes; next, we checked whether coexpressed genes Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) develops through overlappedwithconservedTADs,andsearchforassociated theaccumulationofbothgeneticandepigeneticalterations. SNPs that could alter those TADs. A candidate region was While the former are used as prognostic and predictive deleted from HCT15 and 293FT cell lines using CRISPR- biomarkers,thelatterarelesscharacterized.Theaimsofthe Cas9technology,andtheexpressionofneighbouringgenes study were to identify signature alterations in the CRC was assesed. methylome, to test whether they represent early events in Results: Thirty-eight putative TAD fusions and disrup- CRC development and to explore the use of non-invasive tions were identiﬁed when we compared celiac and control techniques to reveal altered methylation. groups and considered TAD and CD-associated SNP Materials and Methods: methylome analysis was coordinates. Deletion of an inter-TAD region spanning conducted by HumanMethylation450 BeadChips and raw chr20: 34026832 - 34027214 (Hg19), including a CTCF data were analysed using RnBeads. Pathways enrichment bindingsite anda DNase hypersensitivity site,locatednear was evaluated using ToppGene. In silico validation was the associated risk SNP rs224436 resulted in the coexpres- performed in publicly available datasets. Methylation of sion of adjacent genes PROCR and ROMO1 resembling three selected and validated markers was analysed in active CD. 24 stool DNAs and 45 plasma DNAs by digital PCR. Conclusions: This study shows that changes in TAD Results:weidentiﬁedin39samplesandvalidatedinover structure could functionally explain part of the genetic 500 samples a panel of 74 altered CpG islands. The panel associations in complex diseases through gene (co)expres- discriminates CRCs and adenomas from peritumoral and sion regulation. normal mucosa, with very high speciﬁcity (100%) and Funding: ISCIII PI13/01201 and PI16/0258, co-funded sensitivity (99.9%). To establish the usefulness of these by ERDF/ESF, a way to make Europe. ﬁndings as non-invasive markers for detection of CRC, we I. Romero-Garmendia: None. N. Fernandez-Jimenez: selected and tested three biomarkers in stool DNA and None. K. Garcia-Etxebarria: None. A. Jauregi-Miguel: plasma cell-free circulating DNA, conﬁrming the presence None.A.Olazagoitia-Garmendia:None.I.Santin:None. of altered methylation in affected patients. A. Castellanos-Rubio: None. J. Bilbao: None. Conclusions: our study identiﬁes a panel of genes with strongly altered methylation in both adenomas and CRCs, P17.14B candidating its use as biomarker for adenomas and early Discovery and validation of altered methylation loci as CRC detection through non-invasive techniques. early biomarkers of colorectal cancer Grants: Fondazione Banco di Sardegna (2012), Regione Autonoma Sardegna (CRP-79303), AIRC IG n. 17707, A.Fadda1,D.Gentilini2,3,L.Moi1,L.Barault4,5,V.P.Leoni6,P. AIRC 2010 Special Program Molecular Clinical Oncology Sulas6,L. Zorcolo7,A. Restivo7, F.Cabras7,F. Fortunato7,C. 5 per mille, project no. 9970. Zavattari8,L. Varesco9,V. Gismondi9, M.De Miglio10,A.M. A. Fadda: None. D. Gentilini: None. L. Moi: None. L. Scanu10,F. Colombi4,P. Lombardi4,I.Sarotto5,E. Loi1, F. Barault: None. V.P. Leoni: None. P. Sulas: None. L. Leone4,5,S.Giordano4,5,F.Di Nicolantonio4,5,A. Columbano6, Zorcolo: None. A. Restivo: None. F. Cabras: None. F. P. Zavattari1 Fortunato:None.C.Zavattari:None.L.Varesco:None. V. Gismondi: None. M. De Miglio: None. A.M. Scanu: 1Unit of Biology and Genetics, Department of Biomedical None.F.Colombi:None.P.Lombardi:None.I.Sarotto: Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 2Department None.E.Loi:None.F.Leone:None.S.Giordano:None. of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, F. Di Nicolantonio: None. A. Columbano: None. P. Italy, 3Bioinformatics and Statistical Genomics Unit, Istituto Zavattari: None. Auxologico Italiano IRCCS, Cusano Milanino, Milano, Italy, 4Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, P17.15C 5Candiolo Cancer Institute-FPO, IRCCS, Torino, Italy, 6Unit GHSR methylation as a biomarker of colorectal cancer of Oncology and Molecular Pathology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, F. Coppedè1,A. Stoccoro1,A. Lazzarotti1,R. Spisni2, L. 7DepartmentofSurgery,ColorectalSurgeryCenter,University Migliore1608 J.delPicchia 1Dept of Translational Research and New Technologies in Introduction: The Human Leucocyte Antigen (HLA) Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, explains around 40% of the heritability of celiac disease 2Department of Surgery, Medical, Molecular & Critical Area (CD).However,thepathogenesisofCDcouldbedrivenby Pathology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy other layers of genomic information independent from inherited sequence variation, such as DNA methylation, Introduction: Epigenetic events contribute signiﬁcantly to also in this region. colorectal cancer (CRC) pathogenesis. DNA methylation Methods: DNA methylation landscape is expected to be signatures have been proposed as potential biomarkers in different among cell types. Therefore, we analyzed the CRC diagnosis and in measuring response to therapy. methylome and the transcriptome of sorted epithelial and Recently, hypermethylation of the growth hormone secre- immune cells of duodenal biopsies in 10 CD-patients and tagogue receptor (GHSR) gene has been proposed as a 10 controls. Methylation differences were conﬁrmed by common epigenetic alteration of high diagnostic value in a nextgenerationsequencing(NGS)inbisulﬁte-treated,PCR- broad spectrum of cancers. Regarding CRC, only a single ampliﬁed fragments spanning TAP1 and HLA-B promoters study addressed this issue in a small sample of CRC in an independent cohort of 14 inactive-CD and 14 control specimens. individuals. Materials and Methods: In order to validate GHSR Results: TAP1 was hypomethylated in the CpG island hypermethylation as a CRC biomarker we compared 73 shores surrounding its promoter in both epithelial and DNA samples extracted from CRC tissues and 73 DNA immune cells,andsowasHLA-Bintheepithelia. Thiswas samples obtained from the healthy colonic mucosa of the conﬁrmed in complete biopsies from inactive-CD patients. same patients. Additionally, TAP1 and its overlapping gene PSMB9 were Results: Very interestingly we observed a statistically overexpressedintheepithelialandimmunefractions,while signiﬁcanthypermethylationofGHSRintumortissuesthan the upregulation of HLA-B and its overlapping pseudogene in healthy mucosa (51.3% vs. 20.5%, P<5 x 10-7). ROC was observed only in epithelia. Both TAP1-PSMB9 and analysis revealed a high degree of both sensitivity and HLA-B-pseudogene pairs were coexpressed. speciﬁcity for discriminating tumor tissue and correspond- Conclusions:Theconﬁrmationofthedifferentialmethy- ing healthy mucosa (AUC value of 0.819). No correlation lationininactive-CDsuggeststhatalterationswereacquired between GHSR hypermethylation in tumor DNA samples early in life. Expression results are coherent with the cell and tumor stage, size, location, or patient’s age and gender type-speciﬁcity of the methylation alterations.We propose was observed, indicating that this is an early epigenetic theidentiﬁedgenesasnovelCDcandidatesandparticularly event already observable at the adenoma stage. Moreover, TAP1,animportantHLAclass-Ipeptidewhoseexacervated nocorrelationbetweenGHSRmethylationandpolymorphic expression suggests an anomalous boost of adaptive variants of genes involved in DNA methylation reactions, immunity. includingDNAmethyltransferasesandfolate-relatedgenes, Funding: Basque Government-POSDOC Fellowship was observed. In the normal colonic mucosa tissue a (POS_2016_2_0026); ISCIII PI13/01201 and PI16/0258, signiﬁcant positive correlation between GHSR methylation co-funded by ERDF/ESF, a way to make Europe. and age (r=0.34; P=0.003) was observed. N. Fernandez-Jimenez: None. I. Romero-Garmendia: Conclusions: Present results conﬁrm GHSR methylation None. K. Garcia-Etxebarria: None. A. Jauregi-Miguel: as a strong and highly accurate epigenetic biomarker None. I. Irastorza: None. J.R. Bilbao: None. of CRC. F. Coppedè: None. A. Stoccoro: None. A. Lazzarotti: P17.18B None. R. Spisni: None. L. Migliore: None. Analysis of endothelin-1 (EDN-1) promoter region P17.17A C.LópezSolarat1,M.Lago-Docampo1,A.Baloira2,D.Valverde1 TAP1 and HLA-B genes in the HLA region are hypomethylated and overexpressed in celiac duodenal cell 1University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Servicio de Neumología, populations Complejo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Vigo, Spain N.Fernandez-Jimenez1,I.Romero-Garmendia1, K.Garcia- Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a peptide secreted by the endothe- Etxebarria1,A. Jauregi-Miguel1,I.Irastorza2,J. R.Bilbao1 lium of blood vessels that promotes vasoconstriction. A deregulation in the synthesis of endothelin-1, increasing its 1UPV/EHU, BioCruces, CIBERDEM, Leioa, Spain, 2Cruces secretion, is a triggering factor for Pulmonary Arterial University Hospital, Leioa, Spain Hypertension(PAH).Wecarriedoutthecharacterizationof the promoter region of endothelin-1gene (EDN-1), in orderAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 609 todeterminepossiblevariationsthatmaybeassociatedwith rapidly depleted from the nuclei in a TCR activation this disease and therefore target possible treatments. dependent manner. Furthermore, chromatin associated L1 The genetic analysis was carried out in 13 patients with RNAslocalizeongenomicregionsdifferentfromL1DNA, Idiopathic PAH (IPAH), analysing a fragment of 2 kb enriched in euchromatic marker (e.g. H3K4me3, promoter region. First, an in silico analysis was performed H3K36me3) avoiding heterochromatin (e.g. H3K9me3), to evaluate binding transcription factors and CpG islands. foreseeingapossiblencRNAsregulatoryfunction.Wehave Sequencing data was aligned to the reference Ensembl also collected preliminary observations on CD4+ T naïve EDN-1 sequence. Luciferase assay was done to evaluate cellsderivedfrom newbornandoldindividuals, indicating in vitro the SNP inﬂuence in gene expression. thatL1transcriptionalderegulationisahallmarkofimmune A deletion in the promoter region was found system aging. We are now dissecting with novel, custom (rs397751713).Thedistributionofthegenotypefrequencies Next Generation Sequencing technologies L1 relevance at in our IPAH patients were: A/A: 0.15; A/-: 0.31; -/-: 0.54. transcriptional and genomics level in order to dissect the This variation is located in a KLF4 binding sequence, a mechanisms by which L1 elements might contribute to transcription factor related to PAH development. A CpG human CD4+ T lymphocytes cell identity, plasticity and island was also detected that comprise the aforementioned specialization in healthy and disease conditions. variation. Future methylation pattern studies will be F. Marasca: None. S. Sinha: None. R. Bonnal: None. performed. C.Cordiglieri:None.P.Nastaly:None.E.Provasi:None. In conclusion, this SNP in the promoter region of END1 P. Maiuri: None. M. Pagani: None. S. Abrignani: None. could be related with gene expression levels. Even more, B. Bodega: None. the epigenetic regulation could be also related to the methylation state of this region. All these data have to be P17.21A taken carefully as these are preliminary data from 13 Using ChIP-Seq to Proﬁle FFPE Preserved Tumors for patients. Deciphering the regulation of EDN1 expression Epigenetic Alterations could shed light in the molecular basis of this disease. C. López Solarat: None. M. Lago-Docampo: None. A. S. CHLAMYDAS1,A. Blattler2,T. Yen2, P.Lebhart2,B. Egan2 Baloira: None. D. Valverde: None. 1ACTIVE MOTIF, LA HULPE, Belgium, 2ACTIVE MOTIF, P17.19C Carlsbad, CA, United States Epigenetic role of DNA transposable elements (TEs) in shaping CD4+ T cell identity and plasticity in health and FFPE preserved tumors are a valuable resource for retro- disease spective research on clinical samples. Clinical information, treatments and outcomes are often available for these F.Marasca1,S.Sinha1,R.Bonnal1,C.Cordiglieri1,P.Nastaly2, samplesprovidinganopportunitytolinkmolecularbiology E. Provasi1,P. Maiuri2,M.Pagani1, S.Abrignani1, B.Bodega1 researchdatatodisease,diagnosisandbiomarkerdiscovery. Unlikefreshtumorsamples,whichhavebeenusedinChIP- 1INGM, Milan, Italy, 2IFOM, Milan, Italy Seq-based epigenomic proﬁling experiments to discovery novelcancer subtypes, FFPEsamplesaremorechallenging CD4+ T lymphocytes coordinate adaptive immune due to extensive crosslinking which hampers chromatin responses differentiating into functionally different subsets extraction. However, recent advances at Active Motif have that exert an extraordinary degree of functional plasticity, enabled the routine generation of high quality ChIP-Seq novel epigenetic players are still being searched to explain data sets from limited amounts of FFPE preserved tumors. immune related phenotypes. Notably, among non coding FFPE ChIP-Seq data shows 1) extracted chromatin can be genome, Transposable Elements account roughly for the used with multiple different histone modiﬁcation speciﬁc 45% of the genome and although ignored for decades, are antibodies resulting in the expected genome-wide pattern nowadaysrobustlyemergingasnovelkeymoleculesacting foreachhistonemark2)FFPEChIP-Seqepigeneticproﬁles atdifferentlevelofcelltypespeciﬁcgenomeregulation.We arehighlyconcordantwithproﬁlesgeneratedfrommatched are dissecting TEs function in the epigenetic regulation of freshly frozen tumors 3) FFPE ChIP-Seq proﬁles reveal human primary CD4+ lymphocytes. We found that CD4+ tumor speciﬁc, differential histone occupancy patterns 4) T cells subsets show a speciﬁc and dynamic expression of More challenging transcription factor targets, such as LINE1 (L1) elements, being Naïve and Treg enriched in Estrogen Receptor, can be proﬁled efﬁciently using FFPE chromatinassociatedL1transcriptsinrespecttoTeffectors, ChIP-Seq. It is anticipated that the availability of a reliable that are less enriched (i.e. Th1, Th2). Interestingly, L1 ChIP-Seq method for proﬁling FFPE preserved patient RNAs show a peculiar and timely speciﬁc dynamics being sampleswillresultinadvancementsinourunderstandingof610 J.delPicchia disease, lead to the discovery of new biomarkers and P17.23C eventually impact therapeutic decisions. Development of a novel methylation based fetal fraction S. Chlamydas: None. A.Blattler:None.T. Yen: None. estimation assay using multiplex ddPCR P. Lebhart: None. B. Egan: None. G.Koumbaris, S.Kyriakou,A. Achilleos, C.Loizides, L. P17.22B Constantinou,E. Kypri, K.Tsangaras, P.MIna, M.Ioannides, chromatinlandscapeofD4Z4repeatinteractomeunveilsa P. C.Patsalis muscle atrophy signature in facioscapulohumeral dystrophy NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus A.Cortesi1,M.Pesant1,S.Sinha1,F.Gregoretti2,L.Antonelli2, Introduction: Accurate fetal fraction assessment is very G.Oliva2,G.Soldà3,4, B.Bodega1 importantinnon-invasiveprenataltesting (NIPT). Affected samples with low fetal fraction have an increased risk for 1IstitutoNazionalediGeneticaMolecolare,Milan,Italy,2CNR misdiagnosis. We present a multiplex droplet digital PCR Institute for High Performance Computing and Networking, (ddPCR) assay for fetal fraction estimation using methyla- Naples,Italy,3DepartmentofBiomedicalSciences,Humanitas tionsensitiverestrictionenzymes(MSREs)andarobustset University, Milan, Italy, 4Humanitas Clinical and Research of novel fetal-speciﬁc differentially methylated regions Center, Milan, Italy (DMRs). Methods: We discovered 38 fetal-speciﬁc DMRs which Despite increasing insights in genome structure organiza- canpotentiallybeusedforfetalfractionestimationinNIPT. tion, the role of DNA repetitive elements, accounting for Eight biomarkers (7 DMRs and 1 reference control) were more than two thirds of the human genome, remains elu- selected for further analysis. An assay comprising MSRE sive.Facioscapulohumeral Dystrophy (FSHD) is associated digestion followed by multiplexed (octaplex) ddPCR was with deletion of D4Z4 repeat array below 11 units at developed for fetal fraction estimation. A chromosome Y- 4q35.2. It is known that the deletion alters chromatin multiplex ddPCR assay (YMM) was also developed for structureincis,leadingtogeneupregulation.Hereweshow fetal fraction estimation inmalefetuses. YMMwasusedto a genome-wide role of 4q-D4Z4 array in modulating gene test the robustness of the methylation-based fetal fraction expression via 3D nuclear contacts. We have developed an estimation assay in 138 male pregnancy samples. A ﬁnal integrated strategy of 4q-D4Z4 speciﬁc 4C-seq and chro- validation was performed on 234 pregnancy samples. matin segmentation analysis, showing that D4Z4 3D inter- Results: YMM was used to train the methylation-based actome and chromatin states of interacting genes are fetal fraction estimation model. Statistical analysis resulted impaired in FSHD; in particular, genes which have lost the in the ﬁnal optimal methylation assay which employs 4 D4Z4interactionandwithamoreactivechromatinstateare DMRs (FFMM). High correlation between FFMM and enriched for muscle atrophy signature. Among these, we YMMfetalfractionmeasurementswasobservedin85male further characterized the muscle atrophy marker Atrogin 1 pregnancies (r=0.86 CI:0.80-0.91) and conﬁrmed using (8q24), showing by 4C-seq and 3C strengthened enhancer- additional 53 male pregnancies. A ﬁnal validation on 234 promoter chromatin loops at the locus and transcriptional pregnancies using FFMM and fetal fraction measurements upregulation during FSHD myogenic differentiation. obtained from the VERACITY NIPT test showed strong Expression level of these genes is restored by an ectopic correlation. wildtype4q-D4Z4array,suggestingthattherepeatdirectly Conclusions: We developed a robust methylation-based modulates the transcription of contacted targets. assayforaccuratefetalfractionestimationusinganovelset Our study provides insight into the epigenetic role of of fetal-speciﬁc DMRs. This simple method can be used as DNA repeats in ﬁne-tuning gene transcription by orches- an accurate fetal fraction estimation tool in NIPT. trating the crosstalk between chromatin folding and G. Koumbaris: A. Employment (full or part-time); structure, which deregulation maybe central in human Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. S. Kyriakou: A. Employment genetic diseases pathophysiology. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. A. Achil- This work has been supported by the following grants to leos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD B.B.: EPIGEN Italian ﬂagship program, Italian Ministry Genetics. C. Loizides: A. Employment (full or part-time); of Health, Association Française contre les Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. L. Constantinou: A. Employ- Myopathies (AFM). ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. E. A.Cortesi: None. M. Pesant: None. S. Sinha: None. F. Kypri: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gregoretti:None.L.Antonelli:None.G.Oliva:None.G. NIPD Genetics. K. Tsangaras: A. Employment (full or Soldà: None. B. Bodega: None. part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. P. MIna: A.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 611 Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. P17.26B M. Ioannides: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Transcription-dependent de novo DNA methylation at the niﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. P.C. Patsalis: A. Employment imprintedZrsr1-DMRoccursinthegrowingoocyte,butnot (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. in early embryonic cellsH. Soejima1, F. Matsuhisa1, S. Kitajima1, K. Nishioka1, K. Higashimoto1, H. Yatsuki1, T. P17.24D Kono2, H. Koseki3, K. Joh1; Allele speciﬁc chromatin signals, 3D interactions, and reﬁned motif predictions for immune and B cell related 1SagaUniversity,Saga,Japan,2TokyoUniversityofAgriculture, diseases Tokyo,Japan,3RIKEN Centerfor Integrative Medical Science, Yokohama,Japan M.Cavalli1,N.Baltzer1,H.M.Umer1,J.Grau2,I.Lemnian2,G. Pan1,O.Wallerman1,R. Spalinskas3, P.Sahlen3,I.Grosse4,J. Zrsr1isapaternallyexpressedimprintedgenelocatedinthe Komorowski1,C. Wadelius1 ﬁrstintronofCommd1,andtheZrsr1promoterresidesina differentially methylated region (DMR) that is maternally 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Martin Luther methylated in the oocyte. Commd1 is transcribed in the University HalleWittenberg, Halle, Germany, 3KTH Royal opposite direction to Zrsr1 and shows predominant Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Martin Luther expression of the maternal allele, especially in the adult University HalleWittenberg, Halle, Sweden brain.Amechanismfortheestablishmentofmethylationat Zrsr1-DMR in the oocyte has not been well established. Introduction: Several Genome Wide Association Studies Commd1 is expressed in the growing oocyte; therefore, (GWAS) have reported variants associated to immune Zrsr1-DMR transcription occurs when methylation is system diseases. However the identiﬁed variants are rarely established. Zrsr1-DMR methylation was abolished by the real drivers of the associations due to the heterogeneity inserting a poly(A) signal cassette into Commd1, which inandbetween thestudygroups andmostofthemolecular prevents transcription through the DMR. Methylation did mechanisms behind the genetic contributions to immune not occur at the artiﬁcially unmethylated maternal Zrsr1- diseases remain poorly understood. ChIP-seq data for TFs DMR duringembryonic developmentwhen transcriptionat and histone modiﬁcations provide snapshots of protein- theDMRwasrestoredbydeletingthetruncationcassettein DNA interactions allowing the identiﬁcation of hetero- thezygote.LossofmethylationatthematernalZrsr1-DMR zygous SNPs with signiﬁcant allele speciﬁc binding (AS- resultedinbiallelicZrsr1expressionandreducedtheextent SNPs). These variants, which can affect a TF binding site ofthepredominant maternal expression of Commd1. These resulting in altered gene regulation, are primary candidates results indicate that the establishment of methylation at to explain associations observed in GWAS and expression Zrsr1-DMRoccursinatranscription-dependentandoocyte- studies. speciﬁcmanner,andcausedZrsr1imprintingbyrepressing Results: We identiﬁed 17,293 unique AS-SNPs across 7 maternal expression. The predominant maternal expression lymphoblastoid cell lines of which 237 were associated to of Commd1 is likely caused by transcriptional interference immuneGWAStraitsand714togeneexpressioninBcells. by paternal Zrsr1 expression. To elucidate possible regulatory mechanisms we integrated Funding: Japan Society for the Promotion of Science long-range3Dinteractionsdata(HiCandHiCap)toidentify (JSPS); Japan Agency for Medical Research and Develop- putative target genes and motif predictions based on ment (AMED); National Center for Child Health and Parsimonious Markov Models (PMMs) to identify TFs Development (NCCHD); Ministry of Health, Labour and whose binding may be affected by AS-SNPs yielding a Welfare (MHLW); Gunma University. collection of 173 AS-SNPs associated to gene expression H. Soejima: None. F. Matsuhisa: None. S. Kitajima: and 60 to B cell related traits. None. K. Nishioka: None. K. Higashimoto: None. H. Conclusions: We present a systems strategy to ﬁnd Yatsuki: None. T. Kono: None. H. Koseki: None. K. functional gene regulatory variants, the TFs that bind Joh: None. differentially between alleles and novel strategies to detect the regulated genes. P17.27C M.Cavalli:None.N.Baltzer:None.H.M.Umer:None. A studyon globalDNA methylationinwhite bloodcells of J. Grau: None. I. Lemnian: None. G. Pan: None. O. patients with breast cancer Wallerman:None.R.Spalinskas:None.P.Sahlen:None. I. Grosse: None. J. Komorowski: None. C. K.Kankava,T.Kvaratskhelia,E.Kvaratskhelia,M.Zarandia,G. Wadelius: None. Burkadze,E. Abzianidze612 J.delPicchia Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia Introduction: Metabolic triggers are important modulators of inﬂammation in gout. Hyperuricemia predisposes to Methylation changes have long been studied to trigger monosodium urate (MSU) crystallization and also primes initiation and progression of tumors. The aim of our inﬂammatory responses in relation to TLR stimulation. research was to compare changes in global methylation Genetic studies have identiﬁed 28 loci associated to gout levels in blood cells from patients having invasive ductal mainlybasedonurateoutcomes,whereasinﬂammatoryand carcinoma of breast with different histological parameters epigeneticfactorsarepotentialadditionalfactorsinthegout and stage. phenotype. 20patientswithbiopsy-proveninvasiveductalcarcinoma Materials and Methods: Monocytes from healthy ofbreastandnopre-operativechemotherapywererandomly volunteers were pre-treated with urate for 24h and then selected for the study. Blood was collected preoperatively. subjected to increasing resting periods, followed by 24h Global DNA methylation was quantitatively measured stimulation with TLR2 or TLR4 ligands in the presence or using ELISA-based assay. Post-operative specimen was absence of MSU. Cytokine production was assessed by processed routinely for investigation of histological ELISA. ChIP sequencing was performed in treated cells. characteristics. Results:Weshowininvitroandinvivostudiesthathigh The results showed that methylation level in genomic levels of uric acid enhance inﬂammation and that broad DNA from white blood cells correlated neither with the spectrum methylation inhibitors reverse uric acid effects. grade nor the stage of tumor. There was no relationship of The higher IL6 and lower IL-1Ra production persisted for global DNA methylation level with the size or histological up to 3 days after treatment. Genome wide assessment of parameters (duct formation, nuclear pleomorphism, mitotic two main candidate histone posttranslational modiﬁcations activity)ofthetumor,norwithlymphnodestatus.Theonly (histone3lysine4trimethylation,H3K4me3,andhistone3 variablefounddoberelatedwithmethylationlevelwasthe lysine 27 acetylation, H3K27ac) did not show signiﬁcant age - patients older than 75 showed to have signiﬁcantly differencesintheepigeneticlandscapeforthesemarksafter higher global methylation level compared to patients in vitro urate treatment in human monocytes. under 50. Conclusion: Our data suggests the involvement of The results support our previous investigation data methylation regulatory pathways in response to uric acid showing tumor-speciﬁc methylation changes (like LINE-1 andexcludesH3K4me3andH3K27acasregulatorymarks. methylation) to be much better pronounced in tumor tissue Future perspectives for genetic studiesusing hyperuricemic and normal ductal epithelial cells from adjacent area rather controls are warranted for gout research, while the than in blood. Epigenetic changes in cancer tissue and exploration of urate induced epigenetic regulation is likely normalbreasttissueswillfurtherbestudiedinthisgroupto to help understand the variability in the gout phenotype. get a better understanding of whether or not global or site- T. Crisan: None.M. Cleophas: None.V.Kluck:None. speciﬁcmethylationplaysaroleindetermininghistopatho- R. Davar: None. E. Habibi: None. H. Stunnenberg: logical characteristics of cancer. None. M. Netea: None. L.A.B. Joosten: None. The research was funded by Shota Rustaveli National Science Foundation. P17.29A K. Kankava: None. T. Kvaratskhelia: None. E. Variation inmicrobiome composition impacts humangene Kvaratskhelia:None.M.Zarandia:None.G.Burkadze: expression by changing chromatin accessibility None. E. Abzianidze: None. A.L.Richards1,A.L.Muehlbauer2,A.Alazizi1,M.B.Burns2,T. P17.28D J.Gould2,C.Cascardo1, R.Pique-Regi1,R. Blekhman2, F. Persistent effects of urate on cytokine production with Luca1, F.Messina1 implications for epigenetic regulation in gout 1Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States, T.Crisan1,2,M.Cleophas2,V.Kluck2,R.Davar3,E.Habibi3,H. 2University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States Stunnenberg3,M. Netea2,L. A.B. Joosten1,2 Variation in gut microbiome is associated with human dis- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and ease,yettheunderlyingmolecularmechanismsarenotwell Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2Department of Internal understood.Alikelymechanismisthroughchangesingene Medicine and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences regulation in interfacing host epithelial cells. Here, we (RIMLS), Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Molecular treatedcolonicepithelialcellswithlivemicrobiotafromﬁve Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud University,, Nijmegen, healthyindividualsandquantiﬁedchangesintranscriptional Netherlands regulation and chromatin accessibility in host cells. WeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 613 identiﬁed over 5,000 host genes that change expression, usingELISAkit(Abcam)andglobalDNAmethylationwas including 588 distinct associations between speciﬁc taxa measured using the Methylated DNA Quantiﬁcation Kit and host genes. The taxa with the strongest inﬂuence on (Abcam). gene expression alter the response of genes associated with Results: Animals exhibited hyperalgesia during formalin complex traits. Further, using ATAC-seq, we show that test and had high HDAC levels. Treatment with either these changes in gene expression are likely the result of NSAIDs or 3-day pretreatment with HDAC inhibitors changes in host chromatin accessibility induced by expo- reduce nociceptive mechanical and thermal responses of sure to gut microbiota. We then created a manipulated the formalin test independently. NSAIDs used in combina- microbial community with titrated doses of Collinsella, tion with SAHA delay the establishment of hyperalgesia demonstrating that both natural and controlled microbiome and signiﬁcantly reduce its intensity, also decrease HDAC composition leads to distinct, and predictable, gene amount. HDAC and global DNA methylation levels were expressionproﬁles inthehost.Together,ourresultssuggest observed to be different in RVM, CeA and ACC under that speciﬁc microbes play an important role in regulating given conditions. expression of individual host genes involved in human Conclusions: Our data provide evidence that HDAC complex traits. Our work also supports the hypothesis that inhibitors cause analgesia and are potential targets for one of the mechanisms by which the microbiome regulates epigenetic treatment of pain. host gene expression is through changes in chromatin Study supported by Tbilisi State Medical University. accessibilityinhostcells.Finally,theabilitytoﬁnetunethe E. Abzianidze: None. E. Kvaratskhelia: None. T. expression of host genes by manipulating the microbiome Tkemaladze: None. M. Zarandia: None. N. Tsiklauri: suggests future therapeutic routes for human wellness. None. G. Gurtskaia: None. M. Nebieridze: None. M.G. A.L. Richards: None. A.L. Muehlbauer: None. A. Tsagareli: None. Alazizi: None. M.B. Burns: None. T.J. Gould: None. C. Cascardo: None. R. Pique-Regi: None. R. Blekhman: P17.31C None. F. Luca: None. F. Messina: None. The discovery of a new role of HDAC8 in skeletal muscle differentiation and in centronuclear myopathy insurgence P17.30B AreHDACpotentialtargetsfortheepigenetictreatmentof L. Ferrari1, C.Bragato2,3,L. Brioschi1,S. Esposito1,M. pain Mazzola1,A. Pezzotta1,F. Pizzetti4,A. Moreno-Fortuny5,6,P. Riva1,F.Frabetti4,P.Viani1,G.Cossu5,M.Mora2,A.Marozzi1, E. Abzianidze1,2,E.Kvaratskhelia1, T.Tkemaladze1,M. A. Pistocchi1 Zarandia1,N.Tsiklauri2,G.Gurtskaia2,M. Nebieridze2,M.G. Tsagareli2 1Dip. Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Fondazione 1Tbilisi State Medical University, Dept. of Molecular and IRCCS Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Milan, Italy, 3PhD Medical Genetics, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2Ivane Beritashvili Centre program in Neuroscience, University of Milano-Bicocca, of Experimental Biomedicine, Dept of Pain and Analgesia, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Tbilisi, Georgia Specialty Medicine, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, Introduction: Objective of the present study was to eval- FBMH, University of Manchester, Manchester, United uate the changes of a subset of histone deacetylases Kingdom, 6Developmental Genetics, Department of (HDAC) and global DNA methylation level in pain-matrix Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland structures of the brain as the rostroventromedial medulla (RVM), central nucleus of amygdale (CeA) and anterior Histone Deacetylase 8 (HDAC8) is a member of class I cingulatecortex(ACC)offormalintest.Itinvolvesstudyof HDACs with peculiar characteristics: it is subjected to epigenetic agents as potentially therapeutic drugs for man- posttranslational phosphorylation and presents differences agement of inﬂammatory pain. insubstratespeciﬁcity,suggestingauniqueroleforHDAC8 Methods:Allanimalstudiesconformedtotheguidelines acrosstheHDACsfamily.Forexample,HDAC8activityis of IASP regarding investigations. Adult rats receiving speciﬁcallyinhibitedbymoleculessuchasPCI-34051,with intraplantar formalin were tested for antinociception a 200-fold higher selectivity than other HDACs. Here, we following injection of NSAIDs or/and SAHA in thermal describe for the ﬁrst time a speciﬁc expression for HDAC8 andmechanicaltests.ThelevelsofglobalDNAmethylation during skeletal muscle differentiation. In C2C12 myoblasts and HDAC were measured in nuclear extracts of RVM, the expression of HDAC8 increases during differentiation CeA and ACC neurons. HDAC amount was measured and in RD/18 and RD/12 rhabdomyosarcoma cells,614 J.delPicchia respectively with low and high tumorigenic potential con- repeats. To discover alterations in linear splicing, we sistent with their differentiating capability, its expression analyzed genome-wide transcriptomic proﬁles for stria- correlates with the differentiation degree. Furthermore, we tum, cortex and liver at different developmental time demonstrate that PCI-34051-mediated-HDAC8-inhibition points, quantifying the total number of differential AS impairs myogenesis in C2C12 myoblasts and in zebraﬁsh events.Ouranalysisdemonstratedthat,speciﬁcallyforthe embryos. In zebraﬁsh, when HDAC8 activity is inhibited, striatum, the total number of differential AS events only type I ﬁbres are reduced. Moreover, preliminary data increased signiﬁcantly with increasing CAG expansion. showaltered expressionofHDAC8inmusclederivedfrom Interestingly, only EXON SKIPPING, a speciﬁc AS centronuclear myopathy (CNM) affected patients in com- subtype emerged to be strongly and speciﬁcally affected. parison with healthy donors. CNM is a condition char- Additionally, we identiﬁed the ﬁrst circRNA originating acterized by skeletal muscles weakness, hypotonia and fromtheHTTlocus,expressedinthebrainandpresenting atrophy mainly in type 1 ﬁbres. Mutations in MTM1, augmented expression levels with increasing HTT CAG DNM2, BIN1, RYR1 or TTN genes have been associated size. At genome-wide level, a decreased circRNAs pro- with CNM, although some patients do not carry mutations ductioncorrelatedwithmutantHTTexpression,revealing in these genes. Hence the need to identify additional genes 14 circRNAs in neuronal progenitor cells with CAG- associated with CNM. In this work, we demonstrate a new length-dependent decreased expression. In conclusion, role for HDAC8 activity in normal skeletal muscle differ- our results support the idea that AS machinery is entiation,inrhabdomyosarcoma and we suggestapotential responding to HD mutational process altering both linear involvement of HDAC8 in CNM insurgence. andback-splicingeventslocallyattheHTTlocus,butalso L.Ferrari:None.C.Bragato:None.L.Brioschi:None. at the genome-wide level. This knowledge will pave the S.Esposito:None.M.Mazzola:None.A.Pezzotta:None. way to new trials of therapeutic intervention aimed to F. Pizzetti: None. A. Moreno-Fortuny: None. P. Riva: possibly target spliceosomal-circRNAs alterations. None.F.Frabetti:None.P.Viani:None.G.Cossu:None. M. Biagioli: None. D. Ayyildiz: None. E. Dassi: None. M. Mora: None. A. Marozzi: None. A. Pistocchi: None. T.Tripathi:None.A.Monziani:None.E.Kerschbamer: None.F.DiLeva:None.J.Zasso:None.L.Conti:None. P17.32D V. Mattis: None. C. Dieterich: None. S. Piazza: None. Alterations in linear and back splicing as new players in Huntington’s Disease pathogenesis P17.33A Promoter methylation status of interleukin-8 in cystic M.Biagioli1,D.Ayyildiz2,E.Dassi3,T.Tripathi1,A.Monziani1, ﬁbrosis E.Kerschbamer1,F.DiLeva1,J.Zasso4,L.Conti4,V.Mattis5,C. Dieterich6,S. Piazza2 E. Kvaratskhelia1,M.Gagua1,E.Maisuradze1,M. Ghughunishvili2,E. Abzianidze3 1NeuroEpigenetics laboratory, Centre for Integrative Biology, Povo, Italy, 2Bioinformatic facility, Centre for Integrative 1Tbilisi State Medical University, Institute of Medical Biology, Povo, Italy, 3Computational biology laboratory, Biotechnology, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2Tbilisi State Medical Centre for Integrative Biology, Povo, Italy, 4Laboratory of University,ZhvaniaClinicofPediary,Tbilisi,Georgia,3Tbilisi StemCellBiology,CentreforIntegrativeBiology,Povo,Italy, State Medical University, Dept. of Molecular and Medical 5The Board of Governors Regenerative Medicine Institute, Genetics, Tbilisi, Georgia Cedars-SinaiMedicalCenter,LosAngeles,CA,UnitedStates, 6SectionofBioinformaticsandSystemsCardiology,University Introduction: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is an inherited disorder Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany characterised by a chronic infection and neutrophil- dominated airway inﬂammation. This inﬂammation is Recent ﬁndings revealed that alternative splicing (AS) characterised by an increased production of pro- might be compromised in Huntington’s Disease (HD), a inﬂammatory cytokines in the lung. Interleukin-8 (IL-8), a fatal neurodegenerative disorder, caused by ‘CAG’ tri- member of the CXC chemokine family that attracts neu- nucleotiderepeatexpansionintheHuntingtin(HTT)gene. trophils and other leukocytes, has been elevated in Cystic AS regulation is crucial to the establishment of protein Fibrosis (CF) disease. Epigenomic disregulation has been coding isoforms, but also to the biogenesis of circular reported to play a role for the development of chronic RNAs (circRNA), stable non-coding RNAs produced by inﬂammation in CF. In the present work we analyzed the circularization of exons. The goal of our research was expression of IL-8 by the CD4+ T-cells from CF patients to discover alterations in linear and back-splicing events and DNA methylation status in the promoter region of the ininvivoandinvitromodelsbearingnormalorexpanded IL-8 gene.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 615 Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA from activated 7q31.1 microdeletion of maternal origin were detected in a CD4+T-cellsof7CFpatientsand7controlswerepuriﬁed patient. The 7q31.1 microdeletion affected included only and subjected to bisulﬁte modiﬁcation using EpiTect Fast exons1-2oftheIMMP2Lgene.IMMP2Lgeneislocatedin BisulﬁteKit (Qiagen, USA). Methylation status oftheIL-8 the critical region for the autistic disorder locus on gene was determined by methylation-speciﬁc polymerase chromosome 7q (AUTS1). The bisulﬁte sequencing of 87 chain reaction (MSP) analysis. PCR products were electro- intragenic CpG-sites revealed the comparable level of phoresedon3%agarosegelandvisualized.LevelofIL-8in methylation in the proband, healthy sibling without supernatantsofactivatedCD4+T-cellswasmeasuredusing microdeletion and father. Whereas a reduced methylation ELISA method. level and increased IMMP2L expression were observed in Results: Our results indicate that individuals with CF healthy mother’s peripheral blood lymphocytes in compar- have a signiﬁcantly higher percentage of hypomethylation ison with a proband. of IL-8 gene promoter regions in CD4+ T-cells compared Conclusion: Obtained results provide evidence for a to healthy controls and expression level of IL-8 was higher possible compensation of IMMP2L haploinsufﬁency in a than in individuals without CF. healthymotherwith7q31.1microdeletionduetoepigenetic Conclusions: Our results suggest that methylation status mechanisms. This study was supported by Russian Science of the IL-8 promoter region might be a useful predictor of Foundation, grant 16-15-10229. the complication of Cystic Fibrosis. The study was N.A. Skryabin: None. S.A. Vasilyev: None. E.N. supported by a grant from the Ministry of Science and Tolmacheva: None. R.R. Savchenko: None. D.I. Zhiga- Education of Georgia (N59; 2015-30-01). lina: None. A.A. Kashevarova: None. A.A. Zarubin: E. Kvaratskhelia: None. M. Gagua: None. E. Maisur- None. E.O. Belyaeva: None. L.P. Nazarenko: None. I.N. adze: None. M. Ghughunishvili: None. E. Lebedev: None. Abzianidze: None. P17.35C P17.34B Epigenetic modiﬁcations associated with intrauterine Role of intragenic DNA methylation in incomplete growth restriction penetrance of IMMP2Lgene microdeletion C. Caniçais1,J.Marques1,2,C. Ramalho3,4,S.Dória1,5 N.A. Skryabin, S.A. Vasilyev, E.N.Tolmacheva, R.R. Savchenko, D.I.Zhigalina, A. A.Kashevarova, A. A.Zarubin, 1GeneticsUnit,DepartmentofPathology,FacultyofMedicine, E. O.Belyaeva,L. P.Nazarenko, I.N.Lebedev University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2i3S – Instituto de InvestigaçãoeInovaçãoemSaúde,UniversityofPorto,Porto, Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 3Department of Obstetrics and Research Medical Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Gynecology, Centro Hospitalar São João and Faculty of Tomsk, Russian Federation Medicine,Porto,Portugal.,Porto,Portugal,4i3S–Institutode InvestigaçãoeInovaçãoemSaúde,UniversityofPorto,Porto, Introduction:MostofCNVsinthehumangenomeexhibit Portugal, Porto, Poland, 5i3S – Instituto de Investigação e incomplete penetrance with unknown underlined mechan- Inovação em Saúde, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal isms. One of such mechanisms may be epigenetic mod- iﬁcations of DNA, in particular, DNA methylation. Here, Intrauterine growth restriction is a condition in which the wereportaboutdifferentialmethylationofintragenicCpGs fetus is not able to reach its normal growth potential. The of IMMP2L gene in a proband with maternal 7q31.1 abnormalimprintedgeneexpressionisassociatedwithfetal microdeletion and de novo 15q11-q13 microdeletion. growth restriction and may be controlled by DNA methy- Materials and Methods: The proband with Prader-Willi lation. DNA hydroxymethylation was recently described phenotype with signs of autism spectrum disorders was andassociatedwithfetalsizeatbirth.Theaimofthisstudy analyzed using aCGH. The presence of 7q31.1 and 15q11- was to ﬁnd biomarkers that allow the prediction of IUGR, q13 microdeletions in his parents and healthy sibling was studying the effects of imprinted genes (PHLDA2, investigated by real-time PCR. DNA methylation level in CDKN1C, KCNQ1, H19, IGF2, PEG10 and MEST), the intragenic CpGs of IMMP2L gene was measured by effects of KvDMR1 methylation and the global bisulﬁte amplicon next generation sequencing. Genome- hydroxymethylation. wideexpressionproﬁlewasassessedbymicroarrayanalysis Quantitative Real-Time PCR, Combined Bisulﬁte and (Agilent Technologies). Restriction Analysis and 5-hmC DNA ELISA were Results: De novo 15q11-q13 microdeletion consistent performedintwenty-onetermplacentalsampleswithIUGR with Prader-Willi phenotype (OMIM: 176270) as well as and in nine normal placental samples. Bisulﬁte sequencing616 J.delPicchia was performed to conﬁrm KvDMR1 methylation level in Results: In SALS patients, a total of 775 deregulated ﬁve samples. mRNAs(45%downand55%up)and235lncRNAs(76% Gene expression analysis demonstrated a signiﬁcantly downand24%up)werefound.84oflncRNAsarereported increased expression of CDKN1C, PHLDA2 and PEG10 as antisense, 91 as lincRNAs, while remaining 60 RNAs genes in IUGR. The results for CDKN1C and PHLDA2 classiﬁed as processed transcripts or intronic sense RNAs. genes are consistent with literature and with parental Interesting, the analysis of SALS patients classiﬁed by fat conﬂict theory. However, the result for PEG10 gene and slow progression (Gomeni et al., 2013) showed a most suggests a compensatory response to IUGR. The COBRA important deregulation and the involvement of different and BS-sequencing results demonstrated the KvDMR1 pathways in faster-progressing patients. About mutated hypermethylationinIUGR.Theglobalhydroxymethylation patients, the most interesting data are about FUS patients analysisexhibitedthepresenceof5-hydroxymethylcytosine that showed the major number of deregulated genes. intheplacenta.However,theresultsshowednon-signiﬁcant Conclusions: This investigation has conﬁrmed the changes between the two groups samples. importance of extending our knowledge on molecular In this study, CDKN1C and PHLDA2 genes were alterations of transcriptome in ALS disease offering identiﬁed as potential IUGR biomarkers. In addition, the numerous starting points for new investigations about study conﬁrmsthepresenceof5-hydroxymethylcytosinein pathogenic mechanism involved in ALS disease.Grants: placentaandshowtheKvDMR1hypermethylationinIUGR ALS-ARiSLA, FRRB 2015-0023 samples. The imprinted genes expression increase may S.Gagliardi:None.S.Zucca:None.C.Pandini:None. result from hypermethylation of KvDMR1, leading D.Sproviero:None.O.Pansarasa:None.R.A.Calogero: to IUGR. None. C. Cereda: None. C. Caniçais: None. J. Marques: None. C. Ramalho: None. S. Dória: None. P17.38B Peripheral blood DNA methylation as potential biomarker P17.37A of malignant pleural mesothelioma in asbestos-exposed Analysis of coding and long non-coding RNA expression subjects proﬁles in Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells from Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis patients S. Guarrera1,2,C. Viberti1,2,G.Cugliari1,2,A. Allione1,2, E. Casalone1,2,M.Betti3,D.Ferrante4,5,A.Aspesi3,C.Casadio6,F. S. Gagliardi1,S. Zucca1,C.Pandini1,2,D.Sproviero1,O. Grosso7,R. Libener8,E. Piccolini9,D.Mirabelli10,11,12,I. Pansarasa1,R. A. Calogero3,C. Cereda1 Dianzani3,13,C.Magnani4,5,13,G.Matullo1,2,14,13 1IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Genomic and Post Genomic 1Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine (IIGM), Turin, Italy, Center, Pavia, Italy, 2University of Pavia, Department of 2Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Biology and Biotechnology “L. Spallanzani”, Pavia, Italy, Italy, 3Department of Health Sciences, University of Piemonte 3DepartmentofMolecularBiotechnologyandHealthSciences, Orientale, Novara, Italy, 4Medical Statistics and Cancer Bioinformatic and Genomic Unit, University of Turin, Torino, Epidemiology Unit, Department of Translational Medicine, Italy University of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy, 5Cancer Epidemiology Unit, CPO-Piemonte, Novara, Italy, 6Thoracic Background: Alteration in RNA metabolism, concerning Surgery Unit, AOU Maggiore Della Carità, Novara, Italy, both coding and long non coding RNAs (lncRNAs), may 7Division of Medical Oncology, SS. Antonio e Biagio General play an important role in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Hospital, Alessandria, Italy, 8Pathology Unit, SS. Antonio e (ALS) pathogenesis (Gagliardi et al., 2018). We have ana- Biagio General Hospital, Alessandria, Italy, 9Pneumology lyzed the regulation of mRNAs and lncRNAs in Sporadic Unit, Santo Spirito Hospital, Casale Monferrato (AL), Italy, (SALS) and mutated ALS patients and in matched controls 10CancerEpidemiologyUnit,DepartmentofMedicalSciences, in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and we UniversityofTurin,Turin,Italy,11CancerEpidemiologyUnit, have correlated the founded RNA regulation with ALS CPO Piemonte, Turin, Italy, 12nterdepartmental Center for onset and disease progression. Studies on Asbestos and Other Toxic Particulates "G. Materials and Methods: RNAs from PBMCs of SALS, Scansetti", University of Turin, Turin, Italy, SOD1, FUS, TARDBP mutated patients and matched 13Interdepartmental Center for Studies on Asbestos and Other controls have been used for RNA-seq experiments (TruSeq Toxic Particulates "G. Scansetti", University of Turin, Turin, Stranded RNA Library Prep, Illumina) that have been Italy, 14MedicalGeneticsUnit,AOUCittàdella Saluteedella analyzed by R package EBSeq. RNA-seq data has been Scienza, Turin, Italy validated by Real time PCR.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 617 Introduction: Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is M.Ustinova1, I.Silamiķelis1,I.Elbere1,I.Kalniņa1,L. an aggressive tumour strongly associated with asbestos Zaharenko1,R.Pečulis1,I.Konrāde2,V.Pīrāgs3,J. Kloviņ1 exposure.MPMprognosisispoor,highlightingtheneedfor non-invasive tests to monitor asbestos-exposed people 1LatvianBiomedicalResearchandStudyCentre,Riga,Latvia, aiming at an early MPM diagnosis. 2Riga East University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 3Pauls Stradiņ Methods: We investigated genome-wide DNA methyla- Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia tion (HumanMethylation450-BeadChip) in 163 MPM cases/137 cancer-free controls (82/68 Training-Set; replica- Introduction: Metformin is the ﬁrst-line antidiabetic agent tion 81/69 Test-Set), all of them with asbestos exposure used in pharmacotherapy of type 2 diabetes to improve assessment. glucose homeostasis. Nevertheless, additional therapeutic Results: We found case/controls differential methylation directionssuchascancerprevention,treatmentofpolycystic (>800CpGsites, <0.05)mainlyinimmunesystemrelated ovary syndrome and neurodegenerative diseases have been Pfdr genes,andacceleratedmethylationageofwhitebloodcellsin highlighted lately justifying the pleiotropic effect of the MPMcases(extrinsicepigeneticageacceleration,p=0.009). drug. Despite the identiﬁcation of AMPK as the major Considering the “top” differentially methylated signals, 7 mediator of its effects, exact mechanisms of metformin single-CpGs and 5 genomic regions replicated with similar action remain obscure. effectsizeintheTestSet(p <0.05).Thetophypomethylated MaterialsandMethods:Thelongitudinalstudyenrolled fdr single-CpG (cases vs controls effect size<-0.15, p <0.05 in 25 healthy volunteers of European descent, receiving oral fdr both Training and Test sets) was detected in FOXK1 850mgdoseofmetformintwice-dailyforsevendays.RNA (Forkhead-box K1) gene, an interactor of BAP1 which was was isolated from whole blood samples, collected at three found mutated in MPM tissue and as germline mutation in consecutive time points: before metformin administration, familial MPM. In the Test set, comparison of receiver 10 hours after the ﬁrst dose and at the end of metformin operatingcharacteristic(ROC)curvesanalysisoftwomodels, treatment. RNA-seq was performed on Ion Proton™ including/excluding methylation, showed a signiﬁcant System and Ion PI™ Chip. For bioinformatic analysis increase in case/control discrimination when considering Trimmomatic 0.36, STAR 2.5.3a, edgeR and DAVID 6.8. DNA methylation together with asbestos exposure tools were applied. (AUC=0.81 vs AUC=0.89, DeLong’s test p=0.0013). Results: In total 681 differentially expressed genes were Additionally, preliminary results from mediation analysis identiﬁed (FDR<0.05), among them genes related to suggest asbestos-related differential methylation. inﬂammatoryresponses,promotingenrichmentofintestinal Conclusions: We identiﬁed signatures of differential immune networkfor IgA production andcytokine-cytokine methylation in DNA from whole blood between asbestos receptor interaction pathways. Four additional functional exposed MPM cases and controls. Our results suggest the gene clusters were revealed after consideration of subject- potential use of DNA methylation proﬁles in blood to speciﬁc effects including ribosomal genes, snoRNAs and develop non-invasive tests for MPM detection in asbestos- genes relevant to insulin production (HNF1B, HNF1A, exposed subjects. HNF4A, GCK, INS, NEUROD1, PAX4, PDX1, ABCC8, Grants: AIRC 2015-IG17464(GM), IIGM(GM), KCNJ11) and cholesterol homeostasis (APOB, LDLR, Ricerca-Scientiﬁca-Applicata(DM), ISS2013-14(CM). PCSK9). S. Guarrera: None. C. Viberti: None. G. Cugliari: Conclusion: In healthy individuals universal metformin- None. A. Allione: None. E. Casalone: None. M. Betti: induced alterations of global gene expression proﬁles in None. D. Ferrante: None. A. Aspesi: None. C. Casadio: white blood cells are associated with immune responses, None. F. Grosso: None. R. Libener: None. E. Piccolini: while subject-speciﬁc effects, which tendency to be more None.D.Mirabelli:D.SpeakersBureau/Honoraria(speak- permanent are related to energy metabolism. Funded by ers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; DM ERDF Project Nr.1.1.1.1/16/A/091. servedasexpertwitnessforthepublicprosecutionofﬁcein M. Ustinova: None. I. Silamiķelis: None. I. Elbere: asbestos–related deaths court trials. I. Dianzani: None. C. None.I.Kalniņa:None.L.Zaharenko:None.R.Pečulis: Magnani:D.SpeakersBureau/Honoraria(speakersbureau, None. I. Konrāde: None. V. Pīrāgs: None. J. symposia, and expert witness); Modest; CM served as Kloviņ: None. expert witness for the public prosecution ofﬁce in asbestos–related deaths court trials. G. Matullo: None. P17.40D Correlation status of BRAF V600E mutation and miR-137 P17.39C and miR-181b expression in Iranian PTC patients Metformin-induced alterations of transcriptome proﬁle in healthy individuals618 J.delPicchia M.Zarkesh1,Z. Nozhat1,A. Zadeh-Vakili1,A. Fanaei2,M. P17.41A Akbarzadeh1, A.Daneshafrooz1,M. Hedayati1,F. Azizi3 Identifying eQTL inﬂuence on gene expression through microRNAs 1CellularandMolecularEndocrineResearchCenter,Research InstituteforEndocrineSciences,ShahidBeheshtiUniversityof R. Inno,S.Sõber, M.Laan Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Association Professor of General Surgery, Erfan Hospital, Institue of Biomedicine and Translational Meidicine, Tartu, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Endocrine Research Estonia Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Introduction: microRNAs drive coordinated expressional Republic of changes of their target genes and trigger functional shift in cells. Placental microRNAs are speciﬁcally involved in Introduction: Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) as well- trophoblast differentiation and function. Additionally, differentiated thyroid carcinoma is the most frequent miRNAs transferred by extracellular vesicles released from endocrine malignancy. Abnormal expression of micro- trophoblastic cells exhibit critical immunomodulatory role RNAs (miRs) is related to numerous carcinomas and at the maternal-fetal interphase. Single nucleotide variants malignancy.WeplannedtoassessthemiR-137and-181b (SNVs) associated with the expression level of genes are expressions and their association with BRAF V600E deﬁned as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). The mutation and clinicopathological features in Iranian aim of my PhD project is to identify placental eQTLs PTC cases. modulatingtheexpressionofmicroRNAsandtounderstand Materials and Methods: In total, 90 primary thyroid their downstream effect on the placental transcriptome. samples (60 PTC and 30 benign with multinodular goiter Materials and Methods: Placental miRSeq (unpubl. (MNG))andtwocelllinesincludinghumanPTC(B-CPAP) data) and genotyping (Kasak et al 2015) datasets were and human embryonic kidney (HEK293) were surveyed. subjectedtogeneticassociationtestingforeQTLdiscovery, Allclinicopathologicalinformationofpatientswasobtained implicatedinPLINKv1.07(Purcelletal2007).microRNA and a pathologist conﬁrmed specimens. T1799A mutation target genes were predicted using the BCmicrO database of exon 15 in the BRAF gene was identiﬁed. MiRs (Yue et al 2012). Association testing between identiﬁed expression was assessed by quantitative reverse transcrip- miRNAeQTLsandplacentalexpressionlevelsofpredicted tase real-time PCR. target genes were tested in PLINK. Correlations between Results: Of 60 PTC cases and 30 MNG subjects, 75 and the expression proﬁle of placental miRNAs (miRSeq 83.3%werefemale,respectively.MiR-137and-181bwere dataset) and transcripts (RNA-Seq dataset; Sõber et al upregulated in PTC compared to MNG (P=0.010 and 2015) were analyzed using DESeq2 platform (Love 0.007, respectively). Their levels were upregulated in B- et al 2014). CPAPcomparedtoHEK293cellline(P<0.001).Moreover, Results: In total, 11 placental microRNAs were detected these two miRs were upregulated in PTC patients with thatwereexpressionallymodulatedbySNVs.Researchwas BRAFV600Emutation(P=0.036and0.002,respectively), focused to six miRNAs (hsa-miR-130b, hsa-miR-490-3p, tumor size ≥2cm (P=0.002 and 0.010, respectively), hsa-miR-3927, hsa-miR-941, hsa-miR-301b, hsa-miR-152) extracapsular invasion (P=0.034 and 0.027, respectively), that have been implicated in the placental function and/or lymphovascular invasion (P=0.038 and 0.032, respec- pregnancy complications. For each prioritized miRNA tively). The miR-181b expression was elevated in patients severalnoveltargetgenesandinvolvedbiologicalpathways with multifocal tumors (P=0.045) and the miR-137 level were identiﬁed. was increased in PTC cases with lymph node metastasis Conclusions: miRNA eQTLs may represent additional (P=0.011). modulators of the placental transcriptome, placental func- Conclusions: Upregulation of miR-137 and -181b have tion and pregnancy course. been conﬁrmed in PTC tumors and cell line. These two Grant: IUT34-12 (Estonian Research Council) miRs associated with BRAF V600E mutation and malig- R. Inno: None. S. Sõber: None. M. Laan: None. nancy of PTC. 1 P17.42B M.Zarkesh:None.Z.Nozhat:None.A.Zadeh-Vakili: Toolforpathogenesisanalysisofnucleotidevariantsbased None. A. Fanaei: None. M. Akbarzadeh: None. A. on high-conﬁdence human miRNA-mRNA interactions Daneshafrooz:None.M.Hedayati:None.F.Azizi:None. O.M.Plotnikova1,M. Y.Skoblov2,1Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 619 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Bioinformatic and Genomic Unit, University of Turin, Torino, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Italy Moscow, Russian Federation Introduction: Exploring robust biomarkers is essential for miRNAs play a key role in the regulation of gene expres- early diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases. Blood con- sion, while a majority of miRNA-mRNA interactions tains microvesicles (MVs) and exosomes (EXOs), extra- remain unidentiﬁed. Different miRNA prediction pro- cellular vesicles of different sizes and biological functions, grammes havea lack of consensusabout predicted miRNA which transfer mRNA, miRNAs, or proteins among dif- bindingsites.Crosslinkingimmunoprecipitation(CLIP)-seq ferent cell types. Aim of our study was to investigate experimental techniques allow revealing transcriptome- mRNA/miRNA signature in plasma derived MVs and wide binding sites of RBPs. Today there are many data of EXOs of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) and Alz- CLIP-seq experiments with AGO2 protein which allow to heimer’s Disease (AD) patients. useitforhigh-throughputcharacteristicsofmiRNA-mRNA Materials and Methods: MVs and EXOs were isolated interactome of human. from plasma of 5 sALS, 5 AD patients and 5 healthy We collected results of 79 AGO2-CLIP-seq data (18 volunteers (CTR) by ultracentrifugation and whole RNA PAR-CLIP and 61 HITS-CLIP) from 11 studies in 9 cell was extracted. mRNA libraries were prepared by TruSeq types. We also took data from two modiﬁed CLIP-seq Stranded Total RNA kit (Illumina) (60 million reads). studies (CLASH, CLEAR-CLIP) that straightforwardly miRNA libraries were prepared by TruSeq Small RNA detect miRNA–mRNA pairs as chimeric reads. Library kit (Illumina) (5-8 millionreads). Data were Totally, we identiﬁed 156 thousand miRNA binding analyzed with ad hoc Bioconductor packages. regionsandformedasubsetof45thousandhigh-conﬁdence Results: RNA-seq analysis showed different proﬁles regions that were identiﬁed in at least two different between ALS, AD and CTR. In EXOs, we have detected 8 experiments. The analysis of high-conﬁdence miRNA deregulated genes (DE) in ALS patients and 72 in AD binding sites revealed tissue-speciﬁc interactions for two group. In MVs, we found 17 DE in ALS, 173 DE genes in predominatecells:HEK293andHuh7.5.Ontheotherhand, AD.InADpatients, 3DEmiRNA weredetectedinEXOs, we obtained a group of 13,6 thousand “house-keeping” while65miRNADEinMVs.InALSgroup5miRNAwere miRNA binding regions that were identiﬁed in DE in exosomes while 9 were altered in MVs. predominant cells. Conclusions: About ALS, the most interesting data For analyzing nucleotide variants from patients with an concern the exosome coding transcriptome where we inherited disease which could be caused by breaking in the identiﬁed 8 coding RNAs. Regarding AD, a distinct miRNA-mRNA interactions, we developed a tool based on miRNA signature (65 miRNA) was identiﬁed in micro- the high-conﬁdence regions. vesicles. Our results hypothesized a mRNA/miRNA We identiﬁed the subset of 45 thousand high-conﬁdent signature in plasma derived EVs that may be an speciﬁc human miRNA binding regions that were arranged in the biomarker for neurodegenerative diseases. tool. Hence, it will be a valuable resource that should C.Cereda:None.D.Sproviero:None.S.Zucca:None. provide additional insights into the identiﬁcation new M. Giannini: None. S. Gagliardi: None. M. Arigoni: molecular mechanisms of hereditary diseases caused by None. O. Pansarasa: None. R.A. Calogero: None. breaking in the miRNA-mRNA interactions. O.M. Plotnikova: None. M.Y. Skoblov: None. P17.44D Genomic methylation and mtDNA copy number variation P17.43C in atherosclerosis mRNA/microRNAin extracellular vesicles from ALS and AD patients: a speciﬁc signature for Neurodegenerative M.V. Golubenko1,2,A. V.Markov1,R. R.Salakhov1,2, A.A. Diseases Zarubin1,3,A.V.Frolov2,A.A.Sleptcov1,M.S.Nazarenko1,2,3, O.L. Barbarash2,V. P.Puzyrev1,3 C. Cereda1,D.Sproviero1,S. Zucca1,M. Giannini1,2,S. Gagliardi1,M.Arigoni3,O.Pansarasa1,R. A. Calogero3 1ResearchInstituteofMedicalGenetics,TomskNRMC,Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Institute for Complex Issues of 1Genomic and post-Genomic Center, IRCCS Mondino Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation, Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Brain and 3SiberianStateMedicalUniversity,Tomsk,RussianFederation Behavioral Science, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3DepartmentofMolecularBiotechnologyandHealthSciences, Introduction: Mitochondrial DNA is controlled bynuclear genes, and there is increasing evidence that epigenetic620 J.delPicchia mechanisms play signiﬁcant role in mtDNA function and Garofolo,Trieste,Italy,6UOCPediatriaASSTLariana,Como, maintenance. The aim of the study was to explore epige- Italy, 7Clinical Pedriatric Genetics Unit, Pediatric Clinics, netic links between nucleus and mitochondrion in MBBM Foundation, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, atherosclerosis. 8Medical Genetics Unit, Papa Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Materials and Methods: We studied mtDNA copy Bergamo, Italy, 9Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, number (by real time PCR), mtDNA D-loop methylation Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore (by bisulﬁte treatment, PCR and Illumina sequencing) and Policlinico,Milan,Italy,10MedicalGeneticsUnit,Fondazione LINE-1 methylation (by pyrosequencing) in blood and IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, carotid atherosclerotic plaques of patients subjected to Italy, 11Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, endarterectomy (N=50). Università degli Studi di Milano; Division of Pathology, Results: We registered very low level of mtDNA Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore methylation in the D-loop (0.5%-2%, depending on Policlinico, Milan, Italy position), both in CpG sites and for non-CpG cytosines. However,rateofAandGcallsinthereferenceCpositions, Introduction: Several patients with imprinting disorders and C calls in the reference T positions (indicating PCR/ (IDs) exhibit epigenetic alterations not only at the disease- sequencing error rate) was even less (about 0.3%). Blood speciﬁc loci but extended to other imprinted genes, the so samples and plaques did not differ by mtDNA methylation called multilocus methylation imprinting disturbance level. Median value of mtDNA copy number per cell was (MLID). Causative mutations in genes involved in methy- higher in plaques than in blood cells. There was negative lation establishment have been identiﬁed only in few cases correlation of mtDNA copy number with LINE-1 methyla- and in the majority of MLID cases the causative defect tion level in plaques (Spearman r=-0.54), but not in blood. remains unknown. Conclusions: The results indicate that there might be Materials and Methods: We developed a quantitative some epigenetic control of mtDNA replication in the methylation test by MassARRAY to detect alterations at atherosclerotic lesions. Taking into account that decreased 12 imprinted regions in 21 pre-and post-natal Beckwith- overall genomic methylation is considered as negative Wiedemann (BWS) and 7 post-natal Silver-Russell (SRS) factor,theincreasedmtDNAcopynumberinatherosclerotic patients. Targeted NGS analysis was performed to plaques and its negative correlation with LINE-1 methyla- identify possible causative mutations in a panel of 25 tion can be explained by compensatory ampliﬁcation in genes involved in methylation establishment and response to mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress maintenance. in the affected vessels. Results: About 50% of BWS and 29% of SRS patients ThestudywassupportedbyRFBR(No.16-04-01481-A). showed MLID, with loss of methylation conﬁned to M.V. Golubenko: None. A.V. Markov: None. R.R. maternally imprinted loci. NGS allowed the detection of Salakhov: None. A.A. Zarubin: None. A.V. Frolov: two novel mutations in NLRP2 and ZFP42 genes in two None.A.A.Sleptcov:None.M.S.Nazarenko:None.O.L. MLID patients. In our cohort, MLID appears higher Barbarash: None. V.P. Puzyrev: None. frequent in females, with a male-to-female ratio of 1:4. No signiﬁcant differences in clinical features between P17.45A single- and multilocus patients were observed. However, a Molecular diagnosis and genetic bases of multilocus numberofclinicalfeaturesappearedmorefrequentinBWS methylation defects in Beckwith-Wiedemann and Silver- MLID patients, i.e. macroglossia, outer ears anomalies and Russell syndromes facial nevus ﬂammeus. Conclusions:MLIDappearedafrequentﬁndinginBWS/ L.Fontana1,C.Faré2,A.Seresini3,F.Cortini3,S.M.Sirchia4, SRS patients. The hypomethylation conﬁned to maternally V. Pecile5,A. Selicorni6, S.Maitz7,A. Cereda8,D.Milani9, F. imprinted loci, suggests alterations in trans-acting factors Lalatta10,M.F. Bedeschi10,M.Miozzo11,S.Tabano1 involved in methylation establishment/maintenance in the oocyte,asconﬁrmedbymutationsfoundinMLIDpatients. 1Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, In silico analysis and bioinformatics modelling conﬁrm the Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Division of pathogenic effects of these mutations. Pathology,FondazioneIRCCSCa'GrandaOspedaleMaggiore L.Fontana:None.C.Faré:None.A.Seresini:None.F. Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Cortini: None. S.M. Sirchia: None. V. Pecile: None. A. Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Selicorni: None. S. Maitz: None. A. Cereda: None. D. Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Health Sciences, Milani:None.F.Lalatta:None.M.F.Bedeschi:None.M. Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 5Department of Miozzo: None. S. Tabano: None. Genetics,InstituteforMaternalandChildHealthIRCCSBurloAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 621 P17.46B 1AkdenizUniversityMedicalSchool,DepartmentofPediatrics, Do maternal effect mutations in NLRP5 cause ICR1 Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University Medical School, hypomethylation in Silver-Russell syndrome patients? Department of Pediatric Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University Medical School, Department of Medical Biology, M.Elbracht, I.Kurth, M. Begemann,T. Eggermann Antalya, Turkey, 4Akdeniz University Medical School, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Antalya, Turkey, Institute for Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany 5Akdeniz University Medical School, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Antalya, Turkey Imprinting disorders comprise a group of clinical entities sharingparent-speciﬁcchangesintheepigeneticsignature Objective: Osteogenesis Imperfecta(OI) is associated with of speciﬁc genomic loci. The imprinting disorder Silver- long bone deformities and fractures, accompanied by a Russell syndrome (SRS) is caused by loss of methylation genetic connective tissue disorder. According to their clin- (LOM) of the imprinting center region 1 (ICR1) on ical, inherited, and radiological characteristics 17different chromosome 11p15.5 in 30-60% of patients. In nearly types of OI has been reported. There are autosomal domi- 10% of these patients, aberrant methylation on additional nant(OD) and autosomal recessive(OR) transmission, chromosomeshavebeendetected,establishingaspectrum although inheritance patterns differ according to types. of multilocus imprinting disorders (MLIDs). By investi- MicroRNAs(miRNAs) play important roles in processes gating different tissues, MLID cases in the ICR1 LOM suchasossiﬁcation,osteoporosis,osteoblasticproliferation, cohort increases up to 38%. Maternally-provided factors differentiation.Inthisstudyweaimedtoidentifytheroleof in the ooplasm are postulated for the establishment and microRNAsintheclinical heterogenityofOI,contributeto maintenance of imprinting marks in the embryo, leading the understanding of their utility as biomarker,and also to to MLIDs by so-called maternal effect mutations. Several determine the expression differences of bone-associated of these maternal effect genes are members of the NLRP miRNAs(miR-26a,miR29a,miR-133a) between the patients gene family1. andhealthycontrolsinordertosearchfortheirpossibleuse This study questions whether maternal effect mutations as a new therapeutic target. are also cause of apparently isolated ICR1 LOM. We Method: 0-18 years age matched 26 OI patients that analysed peripheral blood lymphocytes from 21 mothers of followed by pediatric genetics, endocrinology and physical ICR1 LOM patients by a targeted next-generation sequen- rehabilitation clinic and 16 healty control group were cing approach (NLRP2-14, TRIM28, KHDC3L). Hetero- involved.MiRNeasySerum /PlasmaKit(Qiagen, 217184) zygosity for variants in NLRP5 were identiﬁed in two was used for the isolation of miRNA(mir-26a,mir-29a,mir- mothers: NM_153447.4:c.68T>A (p.(Val23Asp); 133a) from the plasma. The values determined by rs753824534) and NM_153447.4:c.3259G>A (p. quantitativePCR were normalized using REST programme. (Glu1087Lys), both listed as rare/pathogenic, compatible Results: There was a signiﬁcant difference between the with maternal-effect mutations. It has to be discussed miRNA levels ofthe patient and control groups and the whether our ﬁndings are in line with an association of miRNA levels of the patient group werehigher. Serum isolated ICR1 LOM and maternal effect mutations in calcium and vitamin D levels of patients with higher NLRP5 or whether MLID remained undetected in the mir133alevels were lower than those of the other groups. childrenofthesetwomothers.Thus,identiﬁcationoffurther Conclusion:OIhasnodeﬁnitivetreatment.Identiﬁcation factorscausingICR1LOMandstudiesofadditionaltissues ofsomebiomarkersmaybeimportantinthedetectionofthe with more sensitive approaches should help distinguishing disease at an early stage, monitoring the response to between both possibilities. treatment, and determining miRNAs that are likely to be a 1. new therapeutic targets. Monk, D. et al. Reproduction 154, R161-R170 (2017). L. Oz: None. B. Nur: None. A. Toylu: None. G. M. Elbracht: None. I. Kurth: None. M. Begemann: Celmeli: None. H. Nur: None. E. Mihci: None. None. T. Eggermann: None. P17.48D P17.47C Integrated DNA methylation analysis identiﬁes Evaluation of Serum miRNA (mir-26a, mir-29a, mir-133a) topographical and tumoral biomarkers in pilocytic ExpressionLevelsinPatientswithOsteogenesisImperfecta astrocytomas L. Oz1,B. Nur2,A. Toylu3,G.Celmeli4, H.Nur5,E. Mihci2 E. Loi1, M.Antonelli2,A. Fadda1,L. Moi1,3,C. Zavattari4,P. Sulas5,D.Gentilini6,7,C.Cameli8,E.Bacchelli8,M.Badiali3,A. Arcella9,I.Morra10,F. Giangaspero2,9,P. Zavattari1622 J.delPicchia 1Unit of Biology and Genetics, Department of Biomedical Badiali: None. A. Arcella: None. I. Morra: None. F. Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 2Department Giangaspero: None. P. Zavattari: None. of Radiological, Oncological and Anatomo-Pathological Sciences, University Sapienza of Rome, Rome, Italy, 3Bone P17.50B Marrow Transplantation Unit, Microcitemico Children's Epigenetic signature of preterm birth in adult twins Hospital, Cagliari, Italy, 4Independent Researcher, Machine Learning, Lucca, Italy, 5Unit of Oncology and Molecular Q.Tan1,S.Li2 Pathology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari,Cagliari,Italy,6DepartmentofBrainandBehavioral 1EpidemiologyandBiostatistics,DepartmentofPublicHealth, Sciences,UniversityofPavia,Pavia,Italy,7Bioinformaticsand Odense, Denmark, 2Unit of Human Genetics, Department of StatisticalGenomicsUnit,IstitutoAuxologicoItalianoIRCCS, Clinical Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, CusanoMilanino,Milan,Italy,8DepartmentofPharmacyand Denmark Biotechnology,University ofBologna,Bologna, Italy, 9IRCCS Neuromed,Pozzilli,Italy,10DepartmentofPathologyOIRM-S. Preterm birth is a leading cause of perinatal mortality and AnnaHospital,A.O.U.CityofHealthandScience,Turin,Italy long-term health consequences. Epigenetic mechanisms may have been at play in preterm birth survivors and these Introduction: Pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) is the most couldbepersistentanddetrimentaltohealthlaterinlife.We common pediatric brain tumor. Although genetic and epi- performedagenome-wideDNAmethylationproﬁlingadult genetic alterations characterizing PA from different locali- twins of premature birth to identify genomic regions under zations have been reported, the role of methylome differentialepigeneticregulationin144twinswithamedian alterations in PA development is still not clear. In order to age of 33 years (age range: 30-36). Association analysis investigate whether distinctive methylation patterns may detected three genomic regions annotated to the SDHAP3, deﬁne biological relevant subgroups of PAs, we character- TAGLN3, and GSTT1 genes on chromosomes 5, 3, and 22 izedtheDNAmethylationproﬁlesof20tumorsand4non- (FWER: 0.01, 0.02 and 0.04) respectively. These genes tumoral brain samples. display strong involvement in neurodevelopmental dis- Materials and Methods: genome-wide DNA methyla- orders,cancer susceptibility and premature delivery. The tion analysis was performed using Illumina Inﬁnium three identiﬁed signiﬁcant regions were successfully repli- HumanMethylation27KBeadChips.Geneexpressionlevels cated in an independent sample of twins of even older age of selected differentially methylated genes, evaluated by (median age 66, range: 56-80) with similar regulatory pat- qRT-PCR, were compared to commercially available terns and nominal p values <5.05e-04. Biological pathway human normal brain samples and to GTEx expression data analysis detected 5 signiﬁcantly enriched pathways all observed in different normal brain sites. explicitly involved in immune responses. The study pro- Results: we identiﬁed distinct methylation proﬁles videsnovelepigeneticevidencefortheassociationbetween characterizing PA from different locations (supratentorial important genes/pathways and premature delivery and vs infratentorial) and tumors with onset before and after 3 meanwhilerevealsthatpretermbirth,asanearlylifeevent, years of age. Gene expression analysis of TOX2 and IRX2, could be related to differential methylation regulation pat- hypermethylated insupratentorial PA, revealed a decreased terns observable in adults and even at high ages which expressioninsupratentorialcomparedtoinfratentorialPAs. could potentially mediate susceptibility to age-related dis- Theexpressionlevel ofIRX2inthetumorsamples resulted eases and adult health. in line with that observed in the normal brain sites. In Q. Tan: None. S. Li: None. contrast, TOX2 showed an opposite expression pattern in PA compared to that in normal brain sites. P17.51C Conclusions: our study revealed brain-region and age- The effect of TP63 expression on the methylation level of related speciﬁc methylation patterns in PA and identiﬁed CpG-siteslocatedinenhancersofthegenesassociatedwith IRX2 asatopographic biomarker andTOX2asapromising epithelial-mesenchymal transition in prostate cancer tumoral biomarker. Grants: Fondazione Neuroblastoma, Fondazione Banco R. I.Sultanov1,2,3,G.P. Arapidi3,1,K. Babalyan1,2, V. di Sardegna, Regione Autonoma della Sardegna (CRP- Gordeeva1,2,E.V. Generozov2,V. M.Govorun2,1 79303) and Fondo per la Ricerca Locale (ex 60%), Università di Cagliari. 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State E. Loi: None. M. Antonelli: None. A. Fadda: None. L. University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation, 2Federal Moi: None. C. Zavattari: None. P. Sulas: None. D. Research and Clinical Center of Physical Chemical Medicine Gentilini:None.C.Cameli:None.E.Bacchelli:None.M. of the Federal Medical and Biological Agency of the RussianAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 623 Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Shemyakin- Lecumberri22,M.Levine23,O.Mäkitie24,R.Martin25,G.Martos- Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Moreno26,M. Minagawa27,P. Murray28,A. Pereda29,R. Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian Pignolo30, L.Rejnmar31, R.Rodado13,A. Rothenbuhler6,V. Federation Saraff32,A. Shoemaker33,E.Shore34,C. Silve35,S.Turan36,P. Woods19,M.Zillikens37,G.PerezdeNanclares29,A.Linglart6,17 Introduction: Aggressive forms of prostate cancer (PCa) are often associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition 1Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore (EMT).Thus,thestudyofthemasterregulatorsofepithelial Policlinico, Endocrinology Unit, Department of Clinical fate (TP63) can help to understand the potential mechan- Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Milan, isms of formation non-indolent forms of PCa. Italy, 2Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, Materials and Methods: Whole-genome methylation, MassachusettsGeneralHospitalandHarvardMedicalSchool, RNA-sequencing, and copy number variation data of Boston, MA, United States, 3Imprinting and Cancer group, patientswithPCafromTheCancerGenomeAtlas(TCGA) Cancer Epigenetic and Biology Program (PEBC), Institut portal were used for this research. The regulatory networks d'Investigació Biomedica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Barcelona, were reconstructed from EWAS (epigenome-wide associa- Spain, 4Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Public tion study) based on mixed linear models. ChIP-seq data Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, were downloaded from GEO. Italy, 5Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Results: We obtained a cluster of genes and CpG-sites Department of Pediatrics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, downregulated in PCa samples. Further, we found the Germany, 6APHP, Reference Center for Rare Disorders of associationbetweentheclusterandtheEMTinprostatecell Calcium and Phosphate Metabolism, Platform of Expertise lines (data from Olsen etal. 2013). The master regulator of Paris-Sud for Rare Diseases and Filière OSCAR; APHP, this cluster was TP63 because promoters were signiﬁcantly endocrinology and diabetes for children, Bicêtre Paris-Sud enriched with TP63 binding sites (p-value=5e-26), and Hospital, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 7Developmental TP63-knockdown altered expression of cluster genes. The EndocrinologyResearchGroup,SchoolofMedicine,Dentistry expression of cluster genes was highly correlated (Spear- andNursingStudies,University ofGlasgow,Glasgow,United man<-0.8)withmethylationlevelof556CpG-siteslocated Kingdom, 8IPOHA, Italian Progressive Osseous Heteroplasia in the enhancers and super-enhancers (eCpG-sites, signiﬁ- Association, Cerignola, Foggia, Italy, 9K20, French PHP and cant enrichment with H3K27ac and H3K4me peaks). This related disorders patient association, Jouars Pontchartrain, eCpG-sites interacted with promoters of the genes asso- France, 10APHP, Department of medicine for adolescents, ciated with EMT. Bicêtre Paris Sud Hospital, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, Conclusions: We found the cluster of genes and CpG- 11InsituteofHumanGenetics,TechnicalUniversityofAachen, sites that associated with EMT and were regulated by Aachen, Germany, 12Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, expression of TP63. Expression of cluster genes highly Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Gasthuisberg, correlatedwitheCpG-sites.Wespeculatethatexpressionof University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 13AEPHP, Spanish TP63effectsmethylationlevelofeCpG-sitesbecauseTP63 PHP and related disorders patient association, Huércal- is a pioneer transcription factor. This work was supported Overa, Almeria, Spain, 14Albright Center & Center for Rare by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project No. Bone Disorders, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology & 17-29-06063). Diabetes, Connecticut Children's Medical Center and R.I. Sultanov: None. G.P. Arapidi: None. K. Babal- DepartmentofPediatrics,University ofConnecticutSchoolof yan: None. V. Gordeeva: None. E.V. Generozov: None. Medicine, Farmington, CT, United States, 15APHP, V.M. Govorun: None. Department of Endocrinology, Cochin Hospital; Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France, P17.52D 16Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology & First international consensus statement on diagnosis and Centre for Bone Quality, Leiden University Medical Center, management of pseudohypoparathyroidism and related Leiden, Netherlands, 17INSERM U1169, Bicêtre Paris Sud, disorders Université Paris Sud Paris Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 18APHP, Reference Center for Rare Disorders of G.Mantovani1,M.Bastepe2, D.Monk3,L. deSanctis4,S. Calcium and Phosphate Metabolism, Platform of Expertise Thiele5,A. Usardi6,F. Ahmed7,R. Bufo8,T. Choplin9,G. Paris-Sud for Rare Diseases and Filière OSCAR; APHP, DeFilippo10,G.Devernois9,T. Eggermann11,F. Elli1,K. Department of Endocrinology and Reproductive Diseases, Freson12,A.Garcia-Ramirez13,E.Germain-Lee14,L.Groussin15, Bicêtre Paris Sud Hospital; INSERM U1185, Le Kremlin- N.Hamdy16,P. Hanna17,O.Hiort5,H.Jüppner2, P. Bicêtre,France,19UKacrodysostosispatients’group,London, Kamenický18,N.Knigh19, M.Kottle20,E.Le Norcy21, B. United Kingdom, 20Department of Genetics, Caen University624 J.delPicchia Hospital, Caen, France, 21APHP, Department of Odontology, diagnosis, to the molecular conﬁrmation up to the man- BretonneauHospitalPNVS,Paris;FacultyofDentistry,Paris agement of the most frequent manifestations of these rare Descartes Universit, Montrougeu Hospital PNVS, Paris; diseases. Faculty of Dentistry, Paris Descartes University, Montrouge, Methods: A consensus statement was prepared for 2 France,22DepartmentofEndocrinologyandNutrition,LaPaz years to produce recommendations for clinical and University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 23Department of molecular diagnosis and management of patients with Pediatrics, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes and PHP and related disorders. The approach comprised 2 Center for Bone Health, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, pre-consensusmeetings,anexpertconsensusmeeting,anda University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Delphi-like methodology, adjusted to rare diseases. Philadelphia, PA, United States, 24University of Helsinki and Results: After literature search using PubMed, >800 Helsinki University Hospital, Children's Hospital., Helsinki, papers published since 1990 to 2016 have been reviewed Finland, 25Laboratório de Metabolismo e Endocrinologia do and recommendations on clinical and diagnosis and Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica do Instituto de managementonPHPandrelateddisordershavebeenvoted Ciências Biomédicas da Universidade de São Paulo (ICB- and approved with different levels of evidence: 14 USP), São Paulo, Brazil, 26Department of Endocrinology, recommendations on clinical diagnosis, 11 on molecular Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús. IIS La Princesa. diagnosis and 39 on management and treatment. Department of Pediatrics, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. Conclusion: Overall, a coordinated approach from CIBERobn, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 27Division of infancy through adulthood should help us to improve the Endocrinology, Chiba Children's Hospital, Chiba, Japan, care of patients affected by these disorders. 28Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Funding: This consensus meeting was supported by Children's Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation several patients’ associations and scientiﬁc societies, Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 29Molecular (Epi) including ESHG. Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National Health Institute, G. Mantovani: None. M. Bastepe: None. D. Monk: Hospital Universitario Araba-Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, None. L. de Sanctis: None. S. Thiele: None. A. Usardi: Araba, Spain, 30Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, None. F. Ahmed: None. R. Bufo: None. T. Choplin: Rochester,MN,UnitedStates,31DepartmentofEndocrinology None. G. DeFilippo: None. G. Devernois: None. T. and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Eggermann: None. F. Elli: None. K. Freson: None. A. Denmark, 32Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Garcia-Ramirez: None. E. Germain-Lee: None. L. Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Groussin: None. N. Hamdy: None. P. Hanna: None. O. Kingdom,33PediatricEndocrinologyandDiabetes,Vanderbilt Hiort:None.H.Jüppner:None.P.Kamenický:None.N. University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States, Knigh: None. M. Kottle: None. E. Le Norcy: None. B. 34Departments of Orthopaedic Surgery and Genetics, Center Lecumberri: None. M. Levine: None. O. Mäkitie: None. forResearchinFOPandRelatedDisorders,PerelmanSchool R. Martin: None. G. Martos-Moreno: None. M. Mina- of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, gawa: None. P. Murray: None. A. Pereda: None. R. United States, 35APHP, service de biochimie et génétique Pignolo: None. L. Rejnmar: None. R. Rodado: None. A. moléculaires, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 36Department of Rothenbuhler: None. V. Saraff: None. A. Shoemaker: Pediatrics,DivisionofEndocrinologyandDiabetes,Marmara None.E.Shore:None.C.Silve:None.S.Turan:None.P. University, Istanbul, Turkey, 37Department of Internal Woods: None. M. Zillikens: None. G. Perez de Nan- Medicine, Bone Center Erasmus MC - University Medical clares: None. A. Linglart: None. Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands P17.53A Introduction: Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) and rela- Functional validation of an epigenomic variant associated ted disorders lead to a wide spectrum of abnormal physical to retinitis pigmentosa characteristics, neurocognitive and endocrine abnormalities that share a common PTH/PTHrP signaling pathway. The A.V.Vig1,2,M.Liang1,2,A.Mollica1,2,E.Tavares2,M.Wilson1,2, clinical and molecular overlap of these disorders leads to V. Mennella1,2,A.Vincent2,1,E. Heon1,2 difﬁculties in clinical and molecular diagnosis which prompt to the possibility of incorrect management of these 1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2The Hospital patients. Over the past 30 years, incredible progress has for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada been made on the pathophysiology of these disorders by physiciansandresearchnetworks.However,caregiversand Introduction: Recently, an intronic variant in OFD1 patientsarelackingguidelinesforthedailylifemanagement (chrX:13768358 A>G), which decreases the amount of of patients. Our aim was to help them from the clinical properly spliced OFD1 transcript, was reported in anAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 625 individual with a subtype of non-syndromic retinal degen- Materials and Methods: The CD4+ T cells from 82 eration(RD)calledretinitispigmentosa23(RP23).Ourlab Korean patients with RA and 40 healthy controls were has identiﬁed an individual with a similar X-linked phe- examined by using the Illumina HT-12 expression and notypewhohasanovelintergenicvariantwithinaDNaseI Inﬁniummethylation450Kbeadchips,respectively.Aftera hypersensitive site (DHS) upstream of OFD1. We hypo- series of standard quality control and normalization thesize that this variant is affecting expression levels of procedures, differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and OFD1. differentially methylated positions (DMPs) were assessed Materials and Methods: OFD1 mRNA and protein usingalinearmodeladjustingfortheslidebatcheffect,age, expression levels of the proband relative to male controls sex and/or relative cell composition. weremeasuredinprimaryﬁbroblastcelllinesusingdroplet Results:Weidentiﬁed55DEGsand91,067DMPsatthe digitalPCR(ddPCR)andimmunoﬂuorescence.4C-seqwas 5% FDR threshold (e.g., P=1.61x10-5 for ASCL2 in the alsousedtocapturephysicalinteractions between theDHS DEG analysis; P=9.69x10-4 for cg11373604 in the DMP and OFD1 in an adult retinal pigment epithelial cell line analysis). In a joint analysis for DEGs and DMPs, higher (RPE1). expression levels in 15 DEGs were explained by lowered Results: Preliminary ddPCR results suggest that the DNA methylation at neighboring DMPs (P<0.05 for a proband expresses lower levels of OFD1 than controls. DEG-DMP correlation). For example, the expression level However, 4C-seq results suggest that the DHS does not of ASCL2 and the methylation level at cg11373604 interact with the OFD1 promoter in adult RPE. Therefore, represented a strong negative correlation (P=8.27x10-6; further functional validation is required to determine the r=-0.424). speciﬁcity of our variant to OFD1 expression and to Conclusions: This study revealed a number of RA- determine how and at which developmental stage our speciﬁcexpressionandDNAmethylationinanRA-relevant variant alters the activity of the DHS. immune cell type, CD4+ T cells, and identiﬁed plausible Conclusions: Although preliminary results suggest that RA-speciﬁc DMPs that lead expressional variances the proband expresses lower levels of OFD1, the mechan- in DEGs. ism by which disruption of the DHS causes disease is *This study was supported from the National Research inconclusive.Additionalfunctionalassayswillelucidatethe FoundationofKorea(2017R1E1A1A01076388)andKorea regulatory and functional consequences of our variant, and National Institute of Health. will provide insight about the ways epigenetics and J. Lim: None. S. Bang: None. H. Lee: None. B. Kim: regulatory genetic mechanisms can inﬂuence RD. None. S. Bae: None. K. Kim: None. Funding:VisionScienceResearchProgram,Restracomp A.V.Vig:None.M.Liang:None.A.Mollica:None.E. P17.55C Tavares:None.M.Wilson:None.V.Mennella:None.A. Genome-wide analysis of RNA editing levels in human Vincent: None. E. Heon: None. blood identiﬁed interactions with mRNA processing genes andsuggestedcorrelationswithbiologicalanddrug-related P17.54B variables DNA methylation and gene expression proﬁling of CD4+ T cells in rheumatoid arthritis E. Giacopuzzi, M.Gennarelli, C. Sacco,C. Magri,A.Barbon J.Lim1,S. Bang2,H.Lee2, B.Kim3,S.Bae2, K.Kim1 Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy 1Department of Biology,KyungHee University, Seoul,Korea, Republic of, 2Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang A-to-I RNA editing is a post-transcriptional modiﬁcation University Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, Korea, catalyzed by ADAR enzymes, that deaminate Adenosines Republic of, 3Center for Genome Science, Korea National (A) into Inosines (I). Most of known editing events are Institute of Health, Chungcheongbuk-do, Korea, Republic of locatedwithininvertedALUrepeats,buttheyalsooccurin coding sequences and may alter the function of encoded Introduction:Rheumatoidarthritis(RA)isanautoimmune proteins. RNA editing contributes to generate tran- disease causing chronic inﬂammation preferentially in scriptomic diversity and it is found altered in cancer, joints. Altered function in CD4+ T cells has been well autoimmune and neurological disorders. However, little is documentedforitsassociationwiththedevelopmentofRA. known about how editing process could be inﬂuenced by In this study, we investigated RA-speciﬁc gene expression genetic variations, biological and environmental variables. and DNA methylation in CD4+ T cells. We analyzed the dynamic of RNA editing in human blood using RNA-seq data from 459 healthy individuals and626 J.delPicchia obtained detectable editing levels for 2,079 sites. Analysis halfofthecontrollevel.Moreover,levelsofH2B15Kwere ofgeneexpressionshowedthatinbloodADARexpression found to be signiﬁcantly lower in RTS patients than in accountsfor~13%ofobservedvariabilityinoverallediting controls. level. After removing ADAR effect, we found signiﬁcant Conclusions:AwidespectrumofCREBBPmutationsin associations for 1,122 genes, mainly involved in RNA RTS patients was associated with a general deﬁcit in processing and identiﬁed 276 potential ADARs interactors, speciﬁc histone acetylation by CBP, providing additional including9ADARsdirectpartners.Inaddition,association understanding of the molecular etiology of the syndrome. analysis between editing levels principal components and Thesepreliminaryﬁndingsmayalsoextendepigeneticsasa 35biologicalanddrugsintakevariablesrevealed24factors key factor and potential therapeutic target in RTS. potentiallyinﬂuencingRNAeditinginblood,includingsex, V.Pérez-Grijalba:None.M.López:None.L.M.Valor: age, BMI, drugs and medications. Finally, we identiﬁed None. E. Domínguez-Garrido: None. genetic loci associated to global editing levels, including knownADAReQTLsandasmallregiononchromosome7, P17.57A containingLOC730338lincRNAgene.Ourdataprovidesa Post-transcriptional regulation of RUNX2 gene during detailedpictureofRNAeditinganditsvariabilityinhuman evolution: implications in the ossiﬁcation process in blood,givinginterestinginsightsonthemechanismsbehind nonsyndromic craniosynostosis this post-transcriptional modiﬁcation and genetic and environmental factors involved in its regulation. L. DiPietro1,M.Barba1,P. Frassanito1,M.Baranzini1,V. E. Giacopuzzi: None. M. Gennarelli: None. C. Sacco: Orticelli1, C.Prampolini1,A. Benitez-Burraco2,W.Lattanzi1 None. C. Magri: None. A. Barbon: None. 1Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, P17.56D 2Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain Histone acetylation is reduced in Rubinstein-Taybi patients: epigenetics role in the syndrome Runt related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) encodes the mastertranscriptionfactorinskeletaldevelopment.RUNX2 V. Pérez-Grijalba1,M. López1,L. M.Valor2,E.Domínguez- affectsskullossiﬁcationandisthoughttobeinvolvedinthe Garrido1 progressive skull “globularization” of anatomically-modern humans (AMHs) compared with extinct species. RUNX2 1Fundación Rioja Salud, Logroño, Spain, 2Hospital mutations cause disorders of skull development, including Universitario Puerta del Mar, Cádiz, Spain craniosynostosis. The aim of our study was to compara- tively characterize the genomic structure of RUNX2 in Introduction: Rubinstein-Taybi(RTS)isarare autosomal- AMHandextincthominins,andtoinferputativefunctional dominant disorder characterized by growth retardation, correlations for human skull morphogenesis, using non- cognitive impairment, facial abnormalities and high inci- syndromic craniosynostosis (NCS) as a disease model. dence of neoplasia. CREBBP mutations account for 50- RUNX2 counts 11 splice variants, alternatively transcribed 60% of RTS cases. CBP, encoded by CREBBP, is a tran- from two promoters, and featuring two alternative 3’UTRs. scriptional co-activator with lysine acetyltransferase (KAT) In silico analysis allowed detecting all nt changes between activity, targeting speciﬁc positions on histones H2B AMH and Neanderthal/Denisova, within noncoding reg- (H2BK15) and H3 (H3K18 and H3K25). The aim of this ulatorysequencesandpredictingtheeffectofchangesinthe study was to assess the relationship of CREBBP mutations 3’UTRs on miRNA binding. miRNA and RUNX2 splice and impaired KAT activity of CBP in RTS patients. isoforms were analyzed by qPCR, during the in vitro Materials and Methods: Histones were puriﬁed from osteogenicdifferentiationofsuture-derivedcells.Wefound nuclearbloodcellsof18RTSpatientswitharepresentative that miRNA expression was modulated during the ossiﬁ- varietyofCREBBPmutations,and6age-matchedcontrols. cation process and correlated with RUNX2 expression. Percentage of acetylation (Ac%) of speciﬁc positions Particularly the isoform containing the second 3'UTR was H3K18 and H3K23 was determined by ELISA. Addition- apparently stabilized by miRNA binding. In silico protein ally,quantiﬁcationofH2B15KAcrelativetototalH2Bwas modeling showed the presence of an additional DNA- carried out by Western Blot in 6 RTS and 4 controls. binding leucine-zipper domain which is lacking in the iso- Results: RTS patients showed a 35- 40% of the control form with the ﬁrst 3’UTR. Our data suggest that RUNX2 acetylation level on H3K18 and H3K25, which implied a genomic evolution may have affected miRNA binding statistically signiﬁcant reduction compared to controls. leading to changes in epigenetic regulation of the gene, More than 70% of the RTS patients showed a consistent mostly affecting a speciﬁc splice isoform. This isoform is Ac% reduction in the two speciﬁc H3 acetylation sites to apparently able to bind the target DNA with increasedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 627 afﬁnity, thus inﬂuencing the expression of bone-speciﬁc P17.60D genes plausibly involved in "globularization". An inﬂammation-related SNP in XPO1 5’UTR regulates L. Di Pietro: None. M. Barba: None. P. Frassanito: protein amount by altering m6A mRNA methylation None. M. Baranzini: None. V. Orticelli: None. C. Prampolini: None. A. Benitez-Burraco: None. W. A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia1,J. Rodriguez2,J.Bilbao1,A. Lattanzi: None. Castellanos-Rubio1 P17.58B 1UPV-EHU, Biocruces, Ciberdem, Leioa, Spain, 2UPV-EHU, A CTCF- dependent chromatin interaction ensures robust Leioa, Spain enhancer - promoter communication at the Shh locus XPO1, located in the Immunochip region 2p16.1, mediates C. Paliou1,P. Guckelberger1, I.Jerković2,V. Heinrich1, S. the nuclear export of other proteins and some RNAs. The Haas1, S.Mundlos1,3,4,G.Andrey1 SNP rs3087898, in the 5’UTR of the XPO1 transcript, has been associated to celiac disease (CeD), an immune dis- 1Max Planck for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, order of the small intestine. N’6 methyladenosine (m6A) is 2Institute of Human Genetics, Montpellier, France, 3Institute the most frequent methylation mark in mRNAs and forMedicalandHumanGenetics,CharitéUniversitätsmedizin, lncRNAs, affecting several aspects of RNA metabolism. Berlin, Germany, 4Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Interestingly, XPO1 shows m6A methylation signals in the Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité Universitätsmedizin, 5’UTR, very near the associated SNP, which could inﬂu- Berlin, Germany ence the function of the protein. Thus, we wanted to investigate whether the CeD-associated SNP could affect Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the distal-posterior the methylation levels of XPO1 mRNA and subsequently, part of developing limb buds and controls digit growth, its protein levels. m6A immunoprecipitation in intestinal number and identity. The ZRS enhancer, which regulates cells conﬁrmed the presence of mRNA methylation on the Shh transcription in developing limbs, is located in the 5’ UTR of XPO1. Moreover, cells heterozygous for the intron 5 of the constitutively transcribed gene Lmbr1 and rs3087898 SNP showed preferential methylation in the has been involved in numerous patient cases with limb CeD-associatedallele.Aftertreatmentwithcycloleucine,an malformations. Shh and the ZRS communicate through a m6A inhibitor, both XPO1 mRNA and protein amounts 1Mb-large stable chromatin interaction. However the tend to decrease, suggesting that there will be lower levels mechanismfacilitatingthislong-rangecontactisnotknown of XPO1 in the individuals with the protection genotype. yet. Using a series of CRISPR/Cas9 engineered alleles and Concordantly,whenwequantiﬁedtheamountsofXPO1in 4C-seqexperimentsinmouseembryos,weaimtoelucidate intestinal biopsies from individuals with different geno- the role of the Lmbr1 constitutive transcription as well as types, we observed that XPO1 levels were higher in the CTCF in the establishment of the Shh-ZRS chromatin presence of the risk allele. These data suggest that the SNP interaction. Deletion of the Lmbr1 promoter abolishes the rs3087898,associatedwithCeD,inﬂuencesthemethylation transcriptionovertheZRS,yet4C-seqexperimentsshowed levels of XPO1 mRNA and regulates XPO1 protein trans- that the contact frequency between Shh and its enhancer lation, which could in turn affect the nuclear export of remains unchanged in these embryos allowing for normal certain proteins that have been related with disease devel- Shh expression. In contrast, the removal of CTCF binding opment as STAT3 or IKBa. Funding: ACM; PI2018007 sitesaroundandwithintheZRSresultsintheemergenceof Basque Government; ISCIII PI13/0120-PI16/0258; compensatory CTCF binding sites as well as in altered 3D CIBERDEM chromatin architecture, diminished Shh transcription and A.Olazagoitia-Garmendia:None.J.Rodriguez:None. skeletal abnormalities. Our results suggest that CTCF acts J. Bilbao: None. A. Castellanos-Rubio: None. to support a robust and permissive enhancer-promoter interactionthatensuresnormalShhexpression.ThisCTCF- P17.61A dependent regulatory mechanism provides a framework to miR-146a single nucleotide polymorphism rs2910164 understand the pathomechanism of unsolved structural (G>C) regulates miR-146a expression in osteoarthritic variants described at the Shh locus in patients with skeletal chondrocytes abnormalities. C. Paliou: None. P. Guckelberger: None. I. Jerković: I.Papathanasiou1,E. Mourmoura1,K. Malizos2,A.Tsezou1 None. V. Heinrich: None. S. Haas: None. S. Mundlos: None. G. Andrey: None. 1Laboratory of cytogenetics and Medical Genetics, Larissa, Greece, 2Department of Orthopaedics, Larissa, Greece628 J.delPicchia Introduction: Deregulation of microRNAs is involved in Materials and Methods: 9 datasets assessed with osteoarthritis (OA) pathogenesis. MiR-146a contributes to Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array and inﬂammation and cartilage degradation observed in OA published in GEO were selected. Samples with known joints. Single polynucleotide polymorphisms in miRNAs radiation exposure were excluded. The analyzed set genes may inﬂuence miRNAs expression and have often included normal thyroid tissue (106 samples); tumor tissue beenassociatedwithdiseases.Inourstudy,weinvestigated of classic papillary carcinoma (67 samples); follicular whether miR-146a rs2910164 (G>C) predisposes to OA variant of papillary carcinoma (35 samples); poorly susceptibility and its possible functional role to miR-146a differentiatedcarcinoma(18samples);anaplasticcarcinoma expression in osteoarthritic chondrocytes. (45 samples). Datasets of RNAseq from SRA and TCGA MaterialandMethods:Geneticassociationanalysiswas repositories were selected for validation. Differential performedusingacohortof900GreekOApatientsand750 expression of 4398 non-coding genes (including 1982 healthy controls. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood lincRNA and 1518 antisense RNA) was assessed. Genes and genotyped using PCR-RFLP. Articular cartilage was with FDR adjusted p-value ≤ 0.01 and Fold Change > 2 obtained from 25 patients with primary osteoarthritis were considered to be differentially expressed. undergoing total knee replacement surgery and 15 healthy Results: In classic PTC 140 lncRNAs were found to be individualswithnohistoryofjointdisease.TotalRNAwas differentially expressed (including 54 lincRNAs and 44 extracted from cultured chondrocytes and expression levels antisense RNAs). In follicular PTC differential expression of miR-146a were evaluated using real-time PCR. was revealed for 88 lncRNAs (including 36 lincRNAs and Results: miR-146a rs2910164-GC and CC genotypes 29 antisense RNAs). In poorly differentiated thyroid were not associated with an elevated risk of OA compared carcinomas 146 lncRNAs were differentially expressed to GG genotype. Moreover, we observed that miR-146a (including 62 lincRNAs and 42 antisense RNAs). The expression levels were signiﬁcantly decreased in osteoar- highest amount of differently expressed genes with out- thritic chondrocytes compared to normal and that the standing statistical signiﬁcance was observed in anaplastic relative expression levels of miR-146a in chondrocytes of carcinomas: 354 lncRNAs, including 140 lincRNAs and OA patients carrying the rs2910164-GC genotype were 109 antisense RNAs. In total, 26 lncRNAs were differently signiﬁcantly lower than that ones with GG genotype. expressed in all histological subtypes. Conclusion: Our study demonstrates, for the ﬁrst time, Conclusion: Common and speciﬁc patterns of lncRNA that although miR-146a rs2910164 (G>C) is not a expression are found in distinct subtypes of thyroid cancer. susceptibility factor for OA, miR-146a rs2910164-GC V. Yakushina: None. A. Lavrov: None. genotype is associated with reduced miR-146a expression levels in osteoarthritic chondrocytes. These data provide P17.63C strong evidence that genetic variations could regulate the Genome-wide microRNA analysis of transient focal expression levels of microRNAs that are linked to OA ischemia in rat brain pathogenesis. I. Papathanasiou: None. E. Mourmoura: None. K. I.B. Filippenkov1,V. V.Stavchansky1,A. E. Denisova2,L.V. Malizos: None. A. Tsezou: None. Dergunova1,2,S. A.Limborska1,2 P17.62B 1InstituteofMolecularGenetics,RussianAcademyofSciences, Differentialexpressionoflongnon-codingRNAsindistinct Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National histological type of thyroid cancer Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation V. Yakushina1,2, A.Lavrov1,3 Introduction: Ischemic stroke is one of the most serious diseasesleadingtodeathordisabilityofthepopulation.The 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian study of non-coding RNAs in ischemia has exceptional Federation, 2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, importance for the development of new strategies for neu- Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian National Research roprotectionandreconstructionofnervetissues.Itisknown Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation that microRNAs can play a role both as neuroprotective agents and also contribute to pathological processes in Introduction: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are ischemia. The work is devoted to the study of the expres- assumed to participate in cancer pathogenesis and can be sion of miRNAs and their possible mRNA targets in rat considered as potential markers or therapeutic targets. model of cerebral ischemia with reperfusion (rMCAO), Investigations of lncRNA in thyroid cancer are not sufﬁ- which resembles events in human ischemic stroke. cient and limited mostly to papillary thyroid cancer.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 629 Materials and Methods: rMCAO in rats, high- Introduction: WNT signaling is fundamental to bone throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), real-time RT- health and its aberrant activation leads to skeletal patholo- PCR, bioinformatics. gies.Aheterozygousmissensemutationp.C218GinWNT1, Results: A comparative analysis of the expression of akeyWNTpathwayligand,leadstosevereearly-onsetand microRNAs and mRNAs was performed in subcortical progressiveosteoporosiswithmultipleperipheralandspinal structures of the brain containing a damage focus in fractures. rMCAO. 24 h after occlusion, the expression level of 407 Subjects and Methods: A cross-sectional cohort study microRNAs was changed (Fold change>2, padj<0.05). on12mutation-positive(35years,range9-59years)and12 Also, the expression level of mRNAs of 108 genes as mutation-negative (35 years, range 9-59 years) subjects potential targets for those microRNAs was changed. They from two Finnish families with a heterozygous p.C218G included collagen (Col3a1, Col4a1), integrin (Itgb2, Itga5), WNT1 mutation. Serum samples were screened with a dopamine receptor (Drd1, Drd2) mRNAs, and other genes custom-designed panel of 192 miRNAs using qPCR. associated mainly with signaling pathways Focal adhesion Findings were compared between the two groups. (p=1.4E-3), ECM-receptor interaction (p=1.8E-3), Gap Results: The pattern of 192 circulating miRNAs is junction (p=0.015), and others. signiﬁcantlydifferentinthemutation-positivesubjects:two Conclusions: RNA-Seq analysis revealed the active were upregulated (miR-18a-3p, miR-223-3p) and six involvement of microRNAs in the regulation of inﬂamma- downregulated (miR-22-3p, miR-31-5p, miR-34a-5p, miR- tion, stress and neurotransmission in rMCAO. Further 143-5p miR-423-5p, miR-423-3p) in the WNT1 mutation- analysis of non-coding RNAs will facilitate the under- positive subjects (p-values=0.001-0.053). Three of these standing of the mechanisms of post-transcriptional regula- (miR-22-3p, miR-34a-5p, and miR-31-5p) are known tion of gene expression in brain ischemia. inhibitors of WNT signaling: miR-22-3p and miR-34a-5p This work was supported by grant from the Russian target WNT1 mRNA and miR-31-5p is predicted to bind to Science Foundation 17-74-10189. WNT1 3’UTR. I.B. Filippenkov: B. Research Grant (principal investi- Conclusions: The miRNA proﬁle reﬂects WNT1 muta- gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell tionstatus.TheresultssuggestthatWNT1mutationdisrupts asgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;GrantfromtheRussian a feed-back regulation between these miRNAs and WNT1, Science Foundation 17-74-10189. V.V. Stavchansky: providing new insights into the pathogenesis of WNT- None. A.E. Denisova: None. L.V. Dergunova: None. S. related bone disorders. These miRNAs could offer future A. Limborska: None. potential in diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis. Grant references: Sigrid Jusélius Foundation, Folkhäl- P17.64D sanResearchFoundation,AcademyofFinland,Foundation Altered microRNA proﬁle in osteoporosis caused by forPediatricResearch,HelsinkiUniversityResearchFunds, impaired WNT signaling Swedish Research Council, Novo Nordisk Foundation, Helsinki University Hospital (KLTO), Finnish Medical R.E.Mäkitie1,M.Hackl2,R.Niinimäki3,S.Kakko4,J.Grillari5, Foundation, Jalmari and Rauha Ahokas Foundation, O.Mäkitie6 SwedishChildhoodCancerFoundation,StockholmCounty Council (ALF project). 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and University of Helsinki, R.E. Mäkitie: None. M. Hackl: A. Employment (full or Helsinki, Finland, 2TAmiRNA GmbH, Vienna, Austria, part-time);Signiﬁcant;TAmiRNA.R.Niinimäki:None.S. 3Department of Children and Adolescents, Oulu University Kakko: None. J. Grillari: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Hospital, and PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Modest; TAmiRNA. O. Mäkitie: None. Oulu, Finland, 4Internal Medicine and Clinical Research Center,UniversityofOulu,Oulu,Finland,5ChristianDoppler P17.65A Laboratory on Biotechnology of Skin Aging, Department of Age-dependent patterns of X chromosome DNA Biotechnology, BOKU - University of Natural Resources and methylation in the elderly LifeSciencesVienna,Vienna,Austria,6FolkhälsanInstituteof Genetics and University of Helsinki; Children's Hospital, S. Li1,Q.Tan2 University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital; and Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, and 1Unit of Human Genetics, Department of Clinical Research, Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Helsinki, University of Southern Demark, Odense M, Denmark, Finland 2EpidemiologyandBiostatistics,DepartmentofPublicHealth, University of Southern Demark, Odense M, Denmark630 J.delPicchia The age-dependent patterns of DNA methylation in the descended from the original founder families. The geo- elderly population have been intensively studied on the graphical isolation of RCI means few outsiders have autosomal chromosomes, revealing large numbers of migrated to the island. As a result, islanders share a high genomic sites under signiﬁcant epigenetic remodeling dur- degree of consanguinity (14.9%), and most islander unions ingtheagingprocess.However,DNAmethylationchanges are at least second cousins (Villanueva et al 2014). on the X-chromosomes have been routinely ignored due to RCIislandersshowanexceptionallyhighoccurrencerate analytical difﬁculties in dealing with difference in X chro- ofdevelopmentallanguagedisorder,10-foldtherateseenin mosome content of females and males and X chromosome mainland Chile. Near complete islander genealogical inactivation in females. Taking advantage of large sample recordshaveshownthat90%ofaffectedchildrenaredirect sizes ofDNA methylation data available ontheelderly,we descendants of a pair of original founder brothers, who performed X-chromosome-wide association study on X- likely carriedasusceptibility variantfor languagedisorders linkedDNAmethylationchangesduringagingbyanalyzing (Villanueva et al 2014). maleandfemalesamplesseparatelyandcomparingtherate To understand the genetic contribution to developmental of change in DNA methylation between sexes to identify language disorder on RCI, we have investigated the signiﬁcant CpGs sites differentially or consistently methy- underlying population structure of the islanders. Extensive lated in males and females. We detected 2300 signiﬁcant pedigree data suggest the current islander population are of CpGs (False Discovery Rate<0.05) displaying sex- recently admixed European and Chilean backgrounds. independent methylation patterns and 286 CpGs showing Recent studies have shown a higher proportion of sex-dependent methylation changes in the Lothian birth indigenous South American ancestry in the mainland cohort born in 1936 in Scotland (732 males with mean age Chilean population than previously thought (Lorenzo- 71.27 and 732 females with mean age 71.23). As a repli- Bermejo et al 2017), and this may therefore be directly cation approach, a similar analysis was performed in an relevant to the RCI population. independent sample of middle aged Danish twins (226 Using high density genome-wide SNP genotyping data maleswithmeanage67.26and226femaleswithmeanage from154islanders,andwholegenomesequencingfrom24 66.04) reporting 136 CpGs consistently and 59 CpGs dif- of the most distantly related islanders, we have performed ferentially methylated in males and females with over- theﬁrstin-depthgeneticanalysisofthepopulationstructure lapping rates of 38.08% and 5.1% with the discovery of RCI. results. In conclusion, we have shown signiﬁcant DNA H.S. Mountford: None. P. Villanueva: None. L. Jara: methylation patterns of aging on the X-chromosome None. M.A. Fernandez: None. Z. De Barbieri: None. L. dominated by sex-independent regulation highly replicable Carvajal-Carmona: None. J. Cazier: None. D.F. in independent samples. Newbury: None. S. Li: None. Q. Tan: None. P18.04D Analysis of bones ancient mtDNA from the medieval P18Geneticepidemiology/Populationgenetics/Statistical archeological site of Amiternum (L’Aquila), Italy methodology and evolutionary genetics A.M.G.Poma1,2,O.Zarivi1,2,S.Colafarina1,2,G.Vecchiotti1,2, P18.02B P. Piccone3, A.Iannarelli3,F. Savini1,4, F.Redi1,4 Investigating the population structure of Robinson Crusoe Island, Chile 1University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy, 2Dept of Life Health and Environmental Sciences, L'Aquila, Italy, 3ARTA Abruzzo, H.S.Mountford1,P.Villanueva2,L.Jara2,M.A.Fernandez2,Z. Regional Agency for Environmental Protection, L’Aquila, DeBarbieri2,L.Carvajal-Carmona3,J.Cazier4,D.F.Newbury1 Italy, L'Aquila, Italy, 4Department of Human Sciences, L'Aquila, Italy 1Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2University of Chile, Santiago, Chile, 3UC Davis, Davis, CA, Introduction:ThestudyofancientDNAallowstoanalyze UnitedStates,4UniversityofBirmingham,Birmingham,United genetic relationships between individuals and populations Kingdom ofthepastandthepresent.Inthisworkweanalyzedhuman bones remains datable between the 6th-9th century D.C. Robinson Crusoe (RCI) is a geographically and socially from burials of the archaeological site of Amiternum, isolatedislandlocated670kmwestofSanAntonio,Chile.It L’Aquila. wasfoundedin1876byagroupofeightfounderfamilies.It Materials and Methods: As a genetic marker, the is now home to over 800 inhabitants, most of whom are hypervariable 1 region of mitochondrial DNA (HVR1)Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 631 has been chosen. The HVR1 marker has been ampliﬁed by delivery. Our goal was to analyse the efﬁciency of prenatal PCR, the amplicon have been cloned and sequenced. diagnosisofthiscongenitalanomalyintheCzechRepublic. Sequences of the HVR1 region were compared with Methods: We present retrospective epidemiological Anderson's sequence for the identiﬁcation of polymorph- analysis of the prevalence of anencephaly in the Czech isms. The data obtained were analyzed with different Republic.WeusedpopulationbaseddatafromtheNational software and phylogenetic methods. For inter-populations RegistryofCongenitalAnomalies,storedintheInstituteof comparisons, the known sequences in literature and found Health Information and Statistics of the Czech Republic in ancient and modern databases have been used. (1996 - 2015 time period). Results and Conclusions: This work provides prelimin- Results:Duringtheselected20yearsatotalof592cases ary information on the correlation between the inhabitants of anencephaly were diagnosed (2.89 cases per 10 000 live of Amiternum and the Longobards populations of northern births). Only 27 of those cases were diagnosed in births Italy and the Byzantines, migrant peoples transited and/or (0.13 per 10 000), the rest of cases were diagnosed allocated in the territory of Amiternum. The study of the prenatally (565 cases, 2.76 per 10 000). The average haplogroups, the analysis of genetic variability and the gestation week at the time of diagnosis was 17.21 in 1996 studies of phylogeny on the obtained sequences show a and13.00in2015.Theaveragematernalagechangedfrom genetic proximity between individuals of Amiternum, the 23.68 years in 1996 to 28.64 in 2015. current population of north/central Italy and the Germanic Discussion: The majority of anencephaly cases are tribe of Longobards, which dominated theItalian peninsula diagnosed prenatally in the Czech Republic. The overall between 568 and 774 A. D. The match of ancient percentage of terminations of pregnancy is high (95.44%). Byzantines sequences with one of the Amiternum samples We also observed an improvement in ultrasound based highlights also a Byzantine genetic trait in the populations prenatal diagnosis along the study period, leading to a of Amiternum and L’Aquila. Grants RIA Univaq 2017 to signiﬁcant decrease in the average gestation week at the Poma A and Redi F time of diagnosis. A.M.G. Poma: None. O. Zarivi: None. S. Colafarina: Acknowledgements:SupportedbyMinistryofHealthof None. G. Vecchiotti: None. P. Piccone: None. A. the Czech Republic, grant AZV 17-29622A Iannarelli: None. F. Savini: None. F. Redi: None. A. Sipek: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as P18.05A grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Ministry of Health of PrenataldiagnosticsofanencephalyintheCzechRepublic: theCzechRepublic,grantAZV17-29622A.V.Gregor:B. 20 years of population wide surveillance Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already A.Sipek1,2,3,V.Gregor1,2,J.Jirova4,A.SipekJr1,5,M.Maly6,7, received); Signiﬁcant; Ministry of Health of the Czech J.Klaschka6,8 Republic Grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. J. Jirova: None. A. Sipek Jr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,ThomayerHospital,Prague, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Pronatal grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Ministry of Health of Sanatorium, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Medical the Czech Republic Grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. M. Maly: Genetics, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Health Information and consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Statistics of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic, received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech 5Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Republic Grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. J. Klaschka: B. Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or 6Institute of Computer Science of the Czech Academy of consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Sciences,Prague,CzechRepublic,7NationalInstituteofPublic received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech Health, Prague, Czech Republic, 8Institute of Biophysics and Republic Grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. Informatics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic P18.06B Rare coding variants and the risk of congenital anorectal Introduction: Anencephaly is a lethal congenital anomaly malformations: an exome chip association study from the group of neural tube defects. Because of its dis- tinctive phenotype, it is always diagnosed, either during R. vandePutte1,C. H.W.Wijers1,H.Reutter2, C.L. M. pregnancy by ultrasonography, or clinically after the Marcelis1,E.Brosens3,P.M.A.Broens4,E.Jenetzky5,6,C.E.J.632 J.delPicchia Sloots3, T.E. Galesloot1,I.deBlaauw1, H.G.Brunner1,7, N. P18.08D Roeleveld1,I. A.L. M.van Rooij1 Genetic and molecular analysis of urinary magnesium concentration in Scottish and Croatian populations 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, C. B.Joseph1,C. Drake1, C.M.Stanton1, T.S. Boutin1,O. Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Groningen, Devuyst2,T. Hurd1,C. Hayward1 Groningen, Netherlands, 5German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 6Johannes-Gutenberg University, 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Mainz, Germany, 7Maastricht University Medical Centre, MolecularMedicine,Edinburgh,UnitedKingdom,2Instituteof Maastricht, Netherlands Physiology, Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, Zurich, Switzerland Introduction: Anorectal malformation (ARM) is a rare birth defect, resulting from disturbed development of the Introduction: Electrolyte imbalance, including changes in hindgut.Althoughsuspected,evidenceofageneticetiology magnesium concentration and other electrolyte ratios inthe is still scarce. The aim of this study is to identify rare bodycanresultindizziness,arrhythmiaandifleftuntreated variants in ARM etiology. canresultinseriousillnessorevendeath.Magnesiumisthe Materials and Methods: We genotyped 568 Caucasian second most abundant bivalent cation in the body and is ARM patients and 1,860 population-based controls using essential for many cellular processes. Renal magnesium the Illumina ExomeChip, which contains >240,000 rare handlingplaysanimportantroleinmaintainingmagnesium coding variants. GenomeStudio clustering and calling was homeostasis, however the exact biological mechanisms followedbyre-callingof‘no-calls’usingZcall,forpatients remain unclear. A recent genome-wide association study and controls simultaneously. Single variant analyses were (GWAS) identiﬁed an association between urinary magne- performed to identify statistically signiﬁcant variants sium concentration (uMg) and variants in the ARL15 gene (Bonferroni corrected threshold p<1.15*10-6). Based on on chromosome 5. ARL15 encodes a GTP-binding protein the calling quality in the clusterplots and distribution of that interacts with the magnesium transporter channel minor alleles for the variants among patients and controls, TRPM6, and other proteins involved in magnesium home- variants were identiﬁed for validation using Sanger ostasis in physiologically relevant cell lines. Sequencing. Materials and Methods: We conducted meta-analyses Results: In total, 13 single variants reached statistical for urinary magnesium, magnesium to creatinine (uMg/cre) signiﬁcance. However, the majority of minor alleles for ratio,aswellasmagnesiumconcentrationtootherclinically these variants were absent in controls, and some patients relevant electrolyte ratios in 11, 617 individuals from showed 3 or more minor alleles for these 13 variants, Scottish and Croatian populations to determine possible which is highly unlikely. We identiﬁed the 3 most genes involved in these traits. promising candidate variants with acceptable calling Results: We observed genome-wide signiﬁcant peaks in quality that remained statistically signiﬁcant in the single the ARL15 locus in our meta-analyses conducted for uMg, variant analysis after exclusion of patients with 3 or more magnesium to creatinine (uMg/cre), magnesium to phos- minor alleles. However, Sanger sequencing did not phate (uMg/uPh) and magnesium to potassium (uMg/uK) conﬁrm presence of the minor alleles for the variants in ratios. The top SNP associated with uMg and uMg/cre in patients as indicated based on ExomeChip data. the meta-analyses lies within a transcription factor binding Conclusions: We did not ﬁnd evidence for associations site in an enhancer region of ARL15. between ARM and rare coding variants present on the Conclusions: We hypothesise that the variant found ExomeChip. Furthermore, we would like to emphasize the affects the expression of ARL15, which, in turn modulates importance of validation of ExomeChip data before large magnesiumtransport.Weareperformingfunctional studies replication studies are initiated. to elucidate the role ARL15 plays in magnesium home- R. van de Putte: None. C.H.W. Wijers: None. H. ostasis both in vitro and in vivo. Reutter: None. C.L.M. Marcelis: None. E. Brosens: C.B. Joseph: None. C. Drake: None. C.M. Stanton: None. P.M.A. Broens: None. E. Jenetzky: None. C.E.J. None. T.S. Boutin: None. O. Devuyst: None. T. Hurd: Sloots: None. T.E. Galesloot: None. I. de Blaauw: None. None. C. Hayward: None. H.G. Brunner: None. N. Roeleveld: None. I.A.L.M. van Rooij: None. P18.10B Identiﬁcation of incompletely penetrant variants by a population genetic approachAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 633 Á. Mikó1,2,A. Kaposi1, K.Schnabel1,D.Seidl1, K.Tory1,2 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 1MTA-SE Lendület Nephrogenetic Laboratory, Hungarian 2Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, University of Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary, 2First Department Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute for Medical Biometry, of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, 1083, Budapest, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, School of Hungary Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Medicine II, Sana Klinikum, Offenbach, Autosomal recessive (AR) disorders are typically com- Germany, 5Department of Internal Medicine II, Evangelisches pletely penetrant. We recently identiﬁed the ﬁrst variant Krankenhaus, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Department of Visceral, (NPHS2, p.R229Q), that is pathogenic only with speciﬁc Transplant, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University trans-associated mutations. We aimed to identify other Hospital of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 7Department of incompletely penetrant variants (IPV) in AR disorders. We General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University of collected clinical and genotype data from 9.283 Caucasian Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Department of General, patients with biallelic HGMD mutations in 19 genes Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center responsible for frequent AR disorders (ASL, ATP7B, Hamburg-Eppendorf, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, CAPN3, CFTR, CTNS, DHCR7, GAA, GALNS, GALT, Germany, 9Department of Gastroenterology, Radboud IDUA, MUT, NPHS1, NPHS2, PAH, PCCB, PKHD1, University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, PMM2, SLC26A4, TYR) in the medical literature. Variants 10Department of Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, University that were less frequent in the patient population than in the Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany generalEuropeannon-FinnishpopulationofgnomADwere considerednon-pathogenicandwereexcluded(n=28).The Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a metaplasia at the lower eso- penetrance of each pathogenic variant (n=2141) was cal- phagusandaprecancerousconditionforthedevelopmentof culated as its enrichment in the patient population as com- esophageal adenocarcinoma(EA).The etiology ofboth BE pared to that of the loss-of-function (LOF) mutations. andEAismultifactorial.ArecentGWASmeta-analysishas DHCR7 and PMM2 LOF mutations were underrepresented ledtotheidentiﬁcationof14susceptibilitylociforBE/EA. in the patient population suggesting in utero lethality. Out The aim of the present study was (i) to link the genome- of the 82 variants that were frequent enough to assess their widegeneticdataofthemeta-analysiswithgeneexpression penetrance,wefound23(28%)ASL,CAPN3,CFTR,GAA, levelsthroughexpressionquantitativetraitloci(eQTLs)and NPHS2, PAH and PKHD1 variants to be incompletely (ii) to analyse identiﬁed eQTL-SNPs in an independent penetrant, including the known IPVs (NPHS2 R229Q, cohort. CFTRR117HandL997F).NootherbuttheR229Qvariant For this, the meta-analysis data were systematically was subject of interallelic interactions. Based on the asso- integrated with the eQTL data from the GTEx tissues from ciated phenotype, most of the IPVs are hypomorphic (16/ gastroesophageal junction and esophageal mucosa. We 23, 70%) vs. 19/59, 32% of completely penetrant variants, selectedSNPsthat(i)revealedap-valueof5×10-5>p>5×10- p=0.0002). Frequent IPVs can be identiﬁed by this com- 8 in the BE/EA meta-analysis and (ii) were an eQTL in at puterized population-genetic approach and are more com- least one of the esophageal GTEx tissues. Here, we monthanexpected.Propergeneticcounselingrequirestheir identiﬁed 35 eQTLs. Of these, 32 were integrated into an knowledge.ThisworkwassupportedbyMTA-SELendulet independent genotyping study, consisting of 1,406 BE/EA Research Grant (LP2015-11/2015). casesand992controls.Followingqualitycontrol,inwhich Á. Mikó: None. A. Kaposi: None. K. Schnabel: None. 9 SNPs were excluded, four SNPs showed a nominal D. Seidl: None. K. Tory: None. signiﬁcantassociation.Inanextstep,weperformedaﬁxed- effect meta-analysis. The best association P-value was P18.11C observed for the SNP rs37050130 (p = 9.22×10-8), an Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma: eQTL for AF131215.9, which is an uncharacterized gene. systematic integration of eQTL data and candidate loci The second best associated eQTL mapped to SLC22A3, association study encoding an organic cation transporter that improves chemotherapy drug absorption. J.Schröder1,2,V.Schüller3,N.Ishorst1,2,N.Fricker1,2,M. Our study is the ﬁrst systematic approach that identiﬁes Knapp3,A. May4,C. Gerges5,N.Kreuser6,T. Schmidt7,Y. speciﬁceQTLsatBE/EAcandidatelocianditprovidesﬁrst Vashist8,W.H.M.Peters9,H.Neuhaus5,T.Rösch10,C.Ell4,M. insights into the biological mechanism contributing to the M.Nöthen1,2,I.Gockel6, J.Schumacher1,A. C. Böhmer1,2 development of BE/EA. J. Schröder: None. V. Schüller: None. N. Ishorst: None. N. Fricker: None. M. Knapp: None. A. May:634 J.delPicchia None. C. Gerges: None. N. Kreuser: None. T. Schmidt: The MP-GWAS is a powerful approach to detect shared None. Y. Vashist: None. W.H.M. Peters: None. H. genetic effects on correlated phenotypes, as demonstrated Neuhaus: None. T. Rösch: None. C. Ell: None. M.M. by our analysis of lipids and BMI. Nöthen:None.I.Gockel:None.J.Schumacher:None.A. Funding: EU-FP7-MARVEL (PIEF-GA-2013-626461), C. Böhmer: None. WT205915. M. Kaakinen: None. R. Mägi: None. V. Lagou: None. P18.12D A. Claringbould: None. K. Gaulton: None. K. Fischer: Multi-phenotype genome-wide meta-analysis of lipid levels None. A.P. Morris: None. I. Prokopenko: None. and BMI in 64,736 Europeans suggests shared genetic architecture P18.13A Potentialadaptiveroleofthehuman-speciﬁcduplicationat M.Kaakinen1,R. Mägi2,V. Lagou3,4,A. Claringbould5,K. 16p11.2 in iron homeostasis and immune response Gaulton6, BIOS consortium,K. Fischer2,A. P. Morris7,I. Prokopenko1 G.Giannuzzi1,2, D.Risso3,X. Nuttle3,E. Porcu1,2,16p11.2 Consortium, G.Willemin1,4,K. Hoekzema3,J. Chrast1, Y. 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, Herault5, Z.Kutalik6,2,R. Bernier7,E. Eichler3,8,A. Reymond1 2University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3VIB Center for Brain & Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium, 4KU Leuven, Leuven, 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Belgium, 5University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Netherlands, 6Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Genome Sciences, States, 7University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Mouse Metabolic Evaluation Facility, Center Serumlipidlevelsandobesitysharebiochemicalpathways, for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, suggesting overlapping causal genetic factors. Genome- Switzerland, 5Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire wide association studies (GWAS) of correlated phenotypes et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France, 6Institute of Social and havebeendevelopedtoidentifysuchsharedgeneticeffects Preventive Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), with increased power. Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Department of Psychiatry and We performed a multi-phenotype GWAS (MP-GWAS) Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, on three blood lipids (high-/low-density lipoprotein choles- United States, 8Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University terol and triglycerides, HDL-C/LDL-C/TG) and body-mass of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States index (BMI) in 22 European-ancestry studies (N=64,736) imputed to the 1000 Genomes reference panel (Phase 1). Recurrent pathogenic copy-number variation (CNV) at Weﬁtteda“reverseregression”modelbetweeneachsingle- humanchromosome16p11.2ismediatedbyHomosapiens- nucleotide variant (SNV) and the linear combination of speciﬁc duplications of a segment including the BOLA2/2B HDL-C/LDL-C/TG/BMI using the SCOPA software, i.e. andSLX1A/1Bgenes.Thissegmentiscopy-numbervariant for theithvariantSNV=β ×HDL-C+β ×LDL-C+β ×TG in humans (3-8 copies per genome) and its duplication is i 1i 2i 3i +β ×BMI+ε,whereε~N(0,ơ2).Study-speciﬁceffectsizes almost ﬁxed most likely due to positive selection. BOLA2- 4i i i and variance-covariance matrices for each variant were GLRX3 heterotrimers participate in iron homeostasis. combined in a meta-analysis using the META-SCOPA SLX1, together with SLX4, MUS81 and EME1, forms a software. complex involved in the control of genome stability. SLX4 We identiﬁed 14 novel and 41/9 established lipid/BMI mutations cause Fanconi anemia, characterized by the loci,respectively,atgenome-widesigniﬁcance(P<5x10-8). inability to produce blood cells. Nine novel (SDC1, SLC8A1, EPHA6, SPATA4, MAGI2, To gain insights into the potential adaptive role of this CTSB,BC014119,SMCO4andCNTN5)and32established human-speciﬁcduplication,weanalyzedhematologicaland loci showed effects on both BMI and lipids in the joint blood iron data in 16p11.2 deletion carriers with varying model, suggesting shared genetic architecture. This obser- copies of this segment. We found that 50% of individuals vation was supported through hierarchical cluster analysis, with the lowest number of copies, i.e. three, need iron whichresultedinsixcladesrepresentingamixtureoflipid- supplementationand/orareanemic,and4outof6havelow andBMI-associatedvariants.WedetectedsigniﬁcanteQTL lymphocyte counts. When compared to individuals with effects in whole blood, subcutaneous/visceral fat and liver morecopies,i.e.fourandﬁve(n=14),thefrequencyofthe at 16 of the identiﬁed loci, and enrichment of association iron phenotype was not signiﬁcantly different (P=0.13) signalsatHDAC6bindingsites,indicatingacriticalroleof while the low lymphocyte count was (P=0.004). Similarly, associated loci in various cellular events. mouse models carrying the 16p11.2 orthologous deletionAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 635 and, more speciﬁcally, Bola2 knockout mice show Conclusions: 15q11.2 (BP1-BP2) deletions and duplica- signiﬁcantly lower blood iron and hemoglobin levels than tions are common ﬁndings among affected and unaffected theirwild-typelittermates.Corroboratingly, genedosage of populations,suggestingalowpathogenicityoftheseCNVs. the 16p11.2 BP4-BP5 CNV is positively associated with I.Maya:None.M.Shohat:None.S.Kahana:None.S. blood lymphocyte count in the UK biobank cohort Yacobson: None. T. Tenne: None. I. Agmon-Fishman: (P=0.007). None.L.Basel-Salmon:None.R.Sukenik-Halevy:None. Taken together, our results suggest a role of the genes mapping to this human-speciﬁc duplication in iron home- P18.15C ostasis and lymphocyte level and a potential adaptation in Study of the character of psychiatric symptoms with improving iron metabolism and/or immune response. hereditary metabolic diseases. Symptom complex and G. Giannuzzi: None. D. Risso: None. X. Nuttle: None. comorbidity E. Porcu: None. G. Willemin: None. K. Hoekzema: None. J. Chrast: None. Y. Herault: None. Z. Kutalik: E. Grechanina, Y.Grechanina, L.Molodan, D.Oleinyk,A. None. R. Bernier: None. E. Eichler: None. A. Zabelina Reymond: None. KISMCC-CR(O)D, Kharkiv, Ukraine P18.14B What is the signiﬁcance of 15q11.2 BP1-BP2 deletions and Introduction:F.Sedel'sclassiﬁcationofCMDaccordingto duplications? thetypeofpsychiatric symptomsindiseaseonsetallowsto adequately estimate the nature of polyorganous affections, I.Maya1,M.Shohat2, S.Kahana3,S.Yacobson1,T. Tenne4,I. clarify the diagnosis and, normalizing metabolism, relieve Agmon-Fishman5,L. Basel-Salmon1,R. Sukenik-Halevy4 the patient from psychiatric disorders. TheObjective:tostudyCMDspectrum,accompaniedby 11Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah psychiatric disorders. Tikva, Israel, 2Asuta Genetic Institute,,Ashdod, Israel, Results: among ﬁrst applied 132,309 patients, 1056 3Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah nosological forms were revealed. Children with mental Tikva,Israel, Israel, 4Meir Medical Center, Kfar Saba,Israel, retardation-863cases-0.65%amongtheﬁrst-applied,and 5M1Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Centerl, Petah 81%amongthenosologicalforms.Psychiatricdiseases-in Tikva, Israel the case of urea formation cycle defects, methionine remineralization defects, porphyria. Chronic psychiatric Purpose: To assess the detection rate of copy number symptoms - in patients with homocystinuria, Wilson's variations (CNVs) of 15q11.2 (BP1-BP2) in relation to disease, adrenal leukodystrophy and lysosomal accumula- indications for testing, and other clinical characteristics. tion diseases. Homocystinuria, spinal-tendinous xanthoma- Methods: We analyzed 11,004 chromosomal microarray tosis, non-ketone hyperglycinemia, monoamine oxidase tests performed in a single referral lab during a four-year insufﬁciency, insufﬁcient dehydrogenase of half-aldehyde period (7,596 prenatal, 3,408 postnatal). of succinic acid and creatine transporter deﬁciency - in Results: Deletions were detected in 66 cases (0.6%); 39 patients with mild mental retardation and behavioral in prenatal tests (0.51%) and 27 in postnatal tests (0.79%). changes.Thegreatestnumberofpatientswiththesechanges Duplications were detected in 94 cases (0.85%); 62 in - in porphyria and methionine remethylation disorder. In prenatal tests (0.82%), 32 in postnatal tests (0.94%). The severe cases of tryptophan, methionine, heme metabolism, prevalence of deletions and duplications among clinically- comprehensive treatment has allowed to get mental indicated prenatal tests was 0.57% and 0.9% respectively, recovery. which was not statistically different from tests performed Conclusions: since 2007 - the conduction of selective without an indication; 0.49% and 0.78% (p=0.6, 0.59, screening for methionine metabolism, investigating the respectively). The prevalence of deletions and duplications polymorphismsofMTHFR,MTRR,MTRandRFC1folate amongpostnataltestsperformedduetoaclinicalindication carrier.11579patientswereexaminedinwhomheredityis was 0.73% and 1%, respectively, which was similar to the burdened by cardiovascular, psychiatric, oncological dis- prevalence in healthy individuals; 0.98% and 0.74%, orders. Population frequency of homozygotes C677T respectively; (p=0.497, 0.67). There was no difference MTHFR - 7.04%, among patients - 10.1%; the allele between fetal sex, the prevalence of additional CNVs and frequency of MTRR A66G - 57%. These features increase the size of the deletion/duplication involving 15q11.2 the chances of combining any form of CMD with folate- between indicated and unindicated tests. methionine cycle disorder. Currently we determine comor- bidity frequency.636 J.delPicchia E. Grechanina: None. Y. Grechanina: None. L. None. O. Pietiläinen: None. M. Daly: None. A. Molodan: None. D. Oleinyk: None. A. Zabelina: None. Palotie: None. P18.16D P18.17A CNVAssociation with Neurodevelopmental Phenotypes in Targetedresequencingofnon-codingrisklociusingsingle- Finnish Population Cohort molecule molecular inversion probes (smMIPs) E. Saarentaus1,M.Kurki1,2,3,L. Urpa1,A. S. Havulinna1,4,M. F. Thieme1,2,L. Henschel1,2,N.Ishorst1,2,E. Mangold1,A. Perola4,V.Salomaa4,M.Peltonen4,O.Pietiläinen2,M.Daly2,3, Hoischen3,4,5,K. U.Ludwig1,2 A. Palotie1,2,3 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn, 1InstituteforMolecularMedicineFinlandFIMM,Universityof Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Stanley Center for Psychiatric Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Research, The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Psychiatric and 4Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University NeurodevelopmentalGeneticsUnit,DepartmentofPsychiatry, MedicalCenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands,5RadboudInstitutefor Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, 4National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland Nijmegen, Netherlands Copy Number Variations (CNVs) are associated with a The genetic etiology of complex traits is largely character- myriad of syndromic and severe developmental disorders, ized by associations of common risk variants located in often overlapping developmentally important genes. non-coding regions. These regions might also harbor puta- Usually considered high-impact variants, CNVs are never- tive causative, rare variants in individual families, which theless also observedinthe general population, where their can be identiﬁed by targeted resequencing using smMIPs. impact is poorly characterised and knowledge of their These are 75 bp-long molecules composed of two region- impact to health and well-being is limited. To investigate speciﬁc primers that are linked by a common backbone the effect of CNVs on the health, risk for neurodevelop- sequence. Upon contactwithgenomicDNA,smMIPs form mental phenotypes and socioeconomic and educational acircularDNAfragmentaroundthetargetregion.Barcoded attainment in the population in general, we employ long- primers enable multiplexing, and unique molecular tags in itudinal health record data together with genotypic infor- the smMIPs backbone reduce the number of PCR artifacts mationfrom20098individualsintheFINRISKpopulation in downstream analyses. In a ﬁrst assay, 19 non-coding cohort. Phenotype information includes: neurodevelop- candidate regions at four risk loci for non-syndromic cleft mentaldiagnosesfrom health record data spanningover 35 lip with/without cleft palate were selected for resequencing years; use of select classes of prescription drugs (data in 1,061 cases and 1,591 controls. Data analysis included spanning 20 years); and socioeconomic factors reported on smMIP-designbyMIPGEN,readalignmentwithBWAand participation forms. Genotypic information entails intensity variant calling with UniﬁedGenotyper. Downstream anno- andallelicfrequencydataretrievedusing542585probesin tation was based on rarity of variants, annotation scores the Illumina HumanCoreExome DNA MicroArray. CNVs (e.g. CADD, FATHMM-MKL, LINSIGHT, DANN, and are identiﬁed using both PennCNV and iPsychCNV, Eigen),andco-segregationanalysesinfamilymembers.We focusing initially on CNVs identiﬁed by both algorithms. also assessed concordance rates between genotypes All calls will be manually curated for validity. We have obtainedbyarray genotyping andsmMIPs,andidentiﬁeda analysed the dataset with PennCNV, the iPsychCNV ana- concordance of 100% for each of three analyzed common lysis and phenotype association analyses are ongoing. In SNPs in 1,400 samples, after ﬁltering out low-quality our preliminary analysis, carrying a large deletion (>1Mb) smMIPsvariantcalls. Firstannotationresultsshowvarying increased the risk for a neurodevelopmental or neu- degrees of correlation between the different scores, sug- ropsychiatricphenotypealmost2-fold(18.6%vs9.8%).For gesting that no single score is sufﬁcient for assessing the intellectual disability, the risk ratio was 9.6 (2.3% vs potentialpathogenicityofvariants.WesuggestthatsmMIPs 0.24%). We will also perform enrichment analyses for resequencing is a powerful tool for targeted sequence ana- neurodevelopmental phenotypes, use of prescription drugs, lysisbeyondtheprotein-codingregions,inlargecohorts,in socioeconomic status, educational attainment and overall a cost-efﬁcient way. health status. F.Thieme:None.L.Henschel:None.N.Ishorst:None. M. Kurki: None. L. Urpa: None. A.S. Havulinna: E. Mangold: None. A. Hoischen: None. K.U. None.M.Perola:None.V.Salomaa:None.M.Peltonen: Ludwig: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 637 P18.20D Signiﬁcant; A European DNA bank for deciphering the Genetic homogeneity in DARWIN, an isolated population missing heritability of Alzheimer's disease (EADB). I.B. in the Netherlands Mathijssen:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam. E. S.vanWalree1,2,I.E. Jansen2,3,I.B. Mathijssen1,D. D. Posthuma: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Posthuma2,H. J.Meijers-Heijboer1,4 collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; NWO Vidi, NWO 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Aspasia grant, Scott Fuller Memorial Award from the Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Complex Trait International Behavior Genetics Association, NWO VICI. Genetics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, H.J. Meijers-Heijboer: B. Research Grant (principal VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants Neurology, Alzheimer Center, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU aswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;NWOVidi, University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, NutsOhra,CCA/V-ICI,DutchCancerSociety,ErasmusMC 4Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Revolving Fund “Top down". Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands P18.21A Introduction: Isolated populations have the potential to Age,originandspreadingofthemyotonicdystrophytype2 facilitate gene mapping of complex traits. The number of mutation throughout Europe haplotypes shared among inhabitants is smaller, while the lengthofthesharedhaplotypesislonger,astheyhavebeen M.Brkušanin1,J.Peović1,S.Perić2,J. Radvanszky3, S. derived from a handful of relatively recent founders. Mairević1,V.Kovčić1,Z.Musova4,K.Stehlíková5,L.Leonardis6, Together with genetic drift and restricted migration this K.Kekou7,V.Jovanović8,G.Brajuković1,L.P.Ranum9,10,11,V. leads to the enrichment of rare alleles and genetic homo- RakočevićStojanović2,D.Savić-Pavićević1 geneity. Combined with environmental homogeneity resulting from a comparable lifestyle, population isolation 1UniversityofBelgrade-FacultyofBiology,CentreforHuman increases power to detect genetic risk loci. Molecular Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2University of Methods and Results: The DARWIN (DNA Analysis in Belgrade-School of Medicine, Neurological Clinic, Clinical ResidentsWithinanIsolateintheNetherlands)villageisan Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute for Clinical and isolated population (~22.000 inhabitants) that was founded Translational Research, Biomedical Research Centre, Slovak in the 14th century by 7-20 families, and remained in Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Department of religious and cultural isolation ever since. By using whole Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, 2nd genome sequencing data of 20 DARWIN trio’s, we show Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, that the DARWIN population has a high inbreeding Czech Republic, 5Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene coefﬁcient, expressed as F : the percentage of the Therapy, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, ROH autosomal genome that is in runs of homozygosity 6Institute of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Clinical (ROH). DARWIN shows features of ancient inbreeding Center,Ljubljana,Slovenia,7DepartmentofMedicalGenetics, (F 3.2% with an ROH threshold of 0.5 Mb) and recent University of Athens, "Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital", ROH inbreeding (F 1.3% with a threshold of 5 Mb). These Athens, Greece, 8University of Belgrade-Institute for ROH numbers are ~6-14 times greater than the F of the Biological Research “Sinia Stanković, Department of Genetic ROH overallDutchpopulation,representedby748trio’sfromthe Research, Belgrade, Serbia, 9Center for NeuroGenetics, GenomeoftheNetherlandsstudy.Furthermore,theF is University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States, ROH equal to or even higher than that of previously described 10DepartmentofMolecularGenetics&Microbiology, College population isolates, such as Sardinia. of Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United Conclusion:TheDARWINvillageisapopulationisolate States, 11Department of Neurology, University of Florida, whosegenetichomogeneityoffersgreat potential for future Gainesville, FL, United States genetic studies. Funding: Amsterdam Neuroscience, Alliance projects Introduction:Myotonicdystrophytype2(DM2)ismainly E.S. van Walree: B. Research Grant (principal investi- a disease of the European Caucasians. Haplotype analyses gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell suggested a founder mutation ~4000-11000 years old, as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Amsterdam Neu- which coincides with the Neolithic Age, when the Near roscience, Alliance projects. I.E. Jansen: B. Research Eastern farmers, and afterwards herders from the Pontic- Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand Caspiansteppe,hadsettledinEurope,shapingthegenomic pending grants as well as grants already received); architectureoftheEuropeans.Weaimedtoestimatetheage638 J.delPicchia and origin of DM2 mutation and reconstruct its Introduction: Down, Edwards andPatau syndromearethe dispersal route. most common chromosomal abnormalities diagnosed dur- Materials and Methods: CL3N122, CL3N99, CL3N59, ing the prenatal diagnostics. The major goal of this study CL3N119, CL3N19 and CL3N23 loci were genotyped in was to identify any possible trends that can be associated 401 individuals from Serbian, Greek, Slovenian, Slovakian with the gradual implementation of non-invasive prenatal and Czech DM2 families. 320 healthy and 79 DM2 genetic testing in the Czech Republic. haplotypes phased by family segregation analysis, and 53 Methods: The population-based data on prenatally DM2 published German haplotypes were used for the diagnosed cases were obtained from the National Registry coalescent modeling of intra-allelic variability in DMLE+. ofCongenitalAnomaliesoftheCzechRepublic(2012-2016 Themaximumlikelihoodestimation(MLE)ofthemutation time period). The proportion of the number of the three age was determined for the population growth rate set at major autosomal trisomies was compared to the proportion 0.025-0.05, assuming DM2 mutation frequency in Finland of all other chromosomal aberrations that were identiﬁed (1/1830). during prenatal diagnostics. The annual number of live Results: The estimated DM2 mutation age is 170-280 births in the Czech Republic was used as a denominator. generations (~3400-5600 years assuming 20 years/genera- The ratios were subjected to the logistic regression. tion).ItdatesbacktotheLateNeolithandtheearlyBronze Statistical evaluation was carried out by the statistical AgewhenmassivemigrationsofYamnayaindividualsfrom software R. the Pontic-Caspian steppe to Europe occurred (3500-2200 Results: Down, Edwards and Patau syndromes together BCE), accompanied by an expansion of the Corded Ware presented 62.6% of all prenatally diagnosed chromosomal individuals (2800-2200 BCE). aberrations. The overall frequency (per 10 000 live births) Conclusion: Presented results bring a novel insight into of major autosomal trisomies have increased from 30.86 in the origin and spreading of DM2 mutation throughout 2012to37.41in2016(Poissonregression:p=0.014).Also Europe. According to epidemiological data, distribution of theproportionofmajorautosomaltrisomiesincreasedfrom the DM2 mutation seems to reﬂect a decreasing Yamnaya 57.22%(ofallprenatallydiagnosedaberrations)in2012to ancestry from the north to the south in the present-day 66.09 % in 2016 (logistic regression: p < 0.001). Europeans. Discussion: We conﬁrmed that the overall frequency of Acknowledgements: Grant No. 173016, MESTD, major autosomal trisomies (and their proportion) is Republic of Serbia. increasing. The possible explanations are the improving M. Brkušanin: None. J. Peović: None. S. Perić: None. methods of prenatal diagnostics and also the increasing J. Radvanszky: None. S. Mairević: None. V. Kovčić: maternal age in the Czech Republic. None. Z. Musova: None. K. Stehlíková: None. L. Acknowledgements:SupportedbyMinistryofHealthof Leonardis: None. K. Kekou: None. V. Jovanović: None. the Czech Republic, grant AZV 17-29622A G. Brajuković: None. L.P. Ranum: None. V. Rakočević A. Sipek Jr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Stojanović: None. D. Savić-Pavićević: None. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Ministry of Health of P18.22B the Czech Republic Grant nr. AZV 17-29622A . V. Changing frequencies of main autosomal trisomies in the Gregor: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- Czech Republic: population-based data borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Ministry of Health of the A. SipekJr1,2,V. Gregor2,3,J. Klaschka4,5,M.Maly4,6, A. Czech Republic Grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. J. Klaschka: Sipek2,3,7 B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Republic Grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. M. Maly: B. 2DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,ThomayerHospital,Prague, Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Pronatal consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Sanatorium, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Computer received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech Science of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech RepublicGrantnr.AZV17-29622A.A.Sipek:B.Research Republic, 5Institute of Biophysics and Informatics, First Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech pending grants as well as grants already received); Republic, 6National Institute of Public Health, Prague, Czech Signiﬁcant; Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic Republic, 7Institute of Medical Genetics, Third Faculty of Grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech RepublicAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 639 P18.23C Introduction: In previous studies, we have reported low Epidemiology of Down syndrome in Argentina effective population size (Ne) and census population size (N) ratio in the Lithuanian population. The estimates of Ne J.F. Martini, M.P. Bidondo,S. P.Duarte, R.Liascovich, P. wereapproximatelyone-tenthoftheLithuaniancensussize Barbero, B. Groisman compared with other genetics-based estimates of between 0.21–0.65.Naturallevelsofﬂuctuationssuchasvariancein Red Nacional de Anomalías Congénitas (RENAC), Centro size, reproduction, sex ratio, the degree to which genera- Nacional de Genética Médica, ANLIS, Ministerio de Salud de tions overlap, and possibly inbreeding caused the small la Nación, Buenos Aires, Argentina values of Ne/N. The main interest of this study was to evaluate the potential impact of small Ne/N on inbreeding, Introduction: Down syndrome (DS) is the most common estimatingtheinbreedingcoefﬁcient(F)for50generations t chromosomaldisorderinchildren.Purpose:Todescribethe from effective population size data of Lithuania. epidemiologic characteristics of DS in Argentina based on Methods: 295 randomly selected DNA samples were data from the National Network of Congenital Anomalies genotyped using the Illumina 770K HumanOmniExpress- (RENAC). 12v1.0 array. The Ne values were obtained for 50 Materials and Methods: The prevalence of DS by generations assuming a generation time of 25 years by provinceandbymaternalagefortheperiod2009-2015was using inferred long segments of identity by descent (IBD) calculated,andcomparedbetweenhealthcaresystemsectors from high-density genotyping data. The inbreeding coefﬁ- (private vs. public) and complexity levels of public cient in generation t was estimated as hospitals. The proportion of cases with prenatal diagnosis Results:TheestimatedInbreedingcoefﬁcientrangefrom was established. The association between DS and lower 0.00209 in generation 50 to 1.305 ·10-6 in generation one, birth weight and gestational age was analyzed. with average value of 0.000645. As was expected we Results:From1,358,158birthsexamined,2,344casesof observed F decrease as Ne increased. Statistically sig- t DS were registered. The prevalence -expressed per 10,000 niﬁcant difference between F values of generations and t births-was17.26;amongprovincesitvariedbetween10.99 average value was not found (p=0.5964, Single sample and 23.71. By maternal age, the prevalence ranged from Wilcoxon Test). 10.32 in <20 years, to 158.06 in those ≥45. In public Conclusion: The results don’t conﬁrm the effect of hospitals the prevalence was 16.25 and 21.55 in private elevated inbreeding as couse of small Ne/N in the hospitals, prenatal detection was 14.1% and 30.5% Lithuanian population. However, more detailed analysis is respectively. In high complexity public hospitals the needed. prevalence was 17.45 and 14.62 in hospitals with lower This work supported by the LITGEN project (VP1-3.1- complexity.Therewasanegativecorrelationbetweenbirth ŠMM-07-K-01-013), funded by the European Social Fund weight and DS (B:-362.22, p<0.01). The mean gestational under the Global Grant Measure. age was 0.28 weeks lower in DS newborns than in the A. Urnikyte: None. A. Molytė: None. V. general population. Kučinskas: None. Conclusions: DS prevalence in Argentina is similar to that reported previously in the region. A higher prevalence P18.25A and percentage of prenatal diagnosis was observed in The eQTLs Catalog and LinDA browser: a platform for private hospitals. The association between DS and lower prioritising target genes of GWAS variants birth weight is consistent with previous ﬁndings. Knowl- edge of the epidemiological characteristics will allow the S. Onano1,2,F. Cucca1,2, M.Pala2 implementation of health policies for this pathology. J.F.Martini: None.M.P.Bidondo:None.S.P.Duarte: 1Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche - Università degli Studi None. R. Liascovich: None. P. Barbero: None. B. di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 2Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Groisman: None. Biomedica - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy P18.24D Relationship between effective population size and TheexpressionQuantitativeTraitsLoci(eQTLs)aregenetic inbreeding in the Lithuanian population polymorphisms associated with changes ingeneexpression levels. They have been successfully used to prioritize the A. Urnikyte, A. Molytė,V.Kučinskas target genes of the variants associated with complex traits and diseases (GWAS variants). Up to date a few eQTLs Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania640 J.delPicchia databases exist and they collect only a small portion of the physiologicalcardiacconductiontraits.Fromananalysisof available datasets. 4342 subjects from the Cooperative Health Research In We thus planned to build the largest publically available South Tyrol study, we reported association oftwo Junction catalog of eQTLs, coupled with a browser, to optimize and Plakoglobin (JUP) SNPs with P wave length and one simplify their interrogation. Desmoplakin (DSP) SNP with QRS interval. We collected and manually curated 51 eQTL public Material and Methods: In this subsequent study, we studies ranging from 2007 to date, corresponding to more assessed replication in the MICROS (N=636), an indepen- than100sampletypesand25humanpopulationsforatotal dent study from the same geographical region, and in the of259176cis-eQTLsand32929geneswithatleastonecis- Northern Germany SHIP/SHIP Trend (N=3797) studies. eQTL (cis-eGenes). Most of the eQTLs studies were We characterized the variants and their genomic context conducted in blood samples from healthy individuals of usingtheSCREEN/ENCODEtool,theGTeXandmethyla- European ancestry. We found that for 93% of the known tion QTL (meQTL) databases, and Framingham Heart protein-coding genes were eGenes, 20% of them intersect- Study meQTL data (N=4170). We tested few biological ing(r2≥0.8)withtheNHGRI-EBIGWASCatalogand26% hypotheses using two-sample Mendelian randomization of whom considered as druggable. Furthermore, for those (MR) based on Wald estimator, with standard errors GWAS variants for which an eGene was known, we found computed via delta method. that the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog proposed the same Results: The DSP rs2744389-QRS association was gene as candidate target only for the 60% of the times. replicated in MICROS (p=0.010) but not in SHIP/SHIP OureQTL-Catalogcanbeusedasareferencetomeasure Trend (p=0.505), suggesting genetic heterogeneity. We the degree of novelty for future eQTLs studies; it is didnotreplicatethePwaveassociations.FallingintheDSP provided within a platform with a web interface (LinDA) promoter, the rs2744389 is an eQTL of the antisense RNA that we plan to implement with other types of quantitative RP3-512B11.3,andameQTLofcg02643433.MRanalysis traits (i.e. epigenetic, proteomic, metabolomics and micro- showed evidence of a causal effect of cg02643433 biota)tobetterdissectthepleiotropyoftheGWASvariants. methylationonQRS(p=0.001),ofRP3-512B11.3expres- S. Onano: None. F. Cucca: None. M. Pala: None. sion on QRS (p=0.030), but lacking evidence of a causal effect of RP3-512B11.3 expression on cg02643433 methy- P18.26B lation (p=0.090). Bioinformatic and mendelian randomization analyses Conclusions: While needing to understand the reasons characterize variants in desmosomal genes associated with for the partial lack of replication, MR results suggest an ECG traits in the general population antisense RNA-mediated mechanism of DSP expression control to be validated with laboratory experiments. L. Foco1,F. DelGreco M1,C. Fuchsberger1,M.Gögele1,F. L.Foco:None.F.DelGrecoM:None.C.Fuchsberger: Murgia1,T.Huan2,3,D.B.Levy2,3,A.Teumer4,5,M.Dörr5,6,G. None. M. Gögele: None. F. Murgia: None. T. Huan: Schmidt7,A. Rossini1,P. P. Pramstaller1,8,9,C. Pattaro1 None. D.B. Levy: None. A. Teumer: None. M. Dörr: None. G. Schmidt: None. A. Rossini: None. P.P. 1InstituteforBiomedicine,Bolzano,Italy,2FraminghamHeart Pramstaller: None. C. Pattaro: None. Study, Framingham, MA, United States, 3The Population Studies Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of P18.27C theNationalInstitutesofHealth,Bethesda,MD,UnitedStates, A functional strategy to characterize expression 4Institute for Community Medicine, University Medicine Quantitative Trait Loci Greifswald,Greifswald,Germany,5DZHK(GermanCenterfor Cardiovascular Research), partner site Greifswald, E. Grassi1, E.Mariella1,M. Forneris2,F. Marotta1,M. Greifswald, Germany, 6Department of Internal Medicine B, Catapano3,I. Molineris4,P. Provero1,4 University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 7Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik, Klinikum rechts der Isar, 1DepartmentofMolecularBiotechnologyandHealthSciences, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 2Genome Biology Unit, 8DepartmentofNeurology,GeneralCentralHospital,Bolzano, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Italy,9DepartmentofNeurology,UniversityofLübeck,Lübeck, Germany, 3Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Germany King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 4Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, San Raffaele Introduction: Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy is caused Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy by mutations in desmosomal genes. We previously tested association of common variants in such genes withAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 641 Introduction: Expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL) at-onset (AO), including within some families. We hypo- studies represent an important step in the functional char- thesized that candidate genes associated with TTR path- acterization of genetic variants that have been associated ways, such as C1QA and C1QC, might act as genetic with diseases by Genome Wide Association Studies modiﬁers of AO in TTR-FAP Val30Met Portuguese (GWAS). We propose a new strategy to detect eQTLs patients. leveraging the idea that changes in gene expression often Subjects&Methods:WeanalysedDNAsamplesof267 pass through the alteration of transcription factors (TFs) patients(117families).Tosearchforvariants,allexonsand binding on regulatory regions. ﬂankingregionsweregenotypedbyautomatedbidirectional Material and Methods: The Total Binding Afﬁnity sequencing. We used generalized estimating equations (TBA)measuresthepropensityofaTFtobindasequence. (GEEs) to take into account the non-independency of AO Ineachmodel,wecomputeTBAvaluesfor640humanTFs among relatives. Intensive in silico analyses were per- on a regulatory region after the reconstruction of its formed, using various software to assess miRNAs target sequence in several individuals and then correlate this sites, splicing sites, transcription factor binding sites TBA proﬁle with the expression of a target gene through alterations and gene-gene interactions. principalcomponentregression.Thisapproachwasapplied Results: Two variants for C1QA gene: GA genotype of to the analysis of a dataset including genome and coupled rs201693493 (P<0.001) and CT genotype of rs149050968 gene expression data for 344 European individuals. (P<0.001)weresigniﬁcantlyassociatedwithlaterAO(≥50 Results: Our TBA-based inference detected 3,781 years). In silico analysis demonstrated, that rs201693493 eQTLs, of which 1,543 weren’t revealed by the traditional may alter splicing activity. Regarding C1QC, we found single-SNPmethod.Inadditionitpermittedtheformulation three statistically signiﬁcant variants: GA genotype of of mechanistic hypotheses pinpointing for each gene the rs2935537 (P=0.003), GA genotype of rs201241346 most relevant TFs in each associated regulatory region and (P<0.001) and GA genotype (P<0.001) of rs200952686 we showed that these outcomes are fairly consistent with (P<0.001).TheﬁrsttwowereassociatedwithearlierAO(≤ the presence of binding QTLs (bQTLs). 40 years), while the third was associated with late-onset. Future perspectives: We want to integrate the TBA Conclusions: C1QA was associated with later. C1QC model with new approaches, collectively named Transcrip- mayhaveadoublerole:variantsmayconferearlierorlater tome Wide Association Studies (TWAS), that combine AO, depending on the associated pathophysiological GWAS and eQTL data to identify susceptibility genes. At mechanisms. We thus conﬁrmed the role of C1Q comple- leastinprinciple,TBA-basedTWAShavetheadvantageof ment genes as modulator of AO in TTR-FAP Val30Met considering also the effect of rare variants that cannot be Portuguese patients. measured in standard eQTL studies. M. Alves-Ferreira received a FCT fellowship grant E. Grassi: None. E. Mariella: None. M. Forneris: [SFRH/BD/101352/2014] None. F. Marotta: None. M. Catapano: None. I. A. Dias: None. D. Santos: None. T. Coelho: F. Molineris: None. P. Provero: None. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Pﬁzer Inc. M. Alves- Ferreira: None. J. Sequeiros: None. I. Alonso: None. C. P18.28D Lemos: None. A. Sousa: None. Complement C1Q genes act as modiﬁers of age-at-onset in TTR-FAPVal30Met Portuguese patients P18.30B Association of genetic markers of coagulation and A. Dias1,2,3, D.Santos1,2,4,T. Coelho5, M.Alves-Ferreira1,2,4,J. ﬁbrinolysis with prematurity complication Sequeiros1,2,4,I.Alonso1,2, C.Lemos4,1,2,A. Sousa4,1,2 T. M.Damnjanovic1,M.Grk1,T. Varljen2,J. Pantelic3,N. 1UnIGENe,IBMC-InstitutodeBiologiaMoleculareCelular, Maksimovic1, B.Jekic1,I.Novakovic1 Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of Porto, Portugal, 3FCUP, Faculdade de Ciências da Forensic Medicine "Milovan Milovanovic", Belgrade, Serbia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4ICBAS - Instituto 3Clinic for eye disease, Belgrade, Serbia Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 5UCA, Unidade Corino de Andrade, Centro Introduction: The risk of complications in premature Hospitalar do Porto (CHP), Porto, Portugal babiesincreaseswithlowergestationalage(GA)andlower birth weight (BW). Most frequent complications are Introduction: Transthyretin (TTR) familial amyloid poly- respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), bronchopulmonary neuropathy (FAP) (OMIM 176300) shows a variable age- dysplasia (BPD), intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH),642 J.delPicchia retinopathyofprematurity(ROP)andsepsis.Recentstudies Materials and Methods: In accordance with the FarGen showed that FV Leiden and PAI-1 4G/5G gene poly- projectpedigreesweremadefromall1530individualswho morphisms are associated with spontaneous abortion and had registered as FarGen participants. All the participants prematurity. Our objective was to analyse the FV Leiden are in the Multi-Generation register and have answered a and PAI-1 4G/5G variants in order to determine their questionnaire about health status. Three different pedigrees association with complications in premature babies. were constructed: 1) all 1530 participants, 2) participants Material and Methods: The study included 136 with “good” health status, and 3) participants with “bad” premature babies, mean GA= 30,46±1,98 and BW=1294 health status. From the 21 different ICD-10 groups of ±278,3. Genotyping of FV Leiden variant was performed diseases reported in the FarGen project, pedigrees were by Real-time PCR analysis with speciﬁc TaqMan assay. made using 15 speciﬁc diseases. PAI-1 4G/5G variants genotyping was performed by PCR- Results:Wepresentthreelargepedigreesspanningseven RFLPs method. generations, withdata from group pedigrees with good and Results: The frequency of complications in premature bad self-reported health status we show whether consan- babies was: 73,7% RDS, 19,1% BDP, 14,6% IVH, 46,7% guinity reﬂects the outcome, and trace its origins to the ROP and 35,8% sepsis. The frequency of risk allele A for differentislandsontheFaroeIslands.Wepresent15family FVLeiden variantis6.7%. FVLeiden variant isassociated pedigreeswithspeciﬁcdiseasestatus,whichmaycontribute with development of BPD (X2=5,245, p=0,022; OR to our understanding of the pathogenesis of these diseases. 0,302, 95% CI 0,104-0,877). The frequency of risk allele Perspectives: The pedigrees will be used in combination 4G for PAI-1 4G/5G variant is 60,6%. PAI-1 variant is a with genotype data to gain information on population associated with IVH expression (X2=6,700, p=0,035; stratiﬁcation and the demographical history of the Faroe 0,257, 95% CI 0,088-0,775). There was no signiﬁcant Islands. association of analyzed variants with RDS, ROP or sepsis. Funding: The project is funded by the Faroese Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that FV Leiden Government. variantis a risk factor for development of BPD while the Ó.Mortensen:None.L.N.Lydersen:None.B.áSteig: presence of 4G variant is associated with occurrence None. G. Andorsdóttir: None. N.O. Gregersen: None. of IVH. T.M. Damnjanovic: None. M. Grk: None. T. Varljen: P18.32D None.J.Pantelic:None.N.Maksimovic:None.B.Jekic: Households and Family Projections: Tehran Lipid and None. I. Novakovic: None. Glucose Study: 1999 to 2016 P18.31C K. Guity1,B. SedaghatiKhayat1, A.Momenan2, A. Use of large pedigrees from the FarGen project to gain Seyedhamzehzadeh1, N.Sarbazi1,F. Azizi3,M. Daneshpour1 information on consanguinity and inbreeding within the Faroese population 1CellularandMolecularEndocrineResearchCenter,Research InstituteforEndocrineSciences,Shahid,Tehran,Iran,Islamic Ó.Mortensen1,L.N.Lydersen1,B.áSteig2,G.Andorsdóttir1,N. Republic of, 2Prevention of Metabolic Disorders Research O.Gregersen1 Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Endocrine Research 1FarGen,TheGeneticBiobankoftheFaroeIslands,Tórshavn, Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid, Faroe Islands, 2General Medical Department, National Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Hospital of the Faroe Islands, Tórshavn, Faroe Islands Introduction: During last decade, along with developing Introduction: The Faroe Islands is a north Atlantic isolate high throughput sequencing technology and mapping the with a current population size of 50.000 individuals. The human genome, social and biological relationships are Multi-Generation register of the Genetic Biobank (www. considered as pivotal tools in medical genetics. Family- biobank.gov.fo) comprises hereditary records of all indivi- based studies are suitable for population stratiﬁcation con- duals registered in the Faroe Islands since 1800, moreover trol,investigationsofparent-of-origin;X-linkedtransmitted the majority of the individuals (85%) have records dating inheritance and identiﬁcation of disease risk factors. The back to 1650. Together with the FarGen project (www.fa aim of the current study was to describe the family struc- rgen.fo)weareusingthisvaluableresourceofgenealogyto tures of Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study (TLGS) popula- show consanguinity and inbreeding within the Faroese tion, and rates of its consanguineous marriage. population. Materials and methods: The TLGS is one of the oldest longitudinal cohort study, which has been performed on aAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 643 population residents of the region district 13 of Tehran wide penalties according to marginal p-value were applied municipality, in two main and four follow up phases. for two-step methods. Between1999-2016,thecompletegenealogydataof20,077 Results: We identiﬁed ﬁve loci near ABCG8, ATP2B1, participants were documented and collected. Pedigree of CWC27includingthegeneticinteractionwithsmoking.The each participant was drawn on paper sheet based on heritabilityexplainedbyABCG8was0.9%byaGWASbut standardizedhumanpedigreenomenclatureandcheckedby was increased to 5.7% when we considered GxSmoking ChIP-TypeddatafromtheTehranCardiometabolicGenetic interactions. We also identiﬁed 11 signiﬁcant loci near Study (TCGS). CCDC63,SH2B3,CUX2forGxAlcoholinteractions.About Results:Genealogydataofparticipantsandtheirrelatives 11.6% of the heritability has been elucidated further due to overall for 23259 individuals were checked through 5434 the interplay between identiﬁed loci and alcohol. We households.Beforepedigreedrawingandsplicingunrelated identiﬁed several suggestive loci that synergistically individuals, themean ofcluster was4.2±1.9(Min1,Max increase the risk of HBP with obesity. 18). After taking into account ChIP genotyping data, 1741 Conclusion: The identiﬁed loci might be used as genetic clusters which their members had a common ancestor, markers to give a personalized guideline for those who are joined together to make extended families by the appro- particularly susceptible to smoking, alcohol, and obesity. priated methods. With splicing and adding disjointed, Someamountofmissingheritabilitywouldbeexplainedby dummy individuals, 25642 remained in 3724 ± 6.9 (Min discovering more GxE interactive loci. 3,Max52)pedigrees.FamilystructuresoftheTLGSalong M. Kang: None. J. Sung: None. with demographic, anthropometrics, biochemical, genetics, and well-phenotyped data can explore more genetics P18.34B different. Geneticlandscapeofkidneyfunction:resultsfromatrans- K. Guity: None. B. SedaghatiKhayat: None. A. ethnic genome-wide association meta-analysis of >750,000 Momenan: None. A. Seyedhamzehzadeh: None. N. individuals Sarbazi: None. F. Azizi: None. M. Daneshpour: None. C. Pattaro,CKDGen Consortium P18.33A A genome-wide gene by lifestyle interaction study on high Eurac Research, Institute for Biomedicine, Bolzano, Italy blood pressure Introduction: Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a public M.Kang1, J.Sung2 health threat, which affects >10% adult population in Western countries and is associated with increased risk of 1Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Seoul end-stage renal disease, cardiovascular disease, and all- NationalUniversity,Seoul,Korea,Republicof,2Departmentof cause mortality. In the absence of therapies for CKD pre- Epidemiology,SchoolofPublicHealthandInstituteofHealth vention, understanding the biological regulators of glo- and Environment, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, merular ﬁltration rate (GFR), the key element that deﬁnes Republic of CKD, is of the highest relevance. Materials and Methods: Within the CKDGen Consor- Introduction: Epidemiologic studies showed synergistic tium,121studiesappliedstandardizedprotocolsandscripts effects on the risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease torungenome-wideassociationscans(GWAS)ofestimated duetotheinterplaybetweenhighbloodpressure(HBP)and GFR (eGFR) on ~9 million high-quality SNPs, imputed on lifestyleincluding smoking,alcohol,andobesity.Although the 1000 Genomes ph3v5 or Haplotype Reference Con- severalGWASs and candidate-gene studies have found out sortium datasets. We performed ﬁxed-effect meta-analysis GxE interactions on hypertension, relatively fewer studies ofGWASdataon>750,000participantsofEuropean,East- have been performed to scan the entire genome to identify Asian, South-Asian, Hispanic, and African ancestries. variants that modify the effects of lifestyle on the risk Effect heterogeneitydue to ancestry was investigated using of HBP. trans-ethnic genome-wide meta-regression as implemented Methods: 21,504 individuals from three Korean cohorts in MR-MEGA. were involved. Bloodpressurewas measuredfollowingthe Results: Genomic inﬂation was negligible: lambda = American Heart Association (AHA) guideline. We con- 1.05 and LD score regression intercept = 1.04. Across ducted exhaustive GxE interaction analyses for 4.1 million ethnicities, we identiﬁed 3081-Mb segments containing ≥1 SNPs imputed using the 1000 genomes GRCh37 reference SNP associated with eGFR (pvalue ≤ 5E-08): 228 ofthese panel. We applied various exhaustive scans and two-step loci were novel and 80 validated previously identiﬁed methods for detecting GxE interactions in parallel: step- signals. Trans-ethnic meta-regression revealed limited644 J.delPicchia heterogeneity correlated with ancestry for most genomic involving this marker attained p=0.13 and p=4.0×10-3, regions.ApproximateconditionalanalysisoftheEuropean- respectively. ancestry dataset identiﬁed 269 independent variants, which Conclusion: We extended our MP approach to MP- togetherdoubledtheeGFRvarianceexplainedcomparedto EWAS, and demonstrated its enhanced power over single- previous estimates. traitanalysisfordetectionofMPepigeneticeffectsinlarge- Conclusions: This study represents the largest screen of scale data. kidney function genetic loci to date. The large number of Funding: DYNAhealth-H2020-PHC-2014-633595, identiﬁed loci will contribute to increase our understanding WT205915, Academy of Finland, EGEA, 285547. of kidney function’s biology. H. Draisma: None. M. Wielscher: None. S. Hassan: C. Pattaro: None. None. Z. Balkhiyarova: None. M. Jarvelin: None. M. Kaakinen: None. I. Prokopenko: None. P18.35C Multi-phenotype epigenome-wide association analysis of P18.36D fasting glucose and insulin in 981 Finnish individuals Characterisation and somatic mosaicism of the human glycophorin DUP4 structural variant,and association with H.Draisma, M.Wielscher, S.Hassan, Z.Balkhiyarova, M. hemoglobin levels in a malaria-endemic village Jarvelin, M.Kaakinen,I. Prokopenko W.Algady1,S.Gomes2,D.Carpenter1,P.Brajer1,A.Färnert3,I. Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom Rooth4,M.Shaw5,F. Yang2,E. J.Hollox1 Background: Multi-phenotype genome-wide association 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, studies(MP-GWAS)ofcorrelatedtraitshavegreaterpower 2Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, to detect genotype–phenotype associations than single-trait 3Infectious Disease Unit, Department of Medicine Solna, GWAS. In our previously-developed MP-GWAS method, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Nyamisati Malaria implemented in the SCOPA software, single-nucleotide Research,Ruﬁji,NationalInstituteforMedicalResearch,Dar- polymorphism (SNP) genotype dosage is ‘reversely’ es-Salaam,Tanzania,UnitedRepublicof,5SchoolofMedicine, regressed on a linear combination of phenotypes. Con- University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom sidering the epidemiologic correlations between fasting plasma glucose (FG) and fasting insulin (FI) levels, we HumanglycophorinsAandBareproteinsexpressedonthe aimed to use a SCOPA adaptation for multi-phenotype surfaceoferythrocytes,andarereceptorsforinvasionofthe epigenome-wideassociationanalysis(MP-EWAS)forthese Plasmodium falciparum parasite, which causes malaria in two traits in non-diabetic individuals. sub-Saharan Africa. The proteins are encoded by the genes Methods: We developed the “methylSCOPA” software, GYPA and GYPB which, together with GYPE, reside on a extending the SCOPA approach to MP-EWAS using DNA tandemly-duplicated repeat region on chromosome [hyper/hypo]methylation data, and applied it to FG, FI and 4q31.21. Previous genome-wide analysis has shown that a IlluminaInﬁniumHumanMethylation450KBeadChiparray structural variant within this region (DUP4), is identical to data from the Northern Finland Birth Cohorts (NFBC) the blood group antigen Dantu NE+, and confers a 1966/1986. We subjected all data to stringent quality clinically-important protective effect, is common in East control and corrected them for measured (potential) Africans and is strongly protective against severe malaria, confounders by linear regression analysis, and normalized reducingtheriskofseveremalariabyupto40%.DUP4isa the methylation signal intensity and FI data. The MP- complex structural genomic variant that carries hybrid EWAS included data for 635/346 individuals and 459,378/ (GYPA/GYPB)fusion genes. Using ﬁbre-FISH, we validate 466,290 methylation probes from NFBC1966 and the structural arrangement of the glycophorin locus in the NFBC1986, respectively. We meta-analyzed the study- DUP4variant,andprovideevidenceofsomaticvariationin speciﬁc MP-EWAS results, mapped genomic locations to thenumberofGYPA/GYPBfusiongenes.Subsequently,we CGCh37/hg19,andadoptedp<1×10-7todenoteepigenome- havedevelopedaparalogue-speciﬁcjunctionfragmentPCR wide signiﬁcance. to genotype DUP4. We demonstrate association of DUP4 Results: In meta-analysis, the MP-EWAS association variant with hemoglobin levels - a phenotype related to involving a methylation marker located at chromosome malaria - in 348 unrelated DNA samples from a Tanzanian 22:49,088,813 and annotated to FAM19A5 attained the village holoendemic for malaria using a family-based lowest p-value (p=1.4×10-7) epigenome-wide. In single- association test. Using the family-based association trait FG and FI EWAS meta-analyses, the associations approach implemented in (QTDT), we have found a sta- tistically signiﬁcant association of the DUP4 variant withAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 645 hemoglobin levels (p=0.0054). Our study conﬁrms the variants in ABCG2/BCRP, including rs72552713 (Q126X) importance of the DUP4 variant in malaria protection, and and rs2231142 (Q141K). However, the effects of rare raises the intriguing possibility of heightened somatic ABCG2 variants on gout is unknown. Therefore, we instability and somatic mosaicism at this locus in DUP4 investigated their effects on gout susceptibility. carriers, which might confer added protection against Materials and Methods: We sequenced all exons of malaria. ABCG2 in 480 gout patients and 480 healthy controls W. Algady: None. S. Gomes: None. D. Carpenter: (Japanese males). We also performed functional assay of None.P.Brajer:None.A.Färnert:None.I.Rooth:None. non-synonymous ABCG2 variants and analyzed the M. Shaw: None. F. Yang: None. E.J. Hollox: None. correlation between urate transport function and scores fromtheproteinpredictionalgorithms(SIFTandPolyPhen- P18.37A 2). Stratiﬁed association analyses and multivariate logistic BothcommonandraregeneticvariantsofABCG2arerisks regression analysis were used to evaluate the effects of for gout ABCG2 variants on gout susceptibility. Results: We genotyped 3 common and 19 rare non- T. Higashino1, T.Takada2,H.Nakaoka3,Y. Toyoda2,B. synonymous variants of ABCG2. SIFT scores were Stiburkova4,5,H.Miyata2,Y. Ikebuchi2,H.Nakashima6,S. signiﬁcantly correlated with the urate transport function. Shimizu1,M.Kawaguchi1,M. Sakiyama1, A.Nakayama1,A. After the effects of common variants were removed by Akashi1,Y. Tanahashi1,Y. Kawamura1,T. Nakamura7, K. stratiﬁcation, the rare ABCG2 variants were signiﬁcantly Wakai8, R.Okada8, K.Yamamoto9,K. Hosomichi3,10, T. associatedwithgoutsusceptibility(oddsratio[OR]=3.2,p Hosoya11,12,K. Ichida12,13,H. Ooyama14,H.Suzuki2, I.Inoue3, =6.4×10-3). Additionally, multivariate logistic regression T. R.Merriman15,N.Shinomiya1, H.Matsuo1 analysis clariﬁed that these rare ABCG2 variants (OR=2.7, p=3.0×10-3) were similar in effect size to Q126X 1Department of Integrative Physiology and Bio-Nano (OR=3.4, p=3.2×10-6) and Q141K (OR=2.3, p= Medicine, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, 2.7×10-16). Japan, 2Department of Pharmacy, The University of Tokyo Conclusions: We showed that both common and rare Hospital,FacultyofMedicine,TheUniversityofTokyo,Tokyo, variants of ABCG2 are independent risks for gout. These Japan,3DivisionofHumanGenetics,DepartmentofIntegrated resultscouldsupportnotonly“CommonDisease,Common Genetics, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan, Variant” but also “Common Disease, Multiple Rare 4First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General Variant” hypotheses for the association between ABCG2 UniversityHospitalinPrague,InstituteofInheritedMetabolic and gout. Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Institute of Fundings: Japan (MEXT [Nos. 25293145, 15K15227, Rheumatology, Prague, Czech Republic, 6Department of 17015018, 221S0001, 221S0002, 16H06277 and Preventive Medicine and Public Health, National Defense 16H06279],MHLW,MOD,theKawanoMasanoriMemor- Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan, 7Laboratory for ial Foundation for Promotion of Pediatrics, and the Gout Mathematics, National Defense Medical College, National Research Foundation) DefenseMedicalCollege,Tokorozawa,Japan,8Departmentof T. Higashino: None. T. Takada: E. Ownership Interest Preventive Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan, 9Department of Medical Modest;apatentpendingbasedonthework.H.Nakaoka: Chemistry, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, None. Y. Toyoda: None. B. Stiburkova: None. H. Japan, 10Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, Miyata:None. Y. Ikebuchi: None. H. Nakashima: None. Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kanazawa University, S. Shimizu: None. M. Kawaguchi: None. M. Sakiyama: Ishikawa, Japan, 11Division of Kidney and Hypertension, None. A. Nakayama: None. A. Akashi: None. Y. Department of Internal Medicine, Jikei University School of Tanahashi: None. Y. Kawamura: None. T. Nakamura: Medicine,Tokyo,Japan,12DepartmentofPathophysiologyand E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other TherapyinChronicKidneyDisease,JikeiUniversitySchoolof intellectual property); Modest; a patent pending based on Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 13Department of Pathophysiology, the work. K. Wakai: None. R. Okada: None. K. Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Hachioji, Yamamoto: None. K. Hosomichi: None. T. Hosoya: Tokyo, Japan, 14Ryougoku East Gate Clinic, Tokyo, Japan, None. K. Ichida: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock 15Department of Biochemisty, University of Otago, Dunedin, options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; a New Zealand patent pending based on the work. H. Ooyama: None. H. Suzuki: E. OwnershipInterest (stock, stock options, patent Introduction: Previous studies unveiled the association or other intellectual property); Modest; a patent pending between gout susceptibility and common dysfunctional basedonthework.I.Inoue:None.T.R.Merriman:None.646 J.delPicchia N.Shinomiya:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, to be involved in CS activation. Further characterization is patent or other intellectual property); Modest; a patent warranted to deﬁne their pleiotropic landscape and involve pending based on the work. H. Matsuo: E. Ownership CS activation in complex disease etiology. Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual D. Noce: None. L. Foco: None. C. Fuchsberger: None. property); Modest; a patent pending based on the work. M. Gögele: None. F. Kronenberg: None. R. Würzner: None. C. Lass-Flörl: None. P.P. Pramstaller: None. D. P18.38B Orth-Höller: None. C. Pattaro: None. Genome-wide association study on the complement system activationbytheclassical,lectin, andalternativepathways P18.40D in the Cooperative Health Research in South Tyrol Genome-Wide Association Study of Serum Uric Acid in (CHRIS) study Korean D.Noce1,2,L. Foco2,C. Fuchsberger2,M.Gögele2,F. S. Im Kronenberg3,R.Würzner1,C.Lass-Flörl1,P.P.Pramstaller2,4,5, D.Orth-Höller1,C. Pattaro2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, 1Division of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, Medical Republic of University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Istitute for Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Afﬁliated Institute of the Elevated serum uric acid (SUA) contributes to diverse University of Lübeck, Bolzano, Italy, 3Division of Genetic health outcomes including gout, hypertension, diabetes Epidemiology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, mellitus and cardiovascular disease. The incidence and Austria,4DepartmentofNeurology,GeneralCentralHospital, prevalence of hyperuricemia have been increasing. The Bolzano, Italy, 5Department of Neurology, University of proportion of heritability contributing to SUA levels is Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany estimated to be about 40~70%. We aimed to identify genetic variants involved in the regulation of SUA using Thecomplementsystem(CS),afundamentalcomponentof genome-wide association study (GWAS) in Korean. the innate immune response, can be activated via the clas- Genetic association was assessed with 4,414,664 single sical (CP), lectin (LP), and alternative (AP) pathways. We nucleotidepolymorphisms(SNPs)aftergenomicimputation conductedagenome-wideassociationstudy(GWAS)ofthe in 1905 unrelated men. We identiﬁed four loci (FRMD8, three pathways in a general population framework. CS OVOL1, ABCG2 and NRXN2) that reached genome-wide activation was assessed in 4990 participants of the CHRIS signiﬁcance (<p<5×10-8). The strongest association was study, using the WIESLAB commercial assay. For each found with a SNP in FRMD8 (rs184521656, p=3.02×10- pathway, GWAS were performed on >7 million dosage 18),whichhasnotbeenreportedtobeassociatedwithSUA levels, imputed on the Haplotype Reference Consortium in the other studies. The other two loci (ABCG2 and dataset,andselectedforminorallelefrequencyof≥0.01and NRXN2) were frequently reported in previous studies of imputation quality of ≥0.3. Association models accounted severalethnicgroups.Inaddition,weconductedreplication for sex, age, plate and date of experiment, and relatedness. study of the SNP, rs184521656 in 2912 Koreans including ForsigniﬁcantSNPs,SNP-by-sexinteractionwastestedvia both men and women. Rs184521656 (p=1.50×10-10) was linear mixed models. SNP-based heritability was estimated successfully validated. Rs184521656 is found only in East usingGCTA-GREML.AllSNPsexplained14%,13%,and Asian with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of 0.01 and 45%, of the CP, AP, and LP variance, respectively. We functions as a protective allele in the direction of lowering identiﬁed associations at 8 loci carrying 12 independent the SUA in our study. This study validated previously variantswithlargeeffects:forAP,atchromosomes1q31(p published results and suggested new possibilities. =8.8e-10),5p13.1(p=1.8e-17),6p22.1(p=4.7e-14),and S. Im: None. 12p12.2 (p=1.8e-9); for CP, at chromosome 6p22.1 (p= 1.4e-35); and for LP, at chromosomes 1p36.22 (p=7.3e- P18.42B 11), 9q34.2 (p=7.6e-45), and 10q21.1 (p=1.4e-260). Six A retrospective analysis of the prevalence of imprinting of these loci carry genes known for their relation with CS disorders in Estonia: updated results activation, as partially conﬁrmed by summary-data-based Mendelian randomization analysis. SNP-by-sex interaction M.Yakoreva1,2,T. Kahre1,2,E. Õiglane-Shlik3,4,M. Vals1,3,4,P. analysis identiﬁed a possible interaction between the Mee5,K. Õunap1,2 1p36.22 SNP and sex in association with LP (p=0.023). We identiﬁed eight loci, most of which carry genes knownAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 647 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu 1V.N.KarazinKharkivNationalUniversity,Kharkiv,Ukraine, University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Clinical 2Regional Clinical Dermatovenerologic Dispensary No. 1, Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Kharkiv, Ukraine, 3Medical Center IGR, Kyiv, Ukraine, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 4Kharkiv National Medical University, Kharkiv, Ukraine, Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Children’s 5Kharkiv Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5United Kharkiv, Ukraine, 6National Scientiﬁc Center “Institute of Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia Experimental and Clinical Veterinary Medicine”, Kharkiv, Ukraine Introduction:Imprintingdisorders(IDs)areagroupofrare congenital diseases affecting growth, development, meta- Introduction: The trend to assortative marriages in Eur- bolism and behaviour. Because of high clinical and genetic opean countries leads to population subdivision and heterogeneity, the exact prevalence of IDs is not known. increasedinbreedinglevel.Itresultsindecreasedpopulation Methods: In this study we retrospectively reviewed diversity, loci similarity, intensiﬁed recombination pro- records of all Estonian patients with both molecularly and cesses associated with chromosome rearrangements. The clinically diagnosed IDs found during the period 1998- study was aimed to assess the gene linkage extent at dif- 2017. ferent exogamy degrees of subjects. Results: A total of 83 individuals with IDs were MaterialsandMethods:Thegenotypingwascarriedfor identiﬁed. 31% (26) of them had Prader-Willi syndrome MTHFR677C-T,1298A-C,1p36.3(n=105),MTR2756A- (PWS),18%(15)Silver-Russellsyndrome(SRS),17%(14) G, 1q43, F5 1691G-A, 1q24.2 (n=50), LCT C/T(-13910), Angelman syndrome (AS), 14,5% (12) Beckwith- G/A(-22018), 2q21.3 (n=34), VDR3 61888G>T, Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), 11% (9) pseudo- or 61968T>C, 12q13.11 (n=100). The chromosome structure pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP/PPHP), 5% (4) was analyzed using classical cytogenetics methods, GTG, central precocious puberty (CPP), 2,5% (2) Temple FISH(n=6156).Exogamydegreescale:from1-parentage syndrome (TS14) and 1% (1) transient neonatal diabetes originated from one settlement to 4 - interethnic marriage. mellitus (TNDM). 1/3 of all SRS and BWS cases fulﬁlled Inbreeding level was measured with F . The linkage ST diagnosticcriteriaforthesedisorders,butwerenegativefor disequilibrium (LD) was estimated by D’, r2. geneticabnormalities.Ageatdiagnosisvariedfromprenatal Results: F in urban and rural Ukrainian populations in ST to 83 years. During the period 2004-2017 birth prevalence 2016were81.6×10-6and124.1×10-6,increasedoverpast30 of PWS in Estonia was 1/14,565 live births (1/10,000-1/ yearsupto4times.D’(r2)forSNPsanalyzedwere:1p36.3 25,000 worldwide), AS 1/29,130 (1/12,000-1/20,000), - 0.045 (0.010), 1q43/1q24.2 - 0.025 (0.010), 2q21.3 - BWS 1/22,656 (~1/15,000), SRS 1/16,992 (1/75,000-1/ 0.209 (0.554), 12q13.11 - 0.039 (0.006). Increased 100,000) and PHP/PPHP 1/33,985 (prevalence unknown). exogamy degree was associated with increased D’ (r2) in The total prevalence of IDs in Estonia is 6.3/100,000. loci 1p36.3: 0.027 - 0.081 (0.003 - 0.025), 1q43/1q24.2: Conclusions: The birth prevalence of PWS has been 0.015 - 0.027 (0.002 - 0.004) and 12q13.11: 0.043 - 0.073 foundtobeasexpected,buttheprevalenceofASandBWS (0.008-0.023).Amongalldetectedbalancedtranslocations was ~1.5 times lower. Probably the real worldwide (n=69, 1.12%), 24.6% were in: 1p36.3 (2.9%), 1q43 prevalence of SRS is underestimated and may be at least (5.8%), 1q24.2 (4.4%), 2q21.3 (10.1%), 12q13.11 (1.4%). 4 times higher than expected. The GNAS-gene-related IDs There were no translocations in other loci of chromosomes (PHP/PPHP)mayalsoberelativelyfrequentdisorders.This analyzed. workwassupportedbytheEstonianResearchCouncilgrant Conclusions: Considering pleiotropic effects of genes PUT355. studied, increased F leads to multifactorial diseases. LD ST M. Yakoreva: None. T. Kahre: None. E. Õiglane- could be used as indirect inbreeding evaluation. Shlik: None. M. Vals: None. P. Mee: None. K. O.M. Fedota: None. L.V. Roshenyuk: None. Y.V. Õunap: None. Gontar: None. N.G. Lysenko: None. V.O. Babalian: None. T.V. Tyzhnenko: None. Y.A. Sadovnychenko: P18.43C None. V.M. Vorontsov: None. P.P. Ryzhko: None. A.P. EffectsofinbreedingonlinkagedisequilibriumforSNPsof Gerilovych: None. MTHFR, MTR, F5, LCT and VDR3 genes in Ukrainian population P18.44D Linkage disequilibrium maps in sub-Saharan African O.M.Fedota1,L.V.Roshenyuk2,Y.V.Gontar3,N.G.Lysenko4, populations V.O.Babalian5,T.V.Tyzhnenko1,Y.A.Sadovnychenko4,V.M. Vorontsov2,P. P. Ryzhko2,A. P. Gerilovych6 R.Jabalameli,R.J.Pengelly,W.J.Tapper,S.Ennis,A.Collins648 J.delPicchia University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom elucidate the overall shared genetic etiology between BE/ EA and obesity, one of the major risk factors. We applied Identifying patterns of linkage disequilibrium (LD) is of cross-trait LD score regression (LDSC) to summary level paramountimportanceforeffectiveapplicationofGWASin results of our recently published BE/EA GWAS meta- mapping human complex traits. The LD structure in each analysis and the GIANT consortium. For GIANT data, we population reﬂects the historical impact of recombination extracted genetic data for BMI, as a proxy for general (along with other evolutionary forces) that shapes the cur- obesity, and waist-hip-ratio (WHR), as a proxy for rent human population. Using the Malécot-Morton model abdominal obesity. LDSRs were performed both sex- we constructed LD maps across six sub-Saharan African speciﬁc and sex-combined. We also performed analyses (SSA) populations using the LDMAP program. The LD on single marker level and compared risk alleles for all mapsareconstructedonthescaleoflinkagedisequilibrium genome-wide signiﬁcant SNPs in the BMI and WHR stu- units (LDU) in which the decline of LD to ‘background’ dies with those reported in BE/EA meta-analysis. levelsacrossavariablephysicaldistancecorrespondstoone LDSR in the sex-combined analysis revealed a genetic LDU. Our results demonstrate that although population- correlation (r ) of 0.13 (standard error, se=0.04; p=2×10- g speciﬁcLDU-mapspresenthighlyconcordantcontours,the 4) between BE/EA and BMI and 0.12 (se=0.05, p=0.01) magnitude of LDU steps differs across populations and is between BE/EA and WHR. The sex-speciﬁc analysis reﬂective of the duration since the last effective bottleneck. revealed a stronger correlation with BMI in women, Furthermore, regions of the genome that have been inﬂu- whereas the correlation with WHR was stronger in men. enced by various effective evolutionary forces such as Analysis on single risk marker level revealed a statistical mutation, selection or drift may deﬁne the remaining dif- signiﬁcant enrichment of BMI/WHR associated variants in ferences between population-speciﬁc LDU maps. Cross- BE/EA GWAS data (P=0.0086). population comparison of LD maps suggests that recombi- Our results provide evidence that the WHR in men and nation hotspots are localised in all populations and can be the BMI in women are genetically correlated with BE/EA. leveraged in models of gene essentiality for disease gene Our data point towards sex-speciﬁc mechanisms by which prediction. We posited here that recombination rate and obesity mediates the risk for developing BE/EA. Further haplotype diversity can be considered as a proxy for gene research into elucidation of these mechanisms is required. essentiality and establish the interesting relationship A.C.Böhmer:None.J.Hecker:None.H.Fier:None.J. between gene function andLD strength. The weaker LDin Schumacher: None. African populations achieves unprecedented resolution for functional analysis of LD maps and provides a basis for P18.46B developing integrated models of gene essentiality and Genetic footprints and functional analysis of pathogenicity in the context of human disorders. polymorphisms in the PKLR gene R. Jabalameli: None. R.J. Pengelly: None. W.J. Tapper: None. S. Ennis: None. A. Collins: None. O.C.L.Bezerra1,N.Mabunda2,G.Salomé2,L.A.Arnez1,F.S. G.Kehdy1,F.S.N.Manta1,R.M.Silva1,L.P.Ferreira1,R.O. P18.45A Pinheiro1,A.P.Latini3,E.M.T.Santos4,E.F.Carvalho5,A.G. SharedgeneticetiologyobesitywithBarrettesophagusand Pacheco1,I.V. Jani2, M.O.Moraes1 esophageal adenocarcinoma: Insights from large genome- wide association studies 1FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2National Institute of Health, Maputo, Mozambique, 3Lauro de Souza Lima Institut A. C.Böhmer1,2, J.Hecker3,H.Fier3,J.Schumacher1 (ILSL), Bauru, Brazil, 4Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 5State University of Rio de 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Bonn, Bonn, Janeiro (UERJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Germany, 2Life&Brain Research Center, Department of Genomics, University Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of PKLRencodesforpyruvatekinase,aredbloodcellenzyme Biostatistics, Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, that catalyzes ATP in glycolysis. This gene is under selec- Boston, MA, United States tive pressure by Plasmodium in Africa. Mutations for PK deﬁciency have a dual role: association with resistance to Barrett esophagus (BE) is a precancerous condition of malaria and susceptibility to Salmonella typhimurium. We esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA), characterized by the hypothesized that malaria selective pressure in Africa replacementofnormalsquamousepitheliumbymetaplastic shaped PKLR resistant genotypes in humans and those columnarepitheliuminthedistalesophagus.BEandEAare could be an evolutionary trade off for intracellular patho- multifactorialdisorders.Theaimofthepresentstudywasto gens.Thus,aimingtoinvestigatethePKLRpolymorphismsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 649 and its association to mycobacterial pathogens, we per- 597 individuals from the Wellderly study. LD distances formed two independent case-control studies with leprosy were computed according to the Malecot-Morton model and tuberculosis in Rio de Janeiro and Mozambique. Our which deﬁnes LD maps in LD units (LDUs). results highlighted G allele of the four tested SNPs and the Results: The results suggest that LDU/cM ratios of haplotypeG/G/G/Gasassociatedwithleprosysusceptibility chromosome lengths are nearly constant in human popula- in individuals from Rio de Janeiro (haplotype frequency in tions, where the recombination is the primary determinant cases – 0.39 – and controls – 0.27). Subsequently, the of LD structure. LD is more extensive in genic than association was conﬁrmed in a Mozambican TB case- intergenic regions demonstrating raised natural selection controlstudy.ThefrequencyofthehaplotypeG/G/G/Gwas and decreased recombination in genes. The overall higherincases(0.48)thanincontrols(0.38),suggestingthe difference in the extent of LD between exons and introns samedirectionofassociationinMozambique.Interestingly, is small but LD is more extensive in exons. the frequency of the susceptibility haplotype was aug- Conclusions: LD structure contains important insights mentedinAfrican-ancestrycohortsfromEPIGEN,Salvador into genome function to improve understanding of disease- (0.56), and 1000Genomes, YRI (0.87), compared to causing variation. Therefore, gene-speciﬁc LD structure European-ancestry cohorts, Pelotas (0.32) and CEU (0.27). may be useful to improve ﬁltering of NGS variant lists of In addition, GG-genotype was correlated to higher ferritin disease candidates. and haptoglobin loads in healthy subjects and leprosy A. Vergara-Lope: None. R.J. Pengelly: None. A. patients,whichsupportsarelevance role ofthe PKLRgene Collins: None. with mycobacterial infections. Finally, we evidenced a locusofevolutionarytradeoffinwhichindividualscarrying P18.48D resistant selected genotypes to malaria infection were more Predicting rare allele carriers from genotyping-array data susceptible to intracellular pathogens. using whole genome sequencing data in the Estonian O.C.L.Bezerra:None.N.Mabunda:None.G.Salomé: population None. L.A. Arnez: None. F.S.G. Kehdy: None. F.S.N. Manta:None.R.M.Silva:None.L.P.Ferreira:None.R. T. Sikka1, M.Palover1,T. Nikopensius2, M.Alver1,2,M.Nelis2, O. Pinheiro: None. A.P. Latini: None. E.M.T. Santos: A. Metspalu1,2,N.Tõnisson2,T. Esko1,2 None. E.F. Carvalho: None. A.G. Pacheco: None. I.V. Jani: None. M.O. Moraes: None. 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia P18.47C Fine-scale linkage disequilibrium structure of functional Introduction:Geneticimputationworkswellwithfrequent elements within genic and sub-genic sequences alleles(minorallelefrequency>1%),however,itspredictive accuracydropsforraregeneticvariantswhichcanalsoplay A. Vergara-Lope,R. J.Pengelly, A.Collins a role for eventual development of diseases. Exceptions to such limitations are endogamous populations like Estonia. University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom Currently, 50,000 participants of Estonian biobank have been genotyped, with additional 100,000 being collected Introduction: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technol- withinnext year, and theirgeneticproﬁles will beaddedto ogies have become high-throughput methods to identify electronic health records. We performed a study to predict disease-causing variations. However, NGS involves and verify rare mutation carriers for severe disease predis- sequencing of millions of DNA pieces simultaneously positions such as familial breast cancer (in genes BRCA1 leadingtobig data analyses,whichmay detect hundredsor and BRCA2) and familial hypercholesterolemia (APOB) thousands of apparently deleterious, but false positive, usinglongrangehaplotyping(LRH)and“surrogateparent” variants per sample. The integration of gene-speciﬁc prop- theory. erties, including patterns of linkage disequilibrium (LD), Materials and Methods: We used whole genome may help prioritise genes most likely to be involved in sequence data of 2,244 and genotyped data of 15,416 disease and reduce the number of the false positives. The participants of the Estonian biobank. Whole genome aim of this study is to analyse LD maps of the autosomal sequencing (WGS) with 30x coverage was carried out at genomeataveryﬁnescale,downtotheexonicandintronic Broad Institute using Illumina HiSeq xTen platform. level, providing novel insights into the impact of recombi- Results: WGS identiﬁed 14, 4 and 6 mutations carriers nation and selection on genome structure and function. for BRCA1, BRCA2 and APOB, respectively. We identiﬁed Materials and Methods: We analysed single nucleotide 16 mutations carriers for BRCA1 and 3 for BRCA2, and 5 polymorphism data from whole genome sequence data for carriers for APOB using LRH among genotyped samples.650 J.delPicchia Wefailedtoﬁndcarriersforadditional6outof9mutations, could become a predictive biomarker for increased risk of highlighting these as recent mutations and only present in common disease in middle-aged and aging men. limited historical lineages. The project is funded by an ERC-StG as well as other Conclusion: LRH is a cost-effective approach to predict sources. additional rare mutation carriers for different disease predis- L.A. Forsberg: A. Employment (full or part-time); positionsfromgenotypeddatainendogamouspopulationsand Modest; CRAY Innovation AB. E. Ownership Interest willbeimportantintheprocessofreportingclinicallyrelevant (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); mutations to Estonian biobank participants. Modest; CRAY Innovation AB. F. Consultant/Advisory Grants: PUT1660 & IUT20-60 (Estonian Research Board; Modest; CRAY Innovation AB. J. Halvardson: Council) None. M. Danielsson: None. E. Ryshlicka: None. B. T. Sikka: None. M. Palover: None. T. Nikopensius: Torhabi Moghadam: None. H. Davies: None. J. None. M. Alver: None. M. Nelis: None. A. Metspalu: Dumanski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, None. N. Tõnisson: None. T. Esko: None. patent or other intellectual property); Modest; CRAY Innovation AB. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; P18.49A CRAY Innovation AB. MosaiclossofchromosomeY(LOY)inbloodhelpsexplain why men live shorter lives P18.50B Genotype-phenotype correlation inMarfan spectrum: L.A.Forsberg1,J.Halvardson2,M.Danielsson2,E.Ryshlicka2, application of NGS to study the role of rare and common B. TorhabiMoghadam2,H.Davies2, J.Dumanski2 genetic variants 1DepartmentofImmunology,GeneticsandPathology,Science D.Gentilini1,A. Oliveri2, T.Fazia2,A. Pini3,S.Marelli3, R. for Life Laboratory, Beijer Laboratory of Genome Research, Gaetano3, L.Bernardinelli2, A.M. DiBlasio4 Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden 1Bioinformatics and Statistical Genomics Unit, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, Italy, 2Department of Introduction: A growing number of papers shows that Brain and Behavioural Sciences. University of Pavia, Pavia, LOYinbloodcellsisassociatedwithincreasedriskforall- Italy, 3Centro Malattie Rare, Cardiologia, Fatebenefratelli- cause mortality and disorders such as cancer, Alzheimer’s Sacco, Milano, Italy, 4Medical genetics Laboratory, Istituto disease, and cardiovascular disease. Known risk factors to Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, Italy be affected with LOY include age, smoking and inherited genetic variants. How much of the increased mortality of Introduction: Diagnosis of Marfan Spectrum is based menisassociatedwithLOY?Howcanlosingchromosome several clinical criteria. Although identiﬁcation of patho- Y in blood cells increase risk for disease in other organs? genic variants contributes to the diagnostic process, its Materials and Methods: To answer these questions we value for thepredictionofclinicaloutcomesisstilllimited. are studying functional consequences of LOY at DNA-, Theaimofthestudywastoextendthegenotype-phenotype RNA- and protein-levels. LOY-induced transcriptional correlation starting from genetic data obtained by NGS dysregulation are estimated in single cells using 10X analysis. Chromium system and changes in plasma proteins by Materials and Methods: A cohort of 181 patients were Olinksproximityextensionassays(PEA).FACSsortingare analyzed. NGS panel included 10 known causative genes for usedtocomparelevelsofLOYindifferentimmunecellsin Marfanspectrum(FBN1,TGFBR1-2,COL1A1-A2,COL3A1, men with cancer, Alzheimer’s and controls. COL5A1-A2,MYH11,ACTA2).Analgorithmwasdeveloped Results: Our data suggests that the mechanism(s) behind to obtain a quality control checked pedigree ﬁle containing associations between LOY and a various diseases could be genotypes.Rareandcommonvariantsassociationanalysiswas related to disrupted immune cell functions in cells with performed using the appropriate statistical method and results LOY. Furthermore, men live on average about 6 years were adjusted for multiple testing. shorter compared to women and new analyses of epide- Results: More than 62% genetic variants were rare miological data shows that LOY explains up to 70% of the (MAF<0.01). The overall number of rare variants was increased mortality. signiﬁcantly associated with the number of clinical Conclusions:Thecausalitystillremainanopenquestion manifestations (p < 0.008). Four common variants in the but new data suggest that disrupted immune system COL1A1 were signiﬁcantly associated with skeletal out- function(s) in cells with LOY could mediate reduced comes (p< 0.05). Both rare and common variants were protection from different disease processes. LOY in blood found to signiﬁcantly contribute to clinical spectrum.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 651 Conclusions: The genotype-phenotype correlation was B. Sedaghati-khayat1,N.Javanrouh1,M.Hedayati1,K. Guity1, extendedtotheoverallcommonandraregeneticvariability F. Azizi2,M.SDaneshpour1 observed in NGS data. This approach increased the percentage of phenotypic variability explained by genetic 1CellularandMolecularEndocrineResearchCenter,Research factors. InstituteforEndocrineSciences,ShahidBeheshtiUniversityof D. Gentilini: None. A. Oliveri: None. T. Fazia: None. Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, A. Pini: None. S. Marelli: None. R. Gaetano: None. L. 2EndocrineResearchCenter,ResearchInstituteforEndocrine Bernardinelli: None. A.M. Di Blasio: None. Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of P18.51C Mendelian Randomization Analysis to Explore a Causal Introduction: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) plays the main Relation between Triglyceride Levels and HbA1c Levels role as one of the risk factors of cardiovascular disease. Some studies demonstrated that 11q23-25 region played a P. E.Wu, C. Y.Shen potential role in the pathogenesis of MetS. This study was performedtoestimatetheassociationof20tagged SNPsin Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan BUD13/ZPR1 cluster with MetS components on Tehran Cardio-metabolic Genetics Study (TCGS). The relationships between triglyceride (TG) and elevated Material and Methods: All participants (10,635 unre- glucose /HbA1c/type 2 diabetes (T2D) have been reported lated) were selected from the TCGS (male 46.2%) with the in many studies. The causal relationship is ambiguous. We average age of 41.29±19.1 years which classiﬁed by JIS used Mendelian randomization analysis to explore a causal deﬁnition. DNA samples were genotyped with relationbetweenelevatedTGleadingtoelevatedHbA1cin HumanOmniExpress-24-v1-0 bead chips. SNPs were set 16,000participantsofTaiwanBiobankCohort.TGshowed accordingtotheirLD,categorizedthruHaploviewsoftware a high correlation in T2D and hyperlipidemia, it was gen- and their association was tested via kernel association test erate a hypothesis that TG may play an important role in (SKAT). For the purpose of single analysis, linear T2D and HbA1c. We selected 7 SNPs and a genetic risk regression analysis was used under recessive inheritance score (GRS) composed of these 7 SNPs, which were model after confounders adjustment. associated with TG speciﬁcally in East Asian populations. Results: The result of SKAT model among 3 SNPs sets TheinterceptofMR-eggerregressionwaswithaconﬁdence withthesizeof5,1and12shownthelastsetin3.3kbhas intervalincludingthenull(intercept,0.143;95%CI-0.868- signiﬁcant association after multiple testing corrections 1.154; P=0.78), suggesting that pleiotropic effect did not (FDR=0.0002). The result of single SNP association inﬂuence the result. Furthermore, the GRS was not sig- analysis has shown that TG has the most signiﬁcant niﬁcantly associated with confounding factors. Based on associated signals in this region and the remarkable lowest GRS, the association between TG and HbA1c shows that p-valuesbelongedtotwovariantsofZPR1(S.E±ß;p-value, one standard-deviation increase in TG-associated GRS was rs2266788 “5.5±57.2;8.84E-25” and rs651821 “6.3 signiﬁcantlyassociatedwitha9%increaseinoddsofbeing ±55.6;1.91E-18”). high HbA1c (>6.8%) (OR: 1.09, 95% CI: 1.001-1.196, Conclusions:Thisstudyindicatesthenotableassociation P=0.048). The ﬁnding suggests a causal role of high TG of ZPR1 SNPs with TG blood concentration among the level leading to HbA1c. To conﬁrm our results, we per- Iranian population. Although most investigations of lipid formed bidirectional MR analysis. It show that the genetic proﬁle associated with chromosome 11 belongs to Apo A determinants of HbA1c don’t contribute to TG, suggested cluster, this study suggests that neighborhood regions are by a non-signiﬁcant beta value. (beta:1.748, 95% CI:- very likely to have signiﬁcant effects on TG metabolism. 11.497-14.9), and indicating no causal role of HbA1c level B. Sedaghati-khayat: None. N. Javanrouh: None. M. to affect TG level. The present study supports a causal Hedayati: None. K. Guity: None. F. Azizi: None. M. S relationship of high elevated TG resulting in high HbA1c, Daneshpour: None. and, by inference, the development of T2D. P.E. Wu: None. C.Y. Shen: None. P18.53A A metabolomic comparison between the ischaemic strokes P18.52D andcoronaryarterydiseases:AMendelianRandomization Genetic risk variants of ZPR1/BuD13 for metabolic approach syndrome and metabolic components identiﬁed in Tehran Cardio-metabolic Genetics Study (TCGS) S. Lee,J.Ahn,J. Sung652 J.delPicchia Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of forms connections between the fusion proteins of intracel- lular andsynapticvesicles, interacting with other important Dyslipidemia is well-established, and one of the strongest componentsofthismechanismassynaptotagmin,GABA -R A risk factors of two major cardiovascular diseases - ischae- or CASK. mic strokes (IS) and coronary artery diseases (CAD). Objective: Our aim is to further explore the role and Although IS and CAD share many risk factors, differences interaction of these proteins involved in the regulatory arealsoevident;AdirectcomparisonsbetweenISandCAD mechanisms of neurotransmitter release, in migraine has been difﬁcult despite its potential value. susceptibility. An NMR-based metabolomics analysis was performed Methods: Fourtaggingsingle nucleotidepolymorphisms for1,000Koreanadultindividuals(with~230metabolites) (SNPs) of NRXN2 were analyzed in 183 cases and 265 with full genetic, epidemiologic and clinical information. controls.ToevaluateassociationbetweenNRXN2SNPsand We performed a genome-wide scan for all metabolomics migraine,amultivariable-logisticregressionwasperformed. traits, and compared the results with existing compatible Allelic and haplotypic frequencies were estimated. Interac- metabolomics-genomicsanalysis.Wesystematicallyidenti- tion between NRXN2-SYT, NRXN2-GABRE and NRXN2- ﬁed IVs of each metabolite using following standards: 1) CASK was assessed by a multivariable-logistic regression SNPs which was previous reported to have genome-wide and conﬁrmed by a multifactor dimensionality reduction signiﬁcance with metabolite 2) markers among 1), which analysis. were replicated (p<0.01) in the Korean studies. We Results: Wefound two strongand signiﬁcant synergistic examined metabolites’ genetic IVs for their roles in the IS interactions between migraine liability and the following (Metastroke) with CCS subtypes, and also in CAD (using gene pairs: NRXN2-GABRE and NRXN2-CASK that GWAS results (CardiOgramPlusC4D). The associations remained signiﬁcant after 1000-fold permutation-based were analyzed using different threshold p-values. correction. Among 230 metabolites, 140 overlapped with previous Conclusions: For the ﬁrst time a genetic interaction was metabolomics-genomics studies and were included. A total found among NRXN2, one of GABA -receptors and CASK A of 114 metabolites, mainly those related to lipid metabo- genes showing a synergetic effect of interaction between lisms were associated either or IS and CAD at p=0.01 these genes in migraine susceptibility. level. Notably, all the metabolites causally associated with These genes interactions may be a small part of a higher IS showed associations with CAD too. Some of the networkofgenes,allowingustobetterunderstandmigraine metabolites showed associations speciﬁcally with CAD etiologyandleadingtothedevelopmentofnewtherapeutic (ApoA1/Esteriﬁed.Cholesterol/FattyAcidLen/FattyAcid approaches. (FA) Omega-3, Medium-LDL Phospholipd (PL) / Mono M.Alves-FerreirareceivedFCTfellowshipgrant[SFRH/ Unsaturated FA/ Sphingomyelin /Extrasmall VLDL Parti- BD/101352/2014] cles/ Extrasmall Extrasmall VLDL triglyceride, extremely M. Alves-Ferreira: None. J.L. Neto: None. J. Pereira- large VLDL Lipids, extremely large VLDL PL, extremely Monteiro:None.J.Sequeiros:None.I.Alonso:None.A. large VLDL particles, extremely large VLDL Triglyceride) Sousa: None. C. Lemos: None. S. Lee: None. J. Ahn: None. J. Sung: None. P18.56D P18.54B A study of Kibbutzim in Israel reveals risk factors for Neurexin (NRXN2) and other components of the synaptic cardiometabolic traits and subtle population structure vesiclemachinery:theimportanceofgene-geneinteraction in migraine susceptibility E. Granot-Hershkovitz1,D.Karasik2,Y. Friedlander1,L. Rodriguez-Murillo3,R.Dorajoo4,J.Liu4,A.Sewda5,I.Peter5,S. M.Alves-Ferreira1,J.L. Neto2,J. Pereira-Monteiro2,J. Carmi1, H.Hochner1 Sequeiros1,I. Alonso2, A.Sousa1, C.Lemos1 1Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, 1IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC, Porto, Portugal Israel, 2Faculty of Medicine in the Galilee, Bar-Ilan University, Zefat, Israel, 33Department of Genetics and Introduction: Migraine is a common neurological disorder Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, affecting about 15% of the general population. In the last NewYork,NY,UnitedStates,4GenomeInstituteofSingapore, years, we have centered our attention to the synaptic vesi- Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, cles’molecularmachineryandlifecycle,withacentralrole Singapore, Singapore, 5Department of Genetics and Genomic in neurotransmitter release and its regulation.Neurexin Sciences,IcahnSchoolofMedicineatMountSinai,NewYork, (NRXN2), a component of the synaptic vesicle machinery, NY, United StatesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 653 Genetic studies in isolated populations have provided MP-GWAS framework, and compared them with the CC increased power for identifying loci associated with com- analysis using simulation studies. plex diseases and traits. We present here the Kibbutzim We simulated genetic data for 5,000/50,000/500,000 Family Study (KFS), initiated for investigating environ- individuals using Hapgen2, and highly (r=0.64) and mentalandgeneticdeterminantsofcardiometabolictraitsin moderately correlated (r=0.33) phenotypes (3/30/120) for extended Israeli families living in communes characterized these individuals in thestatistical packageR. We randomly by long-term social stability and homogeneous environ- chose common (minor allele frequency (MAF)> 5%), low- ment. Extensive information on cardiometabolic traits, as frequency(1%<MAF<5%)andrare (MAF<1%) variants to well as genome-wide genetic data, was collected on 901 be associated with the simulated phenotypes. We consid- individuals, making this study, to the best of our knowl- ered1/10/20/50%missingnessunderthethreemechanisms: edge, the largest of its kind in Israel. We have thoroughly missingcompletelyatrandom(MCAR),missingatrandom characterizedtheKFSgeneticstructure,observingthatmost (MAR), and missing not at random (MNAR). participants were of Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) origin, and The resulting betas and standard errors (SEs) from the conﬁrmingarecentseverebottleneckintheirrecenthistory MP-GWAS after applying the selected methods were (point estimates: effective size ≈450 individuals, 23 gen- compared to the true values from full data analysis as well erationsago).FocusingongeneticvariantsenrichedinKFS as to those from the CC analysis. These analyses showed compared with non-Finnish Europeans, we demonstrated that MI/KNN/RF perform the best, followed by SI, even that AJ-speciﬁc variants are largely involved in cancer- under the scenario of MNAR, although SI/MI assume at relatedpathways.Usinglinearmixedmodels,weconducted leastMAR.FortheCCanalysis,theperformanceworsened an association study of these enriched variants with 16 when the number of phenotypes was increased, while the cardiometabolic traits. We found 24 variants to be sig- other approaches were not inﬂuenced by the number of niﬁcantly associated with cardiometabolic traits. The phenotypes nor differences in phenotype correlations strongest association, which we also replicated, was or MAF. between a variant upstream of the MSRA gene, ≈200-fold In conclusion, we recommend MI/KNN/RF imputation enrichedinKFS,andweight(P=3.6∙10-8).Insummary,the approaches over the commonly applied CC analysis, KFS is a valuable resource for the study of the population especially KNN/RF under MNAR. geneticsofIsraelaswellasthegeneticsofcardiometabolic Funding: DYNAhealth-H2020-PHC-2014-633595. traits in a homogeneous environment. M.D. Anasanti: None. M. Kaakinen: None. I. This study was supported by Israeli Science Foundation Prokopenko: None. grant201/98-1andpartiallybyNationalInstitutesofHealth research grant R01HL088884. P18.58B E. Granot-Hershkovitz: None. D. Karasik: None. Y. A whole-genome sequencing study associates GRAMD1B Friedlander: None. L. Rodriguez-Murillo: None. R. with Multiple Sclerosis risk and disease activity Dorajoo: None. J. Liu: None. A. Sewda: None. I. Peter: None. S. Carmi: None. H. Hochner: None. A. Osiceanu1, F.Esposito1,2,L. Ottoboni3,B. Bollman4,M. Sorosina1,S. Santoro1, A.Zauli1,F. Clarelli1, E.Mascia1,A. P18.57A Calabria5,D.Zacchetti6,D.Lazarevic7,D.Cittaro7,P.Carrera8, Modern approaches to address missing data in multi- D.Toniolo9,A.Sadovnik10,G.Comi2,1,E.Stupka7,C.Vilariño- phenotype genome-wide association studies Güell10, L.Piccio4, F.Martinelli Boneschi11,1,12 M.D.Anasanti, M.Kaakinen, I.Prokopenko 1Laboratory of Human Genetics of Neurological Disorders, Institute of Experimental Neurology (INSPE), Division of Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Neurology, Institute of Experimental Multi-phenotype genome-wide association studies (MP- Neurology (INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele GWAS) play an important role in improving the power for Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Unit of Neuroimmunology, locus discovery. However, joint analysis of multiple phe- Institute of Experimental Neurology (INSpe), Division of notypesincreasestheproportionofmissingness,leadingthe Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute,, Milan, Italy, standardly applied complete case (CC) analysis to become 4Department of Neurology, Washington University School of inefﬁecient. We investigated the properties of single Medicine,,StLouis,MO,UnitedStates,5SanRaffaeleTelethon imputation (SI), multiple imputation (MI), k-Nearest Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), Milan, Italy, 6Unit of Neighbour (k-NN), and Random Forest (RF) within the Cellular Neurophysiology, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute,, Milan, Italy, 7Center for654 J.delPicchia Translational Genomics and Bionformatics, IRCCS San P18.59C RaffaeleScientiﬁcInstitute,Milan,Italy,8UnitofGenomicsfor Genetic testing in the diagnostic workup of vascular human disease diagnosis, Department of Genetics and Cell anomalies Biology, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 9Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele M.Vikkula1,N.Revencu2, A.Dompmartin3,E. Khoury4, A. Scientiﬁc Institute,, Milan, Italy, 10Department of Medical Mendola4,N.Limaye4,R.Helaers4,E.Fastré4,M.Schlögel4,N. Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Sepehr4, P.Brouillard4,L. Boon5 Canada,vancouver,BC,Canada,11DepartmentofBiomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 1deDuveInstitute,UniversitécatholiquedeLouvain,Brussels, 12Department of Neurology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Belgium,2CenterforHumanGenetics,Cliniquesuniversitaires Milan, Italy Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Dermatology, Université de Caen Introduction:Whiletheroleofcommongeneticvariantsin Basse Normandie, CHU Caen, Caen, France, 4Human multiple sclerosis (MS) has been elucidated, the contribu- Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique tion of rare variants remains unclear. We performed a de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 5Center for Vascular whole-genomesequencing(WGS)studyinanItalianfamily Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques with four relatives with MS. universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Materials:A40x-10xcoverageWGSwasperformedin4 Brussels, Belgium affected and 4 unaffected relatives on an Illumina® HiSeq 2000 instrument, and a bioinformatic pipeline used to ﬁlter Introduction: Differential diagnosis of vascular mal- andprioritizerarefunctionalvariants.WeusedHumanOm- formations can be difﬁcult. The identiﬁcation of somatic niexpress array and the Merlin software for linkage geneticcausesformanyhasopenedthedoorforsystematic analyses. A target sequencing of GRAMD1B was applied genetic testing as an aide in clinical assessment. We eval- in 91 probands of familial MS cases. GRAMD1B gene uated the usefulness of such testing. expression in rat cells and tissues and in human peripheral Methods: Data was collected from genetic analyses blood immune cells was evaluated by qRT-PCR, while the performed on >1800 vascular anomaly tissues obtained proteinexpressionwasevaluatedinimmuneandbraincells during surgical treatments or as biopsies. This represented and brain tissues by immunoﬂuorescence. about 1000 individuals. Mutations were screened for using Results: We identiﬁed a missense c.1801T>C (p. targeted NGS for high coverage to identify low frequency Ser601Pro) variant in GRAMD1B gene located at the somatic mutations in heterogeneous samples. Clinical linkage peak (LOD: 2.194). Target sequencing of the gene diagnosis was compared to the genetic results. revealed additional rare missense and splice-site variants, 2 Results:Acausativemutationwasidentiﬁedin>45%of of which (rs755488531 and rs769527838) absent in 1000 patients; sometimes it was a germline mutation. PIK3CA Italian healthy controls, and an additional missense variant was the most frequently mutated: >80% of isolated and (rs199604534) in 4 MS Canadian families. Functional syndromic LMs, and 20% of VMs. Somatic TIE2 mutation studiesdemonstratedthatGRAMD1B,agenewithunknown was identiﬁed in 60% of VMs, and GNAQ or GNA11 function, is expressed by different CNS and peripheral mutation in 70% of SWS and CMs. The genetic result ﬁt immune cells. Notably, GRAMD1B was downregulated in withtheclinico-radiologicdiagnosisinmostcases(+/-920/ vessel-associated astrocytes of active multiple sclerosis 1000 = 92%), but resulted in revised diagnosis in others. lesions in autopsied brains (p<0.05) and by inﬂammatory Importantly, it was helpful for differential diagnosis of stimuli in primary astrocytes (p=0.007) and peripheral lesions of small size, deeper localization and unusual monocytes (p=0.0002). presentation. Series of lesions without any mutation were Conclusions: These ﬁndings suggest a role of also identiﬁed. They often clinically differed from those GRAMD1B in inﬂammation and disease pathophysiology with a mutation. and open new avenues of investigation. Conclusions: Genetic testing has become a valuable tool A. Osiceanu: None. F. Esposito: None. L. Ottoboni: for management of vascular anomalies. It is useful for None.B.Bollman:None.M.Sorosina:None.S.Santoro: conﬁrming and guiding towards correct diagnosis, for None. A. Zauli: None. F. Clarelli: None. E. Mascia: recognising rare entities, and for identifying persons with None. A. Calabria: None. D. Zacchetti: None. D. afamilialrisk.Italsoallowstoidentifyunclassiﬁedentities, Lazarevic: None. D. Cittaro: None. P. Carrera: None. which need further clinico-genetic characterisation. D.Toniolo:None.A.Sadovnik:None.G.Comi:None.E. M. Vikkula: None. N. Revencu: None. A. Dompmar- Stupka:None.C.Vilariño-Güell:None.L. Piccio:None. tin: None. E. Khoury: None. A. Mendola: None. N. F. Martinelli Boneschi: None. Limaye: None. R. Helaers: None. E. Fastré: None. M.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 655 Schlögel:None.N.Sepehr:None.P.Brouillard:None.L. P18.62B Boon: None. Mutation spectrum of PAH gene in phenylketonuria patients from Georgia P18.61A Mitochondrial DNA haplogroups in Bulgarians with P. Gundorova1,I.A. Kuznetsova1, D.Agladze2, L. potential pharmacogenetic effect Margvelashvili3,E.Kldiashvili4,O.Kvlividze5,A. V.Polyakov1 S. Karachanak-Yankova1,Z. Hammoudeh1,D.Nesheva1,A.S. 1Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Galabov2,D.Toncheva1 Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research InstituteofClinicalMedicine,Tbilisi,Georgia,3ChildrensNew 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical Hospital, Tbilisi, Georgia, 4New Vision University, Tbilisi, University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2The Stephan Angeloff Georgia, 5Georgian Foundation for Genetic and Rare Institute of Microbiology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Diseases, Tbilisi, Georgia Soﬁa, Bulgaria Introduction: Georgia is located in the Caucasus region of Introduction: Although mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) Eurasia and populated mostly by Georgians. Due to the variantsthatdeﬁnehaplogroupsaregenerallyconsideredas remotenessofGeorgiansfromthemainroutesofincursions neutral, they may modify the impact of drugs, toxic envir- and migrations, the territory of Georgia was the object of onmentalexposuresorotherfactors.Thepossiblelinkageof great demographic homogeneity. This allows us to assume mtDNA haplogroups with sensitivity to certain drugs and the existence of a unique mutation spectrum in monogenic adverse drug reactions was established in several studies. disease genes in this country. The aim of our research was to determine the mtDNA Materials and Methods: DNA samples of 135 PKU haplogroups with pharmacogenetic effect found in the patientsfromGeorgiawereanalyzedforthepresenceof25 Bulgarian population. common PAH gene mutations using allele-speciﬁc MLPA Materials and Methods: The analyzed sample com- method.Сalculationsweremadefor124unrelatedprobands prised 855 healthy unrelated Bulgarian subjects. Their (248 chromosomes). mtDNA haplogroup classiﬁcation was performed by Results:PAHgenemutationsweredetectedon85.1%of sequencing of the control region of mtDNA in blood chromosomes. At least one pathogenic allele was detected DNA samples, followed by genotyping of coding region in 94.4% cases. The most common PAH gene mutation markers for conﬁrmation of haplogroup assignment. among patients from Georgia is P281L (33.5% of alleles). Results: The Bulgarian mtDNA gene pool is over- ThefollowingfrequentvariantsareIVS10-11G>A(20.2%), whelmingly represented by Western Eurasian haplogroups R261* (7.7%), L48S (4.8%), R261Q (3.6%), R408W (H, U, JT, W, X, V, I). The most common haplogroup H (3.2%), E390G (2.8%), IVS2+5G>C (2.4%), E280K (41.9%) can lead to toxicity of highly active anti-retroviral (1.6%), R252W (1.2%), A300S (1.2%). Also 7 different therapy (HAART) with increased lipoatrophy. Haplogroup pathogenic variants were found in single cases. T,foundin10.6%ofmodernBulgarians,maybeprotective Conclusions: Due to the PAH gene mutation spectrum, against lipoatrophy in HAART, but it is associated with we can conclude, that Georgians are genetically far from peripheral neuropathy in treatment with nucleoside reverse nations living in contiguous territories. This feature is transcriptase inhibitors. The carriers of non-haplogroup H characteristic of most of the ethnic groups living in the mtDNA lineages have better respond to riboﬂavin in Caucasus - they are quite original and preserved their migraine treatment. MtDNA haplogroup J (7.9%) shows national identity. Nevertheless, the frequent mutation linkage with cisplatin-induced hearing impairment. methodthat was originallycreatedfor patients from Russia Conclusion: The accumulation of knowledge about the is suitable for diagnosing patients with PKU from Georgia. prevalence of mtDNA pharmacogenetic variants including P. Gundorova: None. I.A. Kuznetsova: None. D. thosethatarehaplogroupdeﬁninginhealthyandinsubjects Agladze: None. L. Margvelashvili: None. E. Kldiashvili: with adverse drug reactions in different populations will None. O. Kvlividze: None. A.V. Polyakov: None. improve mitochondrial pharmacogenomics - a lagging area in the improvement of drug therapy. P18.63C S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. Z. Hammoudeh: Neurodegenerativedisordersassociatedwithpolyglutamine None. D. Nesheva: None. A.S. Galabov: None. D. expansions:anItalianstudytoinvestigatetheprevalenceof Toncheva: None. Intermediate polyQ alleles in healthy subjects656 J.delPicchia A.Mongelli1,L.Sarro1,A.Castaldo1,E.Rizzo1,C.Gellera1,E. Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Slovak centre of scientiﬁc and technical Salvatore2,F. Taroni1,C. Mariotti1,L. Nanetti1 information, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Medirex a.s., Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Trisomy Test Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 7Comenius 1IRCCS-Foundation Neurological Institute "C.Besta", Milan, University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia Italy, 2University "Federico II", Naples, Italy Introduction: NIPT for common aneuploidies is one of Introduction:Polyglutamine(PolyQ)diseasesareinherited the most rapidly adopted and relatively low-cost DNA neurodegenerative disorders, commonly manifesting in tests.However,theinformationfromtheresultingdataare adulthood, and caused by CAG repeat expansions in the not used up to their full potential. High throughput codingregionsoftherespectivedisease-genes.Alleleswith sequencing on pooled samples, each sample from differ- CAG repeat number slightly below the pathological ent individual, is a strategy to identify genetic variability threshold are deﬁned as intermediate alleles (IAs). IAs are at a small fraction of the cost required to do population associated with reduced penetrance and meiotic instability, scale studies. Here we describe the possible re-use of the and may be responsible for new diagnosis in subjects data generated during NIPT for genome scale population without family history. In Italy the most common polyQ speciﬁc frequency determination of single nucleotide diseases are Spinocerebellar Ataxia type 1-2-17 (SCA1-2- variants (SNV). 17) and Huntington disease (HD). We aimed to investigate Materials and Methods: To evaluate the limitations of thefrequenciesofIAsinHD,SCA1-2-17inhealthyItalian this approach, data generated by massively parallel low subjects. coverage whole-genome sequencing of plasma DNA of MaterialsandMethods:Weenrolled366healthyItalian 1,548 pregnant women undergoing NIPT procedure subjects(177M/189F,aged19-84)withoutfamiliarhistory. was analysed. We used statistical methods, such as All subjects were informed of the purpose of the study and PCA, for visualization and comparison our data to other gave their written consent for CAG repeat screening in studies. SCA1-2-17 and HD genes, according to European guide- Results: We detected 6,622,893 (0.21% of the genome) lines EMQN. Genetic counseling was offered to the distinct potential SNVs. Nearly 98% of the variants were individuals with IAs. found to be already known in dbSNP allowing veriﬁcation Results: One SCA1-IA (35 CAG; 0.1%) and three of our results on several levels. Allelic frequency distribu- SCA17-IAs (42-44 CAG; 0.4%) were found in 4 unrelated tions of our population (Central Europe) were compared to individuals. TwosubjectscarriedaSCA2-IAwith 31CAG the six ExAC populations placing our sample set most repeats(0.3%),and16subjectshadHD-IAsassociatedwith closely to the two European ExAC populations that is meiotic instability (27-35 CAG; 2.2%). consistent with the geographical and genetic relationships Conclusions: The allelic frequencies of IAs in SCA1-2- between the compared populations. 17 and HD diseases in Italian population were similar to Conclusion:Re-usingNIPTdatatodeterminepopulation those previously reported. SCA1-2-17 IAs may be asso- frequencies of small DNA variants can be a real low-cost ciated with extremely late-onset symptomatology. More- alternative to costly population scale studies. over, SCA2-IAs are recognized as risk factors for ALS J. Gazdarica: A. Employment (full or part-time); susceptibility.ThehighfrequencyofHD-IAsmayrepresent Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. J. Budiš: a reservoir for fully pathological expanded alleles. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton A.Mongelli:None.L.Sarro:None.A.Castaldo:None. Ltd.,Bratislava,Slovakia.J.Radvanszky:A.Employment E.Rizzo:None.C.Gellera:None.E.Salvatore:None.F. (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Taroni: None. C. Mariotti: None. L. Nanetti: None. Slovakia. M. Haršanyová: A. Employment (full or part- time); Modest; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. I. P18.64D Gazdaricová: None. L. Striešková: A. Employment (full Non-invasive prenatal testing as a valuable source of or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. population speciﬁc allelic frequencies F. Duriš: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. O. Pös: None. M. J.Gazdarica1,2,J.Budiš3,2,4,J.Radvanszky1,2,M.Haršanyová1,2, Böhmer:None.G.Minárik: A.Employment (full or part- I.Gazdaricová1,L. Striešková1,2,F. Duriš4,2,O.Pös1,M. time); Signiﬁcant; Medirex a.s., Bratislava, Slovakia. J. Böhmer1,G.Minárik5,6,J.Turňa1,4,7,T.Szemes1,2,7,M.Lichvár2 Turňa: None. T. Szemes: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. M. 1FacultyofNaturalSciences,ComeniusUniversity,Bratislava, Lichvár: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty of Geneton Ltd.. mathematics, physics and informatics, Comenius University,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 657 P18.65A P18.66B WhereEuropeandAfricameet:humangenomichistoryof Fine-scale population structure in western France the western Mediterranean J.Giemza1,M.Karakachoff1,2,E.Charpentier1,2,K.Rouault3,4,5, C. L.Hernández1,G.Pita2, B.Cavadas3, J.Dugoujon4,A. A. Saint-Pierre3,4,5,F. Simonet1,2, S.Lecointe1,2, P. Novelletto5,L. Pereira3,R. Calderón1 Lindenbaum1,C. Férec3,4,5,H.Le Marec1,2,S. Chatel1,2,J. Schott1,2,E. Génin3,4,5,R. Redon1,2,C. Dina1,2 1Departamento de Biodiversidad, Ecología y Evolución. Facultad de Biología. Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 1l'institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, Nantes, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro Nacional de Investigaciones France, 2l'institut du thorax, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, Oncológicas(CNIO),Madrid,Spain,3InstitutodePatologiae 3Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Brest, France, 4Inserm ImunologiaMoleculardaUniversidadedoPorto(IPATIMUP), UMR1078, Brest, France, 5Centre Hospitalier Régional Porto, Portugal, 4Laboratoire d’Anthropologie, FRE 2960, Universitaire de Brest, Brest, France Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS), Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France, 5Dipartimento di Characterising the genetic structure of human populations Biologia, Università Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy provides insight into demographical history and informs research on disease association studies, especially on rare Introduction: In the last few years, genome-wide (GW) recentvariantswhichtendtobegeographicallyclustered.In studies have become essentials in the ﬁelds of human this study, we examine the ﬁne-scale genetic structure of genetics and genomic anthropology. Here, we performed a Brittany, Anjou, Poitou and Maine in western France. GW screening of a key geographic area: the western We genotyped 2,500 individuals whose 4 grandparents Mediterranean. Its metapopulation, at the crossroads were born within a small distance in western France on between Europe and Africa, is a target for the study of Affymettrix Axiom PMRA array plates. Principal Compo- human evolutionary history across continents. nentsarehighlycorrelatedwithgeographicalcoordinatesof Materials and Methods: We have analyzed six popula- grandparents'birthplaces(p-value<2e-16).Visualisationof tions from southern Iberia and Morocco. Altogether, single principal components' values (from PC1 to PC5) on 142 samples were genotyped on Illumina’s Omni2.5 array. the map reveals patterns of local genetic structure. Those A systematic pipeline was performed to merge our dataset patterns are conﬁrmed when samples are assigned their with previously reported GW information. Depending on most probable source populations from ADMIXTURE. the SNP density (1.8M and 84k markers), two resolution Loire River and its tributaries, Erdre and Sèvre Nantaise, levels were stablished. By using bioinformatic tools, seemtobeatthelimitsofobservedgeneticsubpopulations. demographic histories, admixture dynamics and genetic Using Identity By Descent sharing (IBDNe), we show that structure of the Mediterranean populations was assessed, identiﬁed subgroups may have followed different trajec- along with global/local ancestries, admixture time model- tories of effective population size evolution in the last 25 ling and the magnitude of population relationships. generations. Results: Our data showed a latitudinal gradient from We here report existence of a ﬁne-scale structure across northern to southern Europe with respect to the African western France, with evidence of distinct demographic genomic contribution. African ancestral proportion in the histories between subpopulations. These results support the southwesternendofIberiadifferstwofoldthanthatfoundin need for a genetically matched panel of controls from most Iberian populations. The analysis of the tract-length France, to avoid confounding effects of ﬁne-scale popula- distribution showed the presence of very short African tion structure. ancestry tracts in southern Iberia. This scenario would be We will subsequently verify and extend our ﬁndings reﬂecting ancient African gene ﬂow to Europe through the methods based on haplotype structure and IBD, on an Iberian Peninsula. Our ﬁndings are compatible with two extended population of 5,700 individuals. Further study of temporally spaced migratory events. demographic models will yield not only insight on Conclusions: Genomic analysis provide clues to under- population history, but also provide a null model for tests stand the complex role of southern Iberia and northwestern of selection. Africaastransitionareasofold,recurrenthumanmigrations J.Giemza:None.M.Karakachoff:None.E.Charpen- across their respective continents. Financial support: tier: None. K. Rouault: None. A. Saint-Pierre: None. F. Spanish Ministry MINECO (CGL2014-53985-R). Simonet: None. S. Lecointe: None. P. Lindenbaum: C.L. Hernández: None. G. Pita: None. B. Cavadas: None. C. Férec: None. H. Le Marec: None. S. Chatel: None. J. Dugoujon: None. A. Novelletto: None. L. None.J.Schott:None.E.Génin:None.R.Redon:None. Pereira: None. R. Calderón: None. C. Dina: None.658 J.delPicchia P18.67C B. Chung,A. Chiu,C. Chung,W. Wong Association of PRDM16 and CtBP2 genes polymorphisms with lipid proﬁle of adolescents Department of Paediatrics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong N.Maksimovic1,V. Vidovic2,T. Damnjanovic1,B. Jekic1,D. Perovic1,S. Vidovic2,I.Milovac2,I.Novakovic1 Thehealthcareburdenofrarediseases(RD)isimportantbut difﬁculttoestimate.Walkeretal.(2017)madeuseofcross- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University referencing between ORPHA codes and ICD-10 in health of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Medicine, administrativedatasetstoidentifyRD-relatedadmissionsin University of Banja Luka, Banja Luka, Bosnia and WesternAustralia.SuchmethodologywasadoptedinHong Herzegovina Kong which has recently awakened to the needs of RD patients. Introduction: Brown adipose tissue (BAT) presence in Methods: We extracted from the local public healthcare adolescents and adults has raised many questions about its databaseadmissionrecordsofallpatientscodedwithoneor physiology and possible inﬂuence on human health. In more of the 1084 ICD-10 codes cross referenced with 467 healthy adults, presence of BAT was associated with lower ORPHA codes from 2005 to 2016. We further analyzed glucose levels, total cholesterol and LDL and levels. The RD-related inpatient healthcare cost using a subset of key regulator of BAT development is PR domain- patients admitted during 2015 -2016. containing protein 16 (PRDM16). It induces brown fat Results: A total of 546,673 admissions were identiﬁed, phenotypebyinteraction with PGC1α,PPARα,PPARγ,C/ representing 3.2% of total admission in 2005-2016. About EBP and represses white adipose tissue speciﬁc genes 109,000 patients were alive at the end of the study, through the association with C-terminal binding co- representing 1.5% of the Hong Kong population. The most repressor proteins (CtBP1 and CtBP2). Our aim was to common RD category in the pediatric age group was ‘rare analyzetheassociationofPRDM16gene(rs12409277)and developmentaldefectsduringembryogenesis’;whereasthat CtBP2gene(rs1561589)polymorphismswithBMI,fasting amongst adults was ‘rare haematological disease’. The glucose level and lipid proﬁle of adolescents. aforementioned subset for 2015-2016 accounted for Material and Methods: Our study included 300 healthy 330,091 patient-days, placing the estimated total inpatient school children, 146 boys (48.7%) and 154 girls (51.3%), cost for RD at HKD$1,594,339,530 (~EUR 163,612,000) 15years ofage.Genotypesfor theselectedpolymorphisms i.e. 4.3% of total inpatient cost. were detected by the Real-time PCR method. Age, gender, Conclusion: Cross referencing between ICD-10 and height, weight, lipid proﬁle (total cholesterol, HDL ORPHA codes may be adopted in different healthcare cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, triglycerides) and fasting datasetsforinternationalcomparison.Despitedifferencesin glucose were recorded. theprevalence ofindividualdiseases,thedisparitybetween Results: We did not ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant associa- RD prevalence and associated inpatient cost is consistent tion between rs12409277 and rs1561589 polymorphisms across settings reﬂects the importance of RD in healthcare with BMI, fasting glucose and lipid proﬁle of adolescents. policies. We further analysed combine effect of the two SNPs. Acknowledgement: Thanks the Society for the Relief of Statistical analysis has shown that carriers of CT genotype Disabled Children (Hong Kong) for funding support of rs12409277 polymorphism and GG genotype of B. Chung: None. A. Chiu: None. C. Chung: None. W. rs1561589 polymorphism had signiﬁcantly lower total Wong: None. cholesterol (p=0.001) and LDL cholesterol (p=0.008) level when compared to all other groups of genotypes. P18.69A Conclusion: Our study suggests that rs12409277 and Explaining RLS families using risk SNPs from GWAS rs1561589polymorphismmighthaveinﬂuenceontotaland LDL cholesterol levels in adolescents. E.Tilch1,2,C.Zhao1,A.Salminen1,A.Antic1,B.Schormair1,K. N. Maksimovic: None. V. Vidovic: None. T. Damnja- Oexle1,EU-RLS-Gene consortium,J. B.Sampson3, B.Müller- novic: None. B. Jekic: None. D. Perovic: None. S. Myhsok4,5,6,J.Winkelmann1,2,5 Vidovic: None. I. Milovac: None. I. Novakovic: None. 1Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, P18.68D Neuherberg, Germany, 2Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, HealthcareburdenofrarediseasesinHongKong-theuse Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technischen Universität of ORPHA codes in an ICD-10 based healthcare München,Munich,Germany,3Neurology,StanfordUniversity, administrative dataset Stanford,CA,UnitedStates,4StatisticalGenetics,MaxPlanckAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 659 InstituteofPsychiatry,Munich,Germany,5MunichClusterfor myopia becomes high with the beginning of the school Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich, Germany, 6Institute of remains unanswered. On the one hand, we must search for Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, an environmental risk factor of myopia changed by spend- United Kingdom ing time at school. On the other hand, while all children visit the school, not all of them develop myopia, therefore Introduction: Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is as disease some children are more genetically sensitive to the envir- of the nervous system. At rest in the evening RLS patients onmental factor we are looking for. So, if we ﬁnd genetic experience an urge to move the legs which impacts sleep factor of the myopia, and this factor is regulated by some and quality of life. RLS has a strong family history. Here, environmental factor, then we can conﬁrm this environ- we investigated whether RLS GWAS risk SNPs might mentalfactortobeariskfactorofmyopia.Inourwork,we explain RLS inheritance patterns in families. found out that the vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism Materials and Methods: Published RLS risk loci from А-3731G was associated with myopia in schoolchildren, GWASweregenotyped/imputedin79familiesofEuropean and the carriers of (-3731A)-allele were more sensitive to descent (843 individuals) using the Affymetrix Axiom the myopia. As the VDR gene signaling pathway is regu- genotyping array. Logistic regression was applied to each lated byUV light we concludedthat UV, orratherit’slack singlefamilyforindividualSNPsandpolygenicriskscores during the stay in the school building during the daytime, (PRS), including the pedigree structure as a random effect cancausetheschoolmyopia.Thismeansthatitisnecessary to correct for relatedness in the association test. The model tochangehygienicnormsofstayingatschooltopreventthe ﬁt was quantiﬁed using Nagelkerke’s R² conﬁdence development of myopia in children in the period of eye intervals and signiﬁcances were assessed empirically. growth and vision formation. Because despite of the fact Results: In family-wise meta-analyses across SNPs that correction of myopia is quite simple, myopia still (Fisher’s method), three families showed a signiﬁcant worsensthequalityoflifeandﬁnallycanleadtoblindness. association after correcting for multiple testing of families. A. Voitovich: None. R. Bannour: None. V. In one family, two SNPs alone almost reached signiﬁcance Larionova: None. at the MEIS and BTBD9 locus after correcting for multiple testing ofSNPsandfamilies.Nofamilyreached signiﬁcant P18.71C association using a PRS. Utility ofSlovenegenomicvariationdatabaseindiagnostic Conclusion: We hypothesize that risk SNPs might NGS explain only some RLS inheritance patterns, either through taggingofa causal variant or interaction with other family- G.Bergant, A. Maver,B. Peterlin speciﬁc RLS triggering genetic/environmental factors. E.Tilch:None.C.Zhao:None.A.Salminen:None.A. Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Antic: None. B. Schormair: None. K. Oexle: None. J.B. Ljubljana, Slovenia Sampson: None. B. Müller-Myhsok: None. J. Winkel- mann: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, Population speciﬁc genetic variability represents a corner- symposia, and expert witness); Modest; UCB. E. Owner- stoneofinterpretationofmassiveamountsofdatagenerated ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other by next-generation sequencing approaches. Large interna- intellectual property); Modest; patent pending (17 15 tional sequencing initiatives have generated good coverage 6438.8). F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; UCB. of genetic variation in major databases, but the utility of thoseislimitedindistinctworldpopulations.Totacklethis P18.70B issuewereportourﬁndingsfromclinicalexomeandwhole Interaction of environmental and genetic factors in school exome sequencing of 1626 patients submitted to our insti- myopia development tution and the implementation of locally gathered data for variant ﬁltration in diagnostic NGS interpretation. A. Voitovich, R.Bannour, V. Larionova We selected functional variants both benign and patho- genic from the analyzed samples which yielded nearly 94 Academy of Molecular Medicine, Saint-Petersburg, Russian exonicnon-synonymousvariantspersample,ofwhichover Federation 43variantspersamplewereconsideredrare,presentonlyin a single individual in our database. Furthermore, aggregat- Sincetheformationofthecompulsoryeducationsystemfor ing detected CNVs, nonconsensus splice site variants, childrenworldwidemanyresearchersobserveanincreaseof mitochondrial variants and genomic breakpoints provided myopia incidence in children attending schools, so called additional information on distinct Slovenian genomic school myopia. Nowadays, the question of why the risk of variability. In total, we discovered over 28 thousand660 J.delPicchia variants previously unreported in population variation D.Marnetto1, F.Mantica2,I.Molineris3, E.Grassi1,I. databases, which also proved beneﬁcial in the diagnostic Pesando4,5, P.Provero1,3 processby having apositive effect on theoverallworkload ofvariantinterpretation.Overall, ourdata provideduswith 1DepartmentofMolecularBiotechnologyandHealthSciences, 18,4% increased variant ﬁltering power, signiﬁcantly UniversityofTurin,Turin,Italy,2EuropeanMolecularBiology supplementingthesequencingdataofGenomeAggregation Laboratory (EMBL), Genome Biology Unit, Heidelberg, Database (gnomAD). Germany, 3Center for Translational Genomics and G.Bergant:None.A.Maver: None.B.Peterlin:None. Bioinformatics,SanRaffaeleScientiﬁcInstituteIRCCS,Milan, Italy,4DepartmentofPhysics,UniversityofTurin,Turin,Italy, P18.73A 5I.N.F.N., Section of Turin, Turin, Italy Violence exposure, stress biomarkers and gender differences on buccal telomere length inAfrican American Introduction:Divergenceattheregulatorylevelunderliesa young adults signiﬁcant fraction of the phenotypic differences between extantspecies,withgenomeexpansionpotentiallyplayinga L. F.Jackson,F. Saadatmand key role in the evolution of gene regulation. Thus, we investigatedhownewlyarisingsequencescontributedtothe Howard University, Washington, DC, United States rewiring of regulatory networks in the human genome throughout its evolution from the common ancestor of all Violence exposure has long-lasting social and biological Vertebrates. impacts on African American (AA) health and can lead to Methods: First, we estimated the evolutionary age of physiological changes, including shorter telomere length each region of the human genome by applying maximum (TL). While studies have investigated the relationship parsimony to genome-wide alignments with 100 verte- between TLandlifestress,fewfocus onAfricanAmerican brates;wethen studied theagedistributionofseveraltypes young adults and their direct nexus to violence. This study of functional regions, focusing on regulatory elements. examines the effect of violence and gender on both stress Results: The age distribution of regulatory elements biomarkers and TL in AA young adults. We examine the revealed the extensive use of newly formed genomic relationship between violence exposure, seven stress bio- sequence in the evolution of regulatory interactions: many markers (IgA/G/E/M, C Reactive Protein, Cortisol, Epstein transcription factors have expanded their repertoire of Barr Virus Antigen)and TLina cross sectional analysis of targets through waves of genomic expansion that can be 50 buccal samples (N=25 males & 25 females) of AA 18- traced to speciﬁc evolutionary events. Repetitive elements 25yearsoldinWashingtonDCwhoexperiencedifferential greatly contributed to such expansion: several classes of violence exposure (physical, threat, witnessed, and sexual). theseelementsareenrichedinbindingsitesofoneorafew Average TL was measured by qPCR. Mann-Whitney tests speciﬁc transcription factors, with such binding sites being identiﬁed differences between males and females in expo- localized in particular portions of the element and suretoviolence,stressbiomarkers,andthemeasuresofTL. characterized by distinctive motif words. Correlations were calculated between TLs, biomarker Conclusions: Taken together, these features suggest that levels, and violence measures. Elevated sexual violence thebindingsiteswereavailableassoonasthenewsequence exposure was positively correlated (R = 0.22 to 0.55) entered the genome, rather than being created later by RANGE with all elevated stress biomarkers except IgE. TL in the accumulation of point mutations. By comparing the age of high violence exposure group was negatively correlated to regulatoryregionstotheevolutionaryshiftinexpressionof allstress biomarkerlevels(R =-0.09to-0.31)except nearby genes, we show that rewiring through genome RANGE for IgG. There was no signiﬁcant difference in TL among expansion played an important role in shaping current females exposed and not exposed to violence. Violence human regulatory networks. exposedfemaleshadalongerTLthanmen(Mean =1.87 D. Marnetto: None. F. Mantica: None. I. Molineris: F:M v 1.62, p≤.054). Male sexual violence exposure was cor- None. E. Grassi: None. I. Pesando: None. P. related to TL (R=0.575, p≤ 0.03). High violence levels Provero: None. correlate to shorter TLs and higher stress biomarker levels in AA young adults. P18.75C L.F. Jackson: None. F. Saadatmand: None. Identiﬁcation of founder effect and haplotype reconstruction in transthyretin amyloidosis patients with P18.74B Glu89Gln mutation in the TTR gene from endemic region Evolutionary rewiring of human regulatory networks by in Bulgaria waves of genome expansionAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 661 Z. Pavlova1,2,A. Kirov2,T. Todorov1,3,2,S.Sarafov4, T. G.Mishra1,2,3,N.Kumar2,3,A.Saxena2,G.Kaur2,S.Jain4,N.K. Chamova4, M.Gospodinova5, I.Tournev4,6,A.Todorova1,2,3 Mehra5,P. K.Tiwari1 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Soﬁa, 1Centre for Genomics, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, India, Bulgaria,2IMDLGenomeCenter“Bulgaria”,Soﬁa,Bulgaria, 2Department of Transplant Immunology and Immunogenetics, 3DepartmentofMedicalChemistryandBiochemistry,Medical All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, UniversitySoﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,4ClinicofNervousDiseases, 3ICMR-National Institute of Pathology, New Delhi, India, UMBAL Aleksandrovska, Department of Neurology, Medical 4District Hospital, Sheopur, India, 5Dr. C G Pandit National University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 5Clinic of Cardiology, MVR Chair,AllIndiaInstituteofMedicalSciences,NewDelhi,India hospital, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 6Department for cognitive science and psychology, New Bulgarian University, Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Introduction: Sahariya, a primitive tribe of Central India, Bulgaria has shown an increased incidence of TB as compared to other tribes. It suggests the role of host immunogenetic Familial transthyretin amyloidosis is an autosomal domi- factors for such a high incidence of PTB. Thus, in view of nantgeneticdisordercausedbymissensemutationsinthe the unique ethnicity of Sahariya, the association of immu- TTR gene resulting in amyloid plaques formation of the nogeneticfactorslikeChemokinesandHLAwithPTBwas transthyretin protein. Depending on the system affection determined. the manifestations may be different and high hetero- Methods: About 400 individuals from Sahariya tribe geneity in the penetrance is observed. An endemic region were genotyped for HLA genes and SNPs in Chemokine in Bulgaria exists where the TTR mutation Glu89Gln is using luminex based methods and ARMS-PCR respec- found with high frequency. This is a rare mutation and tively.Plasmalevelofpositivelyassociatedchemokinewas was probably introduced in the population by a common also determined using commercial ELISA kits. The data ancestor. This phenomenon, called “founder effect” was was statistically analyzed by using SPSSv16.0. proved in carrier families with haplotype analysis of Results: The allelic frequencies of HLA-DRB1*15:01 microsatellite markers showing linkage disequilibrium. and 15:02 were signiﬁcantly increased in the PTB patients Allele frequencies were analyzed and haplotype recon- than in healthy controls (p=0.04). However, DRB1*16:02 struction was done with Arlequin v.3.01 software. The was found to be signiﬁcantly reduced in PTB patients common ancestry of the carriers was demonstrated using (p=0.003). Further, the frequencies of ‘AA’ genotype and additional data for their genealogies and microsatellite ‘A’ allele of -403G/A SNP of CCL5 gene were found datafromacontrolgroupofnon-affectedindividuals.The signiﬁcantlyhigherincasesthan incontrols whichresulted results show that the mutation Glu89Gln is linked to one in increased plasma CCL5 level. However, the level was haplotype,called“hypotheticalfounderhaplotype”which decreased signiﬁcantly in patients who were on therapy or was compared to haplotipic data from other European have completed their therapy (KWp=0.04). patients and no similarity was found. The fact that the Conclusions: Our study for the ﬁrst time, showed a founder haplotype has been subjected to decay was used unique association of HLA-DRB1*16:02 with protection to determine the mutation age using DMLE+ v.2.0 soft- againstpulmonarytuberculosis.Additionally,wefoundthat ware. The results demonstrated that the mutation arouse the CCL5 level may not only be inﬂuenced with the 850 generations ago or 15 300 years, assuming average genotypesof-403G>ASNPandbacillaryloadbutalsowith reproductive age of 18 years. The haplotype analysis of thetreatment.Thus,thesegeneticfactorscouldbeusedasa patients with transthyretin amyloidosis could help with diagnostic marker and could be useful in designing drug to differentiation of subgroups showing the same phenotype target tuberculosis. inordertoinvestigatetheheterogenicmanifestationofthe G. Mishra: None. N. Kumar: None. A. Saxena: None. disorder. Acknowledgement: The study was supported by G. Kaur: None. S. Jain: None. N.K. Mehra: None. P.K. Pﬁzer: Grant №WI220557/15.11.2016. Tiwari: None. Z. Pavlova: None. A. Kirov: None. T. Todorov: None. S. Sarafov: None. T. Chamova: None. M. Gospodinova: P18.77A None. I. Tournev: None. A. Todorova: None. Deletions at 63 GWAS catalog loci based on genome-wide 1000 Genomes project CNV-tagging SNPs P18.76D Association ofimmunogenetic factors with susceptibility to E.Loizidou1,E.Bellos1,L.Coin2,M.Johnson1,I.Prokopenko1 pulmonarytuberculosisinSahariyatribeofNorthMadhya Pradesh 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia662 J.delPicchia Background: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) Médecine Vasculaire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, successfully exploit the variability of most abundant DNA 6AP-HP, Hôpital européen Georges Pompidou, Service de variants, namely single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), Radiologie Cardiovasculaire, Paris, France, 7AP-HP, Hôpital but frequently fail to provide information about causal européenGeorgesPompidou,DépartementdePharmacologie, mutations. Copy number variation (CNV) impacts pheno- Paris, France type variability and disease susceptibility and is one of the sources for the so-called “missing heritability”. Despite Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare genetic notable genomic effects of both CNVs and SNPs, the cor- connective tissue disorder secondary topathogenic variants relation between them is understudied, and the role of within the COL3A1 gene, resulting in exceptional arterial CNVs in SNP-based phenotypic effects is not established. and organ fragility and premature death. No speciﬁc med- Methods: We estimated linkage disequilibrium (LD) ical treatment has been proven as efﬁcient in reducing the betweenCNVsandSNPsinprotein-codinggenesusingthe spontaneous arterial dissections/ruptures, but celiprolol, a 1000Genomesprojectsequencingdata(1000G)fromphase speciﬁc beta-blocker that was shown beneﬁcial in a limited 3. We deﬁned CNV-tagging SNPs for variants reported in open clinical trial. The main objective of this retrospective theGWAScatalogfordisease/phenotypeassociations(July, study was to analyze the outcomes of a large cohort of 2017) and for recently published DIAGRAM consortium molecularly conﬁrmed vEDS patients followed up to 17 type 2 diabetes (T2D) 1000G reference panel-imputed years in a single referral centre, most of them being medi- meta-analysis in Europeans (PMID:28566273). cally treated with celiprolol and scheduled for yearly Results: We replicated established CNV-tagging SNP follow-up. Between 2000 and 2017, 144 patients, (median effects at ten loci, including NEGR1, LCE3A/B, CFHR1-3 age at diagnosis 34.5 years, 87 females, 91 probands) were for obesity, psoriasis and nephropathy, respectively. We eligible for this study. After a median follow-up of 5.3 revealed 31 novel CNVs (length 275bp to ~ 6kb), all but years, overall patient survival was high (71.6%; 95% CI one being deletions. Among novel CNVs ﬁfteen are <1kb, 0.5-0.9)anddependentonthetypeofCOL3A1variant,age tagging lead breast cancer and T2D/lupus erythematosus atdiagnosisandtreatment.Morethantwo-thirdsofpatients SNPs at CHST9 and JAZF1 loci among others. Novel remained asymptomatic, despite a large number of arterial CNVs covered drug-target genes, such as HTR3D/C/E, lesions at the initial follow-up. Patients treated with celi- PLEKHA1, and MGST1 and tagged SNPs associated with prolol had improved survival (p=0.0004) and the greatest major depressive disorder, age related macular degenera- protection was observed with 400mg/day compared to tion, and visceral fat, respectively. <400mg/day (p=0.003). Hospitalization rates for sympto- Conclusion:ThisisthemostdetailedCNV-taggingSNPs matic arterial eventsalso decreased with the systematic use catalog to date, which will help in dissecting the functional of celiprolol. In this long-term survey, vEDS patients impact of SNP-trait associations and could drive the exhibited a high survival rate compared to what was development of new drugs. expected as well as a low annual occurrence of arterial Funding: WT205915 complications. Despite the absence of a control group, E.Loizidou:None.E.Bellos:None.L.Coin:None.M. celiprolol seems to have a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on Johnson: None. I. Prokopenko: None. the rate of arterial complications and survival. S.Adham:None.S.Seigle:None.T.Mirault:None.P. P18.78B Henneton:None.A.Legrand:None.J.Albuisson:None. Improvementof survival in vascular Ehlers-Danlos N. Denarié: None. J. Mazzella: None. E. Mousseaux: syndrome: effect of celiprolol in along-term cohort study None. E. Messas: None. P. Boutouyrie: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None. M.Frank1,2, S.Adham1,3,S. Seigle1, T.Mirault1,4,P. Henneton1,5, A.Legrand1,2,3,J.Albuisson1,2,3,N.Denarié1,J. P18.79C Mazzella1,E.Mousseaux2,3,6,E.Messas1,4,P.Boutouyrie2,3,7,X. Insights to the genetic architecture of quantitative traits in Jeunemaitre1,2,3 the Cooperative Health Research in South Tyrol (CHRIS) study 1AP-HP, Hôpital européen Georges Pompidou, Département de Génétique, Centre de Référence des Maladies, Paris, C.Fuchsberger,J.S.Mitchell,E.König,M.Gögele,C.Pattaro, France, 2INSERM, U 970, Paris Centre de Recherche P. P. Pramstaller Cardiovasculaire – PARCC, Paris, France, 3Université Paris Sorbonne Cité, Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, Paris, Institute for Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Afﬁliated Institute France, 4AP-HP, Hôpital européen Georges Pompidou, of the University of Lübeck, Bolzano, Italy Service de Médecine Vasculaire, Paris, France, 5Service deAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 663 When undertaking an association study of low-frequency 5Department of Dermatology, Hôpital d’Instruction des and rare variants, there are compelling reasons to focus on Armées Legouest, Metz, France, 6Pediatric Neurology and variation in protein-coding sequence. First, coding variants National Reference Center for Neurogenetic Disorders, AP- are enriched for impact on molecular function and support HP,TrousseauHospital,Paris,France,7Neuropediatrics,Gui more direct biological interpretation than associations de Chaulliac Hospital, Montpellier, France, 8department of within non-coding sequence. Second, the functional anno- genetics, Montpellier, France, 9Department of Medical tation of coding variants allows discovery efforts to beneﬁt Genetics,OsloUniversityHospital,Oslo,France,10Divisionof fromtheimprovedpowerofferedbytheaggregationofrare Rheumatology, IRCCS Pediatrico Bambino Gesù’ Children’s alleles presumed to exert broadly similar molecular effects. Hospital,Rome,Italy,11DepartmentofDermatology,Teaching We sequenced the exomes of 3,549 individuals from the Hospital Cochin, AP-HP, Paris, France, 12Internal Medicine, population-based CHRIS study and identiﬁed >389k var- Archet-1 Hospital, Nice, France, 13Internal Medecine, Cochin iants. We then tested 58 quantitative cardiovascular and Hospital, AP-HP, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, metabolic biochemical parameters for genetic associations. 14Pediatric Immunology-Hematology and Rheumatology Unit, We performed single variant analyses using mixed-model Institut Imagine, Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, AP-HP, approaches that account for relatedness (EMMAX). To Paris, France, 15Internal medicine, CEREMAIA, Tenon increase power to detect rare variant effects, we performed Hospital, AP-HP, University of Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, gene-level tests using SKAT-O focusing on non- France, 16Department of Paediatric Nephrology, synonymous variants with minor allele frequency (MAF) Rheumatology and Dermatology, RAISE, Lyon University < 0.05. We identiﬁed at genome-wide signiﬁcance level 31 Hospital, Lyon, France, 17Department of Paediatric loci associated with at least one trait, of which 9 were not Rheumatology, CEREMAIA, Bicêtre Hospital, AP-HP, reportedintheEBIGWAScatalog.Thegene-levelanalysis University of Paris Sud, AP-HP, Kremlin-Bicetre, France, revealed at gene-wide signiﬁcance level 17 association, of 18DepartmentofPaediatrics,CEREMAIA,VersaillesHospital, which 10 were novel. These include novel association for Versailles, France kidney function, anticoagulation, and iron metabolism. Together, these results suggest the value of exome Deﬁciency of adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2) is a sequencinginwell-characterizedcohortsforgenediscovery recently described autoinﬂammatory disorder. Genetic experiments. analysis is required to conﬁrm the diagnosis. We aimed to C. Fuchsberger: None. J.S. Mitchell: None. E. König: describe the identifying symptoms and genotypes of None. M. Gögele: None. C. Pattaro: None. P.P. patientsreferredtoourreferencecentresandtoimprovethe Pramstaller: None. indications for genetic testing. DNA from 66 patients with clinically suspected DADA2 were sequenced by Sanger or next-generation sequencing. Detailed epidemiological, P19 Genetic counselling/Education/public services clinical and biological features were collected by use of a questionnaireandwerecomparedbetweenpatientswithand P19.01A without genetic conﬁrmation of DADA2. We identiﬁed 13 A decision tree for the genetic diagnosis of deﬁciency of patients(19.6%)carryingrecessivelyinheritedmutationsin adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2) ADA2 that were predicted to be deleterious. Eight patients were compound heterozygous for mutations. Seven muta- I.Touitou1, M.Rama1,C.Duﬂos2,I.Melki3,D.Bessis4, A. tions were novel (4 missense variants, 2 predicted to affect Bonhomme4, H.Martin5,D.Doummar6, S.Valence5, D. mRNA splicing and 1 frameshift). The mean age of the 13 Rodriguez6,E. Carme7,D.Genevieve8,K. Heimdal9,A. patientswithgeneticconﬁrmationwas12.7yearsatdisease Insalaco10,N.Franck11,V.Queyrel12,N.Tieule12,J.London13, onset and 20.8 years at diagnosis. Phenotypic manifesta- F.Uettwiller14,S.Georgin-Lavialle15,A.Belot16,I.Kone-Paut17, tions included fever (85%), vasculitis (85%) and neurolo- V. Hentgen18,G.Sarrabay1 gical disorders (54%). Features best associated with a conﬁrmatory genotype included fever with neurologic or 1UMAI laboratoire de génétique, Montpellier, France, cutaneousattacks(oddsratio[OR]10.71,p=0.003andOR 2Medical Information Department, Montpellier, France, 10.9, p< 0.001), fever alone (OR 8.1, p= 0.01), and ele- 3General Pediatrics,InfectiousDiseaseandInternalMedicine vated C-reactive protein (CRP) level with neurologic Department, Robert Debré Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France; involvement (OR 6.63, p=0.017). Our proposed decision Pediatric Hematology-Immunology and Rheumatology tree may help improve obtaining genetic conﬁrmation of Department,Necker-EnfantsMaladesHospital,AP-HP,,Paris, DADA2 in the context of autoinﬂammatory symptoms. France,4DepartmentofDermatology,Saint-EloiHospitaland Prerequisitesforquickandlow-costSangeranalysisinclude Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier, France, one typical cutaneous or neurological sign, one marker of664 J.delPicchia inﬂammation(feverorelevatedCRPlevel),andrecurrentor P19.03C chronic attacks in adults. Important lessons learned in the ﬁrst year of I. Touitou: None. M. Rama: None. C. Duﬂos: None. I. mainstreaming BRCA testing at the north west thames Melki: None. D. Bessis: None. A. Bonhomme: None. H. regional genetics service Martin:None.D.Doummar:None.S.Valence:None.D. Rodriguez: None. E. Carme: None. D. Genevieve: None. S. Whyte,N.Ellery, C.Berlin, A. F.Brady K. Heimdal: None. A. Insalaco: None. N. Franck: None. V. Queyrel: None. N. Tieule: None. J. London: None. F. NorthWestThamesRegionalGeneticsService,London,United Uettwiller: None. S. Georgin-Lavialle: None. A. Belot: Kingdom None. I. Kone-Paut: None. V. Hentgen: None. G. Sarrabay: None. Theidentiﬁcationoftargetedtherapiesforcancerhasledto an increase in the demand of rapid gene test results within P19.02B cancer MDT’s. The Royal Marsden Hospital piloted DeliveringclinicalbioinformaticseducationintheNGSera Mainstreaming Cancer Genetics testing and this has now been rolled out by several Regional Genetics Services. The M.Cornell, A. Brass,A. Davies advantages of BRCA mainstreaming include fast, accurate testing within the cancer care pathway, enabling decisions University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom about best treatments. In addition, it helps identify at risk relatives giving them the opportunity to decrease their Development of next generation sequencing (NGS) tech- cancer risk. We were keen to roll out this service and in nology has enabled panel, exome and whole genome 2016 following training to Gynaecological Oncologists in sequencing for clinical diagnostics. Clinical NGS is the North West Thames region, mainstream BRCA testing becomingincreasingcommonplace.Largescalesequencing wasofferedforpatientswithnon-mucinousovariancancer. projects,suchasthe100,000Genomesproject,arebuilding TheBRCAdetectionratewas11.1%(7/63)andinaddition capacitywithintheNHS,pavingthewayforwholegenome twovariantsofuncertainsigniﬁcance(VUS)weredetected. sequencingofpatients,andamorepersonalisedapproachto The overall experience has been positive. However the the delivery of patient care. The reduced cost of NGS Gynaecological oncologists recognised an issue around enables more widespread testing. A recent UK study sug- informed consent as patients who had previously declined gested all women over thirty should be offered sequencing testing through Clinical Genetics then went ahead with of genes associated with breast cancer. Widespread inte- testing. In addition patients given a normal BRCA result gration of genomics into healthcare requires greater num- were disappointed when they were not eligible for certain bers of healthcare professionals with specialised data treatments. Issues also arose around informing next of kin management and analysis skills, at a time when there is a of results as some patients were terminally ill. The expla- bioinformaticsskillsshortage.Since2013,theUniversityof nation of results such as lifetime risks of cancer and VUSs Manchester (UoM) has been delivering Masters pro- hasbeenvariableandamorestreamlinedpathwayhasbeen grammes to educate bioinformaticians, clinical scientists put in place. The beneﬁts of this service have outweighed and genetic counsellors working in the NHS. Close links the drawbacks however interesting lessons have been between UoM and the Centre for Genomic Medicine, St learned which we felt were important to share. Mary’s Hospital Manchester enables us to ensure that S.Whyte:None.N.Ellery:None.C.Berlin:None.A.F. training aligns with clinical practice and professional body Brady: None. standards. We recently trained 55 students in theuse ofthe ACMG guidelines for variant classiﬁcation and report here P19.04D on how students utilised the guidelines to classify clinical Mainstreaming BRCA1 and BRCA2 testing: an interview variants.Theskillsshortageisaproblemworldwideandwe study of healthcare professionals’ views receive increasing interest from overseas students. In response, we developed a clinical bioinformatics MOOC S.Wright1,D.Stirling1,C.Gourlay1,J.Lawton1,O.Young2,M. (https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/bioinformatics), with Porteous1,N.Hallowell3 over 11,000 participants to date. We are now developing a Distance -Learning Post-Graduate Certiﬁcate in Clinical 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, Bioinformatics, with individual modules also available for 2Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, CPD, launching in September 2018. 3University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom M. Cornell: None. A. Brass: None. A. Davies: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 665 Themainstreamingofgeneticservices incancer care offers Methods: We developed an electronic questionnaire the promise of streamlined, tailored treatment for indivi- (www.surveymonkey.com/r/cardiacvariants)basedoninter- duals,providedthroughsimpliﬁedcarepathways.Weknow disciplinary concerns to gauge international practice. This little abouthowcliniciansworkingoutsideclinicalgenetics link was distributed to colleagues by email or via viewmainstreaming,particularly,howthisimpactsontheir professional bodies. professional role and responsibilities. We conducted a Results: 126 respondents (21 countries) completed the qualitative study of healthcare providers at a UK teaching survey, the majority from UK, US or Australia. 91(72%) hospital, focusing on their views and experiences of pro- were clinical genetics professionals, 12(10%) cardiologists viding treatment-focused BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 genetic and 15(12%) clinical scientists. Table 1 outlines circum- testing(TFGT)forbreastandovariancancerpatients.Semi- stances where predictive testing would be offered to structured interviews were undertaken with: two medical relatives of the proband. Considering class 4 variants, 101 oncologists who offer TFGT to their ovarian cancer (80%) counselled about possible future variant reclassiﬁca- patients, six breast surgeons (and a breast care nurse spe- tion. With negative predictive tests, 88(70%) counselled cialist) who were responsible for triaging patients for about outstanding risks of developing the familial pheno- onwardreferraltoclinical genetics, sixmedicaloncologists type. 33(26%) would recommend discontinuing cardiology whowereabouttoundergotrainingandstartofferingTFGT follow-up,whilefor44(35%)managementdecisionswould to breast cancer patients, and six members of the clinical depend on phenotype and family history. Most (67, 53%) genetics team who counsel patients from the ovarian and respondents thought variant reclassiﬁcation should be breast pathways. Interviewees expressed a range of opi- performed at least annually. nions. Some, primarily oncologists, championed the intro- Conclusions: Considerable variability in management of duction of TFGT in their clinic, while others, primarily familieswithclass3and4variantsexists.Decision-making breastsurgeons,sawtheintroductionofTFGTasathreatto reliesonthephenotype,familyhistoryandgenotype.Close theirprofessional identityandasnegativelyimpactingtheir multi-disciplinaryworkingbetweencardiologyandgenetics workload. Support for mainstreaming was related to the is critical to accurately deﬁne phenotype and genotype. extent to which interviewees regarded this genetic infor- 1. Richards et al, Genetics in medicine. 2015;17(5):405- mationasinformingpersonaltreatmentplans.Wehighlight 424. some of the difﬁculties that may be encountered when introducing genetics into mainstream specialities and Predictivetesting emphasise the need for further education of non-genetics PredictiveTesting Yes No Affectedrelativesonly specialists.BreastCancerNowGrantno:[2016MayPR700] S.Wright:None.D.Stirling:None.C.Gourlay:None. Class5 122(97%) 2(2%) 1(1%) J. Lawton: None. O. Young: None. M. Porteous: None. Class4 99(79%) 2(2%) 23(18%) N. Hallowell: None. Class3 12(10%) 30(24%) 82(65%) P19.05A Managing uncertainty in cardiac genetics - An E. Whitmore: None. T.P. McVeigh: None. L. Kelly: international survey None. T. Clark: None. B. Mullaney: None. D.E. Barton: None. A. Ward: None. S.A. Lynch: None. E. Whitmore1,T. P. McVeigh2,L. Kelly3,T. Clark2, B. Mullaney2,D.E. Barton2,A. Ward2,S. A.Lynch1 P19.06B Patientsathighriskofbowelcancerliketheopportunityto 1Temple St. Children's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, receive,storeandshareconﬁdentialdocumentsviaasecure 2Our Lady's Children's Hospital Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland, website - www.familyweb.org.uk 3Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland S. M.A.Goodman1,R. Jones1,L. Jackson2,H.Skirton1 Introduction: Multi-gene panel testing is useful in geneti- cally heterogeneous conditions, including inherited cardiac 1Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 2Exeter pathologies. Extended panels increase diagnostic yield, University, Exeter, United Kingdom identifying variants where pathogenicity is certain (ACMG (1) class 5), probable (class 4) and uncertain (class 3). Many relatives who share a high lifetime risk of cancer Concerns exist regarding management of class 3 and 4 remain unaware of their opportunities for genetic testing or variants, particularly for conditions of oligo-genic inheri- screening.Providingletters andverbal recommendationsto tance or variable expressivity. patients are not necessarily sufﬁcient to support effective666 J.delPicchia communication in families and methods for disseminating training session focussing on considerations for consent in information to relatives are still under debate. The Family the 100,000 Genomes Project, followed by the opportunity Web study investigated sharing digital documents securely toobserveandbeobservedinconsentappointmentsaswell online. Data from a cross-sectional survey (n=286) and as ongoing mentorship. telephone interviews (n=14) informed website content. Results: 45 NHS staff members across the West of Video recorded Think-Aloud interviews (n=12) elicited Englandregionweretrained,includinggeneticcounsellors, users' reactions to a website through three iterative phases. nurses and specialist registrars. Overall, staff members felt Patientsathighriskofbowelcancerwhohadbeenadvised that the framework provided appropriate information and to have regular colonoscopy and were aware that their guidance; however, some expressed concernsregarding the diagnosis had implications for their relatives were inter- extent of their scientiﬁc knowledge and ability to address viewedwhiletestingthewebsite,commentingonitsappeal the wider familial implications of genomic testing. and function. Recruitment was via NHS clinics or charity Conclusions:Ourexperiencedeliveringtrainingacrossa websites in the UK. Participants welcomed the opportunity region for a speciﬁc project highlights the skill gaps and to store and share personal information on the website but knowledge required for healthcare professionals to address desired more support from health professionals, reporting issues speciﬁc to informed consent for genomic testing. the profound effect of the diagnosis on them and their This emphasizes the need to embed a competency frame- family relationships. They wanted more information on a workinordertoenhancetheprovisionofgenomicmedicine variety of topics to support themselves and inform their for effective patient and family-centred care. relatives. Key issues were: advice on a healthy lifestyle, A. Pichini: None. C. Carpenter-Clawson: None. A. talking to children, gene speciﬁc risks and accessing ade- Watford: None. M. Watson: None. quate cancer surveillance. The results indicate that use of a personalised web-based resource is acceptable to patients P19.08D and meets a range of their information needs. This is Creation of Ukrainian guideline of cystic ﬁbrosis neonatal important in the context of growing numbers of patients screening diagnosedwithLynchsyndromethroughtumourscreening. Website funded by charity: Bowel Cancer West. N.G.Gorovenko1,Z. I.Rossokha2,N.V. Olkhovych3,S.P. S.M.A. Goodman: None. R. Jones: None. L. Jackson: Kyriachenko2 None. H. Skirton: None. 1Shupyk National Medical Academy of Postgraduate P19.07C Education, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2State Institution Reference-centre Developing a competency framework to consent patients formoleculardiagnosticofPublicHealthMinistryofUkraine, for genomic testing Kyiv, Ukraine, 3National Children Hospital «OHMATDIT», Kyiv, Ukraine A. Pichini1,C. Carpenter-Clawson1,A. Watford1,M. Watson2 Introduction: The ﬁrst national pilot project of cystic 1University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, ﬁbrosis newborn screening (CF NBS) was performed in United Kingdom, 2North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, United 2012-2014 years. National program CF NBS is going re- Kingdom start in 2018. The aim of the study was to analyze pre- liminary results and approved strategy of next program for Introduction: Genomic medicine involves unique con- all specialists from 12 regional genetic centers. siderations with regards to informed consent, which have Materials and Methods: IRT level results of 894152 been highlighted in the 100,000 Genomes Project. Speciﬁc newborns tested in pilot program was analyzed together challenges include addressing the needs of different family with all diagnostic procedure of CF NBS. members, data sharing protocols, and returning results Results: IRT retest investigated for 6943 newborns in including additional ﬁndings. It is important to promptly pilot program. 95 patients with positive second IRT retest address the training needs of healthcare professionals that had conﬁrmed CF diagnosis. DNA test was done for 75 may be involved inconsentingpatients for genomictesting patients. CF mutations were found in 92.59% of diagnosed as it becomes increasingly part of standard clinical care. patients.Theseresultswerediscussedatnational workshop Materials and Methods: Standardized consent training with specialists from all 25 Ukrainian regions. There were materialsweredevelopedbytheauthorsandincludedGood approvedbasicprinciplesofCFNBSwithinthisframework Clinical Practice training as well as courses developed by for Ukraine: IRT/IRT/DNA. Health Education England’s Genomics Education Pro- Conclusions: Results analysis showed the advisability gramme.Thecompetencyframeworkinvolvedathreehour IRT/IRT/DNA scheme to screen CF in newborns inAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 667 Ukraine. Workshop results will be included in the national highly valuable for the clinical practice. So far, over 60 guideline with procedure of internal and external quality genes have been adopted (http://humandiseasegenes.nl/ control systems. The increased CFTR mutations spectrum gene-websites/) by more than 60 moderators world-wide will be tested at the next CF NBS program. DNA test will (http://humandiseasegenes.nl/moderators/). If you wish to beheldintwostateaccreditedcenters.Thedevelopmentof adoptageneandjointheteamofmoderatorsplease,contact a national guideline and the workshop is an important link us at the poster or send us a mail to info@humandisease- in the education of specialists and improvement of their genes.com. work quality. M.J. Nabais Sá: None. S. Jansen: None. A. van N.G. Gorovenko: None. Z.I. Rossokha: None. N.V. Remortele: None. J. Ewals: None. M. Verbruggen: Olkhovych: None. S.P. Kyriachenko: None. None. D.A. Koolen: None. H.G. Brunner: None. E. Eichler: None. J. Gecz: None. B.B.A. de Vries: None. P19.09A Adopting a gene through Human Disease Genes website P19.10B series facilitates a clinical diagnosis for rare genetic Awareness of screening and diagnostic tests for Down disorders syndrome in Bulgarian women at reproductive age M.J.Nabais Sá1, S.Jansen1,A. vanRemortele1,J.Ewals1, M. M.Levkova1,2,M.Hachmeriyan1,V.Miteva1,M.Stoyanova1,M. Verbruggen1,D.A. Koolen1,H.G.Brunner1,E. Eichler2, J. Tsvetkova1, L.Angelova1 Gecz3,B. B. A.deVries1 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University Varna, 1Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Varna, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital St Marina, Varna, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Bulgaria Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Introduction: NIPT (non-invasive prenatal tests) are fast Seattle, WA, United States, 3Adelaide Medical School and the coming to the practice and aggressively offered by private RobinsonResearchInstitute,UniversityofAdelaide,Adelaide, companies.Nevertheless, thequestion remains -dowomen SA, Australia at reproductive age understand the possibilities and limita- tions of the different tests for Down syndrome and which Human Disease Genes website series (HDG) is an interna- are the key factors for preferring a certain test. tionallibraryofwebsitesforprofessionalinformationonthe Materials and Methods: We present a survey among clinical consequences of novel variants in the human gen- 300 randomly selected females from 18 to 47 years old, ome(http://humandiseasegenes.nl/).HDGisaninitiativeof carried out both online and at the ofﬁce for genetic the Human Genetics Department, Nijmegen, in collabora- counseling in the Laboratory of Medical genetics, Varna. tion with the University of Washington and the University Of all 59.3% are currently pregnant, 35.8% have been ofAdelaide.Eachwebsiteismoderatedbyadedicatedteam pregnant before, 4.9% not been pregnant. of clinicians and molecular biologists, and collects and Results: 73.2% of the women receive information from providesup-to-datemostlyunpublishedclinicalinformation theobstetricianalthoughhighpercentageareself-educated- aboutonespeciﬁcgeneorcopynumbervariant.HDGaims 26.8%. In total 65.7% of the females think that this toﬁllthegapbetweenﬁrstpublicationofseveralcasesand information is well or very well delivered. 66.1 % describe consecutive publication of a large review paper. Profes- their understanding of biochemical screening for Down sionalscanusetheinformationofthenewandraredisorder syndromeasgoodorverygoodcomparedto41.6%whodo for counseling and will have the opportunity to share clin- notknowwhatNIPTis.Theyarebetterinformedaboutthe ical data. Patients, parents and care-givers will ﬁnd useful amniocentesis-56.2%,thoughonly13.7%woulddeﬁnitely informationonthediseaseandhavetheopportunitytoshare undergo the procedure. The main argument when choosing detailed clinical information through the website of our the method for diagnosing Down syndrome is the accuracy partnerGenIDA.HDGisalsoaplatformwhereresearchers ofthetest-65.1%andonly1.2%pointtheprice.However, can collect and share (functional)data. Recently a new the majority (77.3%) are willing to pay no more than version of the websites has been launched which not only 150 euro. allowscollectionofphenotypedatausingHPO(http://huma Conclusions: The results from the survey highlight the ndiseasegenes.nl/wac/professionals/upload-clinical-informa lack of knowledge about the offered screening and tion/) but also provides an up-to-date overview of the diagnostic tests for Down syndrome, especially NIPT. clinical data that have been collected (http://humandisea Better education and counseling of women during their segenes.nl/wac/graph-and-chart/). These tools will be pregnancy consultations are recommended.668 J.delPicchia M. Levkova: None. M. Hachmeriyan: None. V. ﬁrst step in implementing changes which will have a Miteva: None. M. Stoyanova: None. M. Tsvetkova: positive impact on the care of patients across Europe. None. L. Angelova: None. M.Smith:None.J.Clayton-Smith:None.S.Douzgou: None.B.Kerr:None.S.Banka:None.A.Renieri:None. P19.11C L. Faivre: None. M. Rawson: None. ERN-ITHACA Year 1: Opportunities and Challenges P19.12D M.Smith1,J.Clayton-Smith1,2, S.Douzgou1,2,B. Kerr1,2, S. Clinical implication of FMR1 intermediate alleles in a Banka1,2,A. Renieri3,4,L. Faivre5,M.Rawson1 Spanish population 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester M.Milà1,2,M.Alvarez-Mora1,3,I.Madrigal1,3,F.Martinez4,M. University NHS Foundation Trust, Health Innovation Tejada5,6,S. Izquierdo7, L.Perez-Jurado8,3,L. Rodriguez- Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Division of Revenga1,3 EvolutionandGenomicSciences,FacultyofBiology,Medicine and Health, School of Biological Sciences, University of 1ServeideBioquimicaiGenéticaMolecular,Barcelona,Spain, Manchester,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,3MedicalGenetics, 2HospitalClinic.CIBERERCentreforBiomedicalResearchon University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 4Genetica Medica, Azienda Rare Diseases(CIBERER), ISCIII,,Barcelona, Spain,3Centre Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 5Centre de for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Génétique,CentredeRéférenceMaladiesRares"Anomaliesdu ISCIII,, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Universitario y DéveloppementetSyndromesMalformatifs"Hôpitald'Enfants, Politecnico La Fe,, Valencia, Spain, 5Biocruces Health Dijon, France Research Institute, Barakaldo-Bizkaia, Spain, 6Centre for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII,, The 2011 EUDirectiveon Patients’ Rights inCross-border Madrid, Spain, 7Genetics department Clinical Biochemistry Healthcare aims to facilitate access to healthcare resources Service. University Hospital Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, fromacrosstheEUandthusincreasepatients’management 8Genetics Unit, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and Hospital del and treatment options. In response to this, 24 thematic Mar Research Institute (IMIM),, Barcelona, Spain European Reference Networks (ERNs) for rare disorders were formed in March 2017. FMR1 premutation carriers (55-200 CGGs) are at risk of The ERN for Congenital Malformations and Intellectual developing Fragile X-associated primary ovarian insufﬁ- Disability (ERN-ITHACA) seeks to improve access to ciency (FXPOI) as well asa progressive neurodegenerative diagnosis, consistent high-quality care, educational and disordercalledFragileX-associatedtremor/ataxiasyndrome researchresourcesbyfacilitatingexpertexchange,bringing (FXTAS). FMR1 premutation alleles are also associated TeleHealth into clinical practice where required, establish- with a variety of disorders, including psychiatric, develop- ing rare patient registries, encouraging engagement in pan- mental, and neurological problems. While the clinical European research activities and creating new educational implications of the FMR1 premutation alleles are well resources for professionals and patient groups. Here, we established, there is major concern regarding smaller CGG demonstratesomeofourkeyinitiativesindeliveringpatient expansionsknownasintermediatealleles(IA)orgrayzone beneﬁt as part of ERN-ITHACA. alleles (45-54 CGG). Although several studies have hypo- In year 1 there have been tangible beneﬁts: interaction thesized that IA may be involved in the etiology of FMR1 with patient groups helped us formulate an all- premutation associated phenotypes, this association still encompassing strategy; the web-based Clinical Patient remains unclear. The aim of this study was to provide new ManagementSystem(CPMS)hasbeenpilotedsuccessfully; dataontheclinical implicationsofIA.Wereviewedatotal expertiseoncarepathwaysandtraininginitiativeshasbeen of 17,011 individuals: 1,142 with premature ovarian consolidated and ITHACA has participated in large-scale insufﬁciency, 478 with movement disorders, 14,006 with EU projects, such as SOLVE-RD and the European Joint neurodevelopmental disorders and 1,385 controls. Similar Programme. IA frequencies were detected in all the cases and controls However, there have also been challenges: the networks (cases 1.20% vs. controls 1.39%, p=0.427). When com- areconservativelyﬁnancedby theEU andcan therefore be paring the allelic frequencies of IA ≥ 50CGGs, a greater, accommodated by Health Care Providers (HCPs) from albeit not statistically signiﬁcant, number of alleles were countrieswithexistingmanagementframeworks;theCPMS detected in all the cohorts of patients. However, statistical still presents many technical challenges; inclusion of new analysis did not detect signiﬁcant differences between any HCPswillstraintheERNs.Wehavedevelopedstrategiesto group of patients and controls suggesting that IA do not overcome these challenges and the ﬁrst year represents the confer increased risk for primary ovarian insufﬁciency,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 669 movement disorders, or neurodevelopmental disorder phe- P19.14B notypes.This study wassupportedby ISCIII [PI17/01067], Translating the German Commission on Genetic Testing co-ﬁnanced by FEDER "una manera de hacer Europa" and (GEKO)guidelinefortherequirementsofthequaliﬁcations AGAUR2017SGR1134fromtheGeneralitatdeCatalunya and the contents of genetic counseling into OB/GYN andbygrantsfromMINECO[BIO2011-27069][SAF2013- specialist practice - Results from the GenBIn2 project 49108-R]. M. Milà: None. M. Alvarez-Mora: None. I. Madrigal: I.Nippert1,J. T.Epplen2,A.Gasiorek-Wiens3,R. Glaubitz4, T. None. F. Martinez: None. M. Tejada: None. S. Grimm5, K.Kagan6,R.P. Nippert7,J. Schmidtke8,R. Izquierdo: None. L. Perez-Jurado: None. L. Rodri- Schwerdtfeger9,K. Zerres10,H. Toennies11 guez-Revenga: None. 1Institut für Humangenetik,Universitätsklinikum Münster, P19.13A Münster,Germany,2InstitutfürHumangenetik,RUB,Bochum, Skills and competencies in clinical genetics for the Germany, 3Campus Charité Mitte, Berlin, Germany, 4amedes European general practitioner genetics, Hannover, Germany, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Biozentrum Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, I.Ejarque-Doménech1,C. Cuenca-Valero2, M.Calviño- 6Universitäts-Frauenklinik Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, Naveira3,A. Souvirón-Rodríguez4,V. Martín-Gutiérrez5 7Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, Germany, 8MHH, Hannover, Germany, 9Zentrum für Pränatalmedizin und 1Agència Valenciana de Salut, Valencia, Spain, 2Conselleria Humangenetik, Hannover, Germany, 10Institut für de Sanitat. Hospital de Requena., Requena, Spain, 3Servizo Humangenetik, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 11Robert GalegodeSaúde(SERGAS).,SantiagodeCompostela.,Spain, Koch-Institut, Berlin, Germany 4Centro de Salud de El Palo. Servicio Andaluz de Salud., Málaga.,Spain,5CentrodeSalud.ServicioAndaluzdeSalud., Background: The German Act on Genetic Testing stipu- Sevilla., Spain lates the requirements of good practice with regard to safety, informed consent and free decision-making for Introduction: The training programs of the specialty of people undergoing genetic testing. The act required the General Practitioner (GP) remain heterogeneous at a EU GEKOtoissueaguidelineonrequirementsforcompetence level. Henceforth, in some European countries lack the in genetic counseling within the scope of each medical skillsandcompetenciesinclinicalgeneticsfortheGP.This subspecialty (2011). No empirical data are currently avail- poster is a proposal of these skills and competencies. ableonhowtheGEKOguidelineisappliedatpointofcare. Material and Methods: This study has been carried out Objectives:Toprovidepreliminarydataforassessingthe through a qualitative group of twelve experts selected by translation of the guideline. these three criteria: GP specialists, interested in clinical Methods: (i) key-areas for an assessment were identiﬁed geneticsandfromdifferent Spanishregions.During afour- by a multidisciplinary expert group; (ii) development of a hour session was discussed what kind of skills and questionnairebaseduponkey-areas(iii)apre-study/inquiry competencies should be included in the curriculum of the guided by the questionnaire. trainee for GP. Results: 150 OB/GYN representing different types of Results:Asaresultoftheworkcarriedoutbyagroupof practice participated in the inquiry. 80% had obtained the experts, certain skills and competencies have being qualiﬁcation for genetic counseling within their specialty. identiﬁed for the curriculum of the European GP. 48% reported changes in the management of patients, 61% Conclusions: It is very important to adapt the current reported more referrals to genetic specialists for genetic regulation across Europe in order to include speciﬁc skills counseling. Genetic counseling provided by OB/GYN and competencies in clinical genetic for the curriculum of mostlyinclude:counselingbeforeFirstTrimesterScreening the trainee of GP. A rotation of this professional during a (ETS) (76%) and after ETS with normal results (77%), month in a service of clinical genetics complementing the beforeprenatalultrasoundforfetalanomalies(64%),before current competence-knowledge matrix would grant better NIPT for Trisomy 21 and after NIPT with normal results tools to improve the quality of the service provided to (57%). Additional work load, time constraints in busy patients. practice settings and the guideline conﬂicting with estab- I.Ejarque-Doménech:None.C.Cuenca-Valero:None. lishedapproachestodeliveringcarewerereported.Positive M. Calviño-Naveira: None. A. Souvirón-Rodríguez: responses include: increased sensitivity for skills required None. V. Martín-Gutiérrez: None. for genetic counseling and increased referrals to genetic specialists.670 J.delPicchia Conclusions: By identifying numerous challenges the R.O.I. abo rabia: None. inquiry helps to better understand factors inﬂuencing the translation process and provides groundwork for future P19.16D assessment studies. An alternative pathway for countries without a training I. Nippert: None. J.T. Epplen: None. A. Gasiorek- program for genetic counsellors: the Swedish experience Wiens: None. R. Glaubitz: None. T. Grimm: None. K. Kagan: None. R.P. Nippert: None. J. Schmidtke: None. K. Svensson1,R. Pestoff2,M. Paneque3, C.Malmgren R. Schwerdtfeger: None. K. Zerres: None. H. Ingvoldstad4 Toennies: None. 1OfﬁceforMedicalServices,DivisionofLaboratoryMedicine P19.15C Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Department Factors affecting compliance to genetic counseling in the ofClinicalGenetics,LinköpingUniversityHospital,Linköping Israeli Bedouin population Sweden,Linköpping,Sweden,31i3S–InstitutodeInvestigação eInovaçãoemSaúde,UniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal, r.O.I.aborabia Porto,Portugal,4DepartmentofClinicalScience,Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, Clalit Health Services and the Genetics Institute,, beer sheva, Stockholm, Sweden Israel In Sweden there is currently no academic education at Background: Genetic counseling is mostly carried out in master level in genetic counselling, which is recommended theframeworkofhospitals.Withrecentmassiveprogressin by the European organizations promoting professional genetictechnologiesandpropensityingenetictesting,there regulation. As a result, professionals with different back- is growing need to make the genetic services more acces- grounds and experiences are employed as genetic counsel- sible in community medicine in order to increase respon- lorsinSweden.Thereisaneedtoharmonizethequalityand siveness. This is of speciﬁc interest in inbred rural standards for practice. communities, where consanguinity leads to high incidence The Swedish Society for Genetic Counsellors, SFGV of hereditary diseases, yet mobility to central medical cen- together with the Swedish Association for Medical ters is cumbersome. Genetics, SFMG have determined standards, and created a Objective: To assess in the rural Bedouin Israeli career development pathway for genetic counsellors. community the compliance of arrival to genetic counseling Theresultisanindividualtrainingprogramleadingupto in a central medical center following nurse-mediated early certiﬁcation for genetic counsellors in clinical practice in interviews and referral. Sweden. Each professional has an educational plan, and Methods:Prospectivestudy.Datacollectedfromrecords there are three different levels of employment within the of couples visiting genetics-specialized nurses at public genetic counseling profession. The ﬁrst level is an employ- community clinics, including personal interviews, clinical, ment according to the individual´s basic profession, the demographic and obstetric data, and family history of second level is an assistant genetic counsellor and the third genetic disease variables. level, as a genetic counsellor, requires an academic Results:Ofthe1754womenreachinginitialinterviewby education equivalent to one year at an advanced level in the genetics-trained nurse, 684 (40%) needed further the nursing or biomedical ﬁeld, and approval as a certiﬁed professional genetic counseling at Soroka medical center. genetic counsellor according to the SFMG-standards. Reasons for further formal genetic counseling were: Conclusion: Professional certiﬁcation is a way of Medical problems detected during current pregnancy; assuring that an individual has the mandatory knowledge, Consanguinity; Family history of genetic diseases; pre- skillsandabilitiestoprovidequalityofpatientcareandsafe viously known carrier status of couple. Of the 684 women practice. We describe an alternative pathway for national referred to formal genetic counseling, only 360(52.6%) regulation of genetic counsellor career development and arrived. Reasons for failure to arrive were assessed. certiﬁcation process that may support other countries in Conclusion: In a population with high incidence of providing national regulation of genetic counsellors where intermarriage and genetic diseases, it is recommended to the profession is still emerging, and where no integrate a genetic counseling services in the community educational route. health system to increase responsiveness to genetic K. Svensson: None. R. Pestoff: None. M. Paneque: counseling and testing in a timely manner, adapted to None. C. Malmgren Ingvoldstad: None. religionandculture.Dedicatedteamsshouldbetrainedand continuousactivitypromotingpublicawarenessisessential.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 671 P19.17A E. Dagan1,S. Barnoy2 Complementariness between medical geneticists and genetic counsellors: its added value in genetics services in 1University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 2Tel Aviv University, Tel Europe Aviv, Israel M.Paneque Herrera1,C. Serra-Juhé2,R.Pestoff3, C.Cordier4, Aim: To study factors associated with genetic skills per- J.Silva1,R. Moldovan5,C.Ingvoldstad6 formance in nursing in highly educated nurses in Israel. Methods: Data were collected during a conference for 1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2Genetics Unit, Universitat Pompeu professional associations in nursing in Israel. The partici- Fabra - Hospital del Mar Research Institute (IMIM),, pants were asked to complete a set of anonymous Barcelona,Spain,3DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,Linköping questionnaires which included, genetic knowledge, mathe- University Hospital, Linköping, Sweden, Linköping,, Sweden, matics literacy, sense of genetic epistemology, openness to 4Synlab Genetics, Department of Genetics,, Lausanne, technological innovations, attitude towards the importance Switzerland, 5Department of Psychology, Babe�-Bolyai ofassimilatinggeneticsskillsinnursing,andtheextentthey University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 6Department of Public perform these skills in the routine nursing work. Health and Caring Science, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Results: Participants included 81 nurses aged 46.5±10.6 Sweden years on average, most of them were Israeli born, Jewish, secular,workinginhospitals,and~70%holdingaMaster’s Clinical genetic services have progressed signiﬁcantly the degree. The mean genetic knowledge was low (53.4% last few decades. This has led to the need for non-medical ±13.43), as was the mathematics literacy (61.3%±25.3). healthcare professionals working as genetic counsellors in Nursesreportedoflowassimilationofgeneticskillsintheir Europe and worldwide. However, there is no uniﬁed routine work (1.9±0.78; range, 1-4), although their overall approach to genetic counsellors’ role in healthcare services attitudestowardstheimportanceofgeneticsinnursingwere in Europe, as in most countries the profession is still positive. Positive correlations were found between a sense emerging and the educational backgrounds diverge notice- of epistemology about genetics, and attitudes towards the ably, within and between countries. This qualitative study importance of genetics in nursing, with assimilation of aims to describe the potential added value of genetic genetic skills in routine nursing work. These variables counsellors in clinical genetics teams and to explore their added 33.4% to the explained variance in the hierarchical tasksandresponsibilitiesindifferentEuropeancountries.A regression model for variables predicting genetic skills total of 143 participants providing genetic counselling in performanceinnursing.Additionally,mathematicalliteracy Europe at the time of the survey responded. The results correlated with genetic knowledge, and older nurses held show differences in activities of genetic counsellors, morepositiveattitudestowardstheimportanceofassimilat- although there is a wide range of roles which are similar. ing genetics skills in nursing. The ability to establish a quality relationship with con- Conclusion: Although the nurses in this study were sultandswasfrequentlymentionedasoneofthestrengthsof highly educated, we found disappointingly low scores in geneticcounsellors,aswellasapatientcentredapproach.It genetic knowledge and in performance of genetic skills in is believed that genetic counsellors add a more holistic the nursing routine work. approach of psychosocial and familial dimensions of E. Dagan: None. S. Barnoy: None. genetic concerns to the multidisciplinary teams. This study provides examples of successful integration of genetic P19.20D counsellors in teams, as complementariness with medical The evolving role of the clinical geneticist facing new geneticistbecameclearinseveralcases.Althoughtheadded technologies:theopinionofpatientsfromtheAnDDI-Rares value of genetic counsellors was manifested, professional network recognition of genetic counsellors across Europe is still needed in order to support the quality of patients care and A. Lapointe1,F. Neuhaus2,C. Biotteau2, C.Dervieux2,I. safety of practice. Marchetti-Waternaux2,S. Marlin3, I.BenAissa4,M.Rossi5,A. M. Paneque Herrera: None. C. Serra-Juhé: None. R. Goldenberg6,G.Baujat7,C.Thauvin8,E. Gautier8,L. Pestoff: None. C. Cordier: None. J. Silva: None. R. Demougeot9,L. Faivre9 Moldovan: None. C. Ingvoldstad: None. 1Filière AnDDI-Rares, Paris, France, 2CoPIL Filière AnDDI- P19.19C Rares, Paris, France, 3Centre de référence des surdités Genetic professional skills performance in nursing: A génétiques, Genetic Department, Hôpital Necker-enfants preliminary study in highly educated nurses malades, Paris, France, 4Filière Sensgene, Strasbourg,672 J.delPicchia France, 5CLAD Sud Est - CHU HCL, Lyon, France, 6CLAD Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 4Victorian Clinical Nord de France, Rouen, France, 7Centre de référence des Genetics Service, Parkville, Australia, 5Peter MacCallum Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles, Hôpital Necker-enfants Cancer Centre, Parkville, Australia, 6Walter and Eliza Hall malades, Paris, France, 8CLAD Est, Dijon, France, 9Filière Institute, Parkville, Australia AnDDI-Rares, Dijon, France Introduction: Rapid advances in genomics are bringing The arrival of new diagnostic technologies and genomic beneﬁtstohealthcarebutnotwithoutchallenge.Keyamong medicine lead to important changes in genetic clinics. An these is the need for a workforce that can deliver the ben- expected growing number of indications of tests raise the eﬁts of genomic medicine to patients. question of the prescription of pangenomic tests by non- Methods: In the demonstration phase of Melbourne geneticists. In that case, clinical geneticists are worried of Genomics,anallianceof10leadinghealthcareandresearch the possible reduced quality of patient information, in par- organisations, an immediate need, and opportunity, was ticular the limited time dedicated to the implications of test identiﬁed to develop a workforce to guide genomic results, genetic counselling, but also new issues including sequencing into healthcare across Victoria. To address this secondary data and management of VUS. we have developed a multi-faceted workforce development Inthiscontext,asurveywasdonetostudythepreferences program providing opportunities for learning experiences ofpatientsforthecircuitofprescriptionandtransmissionof that enhance and augment clinical and laboratory practice, results of NGS tests in a clinical diagnostic setting. The focussingonengagementwithreal-lifeproblemsrelevantto survey was sent to a group of 50 patients organizations of practice or skills-based training. the AnDDI-Rares network (developmental disorders and These include: intellectual disability). 404 questionnaires were collected. More than 80 % of the respondents had met a clinical ● Provision and evaluation of genomic sequencing to geneticist in their diagnostic odyssey. 93% of them agreed patients through deﬁned ﬂagships providing a multi- that geneticists should have a primary role in the disciplinary environment for experiential learning; prescription of pangenomic tests, in particular because ● A12weekcross-trainingprogramformedicalscientists genetic teams offer multidisciplinary cares (genetic coun- in variant curation and reporting; sellors, psychologists, social worker). However, 72%, were ● Research placements in genomics for advanced trainee also in favour of NGS tests being prescribed by a non- clinical geneticists; geneticistmedicalspecialist,inparticularbecauseheknows ● Research, clinical and laboratory placements for non- better his patient, and have shorter delay for accessing to genetic medical specialists that address an authentic consultations.Inthesecases,70%oftherespondentswould problem drawn from their practice. like a consultation with a geneticist for transmission of the results. With NGS development, the whole patient care These experiential placements are being augmented with pathway needs to be redesigned and professional training reconsidered to face this the arrival of genomic medicine. ● Interactive workshops in germline and somatic variant A. Lapointe: None. F. Neuhaus: None. C. Biotteau: curation None. C. Dervieux: None. I. Marchetti-Waternaux: ● Developmentofon-linemodulesinvariantcurationand None. S. Marlin: None. I. Ben Aissa: None. M. Rossi: interpretation None. A. Goldenberg: None. G. Baujat: None. C. Thauvin: None. E. Gautier: None. L. Demougeot: None. Results and Conclusions: Ongoing qualitative evalua- L. Faivre: None. tion of the program reveals consistently high levels of engagement and learning. Quantitative evaluation of P19.21A structured workshops measured improved knowledge and “Experience is the teacher of all things”- upskilling the skills for all participants with over 90% reporting high genomics workforce in variant interpretation levels of satisfaction. This success demonstrates the effectiveness of interactive, participant-centred approaches F. Cunningham1,2,3,S.Lunke4,3,T.Y.Tan4,3,M.Martyn1,3,E. in developing a sustainable genomics workforce develop- Lynch1,S. N.A. Roesley1,5,N.Thorne1,6,C. Gaff1 ment strategy. F. Cunningham: None. S. Lunke: None. T.Y. Tan: 1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Parkville, Australia, None. M. Martyn: None. E. Lynch: None. S.N.A. 2Monash Health, Clayton, Australia, 3Murdoch Childrens Roesley: None. N. Thorne: None. C. Gaff: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 673 P19.22B The 100,000 Genomes Project in the UK has established Custom-designed free educational Clinical Genomics apps and reﬁned many of the processes around the delivery of for smartphones & tablets: their international uptake and wholegenomesequencingatscale.Thenextobjectiveisthe further development implementation of these technologies as an integral part of routine healthcare in specialities outside genetics thus pro- E. S.Tobias, A. P.Tobias motingequitableaccesstothesetechnologies.Thisrequires ‘mainstream’ clinicians to adopt some tasks which are Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow, United currently the province of clinical geneticists. In March Kingdom 2017, we held a workshop bringing together clinical and genetics specialists and specialists from other clinical areas Educational and self-assessment smartphone apps that including cardiology, ophthalmology, paediatrics, respira- explain (and test knowledge of) commonly used genomics tory and renal medicine, to evaluate the particular issues andbioinformaticstermsandacronyms,werecreatedbythe thatariseattwointerfaces:patientidentiﬁcationandreferral authors.Thesenon-proﬁtClinicalGenomicsguideandquiz fortesting;andinterpretationofresultsandclinicaldecision appshavebeenmadeavailable,completelyfreeofcharge, making. We found that most clinicians will need a lot of viatheofﬁcialAppleandAndroidappstores(searchfor: support to identify patients who may beneﬁt from testing “Clinical Genomics”). They provide immediate clear and decide which test to request. The capture of necessary explanations of genomics-related terminology (such as clinicalandphenotypicinformationatthepointofreferralis “FASTQ”, “BAM”, “GVCF”, “BED ﬁles”, “GATK” problematic. Examples ofsupporting methodswereshared. and “BWA”) that are otherwise not easily accessible. Similarly, barriers to involving mainstream clinicians in Creating these multi-platform apps was time-consuming. interpretation include practicalities (such as geography, Highlypositivefeedbackhas,however,beenreceivedfrom timing and length of consultation) and lack of required physicians, genetic counsellors, laboratory scientists and expertise, whichmay be outside theirclinical area. Support students, internationally. The apps are used by postgrad- for clinical decision making based on genomic test results uate students to assist their understanding eg during would be vital for effective implementation. For equitable lectures or when reading scientiﬁc papers. For instance, implementationofgenomictestingacrossthehealthsystem they are used to assist understanding of key Clinical detailed attention must be paid to developing new clinical Genomics concepts and terminology by students on the pathways in each speciality and the necessary support sys- internationally popular Medical Genetics & Genomics tems. Our report can be downloaded from http://www. Masters programmes at Glasgow University. phgfoundation.org/report/genomics-mainstream-clinical-pa The apps are also used by professionals, who thways. increasingly receive complex genetic laboratory reports H. Burton: None. A. Hall: None. S. Raza: None. M. that must be interpreted for patient beneﬁt. Kroese: None. The apps have been approved by the ESHG, the ScottishGeneticsEducationNetwork(ScotGEN)andby P19.24D DSDnet. They have been downloaded thousands of times, Genetic counselling in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: across approximately 50 countries and have recently been economical and psycho-social impact shortlisted for a national higher education "Innovation Technology Excellence" award. Further programming and L. Garrido1,T. Nércio1,R. Leal2,R.Guimarães1,L. Ferro1, L. development of the apps is currently underway, to include Vilarinho1,S. Costa1,A. Magalhães1,A. S.Mesquita1,A.F. explanations of additional terms and concepts. The authors Pereira1,I.Gullo1,3,2,H.Pinheiro2,S.Sousa2,B.Carvalho3,2,A. would be grateful for further feedback and for suggestions P.Neto3,2,L.Capela3,2,C.Teixeira1,A.Fareleira1,V.Devezas1, regardinganymoretermsthatcouldbeincorporated.Please G.Macedo1,3,J.Preto1,3,J.Barbosa1,3,M.Baptista1,3,G.Pinto1, email: edward.tobias@glasgow.ac.uk. M.Damasceno1,J.L.Fougo1,3,J.Costa-Maia1,S.Fernandes3,2, E.S. Tobias: None. A.P. Tobias: None. F. Carneiro1,3,2,S.Castedo1,3,2,C. Oliveira2,3 P19.23C 1Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal, 2Ipatimup/i3S, Genomics in mainstream clinical pathways Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology at the University ofPorto(Ipatimup), Porto,Portugal&Instituto de H.Burton,A. Hall, S.Raza, M.Kroese Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), University of Porto, Porto,Portugal,Porto,Portugal,3FMUP,FacultyofMedicine PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal674 J.delPicchia Introduction: Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC) T. M.Aloraini1,A.Gari2,G.AlKarbani2 syndrome is caused by CDH1-germline mutations and carriershavehigh-risktodevelopearly-onsetdiffusegastric 1NGHA, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Alfaisal University; King cancer (DGC) in both genders and lobular breast cancer Faisal Specialist Hospital And Research Center., Riyadh, (LBC) in females. HDGC is deadly for those expressing Saudi Arabia clinical phenotype, but presymptomatic testing allows dis- ease prevention or early-diagnosis in mutation-carriers Thereisaconsensusthatwhole-genomesequencing(WGS) through risk-reduction gastrectomy and yearly breast MRI, and whole-exome sequencing (WES) will improve in discharging~50%ofnon-carriers.AsHealth-Care-Provider accuracy and decline in price, eventually becoming an of ERN-GENTURIS, we aim to evaluate the economic integral part of clinical medicine. In clinical genome impact of genetic counselling, presymptomatic diagnosis sequencing, there is a potential for the recognition of inci- and multidisciplinary care for the National Health Service dental ﬁndings that are unrelated to the indication for (NHS), and the clinical and psycho-social implications for orderingthesequencingbutmaynonethelessbeofmedical HDGC families. value. Here, we aimed to compare the attitudes of genetics Material and Methods: We evaluated outputs of professionals and patients towards incidental ﬁndings from structured oncogenetics and high-risk consultations in 111 WGS/WES, including a hypothetical situation in which a individuals from 7 HDGC families by consulting clinical/ patient/familydeclinestoreceivealltheincidentalﬁndings. ﬁnancial records, and assessed its psycho-social impact by A web-based survey was conducted with 20 genetics pro- applying an emotional-distress-scale (HADS) to 70/111 fessionals (medical geneticists and genetic counselors) and individuals. 30 patients from King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Results: From 2011-2016, we screened 111 individuals, Research Center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Data collection fromwhich53%testednegative(n=58;30M:28F)andwere tookplacebetweenthe2ndofAprilandthe4thofMay2017. discharged from follow-up each costing 200€ to the Theresultsdemonstratedthat55%ofgeneticsprofessionals Hospital. 47% (n=53;26M:27F) tested positive. From 7 would not share all WES/WGS results with patients and probands, 2 were diagnosed with LBC and remain alive they preferred to focus on actionable results that yield after curative surgery, while 5 diagnosed with DGC are beneﬁts such as medical treatment and disease prevention. deceased. The hospital expenses with probands range from However,73.3%ofpatientswereinterestedinreceivingall 30-50K€ independently of cancer type. Costs with carriers the raw genomic data for themselves and their children. opting for prophylactic approaches range from 4-8K€ References1-Alkuraya,F.S.(2014).Geneticsandgenomic (higher cost/females), except if disease is identiﬁed after medicineinSaudiArabia.MolecularGeneticsandGenomic the ﬁrst high-risk consultation,raisingthe cost to 27K€ but Medicine. 2- Kalia et al., 2017. Recommendations for life-saving. Those opting for surveillance, cost ~1K reporting of secondary ﬁndings in clinical exome and gen- €/patient. Concerning psychologic impact, carriers demon- ome sequencing, 2016 update a policy statement of the strate higher levels of distress than non-carriers. American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Conclusion: Structured healthcare in HDGC economic- T.M. Aloraini: None. A. Gari: None. G. allybeneﬁtsNHS,islife-savingforcarriers,reassuringnon- AlKarbani: None. carriers. L. Garrido: None. T. Nércio: None. R. Leal: None. R. P19.26B Guimarães:None.L.Ferro:None.L.Vilarinho:None.S. Informing relatives at risk of inherited cardiac conditions: Costa:None.A.Magalhães:None.A.S.Mesquita:None. attitudes of healthcare professionals, probands and A.F.Pereira:None.I.Gullo:None.H.Pinheiro:None.S. relatives Sousa: None. B. Carvalho: None. A.P. Neto: None. L. Capela:None.C.Teixeira:None.A.Fareleira:None.V. L.M.VandenHeuvel1,M.J.Huisinga1,Y.M.Hoedemaekers2, Devezas: None. G. Macedo: None. J. Preto: None. J. A.B.Baas3,M.Plantinga2,L.Henneman4,J.P.vanTintelen1, Barbosa: None. M. Baptista: None. G. Pinto: None. M. E. M.A. Smets1,I.Christiaans1 Damasceno: None. J.L. Fougo: None. J. Costa-Maia: None. S. Fernandes: None. F. Carneiro: None. S. 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Castedo: None. C. Oliveira: None. 2University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, P19.25A Netherlands, 4VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Comparisonbetweentheattitudesofgeneticsprofessionals Netherlands and patients towards incidental ﬁndings from whole- genome or whole-exome sequencingAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 675 Inherited cardiac conditions (ICCs) can lead to sudden attitudes towards novel therapies for IRD. Interviews were cardiacdeath(SCD)atyoungage.Cardiacmonitoringand/ transcribed verbatim and analysed using thematic analysis. orpredictivegenetictestingisadvisedtoat-riskrelativesto Results: Interviewees’ attitudeswereclassiﬁedinto three prevent SCD. Usually, probands are asked to inform their broad themes: hope, despondency, and ‘knowledge is relatives with a family letter. This study investigated atti- power’. Whilst hope was expressed universally among tudestowardsthisfamily-mediatedapproachinICCstouse participants, this was also accompanied by concerns for potential improvements. A qualitative study design was regarding the risk involved in therapy uptake and the used. Two online focus groups with 27 healthcare profes- lengthy timescale of development. There was also an sionals (HCPs), including cardiologists, clinical geneticists, appetiteidentiﬁedfor access tomore informationregarding geneticcounsellors and psychosocial workers, and25face- therapy development from trustworthy, accessible sources. to-face semi-structured interviews with probands and rela- Althoughparticipantsvariedintheextenttowhichtheyfelt tiveswereindependentlyanalysedbytworesearchersusing anticipation versus resignation it was universally acknowl- athematicapproach.Mainﬁndingsshowthatitisgenerally edged that all would draw empowerment from being preferred that probands inform their relatives. However, provided with up-to-date, accurate information. bothHCPsandprobandsstrugglewiththedependencyand Conclusions: This study suggests there is a need for psychological and practical burden on probands to inform improved dissemination of accessible information on novel their relatives. HCPs think a more active role of HCPs in IRD therapies through face-to-face as well as online informing at-risk relatives is needed to overcome these platforms. The development and validation of an ophthal- barriers. Probands and relatives ideally prefer a tailored mic genetic-speciﬁc PROM may help to ensure the broad information provision strategy to inform at-risk relatives, and complex needs of IRD patients are met. A better- adjustedtofamilydynamicsandpersonalitycharacteristics. informed IRD patient population could improve supply to Incontrast,HCPspreferuniformityinprocedurestorestrict clinical trials and ultimately, aid in the successful develop- the workload. To summarize, although in most cases it is ment and clinical implementation of novel IRD therapies. preferredthatprobandsinformrelatives,severalbarriersare K.L. Barr: None. M. McAllister: None. M. perceived. Based on these ﬁndings, we are conducting a Votruba: None. randomized clinical trial to evaluate the uptake and accep- tance of a tailored approach, compared to the family- P19.29A mediated approach. In this tailored approach probands can An interactive application to support practical teaching in choose which relatives they will inform themselves and medical genomics and bioinformatics whichrelativestheyprefertobeinformedbythecounsellor. L.M. Van den Heuvel: None. M.J. Huisinga: None. Y. K.Prochazkova1,P.Novotny2,M.Hancarova1,D.Prchalova1,Z. M. Hoedemaekers: None. A.B. Baas: None. M. Plan- Sedlacek1 tinga: None. L. Henneman: None. J.P. van Tintelen: None. E.M.A. Smets: None. I. Christiaans: None. 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and UH Motol, Prague, P19.27C Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology and Environmental A qualitative study exploring patient attitudes towards Studies, Charles University Faculty of Education, Prague, novel therapies for inherited retinal dystrophies Czech Republic K. L.Barr1,M. McAllister1,M.Votruba2 Medicalstudentsusuallyﬁndmoleculargenetics, genomics and bioinformatics difﬁcult and remote from their future 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff and clinical plans. However, their orientation in these topics is Vale University Health Board, Cardiff, United Kingdom necessary as genetic testing is rapidly penetrating into all medical specialties. Patient involvement and practical Introduction: There is currently no treatment or cure for laboratory work can enhance teaching, but obstacles limit inheritedretinaldystrophies,yetnumerousclinicaltrialsare their broader implementation. Computer simulations can underway investigating novel therapeutic strategies. This instead be used to ameliorate the teaching process. study aimed to explore the awareness and opinions of new We created an electronic teaching application simulating therapies among IRD patients in South Wales. the process of molecular genetic diagnosis of a monogenic MaterialsandMethods:Tenparticipantswithdiagnoses disorderinafamily.Thirteentaskspresentedonasequence of IRD were recruited through the Genetic Eye Clinic at ofwebpagesdealwiththeclinicalassessmentofpedigrees Cardiff and Vale University Health Board (C&V UHB). and phenotypes, clinical diagnosis, design of a laboratory Semi-structured qualitative interviews explored patients’ test,identiﬁcationofamutationusingcapillarysequencing,676 J.delPicchia assessment of pathogenicity and clinical relevance of the Jupyter notebook-based pipeline with plain contextual mutation,andﬁnalconﬁrmationofthediagnosis.Thetasks explanations was designed to seamlessly progress from employ publicly available bioinformatic resources used in event-level data and obtain species abundance. the daily routine of medical genetics departments Results and Conclusions: Overall, protocols performed worldwide. similarlyenrichingmtDNAdirectlyfromDNAextractions, Feedback from students was obtained using a test both from animal and plant species. We anticipate that the administeredbeforeandafterthepractical.Mostcomments choice of enrichment will depend on the attendees’ onthe practical were verypositive. Theanswers tospeciﬁc educational level and the available laboratory equipment. test questions were classiﬁed as very good, satisfactory, or Sequencingofamockspecimen(artiﬁcialmixtureoffoods) unsatisfactory. There was a signiﬁcant improvement after after a simple 10-minute library preparation allowed the practical (on average by one grade) of knowledge and identifying all species with minimal deviations from the skills of the students in medical molecular genetics, expected. We envisage this hand-on experience as a genomics and bioinformatics. learning-by-doing instrument for transdisciplinary educa- The feedback is used to improve potentially problematic tion adapted to basic laboratory resource settings. sectionsofthepractical.Apilotversionofanotherteaching Funding:AgreementOA17/008withITERtostrengthen application, illustrating the workﬂow of whole-genome scientiﬁc and technological education, training, research, analyses, is under development. development and innovation in Genomics, Personalized Supported by 17-29423A. Medicine and Biotechnology; CEDeI fellowship (Cabildo K.Prochazkova:None.P.Novotny:None.M.Hancar- de Tenerife) to CGN. ova: None. D. Prchalova: None. Z. Sedlacek: None. C. Gonzalez Navasa: None. T. Hernández-Beeftink: None. H. Rodríguez-Pérez: None. J. Lorenzo-Salazar: P19.30B None. R. González-Montelongo: None. C. Flores: None. Developmentofahands-ongenomicseducationaltoolusing mitochondrial DNA PCR-free enrichment and MinION- P19.31C based species apportionment Tricky situation and diagnostic odyssey solved by combinationof“makeapoint”geneticcounselingandNGS C. GonzalezNavasa1,T. Hernández-Beeftink2,H.Rodríguez- Pérez2,J. Lorenzo-Salazar1,R. González-Montelongo1,C. N.Bukvic1,A.D’Aprile2, O.Palumbo3, C.Cesarano2,C. Flores1,2,3 Ceccarini2,P.Palumbo3,F.C.Susca4,A.Stella4,C.Piccoli5,N. Resta4 1Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables, Granadilla de Abona, Spain, 2Research Unit, 1U.O.CGeneticaMedicaAziendaOspedaliero–Universitaria HospitalUniversitarioN.S.deCandelaria,UniversidaddeLa Consorziale, Bari, Italy, 2Sez di Citogenetica- Laboratorio Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 3CIBER de Centrale– Dipartimento di Patologia Clinica, Azienda Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Ospedaliero-Universitaria, Foggia, Italy, 3Genetica Medica, Madrid, Spain IRCCSCasaSollievodellaSofferenza,SanGiovanniRotondo (FG), Italy, 4U.O.C Genetica Medica, D.A.I. Patologia Introduction: Because of the low cost, laptop operability, Diagnostica, Bioimmagini e Sanità Pubblica, Università degli and the USB-powered compact design of MinION (Oxford Studi “Aldo Moro”, Bari, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Medicina Nanopore Technologies), using cutting-edge Next-Genera- Clinica e Sperimentale - Universita di FG, Foggia, Italy tionSequencing(NGS)technologyinﬁeldexperimentsand the classroom is a reality. By leveraging the beneﬁts of Encephalopathy due to defective mitochondrial and perox- using mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), here we devised the isomal ﬁssion-1 (EMPF1) is characterized by delayed psy- protocols and materials for a NGS hands-on training with chomotor development and hypotonia that may lead to educational purposes. death in childhood. Many patients develop refractory sei- Materials and Methods: We assessed two procedures zures, consistent with an epileptic encephalopathy, and for facilitated mtDNA enrichment from foods: QIAprep thereafter show neurologic decline. The age at onset, fea- Spin Miniprep Kit (QIAGEN) and the classic alkaline lysis tures, and severity are variable. We report on, 40 years old protocol for plasmid isolation. Enrichment of mtDNA vs. woman pass through our Genetic Counseling, due to posi- nuclearDNAwasevaluatedbyquantitativeReal-TimePCR tive anamnestic data regarding presence of intellectual dis- (CFX96 Touch, BioRad) using primers from eukaryotic ability, transient ischemical episodes and myoclonical conservedregions.PCR-freelibrarieswereconstructedwith seisures in sibs. These signs and simptoms were present in Rapid Sequencing Kit and sequenced with MinION. A ﬁrst son (exitus at 3 years), as also in second son (exitus atAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 677 11 years; the DNA samples available). The children were information regarding the presence or absence of children. generatedbydifferentfathers.AhypothesisofEMPF1was f-treecanassembleapedigreethatcomprisesdataforupto advanced. The sequencing of DNM1L gene has been per- ﬁve generations, and places a couple with and without formed on the proband’s, mother’s and DNA of 2nd father. children within the third and fourth generation of a given The known patogenetic mutation c.1085G>A (p. pedigree, respectively. 2) Next, an interviewer may assist Gly362Asp) and VUS c.1535T>C (p.Ile512Thr) in the the user to complete a multiple-choice questionnaire to DNM1L gene were revailed in proband’s DNA. The collectgenealogicallypertinentinformationfortheuserand sequencing of mother’s DNA resulted in presence of only their relatives over ﬁve generations. 3) f-tree then VUSc.1535T>C(p.Ile512Thr),whileinfather’sDNAboth automatically creates a pedigree chart, which can be variants were absent. On the basis of these observation it reviewed on the screen in real time. was fairly difﬁcult to interpret this situation as de novo Conclusions:Thef-treesoftwareprogramhasbeenmade autosomal dominant variant. The further analysis by NGS available for free on the Iwate Tohoku Medical Megabank has been performed, heterozygosity of c.1085G>A (p. Organization website (http://iwate-megabank.org/en/ Gly362Asp) variant was revealed in 5% of mother’s DNA. genetic/). Until date, this program has been downloaded All variants have been conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. more than 3,000times since itsreleaseonMarch 19,2015. HereinandinnPost-testGeneticCounselingtheresultsand T. Tokutomi: None. A. Fukushima: None. K. Yama- in depth explanation of germinal mosaicism have been moto: None. F. Nakayama: None. Y. Katsube: None. A. discussed. Shimizu: None. M. Sasaki: None. N. Bukvic: None. A. D’Aprile: None. O. Palumbo: None. C. Cesarano: None. C. Ceccarini: None. P. P19.34B Palumbo: None. F.C. Susca: None. A. Stella: None. C. Comparison between different screening strategies for the Piccoli: None. N. Resta: None. detection of all fetal karyotype abnormalities P19.33A F.R.Grati1,B.Grimi1,K.Bajaj2,L.Marcato1,B.Malvestiti1,F. f-tree:AfamilyhealthhistorytoolavailablefromtheIwate Maggi1, G.Simoni1,S. J.Gross3,J.C. P. B. Ferreira4,5 Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization 1TOMA, Advanced Biomedical Assays S.p.A, Busto Arsizio, T. Tokutomi1,2,A.Fukushima1,2,K. Yamamoto1,2, F. Italy,2DepartmentofObstetrics&Gynecology,NYCHealth+ Nakayama2, Y.Katsube2,3, A.Shimizu2,M.Sasaki2 Hospitals/Jacobi, Bronx, NY, United States, 3Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, School of Medicine, Iwate 4Hospital Central de Maputo, Maputo, Mozambique, 5and Medical University, Morioka, Japan, 2Iwate Tohoku Medical Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade Eduardo Mondlane, Megabank Organization, Iwate Medical University, Yahaba, Maputo, Mozambique Japan, 3Genetic Counseling Program, Applied Medical Science, Graduate School of Medical Science, Iwate Medical Introduction: For T21,T18,T13 Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) University, Morioka, Japan tests have a higher detection rate (DR) and a much lower false positive rate (FPR) than traditional serum±ultrasound Introduction:TheTohokuMedicalMegabankprojectaims screening (TSS). However, TSS can pick up unexpected to create a next-generation personalized healthcare system. additional ‘off-target’ chromosome abnormalities con- We designed a questionnaire-based pedigree-drawing soft- sequenttothehigherreﬂexinvasivetestingrate.Theaimof ware program named “f-tree” to enable users to accurately thisstudyistocomparethedetectionratesofall(targetand and rapidly collect genealogical information and assemble off-target) fetal karyotype abnormalities at birth by cfDNA pedigrees. and TSS. Materials and Methods: f-tree is a stand-alone applica- Materials and Methods: Using a model derived from tion written in ActionScript 3.0. Because it was built as a our laboratory data, we predicted the DR of any karyotype cross-platform runtime system using Adobe AIR, it is anomalies at birth in pregnancies with no risk factors other important that Adobe AIR be installed prior to the than maternal age (MA) for seven screening strategies, installation and use of f-tree. including different TSSs, cfDNA tests (±SCAs) and Results: f-tree is a bilingual software designed in contingent/sequential approaches. Japanese and English, and complies with international Results: CfDNA testing for T21,18,13+SCA (cfDNA- nomenclature guidelines for human pedigrees. It can be TXY)hasthehighestDRforallkaryotypeabnormalitiesat used to assemble pedigrees in the following manner: 1) all MAs. In young women, cfDNA for T21,18,13only Upon system startup, the user is prompted to provide (cfDNA-T)hasalowerDRthananyTSSduetothe5%FPR678 J.delPicchia resulting in the identiﬁcation of a greater proportion of off- fromtheirnarratives.Reasonsforchoosingthetestingwere targetabnormalities;cfDNA-TequalsTSSsataMAof38y, describedas“cannotraiseonemorechildwithdisabilities”, when trisomies dominate the risk. and “request for the testing by the child’s grandparents”. Conclusions: Distribution of the chromosome abnormal- Reasons for not choosing testing were described as “don’t ities is different at different MA. Therefore, although two like to terminate the fetus”, and ”can make a happy family strategies may show approximately the same overall DR, regardless of disabilities of the child”. In the setting of TSSs favour the detection of a broad array of ‘off-target’ prenatal GC for the clients who had children with DS, we abnormalities, atthecost ofaconsistentindividualresidual have to aware that they could have ambivalent feelings risk,whileuniversalcfDNAtestsefﬁcientlydetectcommon abouttheburdenandthevalueofraisingchildrenwithDS. aneuploidies with a limited view of ‘off-target’ abnormal- E. Kise: None. M. Ishikawa: None. T. Kojima: None. ities. These results are useful for the development of K. Takano: None. S. Ohira: None. N. Kikuchi: None.Y. screening implementation economical models for public Fukushima: None. T. Kosho: None. health policy decision-makers. F.R. Grati: None. B. Grimi: None. K. Bajaj: None. L. P19.37A Marcato: None. B. Malvestiti: None. F. Maggi: E. Projectmachine:auniqueapproachforindustrialmedical Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other education intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; TOMA Advanced Bio- medical Assays S.p.A. G. Simoni: E. Ownership Interest I.Akalin1,E. Aslan2,E. Akbas2, S.Yilmaz2,U.Telli2,S. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Yildirim2,N.Durcanoglu2,G.Aktemur2,A. Karaoglu2,R. Signiﬁcant; TOMA Advanced Biomedical Assays S.p.A.. Yilmaz2 S.J. Gross: None. J.C.P.B. Ferreira: None. 1Istanbul Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine, P19.35C Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Factors inﬂuencing the decision whether or not to have Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey prenatalgenetictestinginpregnantwomenhavingchildren with Down syndrome Introduction:‘ProjectMachine’isatargetedprojectofour Medical Genetics department. It’s established from under- E.Kise1,M.Ishikawa1,T.Kojima2,K.Takano1,2,S.Ohira3,1,N. graduatemedicalstudentsinouruniversity.Theaimwasto Kikuchi3,1,Y. Fukushima2,T. Kosho1,2 provide them a systematic way of conducting pilot projects to intend innovation and patent targeting academic 1Center for Medical Genetics, Shinshu University Hospital, improvement by teaching them on basic and advanced Matsumoto,Nagano,Japan,2DepartmentofMedicalGenetics, laboratory methods in Molecular Genetics. Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Nagano, Materials and Methods: Project Machine consists of Japan, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shinshu 8 students from 3 different medical classes (Phase 2,3,4). University Hospital, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan The Project Machine group received hands-on training in eleven different subject projects in two years. Trainings In Japan, non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) has been were given by Medical Geneticist, the ﬁrst Author. All of available as a clinical research since the introduction in these activities were done as a team work particularly 2013. Shinshu University Hospital does not participate in during their free studying times besides active medical this clinical research, and offers careful prenatal genetic education. Students were evaluated by Medical Scores counseling (GC) for the decision whether or not to have (before and after participating machine), Laboratory works amniocentesis-based fetal karyotyping by certiﬁed genetic (n=30) and academic skills (n=17) completed. The t test counselors (CGC) and clinical geneticists specializing in and Chi square tests were used for statistics. chromosomal or genetic disorders. In this study, we report Results: The average score of the students who our experiences about prenatal GC to the clients having a participated in the project machine increased signiﬁcantly child with Down syndrome (DS). From medical records of (79,24±8,961;min-max:56-98)(p=0,021). The average Center for Medical Genetics, Shinshu University Hospital molecular techniques learned were 17,75±8,598 (min- from April 2013 to December 2017, we identiﬁed 8 preg- max:6-29). The average academic skills they succeed were nantwomenwhohadachildwithDSandreceivedprenatal 8,25±5,523(2-15) including 3domesticand1 international GC. The average age of the cohort was 36.3 years (range, awards won and 11 projects has ﬁnished during project 32−41). Four of them (50%) had prenatal genetic testing (min-max:9-31 months) with an accepted publication. and the others declined the testing. We reviewed factors Discussion:Participationofmedicalstudentsinscientiﬁc inﬂuencing the decision whether or not to have the testing studiesbymutualinteractionwithacademiciansduringtheirAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 679 medicaleducationmightleadmoresuccessful,prompt,and 23Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of enhanced skills to overcome hard working and time Psychology, Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, consuming jobs in an active team work system. Hence, 24Psychosis Research Unit, Aarhus University Hospital, our study might be pilot model for industrial medical and Risskov, Denmark, 25The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for genetic education. Integrative Psychiatric Research, iPSYCH Aarhus University, I. Akalin: None. E. Aslan: None. E. Akbas: None. S. Aarhus, Denmark, 26University of Sarajevo - Institute for Yilmaz: None. U. Telli: None. S. Yildirim: None. N. GeneticEngineeringandBiotechnology,Sarajevo,Bosniaand Durcanoglu: None. G. Aktemur: None. A. Karaoglu: Herzegovina, 27Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and None. R. Yilmaz: None. Biotechnology“GeorgiD.Efremov”,MacedonianAcademyof Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav P19.38B Republic of, 28Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders Psychiatric Genetic Testing - An emerging, (KIND), Department of Women's and Children's Health, interdisciplinary ﬁeld Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden F. Degenhardt1,O.Andreassen2, I.Borg3,4, A.Børglum5,6,7,S. Psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar Cichon8,9,10,D.Coviello11,P. M.Czerski12,D.Demontis5,6,C. disorderarecommonandhighlyheritable.Despitethishigh Foley13,W. Hennah14,15,16,K. Koido17,L. M.Lopez13, M. heritability it has taken many years to begin to identify Mattheisen18,19,20,K.A.McGhee21,A.McQuillin22,A.Miu23,O. underlyinggeneticriskfactors.However,inthelastdecade Mors24,25,L.Pojskic26,K.Popovska-Jankovic27,K.Tammimies28 majoradvancesinpsychiatricgeneticshavebeendrivenby bothtechnologicaladvances(e.g.costeffectivearray-based 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of genome-wide genotyping and next-generation sequencing Clinical Medicine; Psychosis Research Centre (TOP), Oslo, technologies) and the establishment of large-scale, interna- Norway, 3Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and tional consortia. Of particular relevance has been the iden- Surgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 4Department of tiﬁcationofcopynumbervariants(CNVs),suchas22q11.2 Pathology,MedicalGeneticsUnit,MaterDeiHospital,Msida, deletions, that confer substantial risk for psychiatric dis- Malta,5DepartmentofBiomedicine–HumanGenetics,Aarhus orders. Findings such as these have sparked an interest in University, Aarhus, Denmark, 6The Lundbeck Foundation implementing genetic testing for patients with these dis- Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, iPSYCH, orders in routine clinical care. Psychiatric Genetic Testing Aarhus, Denmark, 7Center for Integrative Sequencing and (PsyGT) is a newly emerging and interdisciplinary ﬁeld. Aarhus Genome Center, Aarhus, Denmark, 8Institute of Across Europe experts with varying backgrounds (e.g. Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Genetics, Epidemiology, Psychiatry) have assembled to Basel,Switzerland,9DepartmentofBiomedicine,Universityof facilitate pan-European research relevant to PsyGT and to Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 10Institute of Neuroscience and helppavethewayforitsclinicalimplementation.Ourwork Medicine(INM-1),ResearchCenterJuelich,Juelich,Germany, will address: (i) establishing a list of genetic factors for 11Department of Genetic Sciences and I.B.M.D.R.; Galliera which it is scientiﬁcally/clinically appropriate to offer Hospital, Genova,Italy, 12Laboratoryof PsychiatricGenetics, genetictesting;(ii)deﬁningpatientinclusioncriteriafore.g. Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, CNV testing; (iii) discussing the potential challenges of 13Department of Psychiatry, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, PsyGT (e.g. informed consent; reporting back incidental Ireland, 14Institute for Molecular Medicine FIMM, University ﬁndings to a patient with a psychiatric disorder); (iv) pro- of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 15Medicum, University of moting research into the potential positive and negative Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 16Department of Health, Mental effectsofPsyGTforpatientsandtheirfamilymembers;(v) Health Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, increasing the “psychiatric genomic literacy” among all Helsinki, Finland, 17Department of Physiology, Institute of relevant stakeholders as genetic counsellors and psychia- Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, trists report that they feel ill-equipped to educate patients Tartu, Estonia, 18Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and their family members about the genetics of psychiatric and Psychotherapy, Center of Mental Health, University disorders. Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 19Department of F. Degenhardt: None. O. Andreassen: None. I. Borg: Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, None. A. Børglum: None. S. Cichon: None. D. Coviello: 20Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Centre for Psychiatry None.P.M.Czerski:None.D.Demontis:None.C.Foley: Research, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 21Faculty None. W. Hennah: None. K. Koido: None. L.M. Lopez: of Science & Technology, Bournemouth University, None. M. Mattheisen: None. K.A. McGhee: None. A. Bournemouth, United Kingdom, 22Division of Psychiatry, McQuillin: None. A. Miu: None. O. Mors: None. L. University College London, London, United Kingdom,680 J.delPicchia Pojskic: None. K. Popovska-Jankovic: None. K. P19.40D Tammimies: None. TestingtheORPHA-codebasedBeta-Masterﬁleusingdata from the Belgian Central Registry of Rare Diseases P19.39C (CRRD) for the use case of rare diseases patient data Improving rare disease identiﬁcation and coordinating sharing at EU level health and social care priorities P.M.Urbina1,A.Rath2,S.Weber3,V.VanCasteren1,A.Olry2, H.McAneney,A.Crowe,J.Miller,K.Kerr,J.C.McMullan,A. M.Marx3,E. Swinnen1 J.McKnight 1WIV-ISP, Scientiﬁc Institute of Public Health, Brussels, Queens University of Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom Belgium, 2Orphanet, INSERM, Paris, France, 33. DIMDI, German Institute of Medical Documentation and Information, Introduction:Rarediseases,presentin<1/ personswith Cologne, Germany 2,000 a genetic cause, affect ~5% of the population in Northern Ireland (NI). Following public and stakeholder consulta- Since2016,5Belgiangeneticcentresstartedtoprovidedata tions, a NI Rare Disease Implementation Plan was pub- to the CRRD for all patients with a genetic diagnosis lished stressing 51 key commitments to improve medical (conﬁrmed or provisional). ORPHA-codes (preferably) or and societal challenges speciﬁcally associated with rare codes cross-referenced to ORPHA-codes are used. One diseases. objective of the CRRD is data sharing at EU level for MaterialsandMethods:Mixedmethodswereemployed epidemiological and other purposes. to seek views from a range of stakeholders to recognise However, lack of standardised use of appropriate rare goodpractice,identifywhereurgentchangeisrequired,and disease (RD) coding across the EU is hampering data prioritise short/medium/longer term goals for rare diseases sharing. To allow data sharing, RD-ACTION WP5* in NI. The establishment of our NI Genomic Medicine members propose the use of a table, retaining only Centre (2015) and applying multi-omics approaches to ORPHA-codes at disorder level in the Orphanet classiﬁca- improvethespeedandaccuracyofdiagnosisforindividuals tion of RD. The table is called “Beta-Masterﬁle”, a tool with rare diseases has revealed important issues. serving RD-coding and exploitation purposes prepared by Results: Differences were noted depending on the the above-mentioned group. method of data collection. Common themes consistently We analysed the diagnosis-related information from the included a frequently tortuous path to diagnosis, difﬁculty current CRRD dataset and evaluated the future exploit- ﬁnding details for health and social care contacts, and ability at EU-level using the above-mentioned table. challenges accessing relevant information in suitable Non-rare cases (~4%) were excluded from further formats. analysis. For only 11 of 1633 cases analysed, a conversion Conclusions: Current health and social care systems in into ORPHA-codes was necessary. ~65% of RD diagnoses NI are not designed to optimise care for rare diseases. The had a conﬁrmed status. development of our digital integrated care record Considering that subtype ORPHA-codes are convertible (http://www.hscboard.hscni.net/encompass/) is offering into their parenting ORPHA-code, data from ~80% of unprecedented opportunities to integrate effective and CRRD patients could be shared at EU level, albeit losing sustainable strategies to improve rare disease identiﬁcation, moredetailedcodinginformationfor~6%ofthem.Forboth optimise care and service provision, provide relevant provisional and conﬁrmed diagnoses, the use of ORPHA- information to individuals living and working with rare codesatgroup-of-diseaselevelisabout20%.Therelatively diseases, and establish effective multi-disciplinary commu- high use of codes at group-of-disease level for conﬁrmed nication networks. diagnoses should be further investigated in order to obtain ALC&KKaresupportedbyaPhDstudentshipfromthe better quality of coding. Department for the Economy. This work was conducted in *WP5: “Steering, maintaining and promoting the adop- collaboration with the NI Department of Health, Public tion of ORPHA-codes for Rare Diseases across member Health Agency, and NI Rare Disease Partnership. states”; EU’s joint action ‘677024/RD-ACTION’ H.McAneney:None.A.Crowe:None.J.Miller:None. P.M. Urbina: None. A. Rath: None. S. Weber: None. K. Kerr: None. J.C. McMullan: None. A.J. V.VanCasteren:None.A.Olry: None.M.Marx:None. McKnight: None. E. Swinnen: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 681 P19.42B ProportionofCliniciansofferingFace-to-Faceappointments Triage in a Clinical Genetics setting - investigating Referral Centre1 Centre2 Centre3 Centre4 Centre5 consistency within and between units 1 CopyNumberVariant 6(67%) 9(100%) 5(100%) 10(100%) 6(100%) T. P. McVeigh1,M.Porteous2, A.Murray3,E. Jones4,S. 2 Hypermobility 0(0%) 8(89%) 3(60%) 4(40%) 2(33%) 3 Intermediate 7(78%) 7(78%) 5(100%) 10(100%) 6(100%) Wedderburn5, E.Kinning6,S.Lynch7 FMR1allele 4 Trisomy21 0(0%) 9(100%) 6(100%) 9(90%) 5(83%) 1National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Ireland, 5 AdultwithIntellectual 5(56%) 6(67%) 3(50%) 9(90%) 6(100%) Disability 2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 6 PredictiveBRCA 4(44%) 9(100%) 8(89%) 7(70%) 3(50%) 3University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, (familialvariant 4ManchesterCenteforGenomicMedicine,Manchester,United informationunavailable) Kingdom, 5NHS GREATER GLASGOW & CLYDE, Glasgow, 7 Cervicalcancer 0(0%) 2(22%) 0(0%) 1(10%) 0(0%) 8 IsolatedCleftlip 0(0%) 2(29%) 1(14%) 7(70%) 3(50%) UnitedKingdom,6NHSGreaterGlasgowandClyde,Glasgow, 9 CongenitalHeartDisease 0(0%) 3(33%) 2(40%) 7(70%) 6(100%) United Kingdom, 7Temple Street Children's University (unspeciﬁed) Hospital, Dublin, Ireland 10 Pregnantwoman,Family 8(89%) 9(100%) 6(100%) 10(100%) 6(100%) historyofDuchenneMD 11 Hereditary 3(33%) 3(43%) 0(0%) 6(60%) 4(67%) Background: The triage process aims to ensure provision Haemochromatosis of appropriate care to patients, within an acceptable time- 12 Mitochondrialdisease 4(44%) 3(43%) 2(40%) 9(90%) 6(100%) (pre-symptomatic) period, depending on urgency of referral. Clinical Genetics 13 NeuralTubeDefect 3(33%) 7(88%) 4(57%) 4(40%) 4(67%) is unique regarding breadth of types of referrals, and age range of patients (pre-natal, paediatric or adults). Referrals are complex, and ensuring consistency of triage can be T.P. McVeigh: None. M. Porteous: None. A. Murray: difﬁcult. None. E. Jones: None. S. Wedderburn: None. E. Aim: To compare triage practices within and between Kinning: None. S. Lynch: None. clinical genetic centres in UK (n=4) and Republic of Ireland (n=1). P19.43C Methods: Thirteen simulated referrals were created Young adults' perceptions of the implications of their (TMcV, SAL) based on common real-life referrals to hereditary visual impairment: A Cape Town based study ClinicalGeneticsservices,anddistributedtoeachcentrefor "triaging". Individuals were asked to pick from the K. Popel1,G.Dusterwald2, C.Leisagang3, J.Greenberg1 following options: offer appointment (face-to-face/tele- phone); hold referral pending further information; manage 1Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pathology, referral by letter/telephone call; or reject referral. For University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2Private patients offered appointments, participants were asked to Practice, Cape Town, South Africa, 3Clinical Pharmocology, specify urgency (priority/routine) and clinician (consultant/ Division of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, counsellor).Dataregardingstafﬁnglevelsandwaitingtimes South Africa for each centre was noted. Results: Inconsistencies were noted within and between Introduction: Globally there are 39 million blind indivi- units (table). In 9/13(69%) referrals, clinicians in Centre1 duals and 246 million with low vision. A third of genetic were the least likely to offer face-to-face appointments. conditionsinvolvetheeye.Knowingthatone’sconditionis Centre1 had the lowest number of consultants/head of genetic presents challenges for individuals and leads to a population. sense of obligation regarding life plans. As young adults Conclusions: Clinical triage is a somewhat subjective with hereditary visual impairment must make choices process. Institutional factors, including stafﬁng levels, regarding relationships, having children, further education local practices; and patient factors, including age of or occupation and independence, which sets the foundation patient/parent (family planning considerations), indication for adulthood, it is important to focus on them. The study for, and type of, referral (predictive/diagnostic), can explored the understanding, perceptions and lived experi- modifytriage decisions.Standardisedguidelinesfortriage encesofyoungadultswithgeneticbasedvisualimpairment. are required to ensure equitable and appropriate service Method: Using qualitative research, ﬁfteen participants provision. were recruited, through purposive sampling, from various organisations for visually impaired individuals. In-depth interviews were conducted and analysed using thematic analysis.682 J.delPicchia Results: Many young adults identiﬁed the dilemma with syndrome), and only 4.4% stated they prefer the current regards to bearing children as the main implication of form (e.g. 1 in 100). The participants noted several factors having a genetic based visual impairment. Almost all which could relieve their anxiety, including explanatory participants had minimal knowledge of their condition and bookletorsite(markedas"helpful"by72.4%and77.9%of felt that they did not understand it well. Many participants the women, respectively). felt misunderstood by society. Social interactions were Discussion: Women receiving abnormal results of Down greatly impacted on by means of social alienation, support syndrome screening experience signiﬁcant anxiety, which structures, and treatment by others. Having a disability seems to be underappreciated by the treating physicians. created the sense of need and desire to succeed and prove Efforts must be made to relieve this distress, including themselves.Anaspectthatsigniﬁcantlyimpactedtheirlives considerationofchangingthehistoricalreportoftheriskas was the challenges with mobility, which included the a ratio to percentage or a combination of options. incapacity of driving and public transportation. L. Sagi-Dain: None. A. Peleg: None. S. Sagi: None. A. Conclusion: This research could assist in improving Singer: None. genetic counselling services, as well as provide organisa- tions with information to strengthen support and guidance P20.03C for these individuals.The study was funded by the NRF. Fabry disease: Female perspectives K. Popel: None. G. Dusterwald: None. C. Leisagang: None. J. Greenberg: None. C. vonder Lippe1,J.Frich2, A.Harris3,K. N.Solbrække2 1Centre for Rare Disorders, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, P20 Psychological/Ethical/legal issues Norway, 2Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, Oslo,Norway,3DepartmentofTechnologyandSocietyStudies, P20.02B Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands A tremendous distress that goes unnoticed - the anxiety caused by abnormal results of Down syndrome screening Introduction: Fabry disease is a rare X-linked disorder caused by a mutation in the GLA gene. Women hetero- L. Sagi-Dain1,A. Peleg1,S. Sagi2,A.Singer3 zygousforamutationmayhavesymptoms.Littleisknown aboutthepsychosocialexperiencesofwomenheterozygous 1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Bnai Zion Medical for Fabry disease. The aim of the study was to explore Center, Haifa, Israel, 3Community Genetics, Public Health women’s psychosocial experiences of being heterozygous Services, Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel for Fabry disease. Materials and Methods: We used an explorative Background: Screening tests for Down syndrome are qualitative study design and conducted in-depth semi- routinely advised during pregnancy, with recommendation structuredinterviewswithtenNorwegianwomenwhowere ofinvasivechromosomaltestingtohigh-riskwomen(about known heterozygous for Fabry disease. We analyzed the 5% of pregnant population). The objective of our survey interviews using inductive thematic analysis. was to evaluate the anxiety experienced by women receiv- Results: Most women reported a relief of getting the ing abnormal screening results, and to explore potential Fabrydiagnosis,asanexplanationtopresentendpreviously ways to relieve this distress. unexplainable symptoms. It was however important for the Methods: Women who had experienced an abnormal women to make a distinction between Fabry disease and screening result for Down syndrome were invited to their daily life. The women on enzyme replacement participate in an electronic anonymous cross-sectional treatment were grateful for available treatment; however, survey. Anxiety level was evaluated by a six-item short- the treatment was not without personal cost. A frustration form of the Spielberger State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. regarding the lack of health care providers’ knowledge of Results: Overall, 559 women have answered the ques- Fabry disease was common. tionnaire. In 86.04% high anxiety scores were reported Conclusions: Women who are heterozygous for Fabry following abnormal screening results. Using logistic disease react to and reﬂect on their diagnosis differently, regression analysis, higher anxiety scores were noted in and they should receive personalized information, support, younger women and in those informed of the abnormal and management. Health care providers should be aware result by the caregiver vs. written answer. 41.7% of the and acknowledge feelings of guilt and difﬁculties in respondents preferred the risk reported as percentage (e.g. communicating about Fabry disease in the family. Health 1% risk for Down syndrome), 16.6% - as positive care providers should also recognize the personal cost of percentage (99% chance for fetus negative for Down receiving treatment, and support the patients on this.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 683 C. von der Lippe: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria P20.05A (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Raw Genomic Data: Storage, Access and Sharing SHIRE, SANOFI. J. Frich: None. A. Harris: None. K.N. Solbrække: None. M.Shabani,D.Vears, P. Borry P20.04D KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Ethical decision-making competence regarding the possibilities of genome editing by CRISPR/Cas Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) and Whole Exome sequencing (WES) for diagnostic and research purposes B. Vajen1,L. Heinisch2, C.Hößle2,U.Krause2,W.Rathje2, B. generate a large volume of raw data. Previous ethical and Schlegelberger1 legal discussions concerning genomic data management havemainlyfocusedonconcernsrelatedtointerpretationof 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute the results and the return of both primary and secondary of Biology and Environmental Science, Oldenburg, Germany ﬁndings from these tests. Yet to date, issues related to the storageandreturnofprimarysequencingdata(suchasbam The CRISPR/Cas9 technology is proclaimed as one of the (Binary Alignment) or fastq ﬁles (unaligned reads)) that greatest innovations of the last decade and has sparked a allow both the regeneration of primary results and the rea- public debate about its ethical issues. To facilitate partici- nalysis of data have received far less attention, particularly pationofadolescentsinpublicdebates,thedecision-making in the clinical setting. This is despite the huge potential for competence is ﬁxed as a part of educational standards for long-termdatastoragetoleadtofuturedatare-analysisand the natural science curriculum in Germany. In the present reinterpretation in light of new evidence. In this paper, we study, we will analyze ethical decision-making compe- critically appraise three main issues, namely, data storage tencesofmedicalstudentsandadolescentsinthecontextof policies and practices of clinical laboratories, patients’ genome editing. access to raw data, and sharing of raw data by individuals. The Oldenburg model of ethical decision-making We argue that there is a need for well-established and competences includes perception of moral relevance, transparent raw genomic data retention and returning poli- assessment,judgement,argumentation,consequencereﬂec- cies in order to enable patients to practice their rights to tion, change of perspective and basic ethical knowledge. access raw genomic data. In addition, professional com- On a paper-pencil test with open-ended questions on munitiescouldguidelaboratoriesinadoptingbestpractices authentic ethical dilemmata, regarding genome editing for for the storage and return of raw data, and introduce uni- somatic or germline gene therapy for RUNX1-associated formitytothesepractices.AsWESandWGSbecomemore familial leukemia, the above-mentioned competences are embedded in diagnostics, it is timely to consider how cur- recorded in a sample of 50 medical students and 50 rent data storage policies align with patients’ rights and adolescents of a secondary school. The responses of interests to access raw data, and how these rights can be participants are analyzed using a structured qualitative managed in the clinical setting. content analysis. Points are awarded for the dimensions of M. Shabani: None. D. Vears: None. P. Borry: None. ethical decision-making competence. First results of the study show, that medical students and P20.06B adolescents are open-minded towards genome editing in Incidentalﬁndingsingenetictesting:acomparisonbetween case of healing heavy diseases. Nevertheless, they have US and european guidelines and a bioethical reﬂection great fears about a misuse of this technology creating “designer babies” or “enhanced humans” and that human M.Vismara1,V. Meschesi2, G.Pulvirenti3,A. Donato4,S. dignity might be hurt while tinkering in the DNA of Vismara5,B.Zepponi6,C.Settanni5,F.Donato7,L.Coltrinari5, embryos.Noneofthemagreewiththeusageingeneral.The V. Moroni5,A. Valentini8,J.Toaff9,G.Donato10 results of this study can be untilized to improve education on ethical decision-making competence and/or on basics 1PhD school of medical genetics, Sapienza University, Roma, abouttheCRISPR/Cas-basedgenomeeditinginschooland Italy,2LiceoScientiﬁcoStataleGiovanniKeplero,Roma,Italy, university. 3PhD school of Cognitive Science, University of Messina, B.Vajen:None.L.Heinisch:None.C.Hößle:None.U. Messina, Italy, 4PhD school of Biomarkers in chronic and Krause: None. W. Rathje: None. B. complex diseases, Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Schlegelberger: None. Italy, 5Indipendent researcher, Roma, Italy, 6Imago child and adolescence neurology and psychiatrics clinic, Roma, Italy, 7OrientaleUniversity,Naples,Italy,8Caravaggiolaboratories,684 J.delPicchia Roma, Italy, 9Indipendent researcher, Versailles, France, 1Bank of Biological Material, First Faculty of Medicine of 10Chair of Pathology, Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2General Italy University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) use in biomedical diagnosisandresearchmakesnowpossibleadeepergenetic Background: Biobanks provide biomedical research with and genomic analysis at a reduced cost. However, the highqualitysamplestogetherwithassociateddataincluding analysisofevidencethatisbasedonsuchbigdatacanresult geneticdata.Sincethedonorsofbiologicalmaterialconsent in the generation of knowledge that is not relevant to the at the same time to storage and use of samples, to proces- clinical question posed because some genes are associated singofpersonaldataandtofutureresearch whosemethods withmultiplemedicalconditions.Thesekindofinformation andaimscannotbeclearlyidentiﬁedatmomentofconsent, are commonly referred to as "incidental ﬁndings" and their there is currently no consensus on the best consent model. management pose new ethical issues and dilemmas, espe- Tobeneﬁtthedonorsoneoftheproposedwaysisreturnof cially regarding their disclosure to patients as well as the research results mainly from genetic research, which can role of the different clinical ﬁgures involved. In this work reveal some of the future health risks. Current opinions we aim to analyze different recommendations and guide- differ in this regard taking into account practical but also lines,referringinparticulartoUSAandEurope.Numerous ethical consideration like the “right not to know”. The aim discussions have been conducted in order to reach a con- ofthisstudyistoexploretheexperience with andopinions sensusonhowtohandlesuchﬁndingsinlinewiththelegal onconsentmodelsandreturnofresearchresultsinpractice and cultural particularities of individual states and general of oncological biobanks. bio-ethical principles and different guidelines have been Methods: Semi-structured interviews with the staff of 6 published.Thesereportsmainlyfocusontheprosandcons recentlyestablishedoncologicalresearchbiobanksinCzech of NGS technology and potential beneﬁts and risks for Republic. reporting of incidental ﬁndings.We want to compare these Results: In Czech oncological research biobanks the various statements and try to ﬁgure out how patient’s will preferred model of consent is broad consent; none of the could be better included in the decision making and the biobanks employs any interactive consent model (,, disclosure process, in order to respect its autonomy. We unethical to remind someone about cancer“). Also return also point out the need for continued debate, research, and of research results was considered inappropriate for discussion among all stakeholders to improve our under- oncological patients (,,To whom the information should standing of the effect that different policies have on be communicated when the donor is dead?“). patients, providers, laboratories, and societies. Conclusions: The recently established Czech research M. Vismara: None. V. Meschesi: A. Employment (full biobanks implemented in their practise broad consent and or part-time); Signiﬁcant; LSS "Keplero". F. Consultant/ no return of research results mainly with regard to speciﬁc AdvisoryBoard;Modest;FondazioneCraxi.G.Pulvirenti: issues connected to oncological patients. This study was A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; University supported by project MŠMT-LM2015089 and RVO ofMessina.A.Donato:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); VFN 64165 Signiﬁcant; Magna Graecia University. S. Vismara: None. V. Frankova: None. R. Hermankova: None. D. Valik: B. Zepponi: Other; Signiﬁcant; Owner of Imago clinic. C. None. K. Jirsova: None. T. Zima: None. Settanni: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; società cooperativa Zurigo. F. Donato: None. L. Coltrinari: P20.08D Other; Signiﬁcant; owner of Coltrinari Law ﬁrm. V. Moving towards clinical use of New Genome Sequencing Moroni: None. A. Valentini: A. Employment (full or technologies: Understanding the Ethical, Legal and part-time); Signiﬁcant; Caravaggio laboratories. J. Toaff: psychological challenge A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blizzard corporation.G.Donato:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); S.JULIA1,2,M.Rosier3,A.Cambon-Thomsen2,4,M.Guedj3,M. Signiﬁcant; Magna Graecia University. MuñozSastre3,E. Rial Sebbag2,5 P20.07C 1Medical genetics department, Toulouse, France, 2U1027 Consent model and return of results in oncological Inserm and University of Toulouse 3, Toulouse, France, biobanks: a qualitative study 3Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches en Psychopathologie et Psychologie delaSantéUT2J,Toulouse,France,4Plateforme V. Frankova1,2,R. Hermankova2,D.Valik3, K.Jirsova1,T. "Génétique et société" Genotoul, Toulouse, France, Zima1Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 685 5Plateforme "Génétique et société" Genotoul, Toulouse, present in this paper the major changes induced by the Austria adoption of several Regulations for the translation of PGx tests into clinics. Medical genetics illustrate the link between technological SincetheadoptionoftheIVDRPGxtestsandcompanion developments, an evolving scientiﬁc knowledge, and prac- diagnostics(CDx)arenowclearlyfallingunderthescopeof tical decisions which impact patients’ lives. The rapid the Regulation (Class C according to the IVD’s classiﬁca- development of sequencing technologies marks a historical tion) with their respective deﬁnitions. Based on the turning point in human genetics. Important questions need evaluation of risks (from Class A, less, to D, high), this to be asked about how to use these new technologies in classiﬁcation introduces some new rules regarding proce- order to maximize the translational relevance of genetic dures. A notiﬁed body involvement is now required for the research for patients and for society: How to give adequate conformity assessment procedure, with speciﬁc provisions informationforpatientsinacontextofuncertainty?Howto for CDx. The performance study for marketing new IVDs deal with incidental/secondary ﬁndings? On the blurring should be based on the clinical beneﬁt of the device between care and research? The introduction of emerging (scientiﬁc validity, analytical performance and clinical technologies in clinic requires technical/clinical validation, performance). New traceability and transparency rules are harmonisation of practice, and evolution of the legal and also provided, such as the Unique Device Identiﬁcation ethical framework. Drawing on our experience with the system and a summary of safety and performance. More- development of genomic technologies and their application over, manufacturers have to put in place surveillance and in clinical settings, we analyze the ethical, legal and psy- vigilance systems with the obligation to produce several chological issues inherent in the sharing, recording and reports. storing of the medical information provided by these tech- Additionally, as for the General Data Protection Regula- nologies. This approach takes into account the current tion, a person responsible for regulatory compliance must contextofgenetictestsandprovidesconcreteanswerstothe be present. concerns of patients and professionals. Several issues to And ﬁnally, as for clinical trial data, a new database is consider are identiﬁed: the status of large scale genetic introduced: Eudamed, including several databases on informationregardingprivacyandconﬁdentiality,clinically medical devices and IVDs. useful information, health related information where no A. Constantin: None. E. Rial-Sebbag: None. L. immediate clinical measure exists. This work highlight the Serres: None. importance of a combined approaches of research in law, psychology and empirical ethic in order to describe the P20.11C beneﬁts and the limits of the use of new sequencing in Precision medicine and its infrastructures of solidarity. clinics which will determine their ethical and social Probing the social contract in US and EU precision acceptability. medicine initiatives S. Julia: None. M. Rosier: None. A. Cambon- Thomsen: None. M. Guedj: None. M. Muñoz Sastre: I.Van Hoyweghen1,E.Aarden2 None. E. Rial Sebbag: None. 1Leuven Institute of human Genomics and Society (LIGAS), P20.10B Leuven, Belgium, 2University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria Impact of the new EU in vitrodiagnostics regulation on pharmacogemonics: the U-PGx project On a global scale, a ‘race for innovation’ between nations has begun to set off for the building of Precision Medicine A. Constantin, E.Rial-Sebbag, L.Serres (PM)initiatives.ToestablishPM,variousinitiativescallon ‘anewsocialcontract’betweencitizens andthehealthcare INSERM - UMR 1027, Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, system. This contract implies that citizens recognize that France theyandeverybodyelsewillbeneﬁtfrommedicalscienceif theyallowdataabouttheirowngenometobecollectedand TheUbiquitousPharmacogenomics(U-PGx)projectaimsat shared.PolicymakerstherebymarkPMnotjustwithgrand addressingthemajorchallengesandobstaclestoimplement claimsonscientiﬁcandeconomicbeneﬁts,butalsowiththe pharmacogenomics (PGx) testing in European patient rou- formation of a new genomic citizenship. In this paper, we tine medical care. In this context, U-PGx has to comply investigate the mobilization of the social contract in the with the current European frameworks for performing economiccompetitionbetween‘PMnations’.Drawingona genetic testing in practice notably the new in vitro diag- comparative analysis of the United States and Europe, we nostic (IVD) medical devices regulation (IVDR). We will show how these new social contracts for PM are not only686 J.delPicchia imaginedasacriticalpartofthesuccessfuldevelopmentof remain long-term. According to 6-month follow-up all 12 PM, but are materialized in infrastructures of health care responders cope with the ﬁnding, none regret the decision delivery. We demonstrate how the successfulness of PM made, and all communicated the ﬁnding to their physician depends on infrastructures of health care delivery that per- and family. Nine of 12 have seen a specialist and ﬁve formastrust-generatingtechniquesforthemutualizationof pursued risk-reducing surgery. beneﬁts and rights. We consider the role of infrastructures Conclusions: The genotype-ﬁrst approach demonstrated ofhealthcaredelivery,whichwecoinas“Infrastructuresof that currently only a minority of individuals carrying Solidarity”,askeymarkersfortheimplicationsofeffortsto pathogenic BRCA mutations areunder appropriate medical incorporate Precision Medicine (PM) in contemporary surveillance. Although the 45 percent response-rate sup- health care systems. We conclude by a reﬂection on what ports choice regardingdisclosure, all participants perceived the new social contracts for PM entail for conditions of resultsreceivedvaluable.Long-termfollow-upshowedthat citizenship, access to health care, and the future of the informationissharedgenerouslyanddemonstratedincrease welfare state. in screening and prevention behavior. I. Van Hoyweghen: None. E. Aarden: None. L. Leitsalu: None. M. Palover: None. A. Reigo: None. T. Nikopensius: None. H. Alavere: None. P. Padrik: P20.13A None. T. Esko: None. A. Metspalu: None. N. Populationbiobankparticipants’preferencesandresponse Tõnisson: None. to disclosure of unexpected genetic ﬁndings P20.14B L. Leitsalu1,M.Palover1,2,A. Reigo1,T. Nikopensius1, H. Secondary ﬁndings from whole exome or genome Alavere1,P. Padrik3,T. Esko1,4,A. Metspalu1,2,N.Tõnisson1,5 sequencing: psychological and ethical Issues. Patient point of view 1EstonianGenomeCenter,InstituteofGenomics,Universityof Tartu,Tartu,Estonia,2InstituteofMolecularandCellBiology, F. Houdayer1,O.Putois2,3,S.Staraci4,5,M.L. Babonneau6,C. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 33Haematology and C.Michon6,H.Chaumet7,L.Joly8,C.Juif8,A.Chassagne3,9,E. Oncology Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, Gautier3,8,C. Thauvin-Robinet3,8, D.Sanlaville1,10, P.Edery1,10, 4BroadInstituteofMITandHarvard,Cambridge,MA,United A. S.Lapointe11,M.Garguilo5,12, L.Faivre3,8 States, 5Department of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia 1Service de génétique, Centre de Référence Maladies du développement,Bron,France,2SuLiSoMEA3071,Strasbourg, Introduction: The Estonian biobank legislation gives par- France, 3FHU TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, ticipants the right to receive results. Disclosure of unex- 4Service de génétique, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance pected genetic ﬁndings to population biobank participants PubliqueetHôpitauxdeParis,Paris,France,5Laboratoirede through genotype-ﬁrst approach provides valuable infor- Psychologie Clinique, Psychopathologie, Psychanalyse mation on how individuals from the general population (EA4056), Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, would respond. Paris, France, 6Filière Nationale de Santé Cardiogen, GH Methods: A project involving participants carrying Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique et Hôpitaux de Paris, pathogenic variants inBRCA1and2genes associated with Paris,France,7Servicedegénétique,Oncogénétique,Hospices familial breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) was initiated. CivilsdeLyon,Lyon,France,8Servicedegénétique,Centrede The procedural framework includes contacting without Référence Maladies du développement, CHU Dijon, Dijon, disclosing genetic status, project speciﬁc consent, indepen- France, 9CIC, Inserm 1431, CHRU Besançon, Besançon, dent validation, disclosure with genetic counseling, colla- France, 10INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5292, Centre de boration with oncologists, and cascade screening. Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, GENDEV Team, Immediate and long-term follow-up were surveyed to Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Bron, France, 11Alliance understand the psychological and behavioral impact of Maladies Rares,Paris, France, 1212 Institut deMyologie, GH results disclosed. Pitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique et Hôpitaux de Paris, Results: Of 49 carriers identiﬁed 22 have visited the Paris, France biobankandexpressedinteresttowardsreturnofresults.Of these participants, only three had no known family history Introduction: Discovery of secondary ﬁndings (SF) in of HBOC, and one individual had previously received diagnostic practice is a major psychological and ethical geneticsevaluation.All19participantswhoreceivedresults issue for the introduction of genomic medicine. perceived this information valuable. Although three parti- Materials and Methods: The purpose of this qualitative cipantsreportedfeelingworryatﬁrst,thesefeelingsdidnot study is to analyze patient expectations for SF and toAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Posters 687 identify the reporting procedures necessary for informed Enfants Armand Trousseau, AP-HP, GUEP, Service de consent, by interrogating patients with no diagnosis, but Neuropédiatrie, Paris, France, 9Centre de Recherche en also patients facing diseases concerned by SF. Five focus Épidémiologie et Santé des Populations, INSERM U1018, groups(FG)wereledbypsychologists:FG1(n=5)without Villejuif, France, 10Hôpital Sud, CHU de Rennes, Service de diagnosis; FG2 (n=10) oncogenetics; FG3 (n=3) cardio- génétiqueclinique,CentrederéférenceMaladiesRaresCLAD- genetics; FG4 (n=3) metabolic diseases; FG5 (n=4) Ouest, Rennes, France, 11Univ Rennes, CNRS UMR 6290, heterozygotes for frequent recessive diseases. Five ques- Rennes, France tions were asked regarding access to SF: 1. Favorable or not.2.Opinionconcerningminors.3.Concerningequityof Introduction: Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a rare access. 4. Concerning reporting procedures. 5. To FG5 disorder characterized by severe intrauterine and postnatal only: opinion on the search for heterozygosity for frequent growth retardation with relative macrocephaly at birth, recessive diseases. The discussions were recorded and then typical dysmorphic features, and feeding difﬁculties. In the analyzed with qualitative research methods. majorityofcases,SRSiscausedbyamethylationdefectof Results: Overall, 10/25 were favorable to the action- 11p15 imprinting center region 1. To our knowledge, only ability of SF, but 13/25 unfavorable because of the three studies have documented the cognitive development psychological consequences. 9/25 modiﬁed their views of children with SRS, but these are old studies in which overthecourseofthediscussions.60%werefavorableand patients were diagnosed only by non-standardized clinical 30% ambivalent to the access of SF by minors. Equity of criteria. Currently, no studies have been published on the access to SF led to philosophical discussions on quality of assessment of the intellectual functioning of adults. life. The 4 key information-based issues for patients were: Materials and Methods: An evaluation of intellectual explanation of the issues of SF, the importance of a efﬁciencywasperformedin8patientswithSRS(4males,4 reﬂection period, autonomy of choice, and quality of females), aged 20 to 39 years (mean age 23.75 years) information. followed at France from 2016 to 2018. All patients had an Conclusions: The weight of individual experience was epimutation of the region 11p15. decisive in patient expectations and fears regarding access Results: Mean overall IQ score was 89.13 (14.33 SD) to SF. Longitudinal studies based on real announcements with a range between 71-107. Verbal comprehension index are necessary to establish guidelines. was on average higher than other indexes (mean 104.50, F.Houdayer:None.O.Putois:None.S.Staraci:None. 18.55SD).50%weretreatedwithgrowthhormone.Speech M.L. Babonneau: None. C.C. Michon: None. H. delay in childhood and learning difﬁculties have been Chaumet: None. L. Joly: None. C. Juif: None. A. reported in some patients. 75% have beneﬁted from speech Chassagne: None. E. Gautier: None. C. Thauvin- therapy and/or psychological care. Seven patients had a Robinet: None. D. Sanlaville: None. P. Edery: None. A. bachelor’s degree and ﬁve patients completed higher S. Lapointe: None. M. Garguilo: None. L. Faivre:None. education. Conclusions: Overall adults with SRS had normal P20.15C intellectual efﬁciency and a fairly positive life course. If CognitiveproﬁleinSilver-Russellsyndrome:aﬁrstFrench more patientsto study areneeded to objectify these results, study in adults they can improve knowledge about SRS and point to the importance of early intervention and multidisciplinary care M.Burgevin1,A. Lacroix1,A. Toutain2,3,D.Martin-Coignard4, from childhood to adulthood in SRS. M.Vincent5,C.Crosnier-Schoedel6,7, V.Coutinho8,9,I. M. Burgevin: None. A. Lacroix: None. A. Toutain: Netchine6,7,S.Odent10,11 None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. M. Vincent: None. C. Crosnier-Schoedel: None. V. Coutinho: None. I. Netch- 1UnivRennes,LP3C(LaboratoiredePsychologie:Cognition, ine: None. S. Odent: None. Comportement, Communication) - EA 1285, Rennes, France, 2CHRU de Tours, Hôpital Bretonneau, Service de Génétique, P20.16D Tours, France, 3Université François Rabelais, Faculté de Attitudes towards reproductive carrier screening among Médecine,INSERMUMRU930,Tours,France,4CHduMans, the genetic muscle disorder community Service de Génétique, Le Mans, France, 5CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France, 6Hôpitaux M.J. Rodrigues1,2,3,R.H. Roxburgh1,2,A. Theadom4 UniversitairesParisEst(AP-HP),HôpitaldesEnfantsArmand Trousseau, Service d’explorations Fonctionnelles 1Auckland District Health Board, Auckland, New Zealand, Endocriniennes, Paris, France, 7Centre de Recherche Saint 2University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, 3Muscular Antoine, INSERM UMR S938, Paris, France, 8Hôpital des688 J.delPicchia Dystrophy New Zealand, Auckland, New Zealand, 4Auckland (74% vs 92%). People diagnosed with a less severe University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand disorder, such as myotonia congenita, were more likely to not favour preconception screening compared to those Methods: We conducted a population-based study of the diagnosedwithamoreseverecondition.Alldiagnosedwith prevalence and outcomes of genetic muscle disorders in Duchenne's favoured screening. New Zealand. All those diagnosed on or before the point Conclusion: The majority of people living with genetic prevalence date of 1st April 2015 were included. All eli- muscle disorders are in favour of reproductive carrier gible cases were invited to participate in an assessment to screeningforthatdisorder.Byexaminingsubgroupswithin determine the impact of the disorders on people’s lives, theoverallcohort(age,severity,inheritancepattern),weare includingtheirattitudetowardspreconceptionscreeningfor able to get a more detailed and nuanced view of attitudes genetic muscle disorders. towardsreproductivecarrierscreening.Anunderstandingof Results:596participatedintheimpactassessment,83of what the community want with respect to the accessibility these were a parent of an affected child(ren). The majority and acceptability of screening is important when consider- (87%) of those with a disorder were in favour of ingutilisingnewgenetictechnologiestooffertheoptionof reproductive carrier screening for their disorder as were screening individuals to identify carrier status for genetic parentsofanaffectedchild(84%).Parentsofolderchildren disorders. (11 - 15 years) were less likely to be in favour of M.J. Rodrigues: None. R.H. Roxburgh: None. A. preconception screening than parents of younger children Theadom: None.