EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2019)27:1174–1813 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0494-2 ABSTRACTS COLLECTION Abstracts from the 52nd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Posters Publishedonline:10October2019 ©EuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics2019 Volume 27 | Supplement 2 The Swedish Exhibition & Congress Center, Gothenburg, Sweden June 15-18, 2019 Sponsorship:Publication ofthis supplement was sponsored by theEuropean Society ofHuman Genetics. All content was reviewed and approved by the ESHG Scientiﬁc Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract 1234567890();,:1234567890();,: sDeilseccltoiosunsr.eInformation:Inordertohelpreadersformtheirownjudgmentsofpotentialbiasinpublishedabstracts,authors are asked to declare any competing ﬁnancial interests. ContributionsofuptoEUR10000.-(TenthousandEuros,orequivalentvalueinkind)peryearpercompanyareconsidered "Modest". Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered "Signiﬁcant". Posters France, 5APHP, Departement of obstetrics, Cochin hospital, Paris, France, 6Reference Center for P01 Developmental Anomalies, Department of Medical Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics Genetics, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France, 7APHM, Department of pediatric neurology, La Timone P01.01A hospital, Marseille, France, 8Department of clinical Prenatal whole exome sequencing in agenesis of the genetics, CHU d’Angers, Angers, France, 9Department of corpus callosum clinical genetics, CHU de Reims, Reims, France, 10APHP, Department of cytogenetics, Trousseau hospital, Paris, S. Heide1, B. Keren1, M. Moutard2, T. Billette de France,11HCL,Departmentofpediatricneurology,HFME, Villeumeur2, M. Spentchian1, C. Garel3, C. Mignot1, Bron, France, 12HCL, Department of radiology, HFME, J. Buratti1, V. Layet4, V. Tsatsaris5, S. Moutton6, Bron, France, 1314. APHP, Fetal Medicine Department, M. Milh7, M. Gorce8, M. Spodenkiewicz9, G. Quenum Trousseau Hospital, Sorbonne Medicine University, Paris, Miraillet10, S. Chantot-Bastaraud10, d. Vincent11, France L. Guibaud12, J. Jouannic13, S. Valence2, D. Heron1 Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) is usually 1APHP, Department of Genetics, Armand-Trousseau and diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound examination. In case of Pitié Salpêtrière hospital, Reference Center for Intellectual isolated ACC (iACC), neurodevelopment is within normal disability of Rare Causes, Paris, France, 2APHP, range in 80 % of cases whereas 20 % of children present Department of pediatric neurology, Armand Trousseau mild to severe intellectual disability (ID). Among genetic hospital,Paris,France,34.APHP,Departmentofpediatric etiologies, only chromosomal causes are investigated radiology, Armand Trousseau hospital, Paris, France, (karyotyping and microarray) during prenatal period while 4Department of genetics, Le Havre hospital, Le Havre, ACCwithIDisduetoasinglegenemutationinmostcases.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1175 Thus,parentsmakethedecisiontocontinueorterminatethe 8361 fetuses was carried out in Department of Medical pregnancy on statistics. Biology from the samples of amniotic ﬂuids which were Our study aims to evaluate the feasibility of prenatal sent from Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of testing of all known ACC genes using whole exome Balcali Hospital. A standard nomenclature has been sequencing (WES). developed to describe each of types of abnormality found Eighteen fetuses with ACC were included (ongoing in human chromosomes. inclusions): 14 iACC and 4 cases of ACC associated to Results: A total of 8361 amniocentesis specimens were otheranomalies(aACC).TrioWESwereperformedonfetal processedduringthestudyperiod.601fetuses(7.18%)had DNA extracted from amniotic ﬂuid sampling. Only patho- various chromosomal abnormalities. 54.4% of abnormal genic variants in known ACC genes were considered. karyotypes (329 cases) were numerical and 43.09% (259 Variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS) and secondary cases) were structural. Both numerical and structural chro- ﬁndings were not reported. WES results were available mosomal aberrations were observed in 13 cases (2.16%). within an average of 21 days. Thirteen WES (72%) were The ratios were as: trisomy 21 (48.93%), trisomy 18 normal (11 iACC, 2 aACC). A pathogenic variant in an (17.93%), monosomy X (9.72%), trisomy 13 (6.99%), ACC with ID gene was identiﬁed in two cases (11%): Triploidy (4.86%),Klinefelter Syndrome (3.34%),Trisomy BRAT1(aACC)andPPP2R1A(iACC).Apathogenic6q27 X (1.21%), XYY Syndrome (0.91%), and the others in all deletionwasidentiﬁedinonecase(aACC).Weidentiﬁeda numerical abnormalities. The frequent structural abnormal- VUS in 2 cases. ities were as: 46,XX/XY, inv(9) (p11;q12)/(p11;q13) Our preliminary results suggest feasibility of prenatal (29.34%), 46,XX/XY, 1qh(+)(11.58%), 46,XY, Yqh(-) WES in fetuses with prenatal diagnosis of ACC. In case of (7.33%), 46,XX/XY, 16qh(+)(7.33%), 46,XX/XY, 9qh(+) etiological diagnosis, WES helps the parents to make a (4.63%) and 46,XY, Yqh(+)(4.24%). Balanced and unba- decision for the pregnancy. However, WES in the prenatal lanced translocations, deletions and duplications were also period arises ethical questions. found in less ratio. S. Heide: None. B. Keren: None. M. Moutard: None. Conclusions: According to the literature and our results, T. Billette de Villeumeur: None. M. Spentchian: None. advanced maternal age is the main cause of fetal chromo- C. Garel: None. C. Mignot: None. J. Buratti: None. V. somal abnormalities. Fetal chromosomal abnormality ratio Layet: None. V. Tsatsaris: None. S. Moutton: None. M. that we found was 7.18%. This ratio emphasizes the Milh: None. M. Gorce: None. M. Spodenkiewicz: None. importance of prenatal diagnosis. G. Quenum Miraillet: None. S. Chantot-Bastaraud: A. Pazarbasi: None. D. Alptekin: None. I.N. Uslu: None.D.Vincent:None.L.Guibaud:None.J.Jouannic: None.N.S.Ilgaz:None.L.Ozpak:None.G.Comertpay: None. S. Valence: None. D. Heron: None. None. G. Ay: None. N. Cetinel: None. E. Akbal-Isık: None. G. Evyapan: None. S. Kocaturk-Sel: None. P01.02B U. Luleyap: None. M.B. Yilmaz: None. S. Buyukkurt: Results of karyotype analysis of 8361 pregnancies in None. prenatalyidentiﬁedcaseswithamniocentesisfromsouth of Turkey P01.03C BiallelicvariantsinAMPD2genecauseprenatalisolated A. Pazarbasi1, D. Alptekin1, I. N. Uslu1, N. S. Ilgaz1, agenesis of corpus callosum L. Ozpak1, G. Comertpay1, G. Ay1, N. Cetinel1, E. Akbal- Isık1, G. Evyapan1, S. Kocaturk-Sel1, U. Luleyap1, L. Mouthon1, S. Heide1, C. Depienne2, C. Nava3, M. B. Yilmaz1, S. Buyukkurt2 A. Rastetter4, D. Lacombe5, T. Attie Bitach6, D. Héron1 1University of Çukurova, Faculty of Medicine, Dept of 1UF Génétique Médicale, APHP Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey, 2University of Çukurova, Paris, France, 2Institüt für Humangenetik, Faculty of Medicine, Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Universitätsklinikum, Essen, Germany, 3UF de Génomique Adana, Turkey du Développement, APHP Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France,4InstitutduCerveauetdelaMoelleépinière,Paris, Objectives: Amniocentesis is a very crucial diagnostic France, 5Service de Génétique Clinique Médicale, CHU procedure for preventing the birth of genetically defective Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 6Département de Génétique, fetuses in order to decrease the prevalence of genetic Hôpital Necker -Enfants Malades, Paris, France diseasesinpopulations.Methods:Aretrospectivereviewof our amniocentesis database for the period from January Introduction: Recessive mutations in AMPD2 gene cause 2000toFebruary2019wascarriedout.Thekaryotypingof Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia (PCH) type 9. This severe1176 neurodevelopmental disease is characterized by intellectual aneuploidies and large CNV is possible it is not disability associated with epilepsy and spasticity. Brain recommended in Obstetricians and Gynecologists guide- imaging shows the association of pontocerebellar anoma- lines. Majority of NIPS providers do not report this lies,agenesisofcorpus callosum(ACC)andmicrocephaly. information. The 2 fetuses already reported with mutations in this gene Materials and Methods: NIPS was carried on Ion had HPC associated with ACC on prenatal ultrasound or S5 sequencer with in-house developed data analysis pipe- MRI. We report two cases of AMPD2 mutations in sibling line. 1300 samples collected at 11-20 weeks of gestation fetuses with prenatal diagnosis of isolated ACC (iACC). were analyzed. NIPS results were conﬁrmed with kar- Cases: Male fetus 1 : prenatal iACC at 32 gestational yotyping of invasively obtained samples or blood cells weeks (GW) ; termination of pregnancy (top) at 37GW, obtained postnatally. Four biopsies of placental tissue were normal CGH array; postnatal iACC (neuropathological performed to assess placental karyotype. examination). Male fetus 2:prenataliACC ;top at31 GW; Results: High aneuploidy risk was detected in 39 cases. normal CGH array; postnatal iACC (neuropathological 14 - trisomy 21, 3 - trisomy 13, 15 sex chromosome examination). abnormalities (4 due to maternal mosaicism) and 7 rare Method: Whole exome sequencing (2 fetuses and 2 autosomalabnormalities(trisomies7,8,10,largeCNV).In parents). one case large CNV was conﬁrmed in the fetus. In two Results: Identiﬁcation of two compound heterozygous cases of rare trisomies, placental tissue was available, in AMPD2 mutations (c.751C>T, p.Arg251Trp; c.1648G>A, both cases, mosaic trisomy was conﬁrmed in the placenta. p.Glu550Lys) in the 2 fetuses. Conclusions: High risk of rare autosomal abnormality Discussion: We report here an unusual prenatal pre- could be associated with miscarriage, conﬁned placental sentationofPCH9in2siblingfetuses,limitedtoaprenatal mosaicism, true fetal mosaicism, and uniparental disomies. andpostnataliACC.ACC isone ofthemost frequentbrain Whole genomeanalysismay identify pregnanciesatriskof malformations, usually detected by prenatal ultrasound. miscarriageandothercomplications.Thestudyissupported Prognosis is variable and correlates with the presence or by the Ministry of Healthcare of Russian Federation absence of other malformations. When isolated, the neuro- J. Shubina: None. I.Y. Barkov: None. O.K. Stupko: development is within a normal range in 80 % of cases None. L.V. Kim: None. T.O. Kochetkova: None. A.Y. whereas 20 % have mild to severe intellectual disability. Goltsov: None. I.S. Mukosey: None. M.V. Kuznetsova: Establishing an etiological diagnosis of a prenatal appar- None.N.A.Karetnikova:None.N.K.Tetruashvili:None. ently iACC is essential to assess neurodevelopmental V.A. Bakharev: None. D.Y. Troﬁmov: None. prognosis. AMPD2 should be considered as a gene responsible for isolated prenatal ACC. P01.05A L. Mouthon: None. S. Heide: None. C. Depienne: Array CGH and next-generations sequencing in None. C. Nava: None. A. Rastetter: None. D. Lacombe: diagnostics of fetal skeletal dysplasia None. T. Attie Bitach: None. D. Héron: None. I. Dimova1, V. Peycheva1, P. Chaveeva2, R. Bozhilova1, P01.04D K. Mihova1, K. Kamenarova1, A. Kanev3, A. Todorova1, Rare autosomal abnormalities detected using V. Dimitrova4, R. Kaneva1 noninvasive prenatal screening 1Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2SAGBAL "Dr J. Shubina, I. Y. Barkov, O. K. Stupko, L. V. Kim, Shterev", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Military Medical Academy, T. O. Kochetkova, A. Y. Goltsov, I. S. Mukosey, Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4SBALAG "Maichin dom", Soﬁa, M. V. Kuznetsova, N. A. Karetnikova, N. K. Tetruashvili, Soﬁa, Bulgaria V. A. Bakharev, D. Y. Troﬁmov Background: Array CGH is routinely used in prenatal Nationalmedicalresearchcenterforobstetrics,gynecology diagnostics of structural fetal defects where the possibility and perinatology named after academician, Moscow, to ﬁnd genomic aberrations is high. This technique is Russian Federation especiallysuitableinahistoryofrepeatedpregnancyfailure together with structural defects. Introduction:NoninvasiveprenatalDNAscreening(NIPS) MaterialsandMethods:Wereportheretheresultsfrom is believed to be highly sensitive to common aneuploidy genomic analysis in fetal skeletal dysplasia (SD) - we per- detection.SincesomeNIPStechnologiesusewholegenome formedarrayCGHincaseswithrepeatedabortionsandfetal sequencing, aneuploidies and large CNV of any chromo- skeletalanomaliesandnext-generationsequencing(NGS)- some could be detected. Although detection of rareAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1177 in cases with lack of diagnosis after aCGH or phenotypes, and 6-8% of sperm showed chromosomal abnormalities. strongly suggestive for monogenic disorder. This percentage signiﬁcantly increases with advancing age Results:TheﬁndingsfromarrayCGHandNGSanalyses in women and in cases of abnormalities of sperm in men. are presented in the Table below. We present the results of oligonucleotide array applica- tion in a cohort of 31 cases of mothers with adverse preg- nancy histories. DNA was extracted from trophoblast and Clinicalmanifestation Genomic/geneaberration umbilical cord. Array CGH was performed using 4x180K Limbsanomaliesand3 7q21.3(94,214,445-95,257,297)x1 microarrays from Oxford Gene Technology (CytoSure previousabortions (1.04Mb)Splithand/footmalformation ISCA, v3). 3rdpregnancywith 1q21.1(145425395-146507577)x1 The detection rate in our cohort was 61,3% (19/31). The phocomelyandlimbs (1.08Mbp)TARsyndrome most commonly found (73,7%) were aneuploidies: trisomy aplasia of chromosomes 14, 16, 18, 21, 22, Turner syndrome and Skeletaldysplasiaand2 17q21.33(48,264,999-48,277,988)x3 previousabortions (12.99Кbp,includingCOL1A1gene) triploidy. Other chromosomal abnormalities included 2ndpregnancywith Xq28(154,974,667-155,208,354)x0 structuralaberrations:deletion7p22.3p12.3andduplication arthrogryposis (234Kbp)VOUS:c.357T>G,p. 9p24.3p13.2 inherited from normal father, deletion Ile119Met(NM_017946.3)in 3q13.31q22.2, deletion 3q22.3q23, duplication 17p12 FKBP14gene inherited from father with foot malformations, deletion 1stpregnancywithdwarﬁsm Possiblydamagingvariants: 17p13.1inheritedfromnormalmother,deletion5q14.3and c.6117C>G(p.Ile2038Met)inHSPG2 de novo deletion 1q21.1q21.2. gene;c.7223C>G(p.Ala2408Gly)in PCNTgene Our research shows that microarray is the only method permitting the identiﬁcation of all unbalanced aberrations (number and structure) with a much higher resolution than Conclusion:GeneticdiagnosisofSDsisstronglyneeded karyotype. because there are so many diseases with complex pheno- The work was supported by project 2016/23/N/NZ2/ types and identiﬁcation of the responsible gene(s) is 02364 from the National Science Centre, Poland. important to understand the diseases themselves. We K. Sobecka: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, demonstrated here the diagnostic utility of aCGH, which collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as couldbetheﬁrst-linetestinprenatalsettings.NGSisavery grants already received); Signiﬁcant; National Science powerfultechniqueindiagnosticsofveryrare diseases,but Centre,Poland.M.Smyk:None.M.Chojnacka:None.B. needsmuchlongertimeforanalysisandadditionalstepsfor Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. E. Michalak: None. T. elucidations of the found variants. Klepacka: None. B. Nowakowska: None. I. Dimova: None. V. Peycheva: None. P. Chaveeva: None. R. Bozhilova: None. K. Mihova: None. K. Kame- P01.08D narova: None. A. Kanev: None. A. Todorova: None. V. Screening by Multiple ligation-dependent probe Dimitrova: None. R. Kaneva: None. ampliﬁcation assay of AZF a, b, c regions in primary infertile men with azoospermia P01.06B Applicationofarraycomparativegenomichybridization K. Haziyeva1, O. Cilingir1, B. Durak Aras1, I. Ure2, (aCGH) for identiﬁcation of lethal chromosomal E. Erzurumluoglu1, E. Tosumoglu1, S. Artan1 aberrations in spontaneous abortion 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, K. Sobecka, M. Smyk, M. Chojnacka, B. Wiśniowiecka- Department of Medical Genetics, Eskısehır, Turkey, Kowalnik, E. Michalak, T. Klepacka, B. Nowakowska 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Urology, Eskısehır, Turkey Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland Y chromosome microdeletions are the most common cause Spontaneous abortions occur in 8-20% cases of recognized of azoospermia and occur in 5-15% of infertile men with pregnancies. Most often, the miscarriage take place in the azoospermia. Microdeletions/partial deletions of the azoos- ﬁrst trimester (7-11 weeks). There are many causes of permia factor(AZF) regions on the Y chromosome are a pregnancy loss, but the most important (~75%) is the well-known genetic cause of male infertility, resulting in presenceofchromosomalaberrations.Ahighpercentageof impairmentofspermatogenesis.Wesoughttodeterminethe chromosomal aberration is caused by the abnormal genetic frequency and the character of AZF region microdeletions/ materialofgermcells.Researchshowedthat20-30%ofova partialdeletionsininfertilemenwithazoospermiabyusing1178 Multiplex Ligation-Related Probe Ampliﬁcation (MLPA). digital images, which may enable accurate diagnosis of In total, 50 azoospermic infertile men without gene and complexmultisystemsyndromes,inparticularinsmallearly chromosome mutations, were screened for Y chromosome gestation fetuses. microdeletions in AZF regions and 50 fertile men assigned We describe the case of a 33 year old primigravida, who to control group. The total frequency of the microdeletions attended for antenatal sonography at 12+5 weeks gestation. was 16%. Most deletions (10%) were seen in the AZFc Anincreasednuchaltranslucencyandhypoplasticleftheart followed by the AZFb (4%). The partial BPY2 gene were observed; multicystic kidneys suspected. Array-CGH deletions, located at AZFc region were detected in ﬁve wasnormal.Thecoupleoptedtoterminatethepregnancyat patients while partial EIF1AY gene deletions, located in 15+6 weeks. AZFblocuswereseenintwopatients.ThecombinedAZFb Due to small foetal size, whole-body micro-CT was andAZFclocideletionwasrevealedinapatient.NoAZFa performed. Image analysis revealed an atrioventricular regiondeletionwasdetectedamong theazoospermiccases. septal defect, mitral valve stenosis, left ventricular hypo- In the literature, it has been shown that BPY2 gene is plasia, aortic atresia and ascending and aortic arch hypo- effective in male germ cell development and loss of plasia. Multiple renal cortical cysts and bilateral upper and EIF1AY gene function can result in azoospermia sporadi- lower limb post-axial polydactyly were observed. Renal cally. The present ﬁndings suggest that MLPA is more histology conﬁrmed extensive cystic dilatation of the renal appropriate compared to mPCR because it investigates tubules. partial and complete deletions of AZF regions for male Genetic testing identiﬁed compound heterozygous muta- sterility compared to previous methods. Our study shows tionsinBBS7[c.187G>A;p.(Gly63Arg)matandc.973G>T; that microdeletion and partial deletions, which are men- p.(Glu325Ter)pat],consistentwithBardet-BiedlSyndrome. tionedintheliteratureasthereasonofazoospermia,canbe Given a recurrence risk for future pregnancies at 25%, the detected by MLPA method at the same time. couple received counselling regarding future preimplanta- K.Haziyeva:None.O.Cilingir:None.B.DurakAras: tion genetic testing. None. I. Ure: None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. E. Tosu- Inconclusion,micro-CTisanon-invasivehighlydetailed moglu: None. S. Artan: None. method for assessing early gestation foetal anatomy, and provides an adjunctive or alternative tool to the standard P01.09A foetal autopsy technique. Characterisation of Bardet Biedl Syndrome in a foetus A.Beleza-Meireles:None.S.C.Shelmerdine:None.M. by post-mortem microfocus computed tomography Singh: None. I. Simcock: None. A.D. Calder: None. M. Ashworth:None.N.J.Sebire:None.O.J.Arthurs:None. A. Beleza-Meireles1,2, S. C. Shelmerdine3,4, M. Singh3, I.Simcock3,4,A.D.Calder3,M.Ashworth5,N.J.Sebire5,4, P01.11C O. J. Arthurs3,4 Preconception expanded carrier screening in a developing country: where does science exactly meet 1Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Centre for bioethics? Craniofacial & Regenerative Biology, King’s College London,London,Austria,3DepartmentofRadiology,Great S. Klumsathian1, B. Panthan1, N. Iemwimangsa1, Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation I. Sensorn1, A. Charoenyingwattana1, Trust,London,UK,London,UnitedKingdom,4UCLGreat T. Chareonsirisuthigul2, Y. Worakijthamrongchai3, Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United M. Sukpraserrt3, W. Chantratita1, O. Trachoo4,1 Kingdom, 5Department of Histopathology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, 1Center for Medical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine London, United Kingdom Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine Conﬁrmation of antenatally detected foetal anomalies is Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, vital following termination of pregnancy due to congenital Thailand, 3Department of Obstetrics-Gynecology, Faculty anomalies. Phenotypic information is essential for genetic of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, testingandcounselling.Howeverantenatalultrasonography Bangkok, Thailand, 4Department of Medicine, Faculty of identiﬁesonlyupto68%ofautopsyﬁndings,whicharenot Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, always available. Bangkok, Thailand Post-mortem imaging using microfocus computed tomo- graphy (micro-CT) provides an alternative, or com- Introduction: Expanded carrier screening (ECS) was plementarytool,toautopsy.Itprovideshigh-resolution,3D recently introduced to Thailand and other developingAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1179 countries in Asia by a large number of international reproductive healthcare depends largely on prospective laboratories. Several incidences were reported concerning parents’ interest in ECS. In this systematic review, we negative psychosocial impact, i.e., anxiety and difﬁculty in synthesized evidence from empirical studies exploring making decision on reproductive option. interest in ECS among individuals and couples in the Material and Methods: Forty healthy Thai couples generalpopulation.Studiesincludedinthisreviewreported visiting preconception clinic were enrolled. ECS was per- prospective parents’ intentions to undergo a (hypothetical) formed using 630-disease panel covering most autosomal ECS test, uptake of an actual ECS offer, or both. Four recessive and X-linked disorders. Thereafter, attitudes on databases (Pubmed, Web of Science, CINAHL, Cochrane ECSandclinicalapplicationwereinterviewed.Geneticdata Library) were systematically searched for relevant publica- were then combined with previous in-house database, tions and 12 empirical studies were included in the review. pooling up to 355 unrelated individuals. Carrier identiﬁca- Owing to the novelty of ECS, all the included studies were tionwereinterpretedusingourdevelopedbioinformaticand relatively recent, having been published during 2015-2019. clinical criteria suitable for legal and ethical issues. In the included studies, 33%-66% of respondents were Results: The most common carrier frequency in our interested in a (hypothetical) ECS test, while uptake rates cohort belonged to beta thalassemia (1/5) which was con- for actual ECS offers were reported at 10%-50%. The sistent with national statistics. Interestingly, primary highest uptake was observed in a study where ECS was hemochromatosisH63D,whichhaveneverbeenrecognised offeredtopregnantwomen.Bycontrast,studiesfocusingon in Southeast Asian populations, became the second com- the preconception population reported lower uptake rates, mon (1/16). Other carriers detected as common in Thais even though some of these preconceptional ECS tests were included alpha thalassemia, Gilbert syndrome, 21- providedfreeofcharge.Ourﬁndingssuggestthattheremay hydroxylase-deﬁcient congenital adrenal hyperplasia and be discrepancies between prospective parents’ self-reported spinalmuscularatrophy.Morethan95%ofthesubjectshad intentions to undergo ECS and their actual test-taking a positive attitude to ECS. They accepted preimplantation behavior, particularly during the preconception period. genetic diagnosis as their reproductive option if they were D. Chokoshvili: None. E. Van Steijvoort: None. P. identiﬁedascouplesatrisk,eithermildorseverecondition. Borry: None. Conclusions: ECS would be useful if the selection cri- teria were clear and consistent with national regulation and P01.14B ethics. Pre-test genetic counseling was necessarily required Prenatal clubfoot increases the risk for clinically for the couples to understand further outcome. signiﬁcant chromosomal microarray (CMA) results - Grants: Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital and analysis of 269 singleton pregnancies Center of Excellence on Medical Biotechnology, Mahidol University. A. Singer1, I. Maya2, B. Ehud3, H. Baris4, C. Vinkler5, S. Klumsathian: None. B. Panthan: None. N. Iemwi- C. Vinkler5, S. Ben-Shachar6, A. Bar-Shira6, L. Sagi- mangsa: None. I. Sensorn: None. A. Char- Dain7 oenyingwattana:None.T.Chareonsirisuthigul:None.Y. Worakijthamrongchai:None.M.Sukpraserrt:None.W. 1Community Genetics, Public Health Services, Ministry of Chantratita: None. O. Trachoo: None. Health, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Recanati Genetics Institute, Beilinson Hospital, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, P01.12D Israel,3GeneticInstituteKaplanMedCntr,Rehovot,Israel, Interest in expanded carrier screening among 4 The Genetics Institute, Rambam the Technion, Haifa, prospective parents: systematic review of the literature Israel, 5Genetic Institute Wolfson Med Cntr, Holon, Israel, 6Genetic Institute Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel D. Chokoshvili, E. Van Steijvoort, P. Borry Aviv,Israel,7GeneticInstituteCarmelmedicalCntr,Haifa, Israel University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Clubfoot, also known as talipes equinovarus, is a well- Expanded carrier screening (ECS) is a reproductive genetic recognized congenital foot deformity. It is diagnosed in test aimed at identifying prospective healthy parents who about 1:1000 pregnancies. Clubfoot can present as an are at risk of conceiving a child affected with a recessive isolated defect or as non-isolated, also called "complex" or disorder. ECS tests screen for large numbers of recessive "syndromic", clubfoot, associated with additional disorders and are currently available through various anomalies. genetic testing laboratories. However, the extent to which Objective: This work was done in order to examine the ECS can be successfully implemented in the context of detection rate of clinically signiﬁcant chromosomal1180 microarrayanalysis(CMA)resultsinsingletonpregnancies without CMA, irrespective of the result of the CMA, we with clubfoot. found signiﬁcant fewer terminations of pregnancies in the Methods: Data from all CMA tests performed due to group with CMA, even if the severity of malformations of sonographic abnormal ﬁndings between January 2013 and the fetuses were comparable. September 2017 were retrospectively obtained from Min- Conclusions: In summary the decision on termination of istry of Health computerized database. All singleton preg- pregnancy is individual and there are many inﬂuencing nancies with sonographic diagnosis of clubfoot (talipes factors to consider. However our data suggests that the equinovarus) and documentation of CMA result were result of additional CMA can be a crucial factor in the included. decision on termination of pregnancy. Results: Of the 5750 CMA tests, a total of 269 (4.7%) T. Reischer: None. J. Brandstetter: None. R. Dra- were performed due to demonstration of fetal clubfoot. Of honsky: None. C. Fast-Hirsch: None. B. Streubel: None. the229caseswithisolateddeformity,nine(3.9%)clinically signiﬁcantCMAresultsweredetected.Thisdetectionrateis P01.16D signiﬁcantly increased compared CMA results in normal Congenital anomalies in children born after assisted pregnancies as previously reported. In 40 pregnancies with reproduction in the Czech Republic: Population based syndromic clubfoot, seven (17.5%) clinically signiﬁcant study CMAresultsweredetected,asigniﬁcantlyhigherfrequency compared to isolated clubfoot cases. A. Sipek Jr1,2, V. Gregor2,3, A. Sipek Sr2,3,4,5, Conclusion: Sonographic diagnosis of clubfoot, whether J. Klaschka6,7, M. Maly6,8, J. Jirova9 isolated or associated with additional sonographic anoma- lies,seemstoincreasetheriskforabnormalCMAﬁndings. 1InstituteofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,FirstFacultyof Thus, CMA analysis, in conjunction with thorough sono- Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, graphic anatomic survey, should be recommended in such 2Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer Hospital, pregnancies. Prague,CzechRepublic,3DepartmentofMedicalGenetics, A. Singer: None. I. Maya: None. B. Ehud: None. H. PronatalSanatorium,Prague,CzechRepublic,4Instituteof Baris:None.C.Vinkler:None.C.Vinkler:None.S.Ben- Medical Genetics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles Shachar:None.A.Bar-Shira:None.L.Sagi-Dain:None. University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5GENNET, Prague, CzechRepublic,6InstituteofComputerScienceoftheCzech P01.15C AcademyofSciences,Prague,CzechRepublic,7Instituteof The inﬂuence of prenatal chromosomal microarray Biophysics and Informatics, First Faculty of Medicine, analysis on the decision on termination of pregnancy Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 8National Institute of Public Health, Prague, Czech Republic, T. Reischer, J. Brandstetter, R. Drahonsky, C. Fast- 9Institute for Health Information and Statistics, Prague, Hirsch, B. Streubel Czech Republic Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria Introduction: Assisted reproduction (AR) is nowadays commonly-used method for treating various fertility Introduction: Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) problems. However, several studies have shown a higher was introduced to prenatal genetic diagnosis a couple of incidence of selected types of congenital anomalies among years ago. There have been many publications before AR-conceived children. Our goal was to study this demonstrating the beneﬁt of CMA in detecting micro- association on a large population cohorts (over 3 millions duplicationsandmicrodeletionsintheprenatalsetting.Aim of live-births) using data from our population based ofthisstudyistoevaluatetheassociationbetween prenatal registries. CMA and the decision on termination of pregnancy. Methods: Our retrospective epidemiological study is Materials and Methods:This isa retrospective study of based on the ofﬁcial data from the National Registry of a single prenatal center in Austria between 2011 and 2017, Congenital Anomalies and National Registry of assisted includingallfetusesthathadprenataldiagnosiswithCMA. Reproduction(runbytheInstituteoftheHealthInformation Results: In general highest rates of pathogenic CNVs and Statistics of the Czech Republic). The registration were found if the indication for prenatal diagnosis was processispopulation-wideandcompulsorybynationallaw. congenital heart disease or brain malformations. There was We evaluated the incidence of congenital anomalies (ICD- astatisticalsigniﬁcantassociationbetweenpathogenicCNV 10 diagnoses Q00-Q99) in AR-conceived children and andthedecisiononterminationofpregnancy(p<0,05).But compared it to the incidence of congenital anomalies in comparing pregnancy outcomes with prenatal CMA and naturally-conceived children. Time period: 2013-2015.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1181 Results: The overall incidence of congenital anomalies frequency data. Therefore, we conduct a study to gather was slightly higher in the AR-children group however, the the frequency of pathogenic variants in the associated difference was not statistically signiﬁcant. The congenital diseases by offering ECS to a Thai couple who plan to anomalies were more common in twins (p<0.005). The conceive. incidence of congenital anomalies in AR-twins was sig- Methods: DNA samples of 40 non-consanguineous Thai niﬁcantlyhigherthantheincidenceofcongenitalanomalies couples were underwent sequencing by NGS in 540 genes in non-AR-twins (p<0.005) while the difference of con- associated with AR and XLR diseases. We classiﬁed the genital anomalies incidence in AR and non-AR singletons variantsdetectedbyNGSusingpopulationdatabases(1000 was not signiﬁcant. Genomes Project, gnomAD, and our in-house Thai exome Discussion: We have found that the incidence of con- database) and diseases databases (Clinvar and HGMD genital anomalies was higher especially in twins born after professional) to determine their pathogenicity. assistedreproductionwhileinsingletonsthedifferencewas Results: 76 variants with strong evidence for pathogeni- not signiﬁcant. We will further analyze this ﬁnding during city are identiﬁed. Deafness is the most common AR dis- the next phases of our population study. eases with six individuals carry deafness-related variants in Acknowledgments: The study is supported by the RVO these genes: SLC26A4, USH2A, OTOF, and MYO3A fol- project: “Thomayerova nemocnice - TN, 00064190”. lowed by ﬁve carriers of vision-loss variants in GRM6, A. Sipek Jr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, USH2A, EYS, and ABCA4 gene. One couple shared a dif- collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as ferent pathogenic mutation in the ABCA4 gene. grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Thomayer Hospital - Conclusions: Though deafness and vision-loss are the Research grant TN, 00064190. V. Gregor: B. Research twomostcommonARcarrierfoundintheThaipopulation, Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand considerationneedtobetakeniftheywereintheECSpanel pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; because these phenotypes are not severe enough for a pre- Thomayer Hospital - Research grant TN, 00064190. A. natal diagnosis. Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- Grant: The study is supported by the Faculty of Medi- borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants cine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University and Center already received); Modest; Thomayer Hospital - Research of Excellence on Medical Biotechnology (CEMB). grant TN, 00064190. J. Klaschka: None. M. Maly: None. S. Klumsathian: None. W. Lorlipiwong: None. K. J. Jirova: None. Sararat: None. N. Poolthong: None. N. Iemwimangsa: None. I. Sensorn: None. B. Panthan: None. A. Char- P01.17A oenyingwattana:None.T.Chareonsirisuthigul:None.O. Carriers for deafness and vision loss are identiﬁed as Trachoo: None. W. Chantratita: None. common autosomal recessive conditions in 40 healthy Thai couples obtaining expanded carrier screening P01.18B High risk - what’s next? Decisional conﬂict, regret and S. Klumsathian1, W. Lorlipiwong1, K. Sararat1, satisfaction among pregnant women making choices N. Poolthong1, N. Iemwimangsa1, I. Sensorn1, about further prenatal testing after a high probability B. Panthan1, A. Charoenyingwattana1, result from the combined test T. Chareonsirisuthigul1,2, O. Trachoo1,3, W. Chantratita1 C. Ingvoldstad Malmgren1,2,3, T. Schlaikjær Hartwig4, 1Center for Medical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine C. Borregaard Miltoft5, A. Tabor5, F. Stener Jørgensen6 Ramathibodi Hospital Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine 1Dept of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Ramathibodi Hospital Mahidol University, Bangkok, Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Stockholm, Thailand, 3Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Sweden,2DepartmentofPublicHealthandCaringScience, Ramathibodi Hospital Mahidol University, Bangkok, Uppsala University,, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Thailand Women’s and Children’s Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Fetal Medicine Unit, Department of Introduction: One of the applications for next-generation Obstetrics and Gynecology, Copenhagen University sequencing (NGS) is expanded carrier screening (ECS) Hospital Hvidovre, Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark, which offer prospective parents to learn their carrier status 5Fetal Medicine Center, Department of Obstetrics, of many autosomal recessive (AR) and x-linked recessive Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, (XLR) diseases at once. However, designing an ECS panel Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Fetal Medicine Unit, Department for Thais can be difﬁcult due to insufﬁcient variant1182 of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Copenhagen University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Hospital Hvidovre, Copenhagen, Denmark 4Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Introduction: The aim was to investigate decision-making Islamic Republic of among Danish high-risk pregnant women when choosing between non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), invasive Introduction: Duchenne (DMD) and Becker muscular testing or no further testing. Women with a high-risk result dystrophy (BMD) are one of the most common genetic from the combined ﬁrst trimester screening were invited to muscular dystrophies. Prenatal diagnosis (PND) or Pre- ﬁll in two online questionnaires at GA 12-14(Q1) and GA implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) could be attractive 24(Q2). The scales used were Decisional Conﬂict and options to prevent the birth of new affected cases. Regret Scales, Satisfaction with genetic Counselling Scale Aneuploidiesarethecauseofover50%ofallmiscarriages. and Health-Relevant Personality Inventory. Early aneuploidy screening in conjunction with PND or Results: In total, 339 women were included, and the PGD can decrease the subsequent complication of preg- response rates were 76 % on Q1 and 88% on Q2, respec- nancy termination. tively.Oftheparticipants,75.4%choseaninvasivetestand Methods: This study aimed to develop a novel panel to 23.8% chose NIPT. The median DCS score among all conﬁrm detection of DMD/BMD and aneuploidy screening participants was within the level associated with imple- simultaneously. The panel functions on the principle of menting decisions, whereas 13.3% had a high level of hemizygosity mapping ofthe6novels STR(Short Tandem decisional conﬂict. Choosing NIPT was associated with a Repeat) markers linked to dystrophin gene. Additionally, high decisional conﬂict; receiving genetic counselling the thisincludesautosomalSTRmarkersforthecriticalregions samedaywasassociatedwithahighdecisionalconﬂict;and ofChromosomes21,18,13,XandY.Thesemarkers were a high satisfaction with the genetic counselling was asso- ampliﬁedinatime-savingandcost-effectivemultiplexPCR ciated with low decisional conﬂict. Furthermore, ‘alex- reaction. ithymia’,thepersonalitysub-traitthatdescribesadisinterest Results: Allele frequency and heterozygosity assessment or inability in identifying and understanding feelings, was of STR markers were studied in 250 unrelated healthy associated with low decisional conﬂict. High decisional individuals. Totally, 85 alleles were detected. Hetero- regret was associated with high decisional conﬂict and low zygosity of markers was 75.7%-89.8%. Genotype fre- satisfaction with genetic counselling. quenciesofmarkerswerefoundtobeinagreementwiththe Conclusion: The results from this study show that satis- Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium (P ≥ 0.1899). For further faction with, and timing of counselling are essential factors conﬁrmation direct mutation analysis was also performed. to limit decisional conﬂict. Also, the results indicate that The results were compatible. The panel was used for more women choosing NIPT have more decisional conﬂict than150PNDcasesand15PGDcandidatesandtheresults comparedtowomenchoosinginvasivetesting.Therewasa were successful. signiﬁcant association between high decisional conﬂict and Conclusion: This panel increases the accuracy and sen- later decisional regret. sitivity of diagnosis. It can be easily applied for PGD/PND C. Ingvoldstad Malmgren: None. T. Schlaikjær ofDMD,aneuploidyscreeningandsexdetermination.Also Hartwig:None.C.BorregaardMiltoft:None.A.Tabor: provides extra advantages like ruling out maternal cell None. F. Stener Jørgensen: None. contamination, paternity testing and avoidance of sample cross-contamination. P01.19C Z. Shariﬁ: None. F. Golnabi: None. F. Rahiminejad: A novel diagnostic panel of 15 STR markers used to None. S. Amini: None. H. Farahzadi: None. S. conﬁrm the detection of Duchene Muscular Dystrophy, Zeinali: None. aneuploidy screening, and sample authenticity testing P01.20D Z. Shariﬁ1,2, F. Golnabi1,2, F. Rahiminejad1, S. Amini1, Relativetelomerelengthinwomenwithearlypregnancy H. Farahzadi3, S. Zeinali1,4 losses 1Dr. Zeinali’s Medical Genetics Laboratory, Kawsar N. Huleyuk1, D. Zastavna1,2, M. Tyrka2, I. Tkach1 Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republicof,2DepartmentofGenetics,FacultyofAdvanced 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, ScienceandTechnology,Tehran MedicalSciences, Islamic Ukraine, 2Rzeszów University of Technology, Department Azad University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Rzeszów, Poland 3Proteomics Research Center, Shahid Beheshti UniversityAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1183 Introduction: Early pregnancy loss (EPL), a spontaneous InstituteofMolecularandCellBiology,UniversityofTartu, abortion before 14 weeks of gestation, occurs in ~ 15% of Tartu, Estonia, 7Lifesequencing SL, Valencia, Spain, clinically-recognized pregnancies and is the most common 8Igenomix Foundation/INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain, complication of pregnancy. Recurrent early pregnancy loss 9Research Department, Igenomix SL, Valencia, Spain, (REPL) affects 1-2% of couples and has a complex 10Department of Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, etiology. Approximately half of miscarriages from EPL Valencia University, Valencia, Spain, 11Department of cases are caused by chromosomal abnormalities in the Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and embryo. Spontaneously lost pregnancies are characterized Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland by shortened telomeres, especially in embryos with aneuploidies. Thus, short telomere length may be more Introduction: The proportions of epithelial and stromal frequent in women with REPL. cells vary in endometrial tissue during the menstrual cycle. Material and Methods: Relative telomere length (RTL) Each cell type has its unique gene expression proﬁle, that was measured in DNA isolated from the blood samples compose whole-tissue expression pattern. using areal-timepolymerasechain reactionapproach.RTL Materials and Methods: Using cell-type speciﬁc tran- was examined in three groups of women with EPL scriptome data and computational deconvolution approach, (N=171): (i) patients with single EPL (EPL1) (N=52), (ii) we estimated the epithelial and stromal cell proportions in patients with two EPL (EPL2) (N=68), (iii) patients with whole-tissuebiopsiestakenduringearlysecretory(ES)and REPL (N=49); and control group (C) - women who had mid-secretory(MS)phases.Theestimatedproportionswere healthy pregnancies with no history of infertility or mis- used as covariates in whole-tissue differential gene carriage (N=113). expression (DGE) analysis. For RNA sequencing we used Results: The EPL group had signiﬁcantly lower RTL paired ES and MS endometrial biopsies, obtained from 35 than control (EPL: 1.39±0.06 versus C: 2.23±0.01, healthy,fertilevolunteers(23-36years).DGEanalysiswas P=0.0000001). Average RTL were similar in EPL2 and performed using two approaches - with and without REPL groups (1.36 ±0.04 in EPL2 and 1.31±0.07 in RPL) deconvolution step, and results compared with each other. and were signiﬁcantly lower compared to control (EPL2: Results: The estimated average proportions of stromal 1.36 ±0.04 vs C: 2.23±0.01, P=0.000001 and REPL: 1.31 and epithelial cells in ES phase were 65% and 35%, and ±0.07 vs C: 2.23±0.01, P=0.000001). during MS phase 46% and 54%, that correlated with his- Conclusions: Women experiencing two or more EPL tological evaluation (r=0.88, p=1.1×10-6). Endometrial have shorter telomeres. We assume that short telomeres in DGE analysis showed 26% differentially expressed tran- women are involved in complex factors that provoke early scripts (n=946) in receptive endometrium in both cell-type pregnancy loss. unadjusted and adjusted analyses. However, the other 74% N. Huleyuk: None. D. Zastavna: None. M. Tyrka: (n=2,645) become statistically non-signiﬁcant after cell- None. I. Tkach: None. type adjustment, underlining the impact of tissue hetero- geneity on DGE analysis. The results suggest new P01.21A mechanisms involved in endometrial maturation involving Endometrial receptivity revisited: endometrial genes like LINC01320, SLC8A1 and GGTA1P, described transcriptome adjusted for tissue cellular heterogeneity for the ﬁrst time in endometrial receptivity context. Conclusion: The better understanding of molecular pro- M. Suhorutshenko1,2, V. Kukushkina3, A. Velthut- cesses during transition from pre-receptive to receptive Meikas2, S. Altmäe2,4, M. Peters2,1, R. Mägi3, endometriumservestoimprovetheeffectivenessofassisted K. Krjutškov2,5, M. Koel2,6, F. M. Codoñer7, J. Martinez- reproduction protocols. Biopsy cellular composition should Blanch7, F. Vilella8, C. Simón8,9,10, A. Salumets2,1,11, betakenintoaccountinfutureendometrial‘omics’studies. T. Laisk2,1,3 M. Suhorutshenko: None. V. Kukushkina: None. A. Velthut-Meikas: None. S. Altmäe: None. M. Peters: 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of None. R. Mägi: None. K. Krjutškov: None. M. Koel: Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, None. F.M. Codoñer: None. J. Martinez-Blanch: None. 2Competence Centre on Health Technologies, Tartu, F. Vilella: None.C.Simón: None. A.Salumets: None. T. Estonia, 3Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, Laisk: None. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Tallinn University of P01.22B Technology, Tallinn, Estonia, 5Research Program of A prospective evaluation of exome sequencing in 51 Molecular Neurology,Research ProgramsUnit, University fetuses with multiple congenital anomalies and lessons ofHelsinki,Helsinki,Finland,6DepartmentofCellBiology, for future prenatal implementation1184 A. Yeung1,2,3, F. Chan4,3, A. Vasudevan5, J. Collett4,3, M. A. de Koning1, M. C. Haak2, P. N. Adama van S. Prystupa6, Y. Chan6, G. McGillivray1,5,3 Scheltema2,C.M.P.C.Peeters-Scholte3,T.T.Koopman1, E. A. R. Nibbeling1, E. Aten1, N. S. den Hollander1, 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children’s C.A.L.Ruivenkamp1,M.J.V.Hoffer1,G.W.E.Santen1 Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Monash Genetics, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia, 3Melbourne 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Dept. of Obstetrics, Leiden 4Department of Anatomical Pathology, Royal Women’s University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Dept. of Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 5Department of Clinical Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Genetics, Royal Women’s Hospital, Parkville, Australia, Netherlands 6Department of Anatomical Pathology, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia Introduction:Exomesequencing(ES)isanefﬁcienttoolto diagnosegeneticdisorderspostnatally.Recentstudiesshow Introduction: Exome sequencing (ES) is a powerful that it may have a considerable diagnostic yield in fetuses adjunct to post-mortem examination for investigating with structural anomalies on ultrasound. We report on the fetuses with congenital anomalies. However, with the clinical impact of the implementation of prenatal ES (pES) implementation of rapid “in-utero” sequencing becoming for ongoing pregnancies in routine care. eminentlyfeasible,fetalphenotypingmay,infuture,relyon MaterialandMethods:Weretrospectivelyanalyzedthe antenatal imaging alone. impact of pES on pregnancy outcome and pre- or perinatal Aim:Todeterminewhether thediagnosticyieldofESin management in the ﬁrst 22, consecutively referred patients fetuses with congenital anomalies following autopsy is toourdepartmentforpESbecauseofoneormorestructural comparable to the yield of ES implemented at the time of anomalies on fetal ultrasound. antenatal ultrasound detection. Results: In two cases, a diagnosis was made by chro- Method: ES was prospectively performed on 51 fetal mosomal microarray analysis after ES counselling. The probandsfollowingautopsyaspartofthePerinatalAutopsy remaining20casesweredividedinthreegroups;(1)pESto Flagship of the Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance aid parental decision making (n = 12), (2) pES in the Demonstration Project. Candidate variants concordant with context of late pregnancy termination requests (n = 5) and phenotypic ﬁndings from fetal autopsy were classiﬁed by (3)pEStoguideprenatalorperinatalmanagement(n=3). multidisciplinary review using ACMG guidelines. Inde- pES had a clinical impact in 75% (9/12), 40% (2/5) and pendently, a phenotype-driven virtual gene panel for each 100%(3/3)respectively,showinganoverallclinicalimpact proband was derived from antenatal imaging reports by of pES of 70% (14/20). clinicians blinded to autopsy ﬁndings. Where a pathogenic Conclusion: We show that clinical implementation of variantfellwithinthis“pre-autopsy”virtualgenepanel,this pES is feasible and affects parental decision making or was viewed as a diagnosis that would have been made by prenatal and perinatal management supporting further combining WES with antenatal imaging alone. implementation of ES in the routine prenatal setting. Results: The diagnostic rate in this cohort was 17/51 M.A. de Koning: None. M.C. Haak: None. P.N. (33%)with4furthervariantsawaitingfunctionalvalidation. AdamavanScheltema:None.C.M.P.C.Peeters-Scholte: Phenotypes with the highest diagnostic yield included None.T.T.Koopman:None.E.A.R.Nibbeling:None.E. skeletal dysplasias (100%); multiple malformations (33%) Aten: None. N.S. den Hollander: None. C.A.L. Rui- and hydrops fetalis (33%). 14/17 of diagnoses would have venkamp: None. M.J.V. Hoffer: None. G.W.E. beenmadeonantenatalﬁndingsalonewhile3/17additional Santen: None. diagnoses were made with ﬁndings only apparent on autopsy. P01.24D Conclusion: ES in pregnancy following the detection of Diagnosis of fetal structural abnormalities using whole structural anomalies on ultrasound is feasible and returns exome sequencing: a single centre study comparablediagnosticyieldstoEScombinedwithautopsy. A.Yeung:None.F.Chan:None.A.Vasudevan:None. S. Drury1, L. Reed1, V. Ramachandran1, Y. Patel1, J. Collett: None. S. Prystupa: None. Y. Chan: None. G. A. Haworth1, J. Rizvi1, R. Dubis1, J. Anton1, J. Short2, McGillivray: None. E. Dempsy2, S. Mansour2, T. Homfray2 P01.23C 1Congenica Ltd, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2South West Fromdiagnosticyieldtoclinicalimpact:implementation Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George’s University of prenatal exome sequencing in routine car Hospitals NHS FoundationTrus, London, United KingdomAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1185 P01.25A Introduction: Fetal abnormality detected on ultrasound Chorionic villi sampling and QF-PCR + SNP-array occursinupto5%offetuses.Intheabsenceofaneuploidy routinely offered in early pregnancy losses or cytogenetic causes, single gene disorders can be responsible; a recent review of 31 prenatal exome A. Borrell1, M. Pauta2, M. Grande3, V. Borobio1, sequencing studies by Best et al., (2018) showed a C. Illanes1, L. Rodriguez-Revenga4, A. Soler4, diagnostic rate of 6.2% to 80%. We have undertaken C. Badenas4 exome sequencing at a single centre for cases of unexplained fetal anomaly in both ongoing and retro- 1BCNatal. Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Barcelona, spective pregnancies. Catalonia, Spain, 2BCNatal. IDIBAPS. Hospital Clinic Materials and Methods: Patients with a fetal abnorm- Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 3IDIBAPS. ality detected on ultrasound were referred to clinical Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, genetics at St George’s Hospital, London. Fetal DNA was 4Biomedical DiagnosticCenter.HospitalClinicBarcelona, from CVS, amniotic ﬂuid, fetal blood or tissue. Maternal Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain cell exclusion was performed where relevant. DNA was enriched using the Agilent SureSelect CREv2 and Background:Geneticinvestigationisnotroutinelyoffered sequenced using Illumina NextSeq 500. Variant analysis in early pregnancy loss due to its high failure and maternal performedusingSapienita™.Genepanelsandvariantﬁlter cell contamination rates. settings including Exomiser prioritisation were pre- Objective: To identify the genetic causes of early preg- conﬁgured to expedite analysis. nancy losses, with the use of QF-PCR and SNP-array in Results:Intheﬁrstyear(2018),42familieswerereferred chorionic villi samples obtained previously to evacuation. for exome sequencing due to fetal anomaly. A diagnosis Methods:Womenwithapregnancylossbefore13weeks was made in 15 cases (36%); 9/17 singletons (BICD2, were offered transcervical chorionic villi sampling prior to FGFR2, LZTR1, NIPBL, PTPN11, RAF1, RMRP, surgical or medical uterine evacuation. During a 3-year SLC26A2, TSC1), 1/1 duo (UBE2A), 4/23 trios (CHD7, study period (September 2015-October 2018) 584 women PIEZO1, POMGNT1, SLC6A9, TUBA1A) and 0/1 quad. consented. A ﬁrst round of QF-PCR including chromo- Updated ﬁgures will be presented. somes 21, 18, 13, X, Y and a second round with chromo- Conclusions: The diagnostic rate for this selected group somes 15, 16, and 22 were assessed. Concurrent is consistent with the literature and is higher than recent karyotyping was also performed and SNP-array when the unselected cohort studies (Petrovski et al 2019, Lord et al chromosomes were normal. 2019). Inseveralcases themolecular diagnosiswas notthe Results: Fifty-ﬁve (9%) samples were excluded after primary suspected clinical diagnosis emphasising the con- microscopic inspection because only maternal decidua tinued importance of expanding and publishing prenatal could be retrieved. Among the 529 samples suitable for genotype-phenotype associations. analysis, a chromosomal anomaly was found in 159 (30%) S.Drury:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; cases at the ﬁrst QF-PCR round, and 128 (24%) at the Congenica Ltd. L. Reed: A. Employment (full or part- second round. The karyotype revealed 66 (12%) anomalies time); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. V. Ramachandran: A. undetected by QF-PCR. Among the 176 remaining early Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CongenicaLtd. losses with a normal karyotype, SNP-array was performed Y. Patel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; in 90 cases with sufﬁcient DNA ad 6 (2.4%) submicro- Congenica Ltd. A. Haworth: A. Employment (full or part- scopic anomalies were found. time);Signiﬁcant;CongenicaLtd.J.Rizvi:A.Employment Conclusions: QF-PCR and SNP-array in chorionic villi (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CongenicaLtd.R.Dubis:A. samples are able to provide a result in 91% of early preg- Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CongenicaLtd. nancy losses. Two rounds of QF-PCR detected a chromo- J. Anton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; somal anomaly in 54% of the cases. If karyotyping is Congenica Ltd. J. Short: A. Employment (full or part- replaced by SNP-array in QF-PCR normal cases, further time); Signiﬁcant; St George’s University Hospitals NHS 12% chromosomal anomalies, 2.4% submicroscopic FoundationTrust.E.Dempsy:A.Employment(fullorpart- anomalies and molar pregnancies will be revealed. time); Signiﬁcant; St George’s University Hospitals NHS A. Borrell: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Foundation Trust. S. Mansour: A. Employment (full or collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as part-time); Signiﬁcant; St George’s University Hospitals grants already received); Modest; Illumina. M. Pauta: NHS Foundation Trust. T. Homfray: A. Employment (full None. M. Grande: None. V. Borobio: None. C. Illanes: or part-time); Signiﬁcant; St George’s University Hospitals None. L. Rodriguez-Revenga: None. A. Soler: None. C. NHS Foundation Trust. Badenas: None.1186 P01.26B 1Departement for Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University NGS based multigene panel analysis in cases of fetal Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Department for Obstetrics brain malformations and Gynecology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark,3CenterforFetalDiagnostics,AarhusUniversity D. Liebrecht, C. Daumer-Haas, C. Bagowski, Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 4Biomedicine, Aarhus N. Hirschberger, S. Minderer, T. Schramm, University, Denmark, Denmark K. P. Gloning, M. Shoukier Introduction: Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) is cur- Praenatal-Medizin München, Munich, Germany rently enteringprenatalgenetic diagnosisforunsolvedfetal malformations. Diagnosticratesvarysigniﬁcantly,butwith Introduction: Identifying the genetic cause of fetal brain low diagnostic rates in isolated increased nuchal translu- malformations is a diagnostic challenge due to the genetic cency (NT) or cystic hygroma [Best et al 2018]. heterogeneity. We present here the results of multigene MaterialsandMethods:G5P2withseverehydropsin2 panel analysis (MGPA) of 65 fetuses with congenital brain malefetuses(missedabortionweek19and20)andhealthy malformations. children. Both hydrope fetuses presented with normal ﬁrst Materials and Methods: From January to December trimesterscans.Cytomegalovirus(CMV)wasthepresumed 2018, 65 prenatal cases with fetal brain malformations (10 cause for the ﬁrst case of hydrops, as the mother ser- with minor extracerebral anomalies) were investigated by oconverted just after the pregnancy. However, PCR for targetedNextGeneration Sequencingofthecodingregions CMV was negative in tissue from the aborted fetuses. of 262 genes. Genes were selected from the developmental Array-CGH was carried out on DNA obtained from brain disorders database (DBDB) and results reported amnioticﬂuidfrombothpregnancies,butleavingbothcases within two weeks. Familial co-segregation analysis for unresolved. WES was performed as trio on DNA extracted variant pathogenicity assessment was carried out, when from amniotic ﬂuid from the second pregnancy, and both necessary. Karyotypes and array-CGH results of fetuses parents. Results were validated by Sanger sequencing. were normal. Results: A novel variant in FOXP3 was identiﬁed in Results: Pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in 10 (15%) hemizygous state in the second pregnancy, inherited from out of the 65 cases. Mutations were found in a total of 8 themother,andsubsequentlyconﬁrmedincellculturefrom genes: TUBA1A and ASPM (2 cases respectively) as well the ﬁrst pregnancy. This variant is currently under further asinGPSM2,FKRP,KAT6B,OFD1,TSEN54andTUBB validation. (1 case each). In addition variants of unclear signiﬁcance Conclusions:GermlineFOXP3mutationscauseimmune were detected in 4 cases (6%). No mutation was identiﬁed dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy and enteropathy, X- in a total of 51 fetuses (79%). Our ﬁndings show a strong linked (IPEX) syndrome. This syndrome is well character- correlation between the detection rate of causative muta- izedinpatientspostnatally.Prenatally,mutationshavebeen tions and complexity of the fetal phenotype. Additionally, reportedtocausethelossofmalefetusesasaresultoffetal Trio-based whole exome sequencing should be considered hydrops[Reichertetal.2015].Thiscaseaddstothebodyof incaseswithnegativeMGPAresultstofurtherimprovethe knowledge suggesting that WES can improve our under- detection rate. standing of prenatal presentation of not only fetal mal- Conclusions: MGPA facilitates the identiﬁcation of formations but also isolated hydrops. genetic causes with a good diagnostic yield and should be S. Ringsted: None. L. Andreassen: None. C. Kamper: used for routine molecular genetic diagnosis of fetal brain None. N. Becher: None. I. Vogel: None. malformations. D. Liebrecht: None. C. Daumer-Haas: None. C. P01.28D Bagowski: None. N. Hirschberger: None. S. Minderer: Absence of AGG interruptions is a risk factor for a full None. T. Schramm: None. K.P. Gloning: None. M. mutation expansion among ethnically diverse FMR1 Shoukier: None. premutation carriers P01.27C N. Domniz1, L. Ries-Levavi1, Y. Cohen1, L. Marom A caseoffetal hydropsand FOXP3 -another argument Haham1, M. Berkenstadt1, E. Pras1, A. Glicksman2, for using exomes in pregnancy for isolated hydrops N. Tortora2, G. J. Latham3, A. G. Hadd3, S. L. Nolin2, S. Elizur1 S. Ringsted1, L. Andreassen1, C. Kamper2, N. Becher1,3, I. Vogel1,3,4 1Sheba MedicalCenter, TelHashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel, 2New York State Institute for Basic Research inAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1187 Developmental Disabilities, New York, NY, United States, Introduction:Wereportonacaseofanonconsanguineous 3Asuragen, Austin, TX, United States couple with one healthy child and two spontaneous abortions (one at 22 and one at 36 weeks of gestation). Introduction:GeneticcounselinggiventoFMR1premuta- Test results of the couple’s chromosome analysis were tion carriers is currently based upon the number of CGG normal, and there was no evidence of genetically relevant repeats. However, recent studies revealed that AGG diseasesintheirfamilies.Frozenskincellsoftheﬁrstabort interruptions may decrease the risk of intergenerational had an insufﬁcient quality to perform gene panel analysis. expansion. Materials and Methods: Clinical exome sequencing MaterialsandMethods:AllFMR1premutationcarriers (CES) was performed on the parents’ DNA followed by who underwent chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or screening for carrier status in 34 relevant genes for intrau- amniocentesis (AC) at Sheba Medical Center during the terine fetal death. period of 2011-2017 were included in this study. To Results: In the maternal DNA sample, we identiﬁed a increase the accuracy of our results, we combined results heterozygous novel mutation c.2423-1G>T in the FRAS1 fromIsraelwiththosefromtheNewYorkStateInstitutefor gene affecting a highly conserved donor splice site and BasicResearchinDevelopmentalDisabilities(IBR).FMR1 leading most probably to aberrant splicing. Various splice PCR and Asuragen Kit were used to determine the number sitemutationsintheFRAS1havebeendescribedbefore.In of CGG repeats and AGG interruptions in all women and the paternal DNA sample, copy number variation (CNV) fetuses. analysis based on next-generation sequencing data showed Results:Thecombineddataincluded1471transmissions a novel heterozygous deletion of thelast three exonsof the of maternal premutation alleles: 369 (25.1%) stable and FRAS1 gene. Junction fragment PCR conﬁrmed this dele- 1,102 (74.9%) unstable transmissions. Full mutation tion and sequencing of the PCR products revealed the expansions were identiﬁed in 20.6% (303/1471) of trans- breakpoints (c.11092+658_*12039+6368del). Although missions.Atotalof97.4%(388/397)oftransmissionsfrom the material of the ﬁrst abort had poor quality, Sanger alleles with no AGGs were unstable, compared to 79.6% sequencingandjunctionfragmentPCRonfrozenskincells (513/644) in alleles with 1 AGG and 46.7% (201/430) in wereabletoidentifythesetwonovelvariantsascompound alleleswith2ormoreAGGs.40%(159/397)ofalleleswith heterozygous. no AGGs expanded to a full mutation, compared to 20.2% Conclusion: Therefore, clinical exome sequencing in (130/644)foralleleswith1AGGandonly3.2%(14/430)in combination with CNV analysis on a couple’s DNA is an alleles with 2 AGGs or more. appropriate method to detect possible causes of multiple Conclusions: Based on this ethnically diverse data we stillbirths, especially when no fetal DNA is available. recommend that the risk estimates for a full mutation M.Kuhn:None.M.Burkert:None.S.Tschürtz:None. expansion for FMR1 premutation carriers will include the K. Mehnert: None. D. Gläser: None. number of AGG interruptions as well as CGG repeat size. Study funding/competing interest(s) - Azrieli foundation, P01.30B Canada-Israel Identiﬁcation of compound heterozygous FTO- N. Domniz: None. L. Ries-Levavi: None. Y. Cohen: mutations in a severe malformation syndrome None. L. Marom Haham: None. M. Berkenstadt: None. E. Pras: None. A. Glicksman: None. N. Tortora: None. U. Siebers-Renelt, Y. Stratis, J. Seggewiß, S. Ledig, G.J.Latham:None.A.G.Hadd:None.S.L.Nolin:None. J. Horvath, P. Wieacker S. Elizur: None. Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany P01.29A Targeted next-generation sequencing and CNV analysis We report on a non-consanguineous couple who presented identiﬁes two novel mutations in the FRAS1 gene in the 19th week of their 6th pregnancy with ultrasound abnormalitiesofthefetus(broadneckwithincreasednuchal M. Kuhn1, M. Burkert1, S. Tschürtz2, K. Mehnert1, translucency, multicystic dysplasia of the kidney, short D. Gläser1 femur, fetal clubfoot). The couple has got just one healthy child. Two spontaneous abortions occurred and one 1genetikum - Center for Human Genetics, Neu-Ulm, pregnancy with trisomy 21 was terminated. Another child Germany, 2Medical Ofﬁce for Prenatal Medicine, Munich, also exhibited a broad neck and additional omphalocele Germany early in pregnancy. Hydrocephaly was ﬁrst visible in the 32nd week. After delivery in the 35th week, she required artiﬁcial respiration. MRI showed a complex brain1188 malformation.Thatchilddeceasedattheageofonemonth. Results: Main contributors to moderate/severe PE Chromosome analysis and microarray were normal in both development: pre-existing vascular complications (nephro- malformed children. After termination of pregnancy we pathy[χ2=10,05,p=0,004,OR=11,2395%CI2,13-59,26], performed a clinical trio-exome (Agilent SureSelect Inher- lower extremities angiopathy [χ2=7,39, p=0,007, ited Disease Panel). We identiﬁed two loss-of-function OR=16,00 95%CI 1,86-137,61], retinopathy [χ2=4,27, mutationsincompoundheterozygosityintheFTOgenenot p=0,039, OR=6,50 95%CI 1,25-33,91]) and their combi- yetdescribed(ACMGclass4).Thedeceasedsiblingcarried nations (nephropathy + retinopathy; nephropathy + lower both mutations and the healthy sister none. Homozygous extremities angiopathy) and ACE DD-genotype. In FTO loss-of-function mutations have been associated with PON1_108CT carriers clinical parameters exerted modify- multiple malformations including short broad neck, differ- ing effect: when combined with nephropathy, or T1DM ent brain malformations, severe developmental delay, duration < 8,5 years, or BMI < 23,8 kg/m2, mild PE failure to thrive and high risk of death in early childhood develops; moderate/severe PE develops when diabetes (Boissel 2009, Daoud 2016). In summary, the FTO- duration is > 13,5 years or BMI is > 25,17 kg/m2. Combi- mutations are very likely to be causative for the disease nation ACE_II/PON1_CC was protective against PE because of the type of mutation, the phenotype and the development, while ACE_ID/PON1_CT is associated with segregation data. Nevertheless, prenatal molecular analysis mild PE. Conclusion: Genetic markers are helpful in should be accompanied by a detailed ultrasound work-up. identiﬁcation of women at high risk for severe PE. Moreover,thecouplehastobeawarethattheabsenceofthe T. Avramenko: None. A. Hrybanov: None. FTO-mutations does not completely exclude the disease. U.Siebers-Renelt:None.Y.Stratis:None.J.Seggewiß: P01.32D None. S. Ledig: None. J. Horvath: None. P. Case of 8p and 18p genetic imbalance in a subfertile Wieacker: None. female patient without pronounced physical and mental abnormalities P01.31C Early prediction of preeclampsia (PE) severity in Y. V. Shilenkova, A. A. Pendina, O. A. Eﬁmova, pregnant women with preexisting type 1 diabetes A. V. Tikhonov, O. G. Chiryaeva, V. S. Dudkina, mellitus (T1DM): new implements for genetic markers L. I. Petrova, I. D. Mekina, O. V. Malysheva, E. S. Shabanova, T. E. Ivashchenko, A. M. Gzgzyan, T. Avramenko1, A. Hrybanov1,2,3 I. Y. Kogan 1State Institution "Institute of pediatrics, obstetrics and D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and gynecologybytheNationalAcademyofMedicalSciencesof Reproductology, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation Ukraine",Kyiv,Ukraine,2MaternityHospital#2,Mykolaiv, Ukraine, 3Public Health Board by Mykolaiv Region State Introduction: We report an unusual case of unbalanced Administration, Mykolaiv, Ukraine karyotype female carrier with no physical and mental abnormalities and her reproductive history. Background: Severe PE strongly correlates with persistent Materials and Methods: Conventional karyotyping disability, long-term cardiovascular complications in (GTG and QFH/AcD-banding techniques) was performed mothers and prematurity, IUGR or BPD in neonates. The on the chorionic villi from aborted material and on PHA- study objective was to establish reliable clinical, genetic stimulated lymphocytes of the patient, her husband and markers associated with PE severity in T1DM women. patient’s parents. FISH and aCGH (CGXv1.1 8x60K,Per- MaterialsandMethods:Group1includedpatientswith kinElmer) were performed on thepatient’sPHA-stimulated mild(n=15),moderate(n=11),severe(n=4)PE;Group2- lymphocytes and whole blood sample, respectively. Stan- 30 patients, in whom pregnancy was not complicated with dard IVF was performed with an embryo biopsy on day 3 PE. Polymorphisms in eNOS (4b/4a, G894T), ACE (I/D), (6-8-cell stage) for PGT-SR by FISH. AT2R1 (A1166C), MGP (Thr83Ala, T138C) and PON1 Results: The patient - 28-years old women - sought (C108T) genes were detected using PCR-RFLP. Data was genetic counseling after loss of two naturally conceived analyzed with SPSS17.0 using paired sample t-test, Pear- pregnancies. The ﬁrst miscarriage was not karyotyped. The son’s chi-squared test with 95%CI calculation for OR. second had karyotype 45,ХХ,der(8)t(8;18)(p23;p11.3),- Binary logistic regression was used to generate statistical 18mat. The patient appeared to have the same karyotype: models and evaluate their prognostic value. ROC curve 45,ХХ,der(8)t(8;18)(p23;p11.3),-18dn. aCGH revealed analysiswasperformedinordertoestablishtheinﬂuenceof terminal deletions combined with microduplication: del(8) polymorphic variants of genes on PE severity. (p23.1p23.3) (6.718Mb), dup(8)(p22p22) (4.937Mb), delAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1189 (18)(p11.31p11.32) (3.693Mb), dup(18)(q23q23) association study (GWAS) for GDM, in 1,399 affected (0.060Mb). The patient’s husband and parents had normal Koreanwomen,revealedassociationsattwoloci:MNTR1B karyotypes. The patient had only slight dysmorphic face and CDKAL1. We conducted trans-ethnic meta-analysis of features and no pronounced physical and mental abnorm- 21 GWAS in 5,374 cases and 346,506 controls of diverse alities.Subsequently,thepatientunderwentfourIVFcycles ancestry (62.0% European, 16.5% East Asian, 3.2% with a total of 25 oocytes obtained. Only 13 of them Mexican-American and 18.3% Afro-Caribbean), each reached MII (52% versus expected 75-90%). Only one out imputed up to reference panels from the 1000 Genomes of 10 embryos was cytogenetically balanced. The embryo Project or Haplotype Reference Consortium. The trans- was transferred, but the pregnancy was not registered. ethnic meta-analysis, performed with MR-MEGA to allow Conclusions: The present case demonstrates a genotype- for heterogeneity in allelic effects between ancestries, phenotype disparity in the carrier of unbalanced chromo- included 13,980,490 variants, after excluding those with somal rearrangement. Considering an unpredictable effect minor allele count <5 and imputation quality <0.4 in each of the genetic imbalance on the offspring phenotype, a GWAS. We replicated both known GDM associations at personalizedapproachtothepatient’sgeneticcounselingis genome-wide signiﬁcance (P<5x10-8): MTNR1B requiredinordertoachievepregnancywithcytogenetically (rs10830963, P=2.3×10-49) and CDKAL1 (rs9348441, balanced embryo. P=9.7×10-15). We also identiﬁed three additional novel Y.V. Shilenkova: None. A.A. Pendina: None. O.A. loci: TCF7L2 (rs7903146, P=1×10-14), CDKN2A/B Eﬁmova: None. A.V. Tikhonov: None. O.G. Chiryaeva: (rs10811660, P=1.9×10-9) and LOC105369513 None. V.S. Dudkina: None. L.I. Petrova: None. I.D. (rs143421658, P=4.1×10-8). Allelic effects of GDM Mekina: None. O.V. Malysheva: None. E.S. Shabanova: associationsignalsweremostlyhomogeneousacrossethnic None. T.E. Ivashchenko: None. A.M. Gzgzyan: None. I. groups. The exception was at the CDKAL1 locus Y. Kogan: None. (P =3.68×10-9), where the signal was driven by East het Asian ancestry GWAS (OR =1.67(1.46-1.89); East-asian P01.33A OR =1.06(1.01-1.12)). Four of the loci (MTNR1B, Europeans Trans-ethnic meta-analysis meta-analysis of gestational CDKAL1, TCF7L2, and CDKN2A/B) have also been diabetes reveals shared genetic background with type 2 robustlyassociatedwithT2D,andleadvariantsareidentical diabetes to those we have identiﬁed for GDM, supporting a shared underlying genetic contribution to both diseases. N. Pervjakova1,2, J. P. Cook3, A. P. Morris3,4, N. Pervjakova: A. Employment (full or part-time); T. Ferreira5,6, R. Mägi1 Modest; AnteGenes OÜ. J.P. Cook: None. A.P. Morris: None. T. Ferreira: None. R. Mägi: None. 1Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Tartu, Estonia, P01.34B 2Genomics of Common Disease, Division of Diabetes, Genome-wide analysis of losses and gains a better Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, understanding of idiopathic male infertility Imperial College London, UK, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, A.Hodžić1,N.Trošt1,B.Zorn2,D.Plaseska-Karanﬁlska3, Liverpool, UK, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 4Estonian P.Noveski3,T.Kunej4,K.Urh4,L.Lovrečić1,B.Peterlin1 GenomeCenter,InstituteofGenomics,UniversityofTartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Center for 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Health for Health Information and Discovery, Oxford Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Andrology Unit, University, Oxford, UK, Oxford, United Kingdom, 66. Reproductive Unit, Department of Obstetrics and Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Gynecology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK, Oxford, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Research Centre for Genetic United Kingdom Engineering and Biotechnology "Georgi D. Efremov" Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), deﬁned as glucose Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, intolerance ﬁrst recognized in pregnancy, has important 4Department of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty, implications for both mother and child. Offspring of University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia mothers with GDM have an increased risk of birth complications associated with higher risk for developing Introduction: Diagnosting workup of infertile man, which metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes (T2D) and cardiovas- include screening for chromosomal aberrations and Y cular disease in later life. To date, the only genome-wide chromosomal azoospermia factor deletions, have not been1190 changed for years and still the etiology of most of the 6Genomics Core Facility, Newcastle University, Newcastle infertile cases remains unknown. Aiming to achieve upon Tyne, United Kingdom progress in elucidating genetic causes of male infertility and to examine suitability of novel genetic testing methods Introduction: Approximately 7% of all men are infertile in clinical routine of infertile man, we investigated man andgeneticsisknowntoplayanimportantroleinthemost with unexplained infertility with Array Comparative severeformsofinfertilitysuchasazoospermiaandextreme Genomic Hybridisation method. oligozoospermia. However, most patients remain undiag- Materials and Methods: We enrolled 90 patients with nosed. In this study, we explored the role of de novo copy- severe male factor infertility, deﬁned as idiopathic azoos- number variations (CNVs) in whole-exome sequencing permia or oligoasthenoteratozoospermia, and analyzed (WES) data from a unique cohort of 108 infertile men and DNA using SurePrint G3 Unrestricted CGH 4x180K their parents. microarrays. We have selected candidate Copy Number Material and Methods: Three different software, CoN- Variants (CNVs) according 2 criterias: 1st criteria was that IFER, XHMM and an optimized GATK4 pipeline were identiﬁed CNVs are not present in currently available used to detect rare de novo CNVs. XHMM and GATK4 databases of genomic variants, and 2nd criteria was that reducedtheinherentnoiseintheexomecoveragedatabest, identiﬁed CNVs are not present in our control data set of resulting in the most accurate CNVs detection. Addition- men with proven fertility. ally, the GATK4 pipeline allowed to integrate allele fre- Results: We identiﬁed 5 CNVs which included genes quency analysis, conﬁrming the loss of heterozygosity previously related to male infertility (CLCA4, USF1, (LOH) in deletions. FCER1G, FNTA, HOTAIR). We have also identiﬁed 7 Results: Application of these tools revealed two rare de CNVs not presented in currently available databases of novo deletions in two different patients. One deletion genomic variants or in our control data set. The identiﬁed occurred on chromosome 11 and partially overlapped a CNVs spanning genes with noticed expression in testis, deletionpreviouslyreportedinaninfertileman.Thesecond, however, their possible functional impact on infertility are affected NXT2 on chromosome X, a gene evolutionary currently not known. conserved and highly expressed in testis. Both CNVs were Conclusion: We provide a several candidate CNVs, validated by microarrays and/or Q-PCR. possibly implicated in male infertility. Taken together with Conclusions: These ﬁrst data indicates that de novo previousresearch,theseﬁndingsareonemorestepforward CNVsmayplayanimportantroleinseveremaleinfertility. to implementation of new testing methods into routine However, replication and functional studies are required to clinical practice of infertile man. further validate the impact of our ﬁndings. By further A. Hodžić: None. N. Trošt: None. B. Zorn: None. D. improving CNV detection from WES data we may be also Plaseska-Karanﬁlska: None. P. Noveski: None. T. able to identify additional de novo CNVs that are currently Kunej: None. K. Urh: None. L. Lovrečić: None. B. missed,aswellasmaternallyinheritedCNVsthatmayplay Peterlin: None. a role in male infertility. F.K. Mastrorosa: None. M.J. Xavier: None. A. Miku- P01.35C lasova: None. M.S. Oud: None. R.M. Smits: None. G. Detection of de novo copy-number variations from Astuti: None. B. Alobaidi: None. S.J. Cockell: None. J. exome sequencing of 108 infertile patient-parents trios Coxhead:None.C.Gilissen:None.L.Ramos:None.J.A. Veltman: None. F. K. Mastrorosa1, M. J. Xavier1, A. Mikulasova2, M. S. Oud3, R. M. Smits4, G. Astuti3, B. Alobaidi1, P01.36D S. J. Cockell5, J. Coxhead6, C. Gilissen3, L. Ramos4, Identiﬁcation of a Novel Genetic Cause of Familial J. A. Veltman1,3 Nonobstructive Azospermia 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, S. G. TEMEL1, B. Turkgenç2, K. Teralı3, M. Ergören4, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Institute of M. Cetinkaya5, M. Başar6, S. Kahraman5 Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Department of Human Genetics, 1UNIVERSITY OF ULUDAG, FACULTY OF MEDICINE, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, DEPARTMENT OF MEDICAL GENETICS, BURSA, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Turkey, 2Acibadem Genetic Diagnostic Genetic Center, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, labgen,ISTANBUL,Turkey,3NearEastUniversity,Faculty Netherlands, 5Bioinformatics Support Unit, Newcastle ofMedicine, Department ofBiochemistry, Nicosia,Cyprus, University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4University of Near East, Faculty of Medicine, DepartmentAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1191 of Medical Biology, NICOSIA, Cyprus, 5Assisted Male infertility is a clinically and genetically highly Reproductive Technologies and Reproductive Genetics heterogeneous disease, mostly characterised by spermato- Centre, Istanbul Memorial Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, genetic failure, clinically noted as oligo- or azoospermia. 6Department of Urology & Andrology, Memorial Sisli The most common form of the latter phenotype is non- Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey obstructive azoospermia (NOA), which can be caused by various genetic defects such as chromosomal aberrations, Infertility is a global reproductive health problem, and in Y-chromosomalAZFmicrodeletionsormonogenicdefects. males it is usually because of the reduced number or the Inthis study, we systematicallyanalysed24genes reported completeabsenceofspermcellsinsemen(oligozoospermia tobeassociatedwithNOAintheOMIMdatabase.Variants and azoospermia, respectively). Nonobstructive azoosper- in these genes were detected in whole exome sequencing mia (NOA) is the most severe form of male infertility data from 484 well-phenotyped infertile patients (azoos- affecting ~0.6% of men from the general population and permia, N=94; cryptozoospermia, N=52; mixed atrophy, ~10% of infertile men. Its etiology remains largely N=93;Sertoli-Cell-Onlysyndrome,N=179;meioticarrest, unknown. To identify the genetic cause of NOA in four N=43; other arrest, N=23). Other clinical causes for their affected members from a consanguineous family, we infertility such as previous chemo-/radiotherapy, as well as performedwhole-exomesequencing(WES).WESrevealed karyotype aberrations and AZF deletions had been a homozygous c.1166C>T (p.Pro389Leu) variation in the excluded. Exclusively novel or rare coding variants were M1AP gene. The segregation of the M1AP variant with assessedconcerningtheirpotentialpathogenicity.Outofthe NOA in this family was conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. 24 genes listed in OMIM, TEX14, TEX11, NR5A1 and The 3D structure of the mutant protein was predicted DMRT1 were validated as clinically relevant genes causing computationally. Sequence- and structure-based in silico NOAwithstrongevidence.Speciﬁcally,weidentiﬁedeight studies andsubsequent preliminarygeneexpression studies patientscarryingTEX11variants.Tenpatientsdemonstrated imply that the M1AP variant has severe implications for compound heterozygous or homozygous TEX14 variants. protein structure and function. Further functional studies to Five patients carried NR5A1 and ﬁve others DMRT1 corroborate our ﬁndings are ongoing. Overall, M1AP is a variants. This is the ﬁrst report of concise exome novel candidate gene for male infertility and, to the best of sequencing in a large group of infertile males. Our results ourknowledge,thisistheﬁrstreportidentifyingM1APasa clearly demonstrate that the TEX14, TEX11, NR5A1 and cause for human familial NOA. And our pedigree analysis DMRT1geneshavereachedasufﬁcientlevelofevidenceto suggests an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance for be prioritised for clinical analyses. This work was carried NOA due to M1AP in the present family. out within the frame of the DFG Clinical Research Unit S.G. Temel: None. B. Turkgenç: None. K. Teralı: “Male Germ Cells: from Genes to Function” (CRU 326). None. M. Ergören: None. M. Cetinkaya: None. M. A. Röpke: None. N. Köckerling: None. M.J. Wyrwoll: Başar: None. S. Kahraman: None. None. J. Emich: None. M. Wöste: None. M. Dugas: None. A. Pilatz: None. H. Schuppe: None. T. Diemer: P01.39C None. D. Fietz: None. C. Krallmann: None. S. Kliesch: Geneticanalysisof24candidategenesvalidatesTEX14, None. C. Friedrich: None. F. Tüttelmann: None. TEX11, NR5A1 and DMRT1 as clinically relevant for non-obstructive azoospermia P01.40D Maternal copy number variations in the DMD gene as A. Röpke1, N. Köckerling1, M. J. Wyrwoll1, J. Emich1, incidental ﬁndings in non-invasive prenatal testing M. Wöste2, M. Dugas2, A. Pilatz3, H. Schuppe3, T. Diemer3, D. Fietz4, C. Krallmann5, S. Kliesch5, N. Brison1, J. Storms1, K. Claeys2, L. Dehaspe1, C. Friedrich1, F. Tüttelmann1 E. Dimitriadou1, C. Melotte1, T. de Ravel1, L. De Waele3, N. Goemans4, E. Legius1, H. Peeters1, H. Van Esch1, 1InstitutfürHumangenetik,Münster,Germany,2Institutfür V. Race1, J. Vermeesch1, K. Devriendt1, K. Van Den Medizinische Informatik, Münster, Germany, 3Klinik und Bogaert1 Poliklinik für Urologie, Kinderurologie und Andrologie, Gießen, Germany, 4Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, 1Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, Histology and Embryology, Gießen, Germany, 5Centre of 2Department of Neurology, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Department of of Pediatric Neurology, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical and Surgical Andrology, Münster, Germany Neurosciences, Leuven, Belgium1192 Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) using shallow whole- (group B, n=110). Associated maternal buffy coats were genome sequencing also reveals maternal copy number blindedandsenttoCHOPforcytogeneticanalysisusingthe variations (CNV’s). Some of those variants are clinically Global Screening Array (GSA, Illumina). actionable or could be harmful for the fetus. CNV’s in the Results:Of107groupAsamples,101wereconﬁrmedby DMD gene, potentially causing dystrophinopathies, are GSA to have maternal X CA (PPV: 94.4%; 97.5% con- amongstthemostcommonlyobservedmaternalCNV’s.We ﬁdence interval (CI), 88.2-100%); in the remaining 6 sam- analyzed the data of maternal CNV’s detected in the DMD ples, 3 were discordant (GSA unable to detect suspected gene by NIPT. Out of 26.123 NIPT analyses, 16 maternal maternalCA),andintheother3samples,maternalCAwas CNV’s in the DMD gene were detected (1/1.632 pregnant suspected, but too ambiguous to call as present. In 67.3% women). Variant classiﬁcation regarding pathogenicity and (68/101)cases, NIPS vs.GSAinterpretationsmatched; and phenotypic severity was based on public databases, 32.7% (33/101) showed similar but varied interpretations segregation analysis in the family and a prediction of the duetoambiguitiesarisingfrommosaicismand/orspeciﬁcX effect on the reading frame. Ten CNV’s were classiﬁed as abnormality. No maternal X CA were found in group B by pathogenic, 4 as benign whereas 2 remained unclassiﬁed. GSA (NPV: 100%; 97.5% CI, 96.7-100%). We present our experience with the detection of maternal Conclusions: The study supports the reporting of CNV's in the DMD gene and propose a scheme for the maternal X CA suspected by SNP-based NIPS, which was interpretationandthereturningoftheseCNV’sdetectedby conﬁrmed in 94.4% of suspected cases. No maternal NIPT. We show that genome-wide NIPT leverages CNV abnormalities were identiﬁed when a fetal abnormality was screeninginthegeneralpopulationofpregnantwomenand suspected. thatinterrogatingthematernalCNVlandscapecanimprove V. Kantor: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- overall pregnancy management. niﬁcant; Full-time Employee, Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership N.Brison:None.J.Storms:None.K.Claeys:None.L. Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual Dehaspe:None.E.Dimitriadou:None.C.Melotte:None. property); Signiﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc. R. Dhamankar: T. de Ravel: None. L. De Waele: None. N. Goemans: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Full-time None. E. Legius: None. H. Peeters: None. H. Van Esch: Employee,Natera,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock None.V.Race:None.J.Vermeesch:None.K.Devriendt: options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; None. K. Van Den Bogaert: None. Stock,Natera,Inc.E.Valenti:A.Employment(fullorpart- time); Signiﬁcant; Full-time Employee, Natera, Inc.. E. P01.41A Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other ValidationofSNP-basednoninvasiveprenatalscreening intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc.. D. test to detect maternal X chromosome abnormalities Lyons:None.M.T.Trefogli:A.Employment(fullorpart- time); Signiﬁcant; Full-time Employee, Natera, Inc.. E. V. Kantor1, R. Dhamankar1, E. Valenti1, D. Lyons1, Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other M.T.Trefogli1,I.Balosbalos1,C.Kao2,H.Hakonarson2, intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc. I. K. A. Martin1 Balosbalos:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Full-time, Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock 1Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States, 2Center for options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Applied Genomics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Stock,Natera,Inc..C.Kao:None.H.Hakonarson:None. Philadelphia, PA, United States K.A. Martin: None. Introduction: Maternal chromosome abnormalities (CA) P01.42B are known incidental ﬁndings with non-invasive prenatal Geneticsignalsforuseofhormonereplacementtherapy screening (NIPS), contributing to false positives with in post-menopausal women suggest potential drug quantitative methodologies. SNP-based NIPS can distin- targets and reﬂect changes in health practice guish the maternal and fetal SNP allele distributions. This study validates the performance of SNP-based NIPS to K. S. Ruth, R. N. Beaumont, J. Tyrrell, A. R. Wood, detect maternal CA on chromosome X. S. E. Jones, M. N. Weedon, T. M. Frayling, A. Murray Methods: Plasma samples from singleton pregnancies were obtained (April-December 2018) and analyzed by University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United SNP-based NIPS. Samples were included in the analysis if Kingdom the algorithm could not return a result (below threshold for reporting) for suspected CA. These samples were stratiﬁed Introduction: Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) is an into suspected maternal (group A, n=107) and fetal origin effective treatment for vasomotor symptoms aroundAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1193 menopause, but in the UK HRT usage dropped following advanced maternal age, previous pregnancy with aneu- the publication of health risks in 2002. ploidy, positive biochemical or NIPT, anxiety etc. Materials and Methods: To understand the biology of Molecularkaryotypeshowsanincreaseddiagnosticyield HRT use, we carried out genome-wide analyses of self- compared to conventional karyotype varying from 1,4% to reported HRT phenotypes (ever taken, age started, age 3,4% depending on the referral reason with the highest stopped and time taken) in up to 153,152 white European addedvalueinfetuseswithabnormalU/Sﬁndings.Among women aged 40-70 years from the UK Biobank. all abnormal CGH samples with normal karyotype, 72,5% Results: We identiﬁed 15 independent signals. A signal of clinically signiﬁcant imbalances would have escaped (AF=95%) in TACR3, the receptor for neurokinin B, was detection from NIPT since they concern rare syndromes associated with raised odds of using HRT (1.18 per allele; (25%), susceptibility to-loci (60%) and backbone abnorm- P=1×10-26) and with vasomotor symptoms in a previous alities (15%) related to the referral reason. genome-wideanalysis(Crandalletal2017).Additionally,a Conclusion:Sincemorethan70%oftheabnormalCGH putative signal (AF=0.1%) near ALDH8A1 (gene involved cases would not be detected neither by conventional kar- in tryptophan catabolism) was associated with taking HRT yotypenorbyNIPT,wesuggestthateverypregnantwoman for longer (0.5 SD per allele; P=4×10-8). Tryptophan is a ofanyageshouldbeofferedtheinformedchoicetoundergo precursor of serotonin, which has been implicated in hot molecular karyotype prenatal testing. ﬂushes, as has neurokinin B. F. Sachinidi: None. E. Panou: None. D. Mpouzarelou: Of the signals, 13/15 were associated with starting HRT None. C. Billi: None. L. Florentin: None. younger at P<5×10-8 and 11 with earlier menopause. A genetically-predicted one year earlier menopause raised the P01.44D odds of HRT use in women starting treatment before 2002 Prenatally diagnosed megalencephaly-polymicrogyria- (OR=1.12, 95% CI=1.10,1.13) but not after 2002 polydactyly-hydrocephalus syndrome (OR=1.02, 95% CI=0.95,1.00). In contrast, the signals near TACR3 and ALDH8A1 were not associated with K. Tael1, K. Ridnõi2,3, E. Kurvinen1, P. Ilves2,4, menopause timing. L. Makarenkova3, S. Pajusalu1,2,5, M. H. Wojcik6,7, Conclusions: Genetic associations for HRT are largely K. Õunap1,2,7, T. Reimand1,2 drivenbymenopausetimingandareaffectedbychangesin healthpractice.Weidentiﬁedtwogeneticsignals,whichare 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, not affected by health practice, near plausible candidate Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of genes for vasomotor symptoms. Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, K.S. Ruth: None. R.N. Beaumont: None. J. Tyrrell: 3East-Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Clinic of None. A.R. Wood: None. S.E. Jones: None. M.N. Wee- Radiology,TartuUniversityHospital,Tartu,Estonia,5Yale don: None. T.M. Frayling: None. A. Murray: None. University School of Medicine, Department of Genetics, New Haven, CT, United States, 6Division of Genetics and P01.43C Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children’s Prenatal diagnostics: the utility of molecular Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United karyotyping States, 7Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States F. Sachinidi, E. Panou, D. Mpouzarelou, C. Billi, L. Florentin Introduction: Megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly- hydrocephalus (MPPH) syndrome is characterized by Alfalab, Genetics and Genomics Center, Athens, Greece megalencephaly, polymicrogyria and a variant in one of three genes: CCND2, AKT3 or PIK3R2. To the best of our Introduction:theaimofthisstudyistohighlighttheuseof knowledge, there is only one prenatally reported MPPH molecular karyotyping in the context of prenatal diagnostic case. We present a new case of MPPH with a variant in testing. CCND2 that was diagnosed prenatally. Materials and Methods: Molecular karyotype was Casereport:Chorionicbiopsywasperformedduringthe appliedon4012prenatalsamples(CVS,amnioticﬂuids)as 1st trimester of the pregnancy due to increased NT value theﬁrstlinediagnostictool.Specimenshavebeenanalyzed (3.39 cm) to a 29-years-old patient. The karyotype of the using Agilent SurePrint G3 8x60K ISCA design and fetuswas 46,XY. Ultrasonographyandmagneticresonance Cytogenomics software. imaging of the fetus showed extensive bilateral cortical Results: women who underwent prenatal molecular kar- dysplasia of the supratentorial cerebral parenchyma with a yotypewerereferredforultrasoundﬁndings,increasedNT, suspected focal acute lesion in the right parietotemporal1194 region. Dysgenesis of the corpus callosum as well as polymorphic microsatellite markers. Bidirectional TP-PCR asymmetry of the hemispheres of cerebellum were also and dodecaplex marker PCR assays were optimized and visualized. The radiological changes were nonspeciﬁc but validated on whole-genome ampliﬁed single lymphoblasts indicated either intrauterine infection or genetic brain mal- isolated from DM1 reference cell lines, and tested on a formation.Thepregnancywasultimatelyterminated,andan simulated PGT-M case comprising a parent-offspring trio autopsy revealed multiple congenital cerebral anomalies: and three simulated embryos. DMPK TP-PCR reliably abnormal cranial occlusion, abnormal additional clefts on detects repeat expansions regardless of allele size, and right in the occipital and parasagital regions, dysgenesis of employing TP-PCR in both directions ensures successful the corpus callosum, and a collapsed and hypoplastic sep- expansion detection even when non-CTG interruptions tum pellucidum. There were no polydactyly and signs of occur at either the 5’ or 3’ end of the expanded allele. inﬂammation in the placental and fetal tissues. To investi- Misdiagnoses and diagnostic ambiguity due to allele gate the underlying etiology of this phenotype, trio exome dropout or exogenous DNA contamination can be easily sequencing (ES) analysis was done. detected through the use of tightly linked microsatellite Result: ES revealed a pathogenic de novo missense var- markers,minimizingtheexclusionofpotentiallyunaffected iant: NM_001759.3(CCND2):c.839C>A p.(Thr280Asn) embryosforuterinetransfer.Thehighlypolymorphicmulti- rs587777620, conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. marker panel also maximizes the likelihood of marker Conclusions: MPPH syndrome should be considered informativenessinat-riskcouples,thusminimizingtheneed when prenatally cerebral dysgenesis is visualized on US for couple-speciﬁc assay customization. and/or MRI. M. Lian: None. C.G. Lee: None. S.S. Chong: None. Funding:EstonianResearchCouncilgrantsPRG471and PUTJD827. P01.47C K.Tael:None.K.Ridnõi:None.E.Kurvinen:None.P. Nicotine and resveratrol alter sox2 and sox4 genes Ilves: None. L. Makarenkova: None. S. Pajusalu: None. expression levels in human amniotic cell culture M.H. Wojcik: None. K. Õunap: None. T. Reimand: None. G. Cömertpay, Ü. H. Lüleyap, B. M. Yılmaz, P. Pazarcı P01.46B Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, ADANA, Turkey Robust strategy for preimplantation genetic testing of myotonic dystrophy type 1 by bidirectional triplet- Introduction: The aim ofthis researchistoinvestigate the primed PCR combined with multi-microsatellite effectsofnicotineonexpressionlevelsofSOX2andSOX4 haplotyping following whole genome ampliﬁcation mastergenesinhumanamnioticcellculturestoindicatethe risksofsmokinginpregnancy.Theeffectsofresveratrolon M. Lian1,2, C. G. Lee3,4,5, S. S. Chong3,1,2 expression levels of these genes in human amniotic cell cultures, which are treated by nicotine were also examined 1National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore, in this study. 2National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, Materials and Methods: Twenty patients were included 3National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, in our study and for each patient; control, nicotine treated 4Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, and nicotine + resveratrol treated cell culture groups are Singapore,5NationalCancerCenter,Singapore,Singapore formed. The expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4 genes are examined in each group by using real time RT-PCR. Myotonicdystrophytype1(DM1)iscausedbymoderateto Results: According to the results of our study, change in very large expansions of the DMPK CTG trinucleotide expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4 genes in nicotine repeat. Disease transmission to offspring can be avoided treatedgroupwerefoundtobestatisticallysigniﬁcant.Also, through prenatal diagnosis or preimplantation genetic when groups treated with nicotine and nicotine + resvera- testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M). We describe a trol were compared the difference was found to be statisti- robust PGT-M strategy that can be applied to virtually any cally signiﬁcant. coupleatriskforDM1,includingcarriersoflargeexpanded Conclusion: In conclusion, nicotine increased the alleleswithnon-CTGinterruptionsateitherthe5’or3’end expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4 genes by 60% in of the repeat. This strategy utilizes whole-genome ampli- human amniotic cell cultures and resveratrol was found to ﬁcation by multiple displacement ampliﬁcation, followed be an important antioxidant that reduces the increased by bidirectional triplet-primed PCR (TP-PCR) sizing of the expression levels of SOX2 and SOX4 genes caused by DMPK CTGrepeat,inparallelwithsingle-tubegenotyping nicotine treatment. and haplotype phasing of 12 closely linked and highlyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1195 This study was supported by the Scientiﬁc Research J. Domaradzka: None. M. Deperas: None. E. Obersz- Project Unit of the Çukurova University tyn: None. A. Kucińska-Chahwan: None. N. Brison: G. Cömertpay: None. Ü.H. Lüleyap: None. B.M. None.K.VanDenBogaert:None.T.Roszkowski:None. Yılmaz: None. P. Pazarcı: None. M. Kędzior: None. M. Bartnik-Głaska: None. A. Łuszczek: None. K. Jakubów-Durska: None. J. Ver- P01.48D meesch: None. B. Nowakowska: None. A placental trisomy 2 detected by NIPT evolved in a fetal small Supernumerary Marker Chromosome P01.49A (sSMC) Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing pitfalls: exceptional report of multiple discrepancies between noninvasive J. Domaradzka1, M. Deperas1, E. Obersztyn1, screening for fetal trisomy 21, karyotype, array CGH A. Kucińska-Chahwan2, N. Brison3, K. Van Den and fetal ultrasound Bogaert3, T. Roszkowski2, M. Kędzior1, M. Bartnik- Głaska1, A. Łuszczek1, K. Jakubów-Durska1, F. Kundul1, K. Cassinari1, G. Joly-Hélas1, N. Le Meur1, J. Vermeesch3, B. Nowakowska1 J. Coursimault1, M. Castelain1, A. Diguet2, E. Verspyck2, S. Torre3, B. Macé1, T. Frebourg1, P. Chambon1 1MedicalGeneticsDepartment,TheInstituteofMotherand Child, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen Obstetrics and Gynecology, Witold Orlowski Public University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F76000, Teaching Hospital, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, NormandyCentreforGenomicandPersonalizedMedicine, 3CentreforHumanGenetics,KULeuven,Leuven,Belgium, Rouen,France,2DepartmentofGynecologyandObstetrics, Leuven, Belgium RouenUniversityHospital-CharlesNicolle,Rouen,France, 3Department of Neonatal Pediatrics, Intensive Care and Objective: Here we report a prenatally detected mosaicism Neuropediatrics,RouenUniversityHospital,Rouen,France of a small supernumerary marker chromosome (sSMC) derived from chromosome 2. The 38-year-old woman Introduction: Pitfalls of noninvasive prenatal test (NIPT) underwent amniocentesis because of a high risk of trisomy for fetal trisomy 21 on circulating cell-free DNA are 2 revealed by the Non-Invasive Prenatal Test (NIPT). currently well known and are linked to conﬁned placental Methods and results: A genome-wide NIPT detected a mosaicism,maternalorfetalmosaicism,maternalneoplasia, trisomy of chromosome 2. The amniocentesis was per- evanescent twin, or low fetal DNA fraction. Unbalanced formed to verify the NIPT result. Array comparative chromosomalrearrangementsmayalsointerferewithNIPT. genomichybridization(aCGH)fromunculturedamniocytes We report here a rare anomaly identiﬁed through NIPT. revealed a duplication of 14,83 Mb on chromosome Case: A NIPT was performed on a 39-year-old woman 2q11.1q13. Interphase ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization with abnormal ﬁrst trimester serum markers. This NIPT (FISH)revealedthreesignalsofcentromere2in30%ofthe (Clarigo,MultiplicomAgilent)didnotshowanytrisomy21 cells. GTG-banded metaphases conﬁrmed the abnormal but was evocative of trisomy 18. An amniocentesis was karyotype (47,XX,+mar[21]/46,XX[19]), indicating 52% performed at the 22th week of gestation (WG) and FISH mosaicism of the cell line with the sSMC. The ultrasound analyses(Aneucyte, Cytocell) onnativeamnioticﬂuidwere examination did not reveal abnormalities. The pregnancy compatible with a trisomy 18 in a female fetus. Unexpect- has been terminated. Cytogenetic analyses (FISH, aCGH edly, concomitant ultrasound control didn’t detect any and conventional karyotype) on fetal skin biopsies were morphological abnormality on a male fetus. Then, fetal performed and conﬁrmed the genomic gain of the cen- karyotype and array-CGH conﬁrmed the female chromo- tromericregionofchromosome2.Intheplacenta,threecell somalsexandrevealedaverypartialtrisomy18,linkedtoa lines were detected: a normal cell line, a cell line with small supernumerary marker chromosome, in mosaic, trisomy2andathirdonewithonlythesSCMderivedfrom which was derivative from a chromosome 18. In addition, chromosome 2. Conclusion: Whole-genome NIPT allows SRY locus was found on the short arm of one X chromo- not only the identiﬁcation of common fetal trisomies (13, some. Genetic counseling being less alarming in this con- 18, 21) but also diagnosis of rare chromosomal abnormal- text than with a complete trisomy 18, this patient pursued ities. Especially in such cases, it is extremely important to her pregnancy and delivered a boy at 36 WG with normal performnotonly NIPT veriﬁcationonasampleofmaterial neonatal examination. A regular monitoring of his psy- other than trophoblast, but also to apply appropriate chomotor development is under way. research methods. Such conduct allows detailed analysisof Discussion: This observation underlines the necessary the detected aberration, thus appropriate clinical validity. precautions while interpreting NIPT and the necessity of a1196 strong cytogenetic conﬁrmation. This case also illustrates P01.51C that incidental ﬁndings are to be expected with NIPT. Unexpected ﬁnding of uniparental disomy mosaicism in F. Kundul: None. K. Cassinari: None. G. Joly-Hélas: term placentas: Is it a common feature in trisomic None. N. Le Meur: None. J. Coursimault: None. M. placentas? Castelain:None.A.Diguet:None.E.Verspyck:None.S. Torre: None. B. Macé: None. T. Frebourg: None. P. D.Van Opstal1, K. E.M. Diderich1, M.Joosten1,L.C. P. Chambon: None. Govaerts1, J. Polak1, M.Boter1, J. J. Saris1, W. Cheung1, S. van Veen1, R. M. van der Helm1, A. T. J. I. Go1, P01.50B M.F.C.M.Knapen1,D.N.M.Papatsonis2,A.Dijkman3, Pilot study of locally performed noninvasive prenatal F. A. T. de Vries1, R. H. Galjaard1, L. H. Hoefsloot1, testing NIPT in Bulgaria M. I. Srebniak1 R. RAYNOVA, S. Bichev, S. Andonova, N. Yaneva, 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Amphia Hospital, C. Kercheva, I. Bradinova, A. Savov Breda, Netherlands, 3Reinier de Graaf Hospital, Delft, Netherlands National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University, Soﬁa, Objective: Non‐invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) detects Bulgaria placental chromosome aberrations. When amniocentesis reveals a normal karyotype, conﬁned placental mosaicism Introduction: With the introduction of noninvasive (CPM) may be assumed. In order to conﬁrm this, placental prenatal testing (NIPT), the prenatal screening for chromo- cytogenetic studies were performed. somal aneuploidies has been expanded beyond ultrasound Method: NIPT was conducted in the course of the examinationandcombinedﬁrst-trimesterscreening(cFTS). DutchTRIDENT study. Placentas of 10 cases with NIPT NIPT using cell-free DNA (cfDNA) circulating inmaternal results indicating an autosomal trisomy and showing a blood presents as an early, accurate, and safe prenatal normal (N = 9) or low mosaic karyotype (N = 1) in testing. Since August 2018 NIPT for chromosomes 21, 18, amniotic ﬂuid (AF) were investigated. The cytotrophoblast 13 and sex determination was introduced in-situ in the as well as the mesenchymal core of two to four placental UniversityHospitalofObstetricsandGynecology”Maichin chorionicvilli biopsies were studied with single nucleotide dom”, Soﬁa. The analysis was discussed with pregnant polymorphism (SNP) array. Clinical outcome data were women after performing cFTS. collected. MaterialsandMethods:Atotalof134pregnantwomen Results: In 10/10 cases, CPM was proven. In 3/10 cases were screened for chromosomal aneuploidies by NIPT trisomy/uniparental disomy (UPD)/biparental disomy using ion semiconductor sequencing platform (Ion Pro- (BPD)mosaicismwasdiscovered.In2/3cases,allthreecell ton™, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and IONA® test (Pre- lineswerepresentintheplacenta, whereasBPDwasfound maithaHealthplc,Manchester,UK).Thepatientswereata in AF. In 1/3 cases trisomy 22/UPD22 was present in AF mean age of 34.5 years. Plasma samples were collected while trisomy 22/BPD22 mosaicism was found in the pla- between 10+5 and 24+5 g.w. centa. Five of 10 pregnancies were affected with pre‐ Results: Due to an intermediate risk (1/100 to 1/1000) eclampsia, low birth weight, preterm delivery, and/or con- NIPT was performed on 68 (47.76%) pregnant women. genital malformations. Othersweretestedbecauseofmaternalanxietyoradvanced Conclusion: The presence of trisomy/UPD/BPD mosai- age. An average of 10.6% (from 3 to 24%) fetal fraction cismin3/10casesthatweinvestigatedprovesthattrisomic (FF) was achieved. One report was unsuccessful due to a zygote rescue may involve multiple rescue events during low fetal fraction inpatientwithBMI=43.03. We obtained early embryogenesis. UPD mosaicism, when present in 132“lowrisk”reportsandone“highrisk”-fortrisomy21, crucialfetaltissues,mayexplaintheabnormalphenotypein conﬁrmed by amniocentesis followed by QF-PCR. undiagnosed cases. Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst introduction of locally D. Van Opstal: None. K.E.M. Diderich: None. M. performed NIPT in Bulgaria. With the accumulation of Joosten: None. L.C.P. Govaerts: None. J. Polak: None. moresamplesanddataapossiblecorrelationbetweencFTS M. Boter: None. J.J. Saris: None. W. Cheung: None. S. results and NIPT; FF or/and gestational week and NIPT vanVeen:None.R.M.vanderHelm:None.A.T.J.I.Go: results could be established. None. M.F.C.M. Knapen: None. D.N.M. Papatsonis: R. Raynova: None. S. Bichev: None. S. Andonova: None. A. Dijkman: None. F.A.T. de Vries: None. R.H. None. N. Yaneva: None. C. Kercheva: None. I. Bradi- Galjaard: None. L.H. Hoefsloot: None. M.I. nova: None. A. Savov: None. Srebniak: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1197 P01.53A (86.2,100.0) (99.95,100.0) Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing: Laboratory Clinical Sexchromosome 80 14 0 100 99.93 aneuploidies Experience: 20000 Clinical Samples (95.42,100.0) (99.88,99.96) G. Savarese, L. De Falco, P. Savarese, R. Ruggiero, All 299 25 0 100 99.87 L. D’Amore, T. Suero, L. Circelli, R. D’Angelo, (98.73,100.0) (99.81,99.91) C. Ramiro, I. Pisano, A. Di Carlo, E. Evangelista, Multiplegestation TP FP FN Sensitivity(% Speciﬁcity(% n=441 (95%Cl)) (95%Cl)) G. Furino, M. Bruno, C. Vicedomini, A. Fico T21 5 0 0 100 100 AMES Genetic Lab, Polidiagnostic Instrumental Centre, (56.55,100.0) (99.13,100.0) Casalnuovo di Napoli, Italy T13 0 1 0 99.77 (99.13,100.0) Introduction:Whole-genomesequencing(WGS)ofmater- ARTpregnancies TP FP FN Sensitivity(% Speciﬁcity(% n=984 (95%Cl)) (95%Cl)) nalplasmacell-freeDNA(cfDNA)canpotentiallyevaluate T21 2 0 0 100 100 all 24 chromosomes to identify abnormalities of the placenta, fetus, or pregnant woman. The objective of this (34.24,100.0) (99.61,100.0) studyistogiveacompleteandrobustclinicalpictureofthe T18 2 0 0 100 100 currentperformanceofNIPTfortrisomy13,18,and21and (34.24,100.0) (99.61,100.0) sex chromosomes aneuploidies as well as for the other T13 0 1 0 99.77 chromosomes. (99.13,100.0) Materials and Methods: All data were generated in our Sexchromosome 7 3 0 100 99.69 AMES accredited laboratory from January 2017 to January aneuploidies 2019 in 20000 samples. The pipeline included automated (64.57,100.0) (99.10,99.69) library preparation (VeriSeq NIPT Microlab STAR, Illu- mina) and WGS sequencing on a Next550 (Illumina). VeriSeq NIPT Assay Software (www.illumina.com/ G. Savarese: None. L. De Falco: None. P. Savarese: NIPTsoftware) was used for data analysis of aneuploidy None. R. Ruggiero: None. L. D’Amore: None. T. Suero: status of 13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes and fetal None. L. Circelli: None. R. D’Angelo: None. C. Ramiro: fraction of cffDNA. An in house algorithm was optimized None. I. Pisano: None. A. Di Carlo: None. E. Evange- to analyze other aneuploidies and subchromosomal lista: None. G. Furino: None. M. Bruno: None. C. aberrations. Vicedomini: None. A. Fico: None. Results: The main results were showed in Table 1. We also reported 19 rare autosomal trisomies (RATs) and P01.54B 6 structural abnormalities identiﬁed in 10500 samples, HightotalDNAcontributestolowfetalfractioninNIPT mainly trisomy 15 (n = 5), followed by trisomy 8 (n = 4) and tends to resolve on redraw and trisomies 16 and 22 (n=2). Conclusions: The performance characteristics were A. Ryan, S. Krinshpun established in samples in which we analysed all 24 chro- mosomes with a minimum fetal fraction of 4%, and has Natera, San Carlos, CA, United States been conﬁrmed by our extensive clinical experience in the same clinical population. Introduction:Lowfetalfraction(FF)isacommoncauseof testfailuresinNIPTandiscorrelatedwithmaternalweight, Table 1: Clinical performance based on clinical gestational age,and aneuploidy[1,2].We show that low FF Experience can also be associated with high DNA concentration (DC) which frequently reverts toward average after redraw. Overall TP FP FN Sensitivity(% Speciﬁcity(% performance (95%Cl)) (95%Cl)) Materials and Methods: Sample DC was estimated by n=20000 comparing to a reference sequence added before ampliﬁ- cation. 99,936 eligible samples were collected between T21 151 1 0 100 100 2012and2014.Additionally,1,374received aredraw after (97.52,100.0) (99.97,100.0) test failure and changes in DC and FF between the two T18 44 6 0 100 99.97 draws were observed. (91.97,100.0) (99.93,100.0) Results: Samples with low DC (below 10th percentile) T13 24 4 0 100 99.98 have average FF 12.4% and samples with high DC (above1198 90th percentile) have average FF 8.6%. The average FF is Results: Fifty CMA analyses were performed due to 10.1%. Samples with test failure were twice as likely to oligohydramnios. Of these, in 21 tests it constituted an havehighDC.Afterredraw,caseswithhighinitialDChad isolated anomaly, 13 cases were associated with anatomic 38 times larger median reduction in DC compared to defects, and the remaining 16 pregnancies were diagnosed overall.The10%ofcaseswithgreatestreductioninDChad with intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR) as well. All median FF increase 1.2%, compared to FF increase 0.4% CMA tests were normal, except for one pathogenic ﬁnding for cases without signiﬁcant change in DC. Change in DC in the IUGR group - a 16p11.2 duplication sized 722Kb. wasasigniﬁcantparameter(p<10-5)inalogisticregression Literature search yielded 394 titles, of which two relevant model for redraw success. articles were found. One of these, published at 1998, yiel- Conclusions:Sampleswith high DCareoverrepresented ded 31 (20.1%) abnormal karyotypes in 154 pregnancies in test failures and have lower average FF. High DC tends with oligohydramnios (11 of these as an isolated ﬁndings), to reduce after redraw, producing larger FF increase. This while another (1995) did not ﬁnd any aberrations in 28 supports the option for repeat NIPT after a failure due to pregnancies with isolated oligohydramnios. low FF. Discussion: Current evidence does not support invasive [1] Pergament et al. Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Aug;124(2 Pt prenatal testing in pregnancies with isolated 1):210-8. oligohydramnios. [2] McKanna et al. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2019 S. Sagi: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None. I. Maya: None. S. Jan;53(1):73-79. Ben-Shachar: None. A. Singer: None. A.Ryan: A.Employment (full orpart-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera. S. Krinshpun: A. Employment (full or part-time); P01.57A Signiﬁcant; Natera. Early experiences with screening for aneuploidy in preimplantation genetic testing for inherited disorders P01.55C Microarray ﬁndings in pregnancies with T. Diemer1, C. L. F. Toft2, C. Hnida3, B. Degn2, oligohydramnios - a retrospective cohort study and H. Okkels2, A. Ernst2, H. J. Ingerslev3, I. S. Pedersen2 literature review 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University S. Sagi1, L. Sagi-Dain2, I. Maya3, S. Ben-Shachar4, Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Department of Molecular A. Singer5 Diagnostics, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 3Fertility Unit, Aalborg University Hospital, 1BnaiZionMedicalCenter,Haifa,Israel,2CarmelMedical Aalborg, Denmark Center, Haifa, Israel, 3Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel,4SouraskiMedicalCenter,TelAviv,Israel,5Ministry Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) is divided into three of Health, Jerusalem, Israel categories based on the indication: PGT-M (Monogenic), PGT-SR (Structural rearrangements) and PGT-A (Aneu- Introduction: This study was performed following a ploidy). A large study of more than 15000 trophectoderm statement in national position paper deﬁning the advised biopsies found the lowest rate of aneuploidy to be 25% in management of pregnancies with abnormal amniotic ﬂuid young women increasing with maternal age to more than volume. The proposed statement recommended to refer all 90%. Thus at least 1 in 4 embryos are expected to be pregnancies with oligohydramnios to genetic counseling, aneuploid, possibly leading to implantation failure, mis- except for proven rupture of membranes, evidence of carriage or an abnormal fetus. Hence, selection of euploid placental insufﬁciency or oligohydramnios diagnosed after embryos should in theory increase pregnancy rates and 37 weeks of gestational age. Thus, the objective of this decrease miscarriage rates, but this is still a subject of study was to explore the risk for abnormal chromosomal intenseinternationaldiscussion.Inourcenterwedon’toffer microarray analysis (CMA) ﬁndings in pregnancies with PGT-A, but as our PGT-SR setup is based on Shallow oligohydramnios. Whole Genome Sequencing, the ploidy status is revealed, Methods:DatafromallCMAanalysesperformeddueto and thus used for prioritizing embryos. Our PGT-M setup oligohydramnios between January 2013 and September includes fragment analysis of short tandem repeats, and 2017 were retrospectively obtained from the Ministry of SNaPshot analysis of the speciﬁc mutation when relevant. Health database. In addition, a search was conducted Since PGT-M setup does not detect aneuploidy, we would through the Pubmed database from inception to February expectahigherrateofimplantationwhenperformingPGT- 2018 for English articles exploring the issue. SR. Mean maternal age is similar in the two groups (30.96 in the PGT-M and 32.56 in the PGT-SR group). WeAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1199 examinedtherateofpositivehCGandongoingpregnancies reassuranceandguideappropriatemedicalmanagementand (OPR) per transfer (SET) on embryos (159 PGT-M and 27 counseling about cause and recurrence risk. PGT-SR) transferred between 01-01-2017 and 01-12-2018. K.L. Howard: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Surprisingly,wefoundnosigniﬁcantdifferenceinoutcome niﬁcant; Full Time Employee, Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership inthetwogroupsintermsofpositivehCG(49.7vs.48.1,P Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual =0.881)orOPR(34.6vs.37.0,P=0.805),butthenumber property); Signiﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc. M.K. Mai- of cases is still rather low. senbacher: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; T. Diemer: None. C.L.F. Toft: None. C. Hnida: None. Iamfulltimeemployee,Natera,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest B. Degn: None. H. Okkels: None. A. Ernst: None. H.J. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Ingerslev: None. I.S. Pedersen: None. Signiﬁcant; Stock, Natera, Inc. K. Merrion: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Full Time Employee, P01.58B Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, Counseling conundrum: sex discordance identiﬁcation patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Stock, followingpreimplantationgenetictestingornoninvasive Natera, Inc. S. Leaonard: A. Employment (full or part- prenatal testing using SNP-based methodologies time); Signiﬁcant; Full Time Employee, Natera, Inc. W. DiNonno: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; K. L. Howard, M. K. Maisenbacher, K. Merrion, Full Time Employee, Natera, Inc.. F. Consultant/Advisory S. Leaonard, W. DiNonno Board; Signiﬁcant; Stock Options, Natera, Inc.. Natera, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States P01.59C Preimplantation genetic testing of monogenic disease: Introduction: Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT) and experience in Russia noninvasiveprenataltesting(NIPT)candeterminefetalsex with high accuracy prior to/during pregnancy. However, S. O. Zhikrivetskaya, Y. L. Volkova, E. V. Musatova, additional prenatal screening or clinical presentation may Y. V. Sofronova, N. A. Shirokova, E. A. Pomerantseva indicatesexdiscrepancyrequiringmedicalfollow-upforan infant’s health. CenterofGeneticsandReproductiveMedicineGENETICO Methods:CasesofpossiblesexdiscrepancyafterPGTor LLC, Moscow, Russian Federation NIPT at a single lab were retrospectively reviewed. For PGT, genotyping was performed using Illumina Cyto12 Introduction: Preimplantation genetic testing of mono- SNP-basedmicroarraywithinformatics.ForNIPT,cell-free genic disease (PGT-M) is an alternative to prenatal testing DNA was isolated and ampliﬁed by massively-multiplexed for couples with high risk of having offspring with single- PCRtargeting13,392SNPscoveringchromosomes13,18, gene disorder. PGT-M is technically challenging, because 21,XandY.Onlycaseswithtestingtoidentifyacausefor of extremely small amount of biomaterial. We report here discrepancy were included. our experience of PGT-M in “Genetico” center in Russia. Results: Four of 23,297 (0.02%) PGT and 49 of Material and Methods: A retrospective analysis of all 1,081,541 (0.005%) NIPT cases had discrepant sex by requests and cycles of PGT-M referred to our center was prenatal screening or postnatal exam. For PGT, child con- performed. Personalized PGT-M assays combine direct cordance with parental samples and remaining embryos diagnosisofthepathogenicvariantsandlinkageanalysisof revealed 2 (50%) resulted from incorrect embryo transfers highly heterozygous STRs. PGT-A by NGS or aCGH was and 2 (50%) resulted from natural conception around the performed for unaffected embryos upon patient’s request. time of embryo transfer. For NIPT, phlebotomy labeling Results:Of109couplesreferredtoourcenterforPGT-M, errors comprised 6 (12.2%); conﬁned placental mosaicism, 92 completed preliminary test for PGT-M for 42 genetic 10(20.4%);ultrasounderrors,13(26.6%);anddisordersof condition: 24 autosomal-dominant, 54 autosomal-recessive, sexual development (DSD), 20 (40.8%). No discrepancies 13X-linkedrequests.Themostfrequentindicationwasspinal were due to lab error for PGT/NIPT cases. muscularatrophy(17).Weperformed85PGT-Mcycleswith Conclusions: Causes of discordant sex after PGT or 413 embryos. The whole genome ampliﬁcation failed in 16 NIPT can include sample swap, ultrasound errors, PGT/ cases(3,9%).Mediannumberofmarkersintest-systemswas NIPT result errors, natural conception around the time of 12 and for embryo analysis it was 10. These highly infor- embryo transfer, vanished twin on non-SNP-based NIPT, mative test systems contributed to low number of incon- embryo mosaicism, conﬁned placental mosaicism and var- clusiveresults - only for7 samples (1,8%). For 156 (58,6%) ious DSDs. A thorough investigation can provide unaffected embryos PGT-A was performed and 91 (34,1%) were suitable for transfer. At the moment we have1200 information about43transfers, 19 pregnanciesand 7 healthy R. Inno: None. S. Sõber: None. M. Laan: None. births and no affected pregnancy or birth. Conclusions: Highly informative test system and accu- P01.62B rate analysis of results can lead to both - high accuracy of Whole exome-based preconception carrier test (PCT) obtained results and decreased number of embryos, that for consanguineous couples: ﬁrst results from clinical were rejected because of inconclusive results. practice S.O. Zhikrivetskaya: None. Y.L. Volkova: None. E.V. Musatova: None. Y.V. Sofronova: None. N.A. Shir- S. C. E. H. Sallevelt1, B. de Koning1, C. E. M. de Die- okova: None. E.A. Pomerantseva: None. Smulders1, C. Gilissen2, A. P. A. Stegmann1, H. G. Brunner1,2, A. D. C. Paulussen1 P01.60D Identifying eQTL inﬂuence on gene expression through 1Maastricht University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, microRNAs Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands R. Inno, S. Sõber, M. Laan Introduction:consanguineouspartnersareatincreasedrisk InstitueofBiomedicineandTranslationalMeidicine,Tartu, of both being carrier of the same autosomal recessive (AR) Estonia disorder, with 25% risk of affected offspring as a consequence. Until recently, no comprehensive preconcep- Introduction: microRNAs drive coordinated expressional tion carrier test was available to identify the very rare changes of their target genes and trigger functional shift in disease-causing mutations these couples may carry. We cells. Placental microRNAs are speciﬁcally involved in developed such a test for consanguineous couples and trophoblast differentiation and function. Single nucleotide implemented this in our clinical practice. variants(SNVs)associatedwiththeexpressionlevelofgenes Materials and Methods: both individuals of a couple aredeﬁned asexpressionquantitative trait loci (eQTLs).The undergowholeexomesequencing(WES).Firstthecouple’s aim of my PhD project is to identify placental eQTLs sequencedataaremerged:onlyvariantspresentinthesame modulating the expression of microRNAs and to understand geneinbothofthemandwithapopulationfrequency<5%, their downstream effect on the placental transcriptome. remain in the dataset. Subsequently, this dataset is ﬁltered Materials and Methods: Placental miRSeq (unpubl. against a gene panel, consisting of >1900 genes associated data) and genotyping (Kasak et al 2015) datasets were with known AR diseases (OMIM-based). Only combina- subjected togenetic associationtestingfor eQTL discovery tionsoflikelypathogenicorpathogenicmutations(classIV (n = 40), implicated in PLINK v1.07 (Purcell et al 2007). or V variants) in both partners are reported. Carriership in microRNAs and their eQTLs were cross-referenced with only one individual is not detected. newbors growth parameters. Additionally association test- Results:thusfar22consanguineouscoupleswereincluded. ing between identiﬁed miRNA eQTLs and placental For7(32%),‘unexpected’pathogenicvariantswerereported expression levels of predicted target genes were analyzed. conferring risk of severely affected offspring, allowing these Correlations between the expression proﬁle of placental couples to opt for prenatal or preconception diagnostic choi- miRNAs (miRSeq dataset) and transcripts (RNA-Seq ces. Disease examples are: sulﬁte oxidase deﬁciency, AR dataset; Sõber et al 2015) were analyzed using DESeq2 epidermolysis bullosa dystrophica, restrictive dermatopathy, platform (Love et al 2014). eQTL and newborn growth infantile epileptic encephalopathy. None of the disease asso- parameter association was validated in combined REPRO- ciations were linked to any known disease in the family, META and Happy Pregnancy cohort (n = 2100) demonstrating the innovative value of this approach. Results: In total, 11 placental microRNAs were detected Conclusions: our WES-based preconception carrier test that were expressionally modulated by eQTLs. Four of (PCT)providesapowerfuldiagnostictoolforidentiﬁcation these microRNAs and their eQTLs show assosiation with of serious disease carrier status in consanguineous couples. newbornsgrowthparametes.Severalnoveltargetgenesand Outcomes provide signiﬁcant reproductive choices that no biological pathways were identiﬁed for these microRNAs. other test currently offers. Conclusions: miRNA eQTLs may represent additional S.C.E.H. Sallevelt: None. B. de Koning: None. C.E.M. modulators of the placental transcriptome, placental func- de Die-Smulders: None. C. Gilissen: None. A.P.A. Steg- tion and pregnancy course. mann: None. H.G. Brunner: None. A.D.C. Funding:EuropeanUnionthroughtheEuropeanRegional Paulussen: None. Development Fund (project Happy Pregnancy, 3.2.0701.12- 0047) and Estonian Research Council (IUT34-12).Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1201 P01.63C or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gennet. M. Koudova: A. CarrierTest - the expanded preconception carrier Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gennet. D. screening Stejskal: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gennet. F. Lhota, F. Zembol, L. Dohnalova, Z. Vilimova, M. Bittoova, I. Soldatova, B. Honysova, M. Famfulikova, P01.64D M. Koudova, D. Stejskal The prevalence of genetic and anatomic fetal defects: data from Happy Pregnancy Study Gennet, Clinic of genetics and reproductive medicine, Prague, Czech Republic K. Rull1,2,3, E. Hanson1,2, M. Laan3 We have developed a NGS panel which screens (i) 889 1Women’s Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, mutations causing 68 severe genetic disorders that can Estonia, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, affect progeny ofhealthyindividuals(genetic compatibility University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of test), (ii) mutations associated with blood hypercoagul- Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of ability inﬂuencing infertility treatment and pregnancy, (iii) Tartu, Tartu, Estonia inherited ovarian response to gonadotrophin stimulation. The test is designated for patients undergoing an IVF Introduction: The study aimed to assess the prevalence of program and for gamete donors. genetic and anatomic abnormalities among the participants CarrierTest is a custom NGS panel with locally assem- of the prospective Happy Pregnancy study (“Development bledbioinformaticpipelineandvariantdatabase.Toreplace of novel non-invasive biomarkers for fertility and healthy MLPAandfragmentationanalysisweimplementedspeciﬁc pregnancy"). design adjustments and sequencing data analysis allowing Methods: The pregnancy course and outcome including detectionoflargedeletionsofSMN1,CFTRgenesandalso the ﬁrst trimester serum test and ultrasound scans at 11-14 microdeletions on chromosome Y (AZF region) within one and 19-21 weeks were documented in the cohort of 2320 laboratory test.The report containscomparative analysis of women visiting the Women’s Clinic of Tartu University detected variants for evaluation of residual risk and pre- Hospital, Estonia in 2013-2015. Targeted FISH, karyotyp- conception compatibility of couple for consideration of ing and SNP-based array was applied in cases of abnormal preimplantation (PGT-M) or prenatal diagnostics. ﬁndings after 12 gestational weeks. So far 8258 samples were analyzed. These include: 3196 Results: In 63 cases (2.7%), the pregnancy resulted with couples before conception, 1388 gamete donors and 478 early (<12 weeks) /late (>12 weeks) loss (n=42 /8) or ter- patients with reproduction impairment without compat- minationofpregnancy(TOP)before22weeks(n=13).The ibilitytesting.Frequentoccurrenceofcarrierswasobserved genetic disorders were detected in 16 cases (0.7%), the inthecommonlyscreenedgenes(SMN12,4%,CFTR3,7%, anatomic defects occurred in 53 cases (2.3%). Serious GJB2 6,2%) but also in other genes previously not tested anatomicdefects,resultedwithTOP,fetaldeathorpostnatal (e.g. ABCA4 4,2%, DHCR7 2,7%, SERPINA1 2,7%, PAH surgical intervention during the ﬁrst year after birth occur- 2,5%, ACADM 1,5%, ATP7B 1,2%, AR 1,1%). We identi- red in 14 cases (0.6%); anomalies two were not antenatally ﬁed 79 pairs (2,4%) with a reproduction risk, which is diagnosed: univentricular heart and cleft lip. twofold increase detection rate in comparison with only CFTR/SMN1/GJB2 testing. Defect Antenataldiagnosis Diagnosisafterbirth CarrierTest facilitates informed decision about reproduc- tion. Screening of couples and gamete donors allows to elu- Genetic 9(7)* 7(1trisomy18) cidatehighernumberofcarriersofseveredisordersinorderto Hand/foot 1 7 offer appropriate preconception and prenatal care. Cleftlip/palate 1(1)* 1 F.Lhota:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Cardiacmild/severe 1/4(1)* 7/1 Gennet. F. Zembol: A. Employment (full or part-time); Urogenital 12 5 Signiﬁcant;Gennet.L.Dohnalova:A.Employment(fullor Gastrointestinal 4(1)* 1 part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gennet. Z. Vilimova: A. Employ- Cerebral 4(1)* 0 ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gennet. M. Bittoova: Minor 1 3 A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gennet. I. Total 37(11)* 32 Soldatova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Gennet. B. Honysova: A. Employment (full or part-time); *termination of pregnancy Signiﬁcant;Gennet.M.Famfulikova:A.Employment(full1202 Summary: The overall prevalence of the serious genetic Freireich: None. R. Segel: None. T. Eldar Geva: None. and/or anatomic among unselected pregnant women in G. Altarescu: None. Happy Pregnancy cohort was 0.97%. Funding: The European Regional Development Fund P01.67C (3.2.0701.12-0047), Estonian Research Council (grants Preimplantation genetic test in couples with history of IUT34-12). infertility and pregnancy loss K. Rull: None. E. Hanson: None. M. Laan: None. S. Y. Yaneva Staykova1, G. Stamenov2, R. Staneva1,2, P01.65A M. Pancheva2, M. Seraﬁmova2, K. Nikolova2, Selecting fetuses in ambiguous setting: Preimplantation O. Antonova1, D. Toncheva1, S. Hadjidekova1,2 Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for variants of unknown signiﬁcant (VUS) 1Medical University of Soﬁa, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Nadezhda Hospital, S. Zuckerman1, K. Rotshenker Olshinka2, O. Weiss1, Soﬁa, Bulgaria N.Srebnik2,S.Shaviv1,O.Freireich1,R.Segel1,T.Eldar Geva2, G. Altarescu1 Introduction: Preimplantation genetic test (PGT) is a cutting-edge technology of early genetic disease detection 1MedicalGeneticsInstitute,ShaareZedekMedicalCenter,, in embryos prior to their implantation in the uterus. The Jerusalem, Israel, 2IVF Unit, Division of Obstetrics and purposeofourstudyistoshowthevalueofPGTincouples Gynecology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, with infertility; its ability to reduce the risk of birth of Israel chromosomally unbalanced offspring and pregnancy loss; to increase the chance of successful pregnancy and birth of The introduction of new technologies of chromosomal an unaffected child. microarrays(CMA)andwholeexomesequencingisleading MaterialsandMethods:Wedescribe185coupleswitha to wider awareness of people to their genetic background historyofinfertilityandpregnancyloss,whoafterextensive andinﬂuenceonoffspring.ThedecisiontoperformPGDto genetic counseling opted for in vitro fertilization procedure select an embryo with no inherited VUS, considering the with PGT. Trophectoderm biopsy was carried out on 497 inherent ambiguity of VUS which is not unequivocally blastocyst stage embryos originating from 231 oocyte linked to a disorder, may give false hope and lead to retrievalcycles.DNAwasextractedandsubjectedtowhole frustration if an affected child is born. In order to evaluate genome ampliﬁcation. Array-based comparative genomic Israeli VUS carriers’ intentions regarding PGD for VUS hybridizationwithmicroarrayplatforms24surev3/24sure+ ﬁndings, we have analyzed database from a large PGD and next-generation sequencing with VeriSeqPGS Librar- center. Twenty three couples required PGD for VUS yPrep protocol were performed. Results were analyzed by detected, in at least one spouse, by CMA analysis. Five BlueFuse Multi version 4.3 software. couples had two VUS detected. Eight couples (35%) had Results: 196 embryos had a balanced proﬁle (39.44%), previous pregnancy termination (TOP) solely due to the 292embryosshowedanunbalancedproﬁle(58.75%)and9 detectionofVUSinanembryo.Thirteencouples(57%)had embryoscould notbe interpreted(1.81%).Embryo transfer no other indication for PGD. The interpretation of VUS in was conducted in 109 cases (58.92%) and chemical preg- the time of counseling was ‘likely-pathogenic’ in 10 cases nancy was detected in 33.03% of the women. Pregnancy (36%), ‘VUS’ in 9 cases (32%) and ‘likely-benign’ in 9 lossoccurredin3.67%ofcases.Livebirthratewas29.36%. cases (32%). PGD was performed in 14 couples (61%): 9/ Conclusions:PGTreducesthenumberoffailedtransfers 10 likely-pathogenic, 5/9 VUS and 1/9 likely-benign VUS. andeliminatesthetrauma ofterminating desired pregnancy Although most couples performed PGD for a likely- and possible medical complications. In couples with pathogenic VUS, some couples regard likely-benign VUS reproductivefailures,PGTcanberecommendedinorderto asanindicationforTOPandPGD.Futuredemandforsuch considerably increase the chance of conceiving with a controversial PGD applications will be growing and chromosomallybalancedembryoandlivebirthofahealthy challenge the medical milieu also considering continuous offspring. re-interpretation of VUS. Setting guidelines for VUS’ S.Y. Yaneva Staykova: None. G. Stamenov: None. R. interpretations, proper counselling regarding VUS’ mean- Staneva: None. M. Pancheva: None. M. Seraﬁmova: ingsanddeﬁningthejustiﬁedapplicationsofPGDusesare None. K. Nikolova: None. O. Antonova: None. D. crucial steps in practicing PGD for VUS ﬁndings. Toncheva: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. S. Zuckerman: None. K. Rotshenker Olshinka: None. O. Weiss: None. N. Srebnik: None. S. Shaviv: None. O.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1203 P01.68D were detected in fetuses with skeletal dysplasias (n=11, Rapid whole exome sequencing to identify the 65%), multiple congenital anomalies (n=4, 23%) or underlying genetic cause in fetuses with sonographic intracerebral structural anomalies (n=2, 12%). anomalies These results suggest that rWES is likely to improve prenatal diagnosis of fetuses with ultrasonic abnormalities. I. Feenstra1, A. C. Deden2, M. I. Nelen1, K. Neveling1, I. Feenstra: None. A.C. Deden: None. M.I. Nelen: S.Castelein3,C.F.Gilissen3,R.P.Pfundt4,M.W.Elting5, None. K. Neveling: None. S. Castelein: None. C.F. T.K.Rinne4,K.E.Diderich6,S.C.Sallevelt7,N.Corsten- Gilissen: None. R.P. Pfundt: None. M.W. Elting: None. Janssen8, K. D. Lichtenbelt9, T. Gardeitchik4, L. Vissers4, T.K. Rinne: None. K.E. Diderich: None. S.C. Sallevelt: H. G. Yntema4, W. A. van Zelst-Stams1 None. N. Corsten-Janssen: None. K.D. Lichtenbelt: None. T. Gardeitchik: None. L. Vissers: None. H.G. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Yntema: None. W.A. van Zelst-Stams: None. Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, P01.69A Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Half decade experience: karyotyping, aCGH or NIPT - Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud changes in prenatal testing strategy UniversityMedicalCenter,RadboudInstituteforMolecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of E.Kuznetsova,V.Gnetetskaya,M.Ermakova,M.Kurtser, Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, Y. Tarasova and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Genetics, Mother and Child, Moscow, Russian Federation Amsterdam Medical University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Over 5 years the strategy of genetic counseling signiﬁ- Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Department of Clinical cantly has changed after introduction of new prenatal Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, diagnostic methods of detection chromosomal abnormal- Maastricht, Netherlands, 8Department of Genetics, ities. In 2013 our laboratory had possibility to use cell- University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, based FISH and karyotyping for pregnancies at risk Netherlands, 9Department of Genetics, University Medical (maternal serum screening, advanced age, ultrasound Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands examination (US), family history, patient’s anxiety). Since 2014 patients in ﬁrst trimester with NT>=2,5 mm Rapid whole exome sequencing (rWES) in critically ill or/and US abnormalities were recommended chorionic newborns with a presumed genetic disorder has shown to villus sampling followed by karyotyping and DNA increase diagnostic yield earlier in life, which leads to extraction which allowed to perform aCGH (array-based improved patient care. Due to this impact, rWES has comparative genomic hybridization) in case of normal become a routine genetic test in this group of patients. We fetus karyotype. In second trimester after the amniocent- hypothesize that rWES could have the same effect even esis mostly aCGH/FISH analysis were recommended due before birth. Therefore we studied the use of rWES in to time limit with compare to cell cultivation of amniotic fetuses with a wide range of sonographic anomalies ﬂuid for standard karyotyping. Chromosome imbalances representing the clinical practice. byaCGHlet us revealabout20 familieswhere one ofthe Weperformedaretrospectiveanalysisoftheﬁrst54cases parents had a balanced rearrangement invisible by referred to our laboratory for prenatal rWES following the standard karyotyping. For these aims subtelomeric FISH detection of fetal sonographic anomalies. Parental and fetal analysis have been performed. When a noninvasive DNAs were sequenced simultaneously in 53 of the cases prenatal testing (NIPT) appeared in 2016 the whole and as singleton analysis in one case due to a deceased amount of invasive procedures decreased up to 50%. parent.Themostcommonidentiﬁedsonographicanomalies NIPT should be recommended to women without US were(multiple)congenitalanomalies,skeletaldysplasiaand abnormalities and family history (Table). Otherwise only intracerebral structural anomalies. invasive prenatal testing is acceptable due to limits of We were able to identify a causative pathogenic mole- NIPT. Since 2013 more than 12000 prenatal analyses cular variant in 12 of the 54 cases (22%) and a likely were done. aCGH increased the detection of pathogenic causative pathogenic molecular variant in another ﬁve chromosomal aberrations on 12%. Prenatal counseling is cases(9%),bringingthemoleculardiagnosticyieldinthis the most important tool for clarifying the appropriate cohort to 31%. Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants strategy in each case.1204 Table. Comparison of NIPT results. case with monosomy X. In 118 cases we made prenatal NIPTtest Result Conﬁrmed False False Refused diagnosis for other reason (usually for chromosomal positive negative invasive pathology in antecedents) and we found only two cases Lowrisks Highrisk procedure with trisomy 21 [1.69%]. In conclusion, prenatal diagnosis Panorama 3381 191 91(61%) 58(38%) 1(0,6%) 41 of chromosomal disorders is very useful in cases with (Natera, since2016) congenital anomalies and positive NIPD. Harmony 1939 79 57(80%) 14(20%) 0 8 V. Martiniuc: None. M. Gramescu: None. S. Popa: (Ariosa Diagnostics, None.R.Popescu:None.A.Paduret:None.I.Resmerita: since2016) None. L. Caba: None. L. Butnariu: None. M. Panzaru: VERASITY 1583 33 31(100%) 0 0 2 (NIPD None. C. Rusu: None. E. Gorduza: None. genetics, since2017) Total 6903 303 179 72 1 51 P01.71C Applicational of the array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) in the prenatal diagnostics of E. Kuznetsova: None. V. Gnetetskaya: None. M. fetuses with increased risk of aneuploidy Ermakova:None.M.Kurtser:None.Y.Tarasova:None. M. Chojnacka1, K. Sobecka1, M. Bartnik-Głaska1, P01.70B M. Smyk1, I. Plaskota1, B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik1, Correlation between reason to apply a prenatal M. Kędzior1, J. Bernaciak1, K. Jakubów-Durska1, diagnosis for aneuploidy and the results of test - A E. Obersztyn1, T. Roszkowski2, A. Kucińska-Chahwan2, retrospectivestudyon2,881foetusinvestigatedinlast15 P. Kretowicz3, B. Nowakowska1 years by FISH method in “Cuza Voda” Maternity, Iasi, Romania 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Professor Witold Orłowski V. Martiniuc1, M. Gramescu2, S. Popa2, R. Popescu2, Independent Public Clinical Hospital - Postgraduate A. Paduret1, I. Resmerita2, L. Caba2, L. Butnariu2, Medical Education Centre, Warsaw, Poland, 3II M. Panzaru2, C. Rusu2, E. GORDUZA1,2 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Center of Postgraduate Education (CMKP), Warsaw, Poland 1"Cuza Voda" Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 2"Grigore T. Popa" University of Medicine and Theoccurrenceofaneuploidyisestimatedat5-11%ofall Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania fetuses. The most common are trisomies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and monosomy of the chromosome X. We analysed retrospectively 2,881 cases investigated by Noninvasive prenatal screening tests allow the risk calcula- prenatal diagnosis, using FISH method in the last 15 years tion of the aneuploidies based on the patients age (above inIasi,Romania.Weusedprobesforchromosomes13,18, 35), biochemical markers (free β-hCG) and ultrasono- 21, X and Y and we found 215 foetus with aneuploidy graphic markers (nuchal translucency parameter). The (7.46%). In 642 cases with abnormal double test we results suggesting a high risk of aneuploidy give strong identiﬁed 17 chromosomal anomalies [2.64%] (12 cases indications for further invasive diagnostics. with trisomy 21 and 1 case with trisomy 18, trisomy 13, The aim of this project was to evaluate the frequency of trisomy XXY and trisomy XYY). In 577 cases with chromosome aberrations other than aneuploidies in the abnormaltripletestweidentiﬁed8chromosomalanomalies groupof204patientswithhighriskoftrisomybasedonthe [1.38%] (4 cases with trisomy 21 and 4 cases with trisomy screening tests, where the ultrasound test did not show any 18).In42caseswithabnormaldoubleandtripletestwedid abnormalities. To perform the array diagnostic evaluation not identiﬁed chromosomal anomalies. In 759 cases with DNA from uncultured amniotic ﬂuid, trophoblast or cul- congenital anomalies identiﬁed by ultrasonography we tured amniocytes was used. found 162 chromosomal anomalies [21.34%] (78 cases Aneuploidy was identiﬁed in 34/204 fetuses (17%). with trisomy 21, 52 cases with trisomy 18, 13 cases with Trisomy 21 was the most frequent abnormality (66%). The trisomy 13, 10 cases with monosomy X and 9 cases with trisomy 13 and 18 were detected in 3% and 11%, respec- triploidy). In 732 cases with advanced maternal age (> 35 tively, followed by X monosomy (11%), X mosaic years) we identiﬁed 16 chromosomal anomalies [2.18%] monosomy (3%) and sex chromosomes disomy (11%). In (14 cases with trisomy 21 and 1 case with trisomy 13, and 10/204cases(5%)structuralaberrationsof115kbto41Mb triploidy). We applied FISH test in 11 cases with positive were identiﬁed. Two of them were classiﬁed as potentially NIPD and we conﬁrmed 9 cases with trisomy 21 and one pathogenic and 8 as pathogenic, where 4 were localized inAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1205 the regions of known microdeletion and microduplication Results: We identiﬁed a novel homozygous missense syndromes. mutation (NM_006731.2, c.898G>A, p.Gly300Arg) in Therefore,wepostulatethatCGHisthemostreliableand Fukutin gene (FKTN), which is associated to Muscular thefastestmethodforidentiﬁcationofgenomicimbalances, Dystrophy-Dystroglycanopathies. Fetal MRI supported even in the cohort of patients with normal results of ultra- molecular ﬁndings. Structural modeling analyses indicated sound examination. a potential pathogenetic mechanism of the variant, through M. Chojnacka: None. K. Sobecka: None. M. Bartnik- a reduced activation of the sugar moieties, which in turn Głaska: None. M. Smyk: None. I. Plaskota: None. B. impairs transfer to α-dystroglycan and thus its glycosyla- Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. M. Kędzior: None. J. tion. These ﬁndings pointed to a redeﬁnition of the ultra- Bernaciak: None. K. Jakubów-Durska: None. E. sonographic suspicion of DWM recurrence to a Muscular Obersztyn: None. T. Roszkowski: None. A. Kucińska- Dystrophy-Dystroglycanopathy type A. Chahwan: None. P. Kretowicz: None. B. Conclusions: The present case conﬁrmed WES as a Nowakowska: None. reliabletoolforprenatalidentiﬁcationofmolecularbasesof Central Nervous System phenotypes. Moreover, it high- P01.72D lights the importance of considering Muscular Dystrophy- Prenatal whole exome sequencing detects a novel Dystroglycanopathies when a posterior fossa anomaly is Fukutin (FKTN) mutation in a fetus with a suspected early prenatally described. recurrence of Dandy-Walker malformation Grant: Italian Ministry of Health, RC1801GC11 A. Traversa: None. E. Marchionni: None. A. Gio- A. Traversa1, E. Marchionni2, A. Giovannetti2, vannetti: None. M. Genovesi: None. S. Bernardo: None. M. Genovesi2, S. Bernardo2, D. Guadagnolo2, D. Guadagnolo: None. N. Panzironi: None. G. Napoli: N. Panzironi2, G. Napoli2, B. Torres3, A. Paiardini4, None. B. Torres: None. A. Paiardini: None. L. Bernar- L. Bernardini3, T. Mazza5, M. Carella1, V. Caputo2, dini: None. T. Mazza: None. M. Carella: None. V. A. Pizzuti2,1 Caputo: None. A. Pizzuti: None. 1LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics,FondazioneIRCCSCasa P01.73A Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), The advantage of comparative genomic hybridization Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza (aCGH) over quantitative ﬂuorescence PCR (QF-PCR) University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 3Laboratory of in genetic testing of chorions after miscarriage Cytogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza,SanGiovanniRotondo(FG),Italy,4Department K. Matuszewska1,2, M. Piechota1, B. Wieckowska3, of Biochemical Sciences "A. Rossi Fanelli", Sapienza K. Milanowska1, N. Kochalska1, A. Stachowiak1, University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 5Laboratory of K. Lacna1, P. Puacz4, T. Olejniczak5, A. Latos- Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Bielenska1,2 Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy 1Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, Introduction:Posteriorfossamalformationsareamongthe 2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of mostfrequentCentralNervousSystemanomaliesprenatally MedicalSciences,Poland,Poznan,Poland,3Departmentof detected. We report on a 17 weeks male fetus with an Medical Statistics and Information Technologies, Poznan ultrasonographic suspicion of Dandy-Walker Malformation University of Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland, (DWM) recurrence. The previous pregnancy of the couple 4Department of Mother and Child Health, Poznan had been interrupted at 22 gestational weeks following a University of Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland, diagnosisofDWM.Weidentiﬁedthemolecularcauseusing 5Division of Perinatology and Women’s Diseases, Poznan Next Generation Sequencing in prenatal diagnosis. University of Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) has been performed on fetal genomic DNA. After Atleast60%ofspontaneousabortionsoccurduetogenetic reads pre-processing, mapping, variant calling and annota- disease(mostoftenchromosomalaberration)intheembryo tion,aﬁlteringstrategybasedonallelicfrequency,recessive and fetus. Genetic testing of miscarriage material is very inheritance and phenotypic ontologies has been applied. A important in order to determine the etiology of miscarriage fetal MRI at 18 gestational weeks has been performed. In and to identify couples at risk. silicoanalysisofapotentialcausativevariantintheFukutin In our laboratory two methods QF-PCR (for chromo- protein has been carried out through a structural modeling somes: 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, X, Y) - 827 chorions and approach.1206 aCGH (with resolution 12x135k or 8x60k) - 417 chorions ﬁnding – increased nuchal translucency, hygroma coli, were used. cardiac abnormalities, excess amniotic ﬂuid, etc. Most fre- Chromosomal aberrations (numerical or structural) were quently causative variants were found in PTPN11 gene (4/ found in 56,5% of chorions analyzed by aCGH and in 10). Surprisingly, in two cases (2/10) we have detected 52,5%testedbyQF-PCR.Amongchromosomeaberrations variant in RIT1, one of the recently reported gene for mostfrequentweretrisomies(65,7%;mostfrequenttrisomy Noonan syndrome. Especially in prenatal diagnostic var- 16;trisomy14with thesamefrequencyastrisomy18),45, iants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VOUS) pose a signiﬁcant X (14%) and triploidy (13,1%). The higher number of problem. There is not enough information to sort them out miscarriages identiﬁed in an individual case, the smaller into classiﬁcatory categories, so they complicate con- percentage of abnormal results were observed. secutive genetic consultation. In our group VOUS was StructuralchromosomalaberrationsincludingCNVswere identiﬁed in 14 samples (14/104; 13,5 %). However, seg- identiﬁedin13,6%ofnoneuploidmiscarriagesexaminedby regation analysis of the variants in family members helped aCGH.SomeCNVswererepeatedandcontainedgenesthat to clarify their signiﬁcance in eight of them. could be candidate genes critical for maintaining healthy Conclusions: The aim of this study was to evaluate pregnancy. The most common micro-aberration (6 none- clinical beneﬁts of massive parallel sequencing in prenatal uploid chorions analyzed by aCGH) concerned the locus diagnosticsofcasessuspectedforRASopathy(i.e.detection 3p21.31, and involved the DAG1 gene. The DAG1 is rate) and compare them to the fraction of detected VOUS. expressed in the placenta during pregnancy. Literature data In general, our results establish this approach as effective correlate deﬁciency of alpha dystroglycan encoded by but with non-negligible number of uncertain ﬁndings. DAG1 gene with embryonic lethality. E. Svobodová: None. M. Matyášová: None. J. Kadle- Introduction of aCGH to the diagnostics of miscarriages, cová: None. D.N. Grochová: None. P. Vlašín: None. enabled the dynamic development of research on genetic causes of recurrent pregnancy losses including other than P01.75C chromosomal aberrations. 1 out of 4 healthy individuals are carriers of a severe K. Matuszewska: None. M. Piechota: None. B. recessive or X-linked disease after using a panel of 15 Wieckowska: None. K. Milanowska: None. N. genes Kochalska:None.A.Stachowiak:None.K.Lacna:None. P. Puacz: None. T. Olejniczak: None. A. Latos- M. Sánchez-Soler1,2, A. Urbano1,2,3,4, E. Montoya1,2,3,4, Bielenska: None. I. Ochando1,2,3,4, R. Vázquez1,2, J. Rueda1,2,3,4 P01.74B 1Unidad de Genética, Hospital HLA Vistahermosa, Two years’ experience with molecular diagnostics of Alicante, Spain, 2Cátedra de Biomedicina Reproductiva RASopathies in prenatal cases Vistahermosa, UMH, Alicante, Spain, 3Departamento Histología, Facultad de Medicina, UMH, Alicante, Spain, E. Svobodová1, M. Matyášová1, J. Kadlecová1, 4E-GENETICARE, UMH, Parque Cientíﬁco, Elche, Spain D. N. Grochová1, P. Vlašín2 Preconceptional tests use Next Generation Sequencing 1Cytogenetická laboratoř Brno, s.r.o., Brno, Czech (NGS) to identify carriers of recessive and X-linked Republic, 2Centrum prenatální diagnostiky, s.r.o., Brno, diseases, with the aim of reducing the risk of offspring Czech Republic bornwiththese alterations. Thegoal ofthepresentstudyis to show the results of the implementation of a reduced Introduction: RASopathies are a group of diseases with carrier screening test analyzed by NGS in a population of similar symptoms caused by disruption of RAS/MAPK 1097 healthy individuals who attend a reproduction center. pathway function. The most abundant diseases are Noonan This test includes 15 genes associated with the 16 most syndrome and neuroﬁbromatosis type 1. prevalent autosomal recessive and X‐linked diseases in Materials and Methods: Resequencing of 20 selected Caucasian population, following the current recommenda- genes was performed by massive parallel sequencing tions of scientiﬁc societies (high prevalence, severe, early approach on samples with normal karyotype originated onsetandwithcleargenotype-phenotyperelationdiseases). from amniotic ﬂuid or chorionic villi tissue. Amongthetotalofindividuals,809(73.7%)arewomenand Results: Samples were indicated on the basis of ultra- 288 (26.3%) are men. 25.4% are carriers of at least 1 sound ﬁndings. From a total of 104 prenatal samples cau- pathogenicorprobablypathogenicalteration(22.5%havea sative variant was found in 10 of them (detection rate 9,6 single mutation and 2.9% have two). Diseases with highest %). All those positive samples had severe ultrasound probability of being a carrier are: cystic ﬁbrosis andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1207 congenital bilateral aplasia of vas deferens (1/13), GJB2- 1qh+ and 9qh+ (0.4%), 5 structural Y-chromosome aber- related DFNB 1 non-syndromic hearing loss and deafness rations (0.4%), 2 deletions of Xqter and 1 ring21 chromo- (1/16),familialMediterraneanfever(1/42),spinalmuscular some. In cases of fetal anomalies array CGH revealed atrophy (1/50) and phenylketonuria (1/52). Out of the 809 17р13.3 microdeletion (Miller-Dieker syndrome), 1p36 women, 2.1% are carriers of a premutation (45-200 CGG microdeletion, 22q11.21 microdeletion (Di George syn- repeats) in the FMR1 gene, causative of X-fragile drome), 22q11.1 microduplication (Cat-eye syndrome), syndrome. In conclusion, 1 out 4 patients without other 10q26.3 microdeletion (2 cases), 22q11.21 microduplica- diseases who attend a reproduction center is a carrier of a tion (2 cases), 15q11.2 microdeletion (3 cases), 17p11.2 pathogenicalterationinoneofthescreenedgenes.Thistest microdeletion (Smith-Magenis syndrome). identiﬁes the most frequent alterations that are at risk of Conclusions: In 6.5% of couples with reproductive fail- beingtransmittedtotheoffspringtopromotetheautonomy ure chromosomal alterations were detected. There is a high of patients to make reproductive decisions. probability (about 30%) to reveal microstructural genomic M. Sánchez-Soler: None. A. Urbano: None. E. Mon- aberrations by array CGH in cases of recurrent fetal toya: None. I. Ochando: None. R. Vázquez: None. J. anomalies. Rueda: None. K. Belemezova: None. M. Rizov: None. R. Kaneva: None.V.Peicheva: None.A.Kanev: None.M.Hristova- P01.77A Savova: None. T. Milachich: None. A. Shterev: None. I. Genomic analyses in cases with reduced fertility and Dimova: None. recurrent fetal anomalies P01.79C K. Belemezova1,2,3, M. Rizov1, R. Kaneva4, V. Peicheva4, Using Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for A. Kanev5, M. Hristova-Savova1, T. Milachich1, retinoblastoma survivors: cost-effectiveness and quality A. Shterev1, I. Dimova1,4 of life improvements 1Medical complex „Dr Shterev“, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, M. Zeppel1, D. Schoﬁeld1, S. Stafﬁeri2, R. Shrestha1, 2University Hospital “St. Ivan Rilski”, Department of D. Jelovic3, R. Jamieson4 Clinical Laboratory and Clinical Immunology, Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Tissue Bank BulGen, 1GenIMPACT, North Ryde, Australia, 2Dept of Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Center of Molecular medicine, Medical Ophthalmology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 5Military Medical Australia, 3Eye Genetics Research Unit, Children’s Academy, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Hospital at Westmead, Children’s Medical Research Institute,SaveSightInstitute,UniversityofSydney,Sydney, Objective:Genomicaberrationsareusuallyassociatedwith NSW, Australia, 4Eye Genetics Research Unit, Children’s reduced fertility, recurrent abortions or fetal anomalies. Hospital at Westmead, Children’s Medical Research Establishment of the exact genetic diagnosis in such cases Institute,SaveSightInstitute,UniversityofSydney,Sydney, has a great impact on the determination of the reproductive Australia risk and making a decision for reproductive options. Design:Inourstudywehavecollectedpatientsamplesin Background: Retinoblastoma (Rb) is a paediatric cancer, the following clinical cases of disturbed reproduction: leadingtolossofvision,eye(s)orlife.Approximately40% infertility or repeated abortions, structural fetal anomalies ofpatientshaveaheritableformofthedisease,causedbya and intrauterine death. mutationinRB1.Offspringoftheseindividualsareata50% Materials and Methods: We performed cytogenetic risk of inheriting the disease. Aggressive and invasive analysisonlymphocytesfromcouplesinallthelistedabove treatments in the ﬁrst ﬁve years of life under general cases (1425 samples) and array CGH analysis of abortion anaesthetic, followed by regular monitoring until age 18, samples in cases of disturbed fetal development impact the patient, family, hospital resources. Preimplanta- (40 samples). tiongeneticdiagnosis(PGD)offersalternativereproductive Results: Chromosomal alterations were established by choices for individuals with a heritable mutation. Costs of cytogenetic analysis in 93 patients (6.5%), distributed as genomic sequencing are rapidly declining, with increasing follows - 19 chromosomal translocations (1.3%), 7 numer- availability of reproductive technologies. ical X/Y aberrations (0.5%), 10 cases of X/Y mosaicism Methods and Materials: We undertook a cost- (0.7%), 2 cases of mosaic marker (0.1%), 25 cases of chr9 effectiveness study of access to PGD for survivors with inversion (1.75%), 20 cases of acrocentric satellite poly- heritable retinoblastoma. We modelled the cost of repro- morphisms (1.4%), 5 cases of pericentric heteromorphism ductive technology, number of affected/unaffected births,1208 and quality of life gains, for parental uptake rates of PGD genotypewasalmostthesameinthestudygroups(18.75% from0-100%.Weincludedthecostsofhospitalvisitsfrom and 12.12%, p>0.05), and the absence of such CD- 0-18years,andcostsofIVFandPGDusingthreecycles(1 predisposing alleles was signiﬁcantly lower in women fresh, 2 frozen). with RPL compared to control (25% and 78.79%, p Results:Inacohortofretinoblastomasurvivors,usingin- <0.0001). vitrofertilization(IVF)andPGDalwaysledtocost-savings, Conclusions:Thestudyofapossiblecorrelationbetween and quality of life improvements, even at low uptake rates. HLA-DQ2/DQ8 haplotype and RPL might suggest new Cost-savings were $156,538 and 20.58 Quality Adjusted diagnostic and therapeutical approaches for RPL women. Lifeyearsweregainedfortencoupleswith50%usingPGD K. Sosnina: None. O. Terpyliak: None. D. compared to the natural pregnancy pathway. Zastavna: None. Conclusions: IVF and PGD were always less expensive, withhigherquality-of-lifecomparedwithtakingthenatural P01.81A pregnancy approach. Affordable and accessible PGD will Expanding our non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) lead to savings for families and health systems for families service using droplet digital PCR with heritable retinoblastoma. M. Zeppel: None. D. Schoﬁeld: None. S. Stafﬁeri: J. Shaw, S. Sheppard, N. Chandler, H. Ahlfors, L. Chitty None. R. Shrestha: None. D. Jelovic: None. R. Jamieson: None. North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom P01.80D Celiac disease predisposition and Recurrent pregnancy Introduction:NIPDwherethemothercarriesamutationis loss: HLA- genotyping hindered by the maternal mutant background in cell-free DNA (cfDNA). Relative haplotype dosage analysis is used K. Sosnina1, O. Terpyliak1, D. Zastavna1,2 in clinical laboratories for NIPD of recessive and X-linked disorders, however this technique requires DNA from both 1InstituteofHereditaryPathology,NAMSofUkraine,Lviv, parentsandaproband.Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR)offers Ukraine, 2Department of Biotechnology and high sensitivity for quantiﬁcation of cfDNA and has Bioinformatics, Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University potential for use in carrier mothers via relative mutation of Technology, Rzeszow, Poland dosage usingonlyamaternal sample.Wehaveappliedthis technologytosicklecelldiseaseand8X-linkeddisordersto In recent years, has been discussed a relationship between determine clinical utility. RPL and celiac disease (CD), one of the most common Methods: ddPCR assays were designed and validated intestinaldisordersinthesmallintestineaffectingupto1% using gDNA for the pathogenic variant. Testing was per- of individuals in Western populations. It is known that formed on cfDNA from maternal plasma samples for susceptibility to CD is linked to certain human leukocyte 22 sickle cell risk pregnancies and 10 X-linked mutations. antigen (HLA) class II alleles, especially in the HLA-DQ Fetalfractionwasdeterminedusingthreedifferentmethods. region. In this context, the aim of this study was to Fetal genotype predictions were generated using sequential investigatetheprevalenceoftheCD-predisposingallelesin probability ratio test, with results conﬁrmed by invasive women with RPL. sampling. Results: The presence of appropriate HLA alleles in 32 Results: For sickle cell disease, correct predictions of women with RPL and 33 women of control group was fetal HBB genotype were generated for 11 samples, with 2 determined. High CD predisposition was considered in incorrect predictions and 9 inconclusive results. Incorrect individuals with HLA alleles DQA1*0501, DQB1*0201- andinconclusivepredictionsresultedfromlowfetalfraction 0203 (encoding HLA-DQ2) and DQB1*0302 (encoding and threshold positioning during analysis. For X-linked HLA-DQ8), the presence of only the alleles DQA1*0501, conditions, assay design has been successful and develop- DQB1*0201-0203 was considered as medium-high predis- ment of the analysis pipeline initiated. position CD and a low risk CD are related allele Conclusions: ddPCR has the potential to be used for DQB1*0302. A signiﬁcantly higher frequency HLA-DQ2/ NIPD for maternal mutation carriers using only a maternal DQ8 haplotype in women with RPL compared to control sample. We will report testing of over 50 additional ongo- was established (21.88% vs. 3.03%, p<0.025). The geno- ing cases to reﬁne and validate the analysis pipeline to type HLA-DQ2 is established with a signiﬁcantly higher further extend the scope of our NIPD clinical service. frequencyinwomenwithRPLcomparedtocontrol(34.8% J. Shaw: None. S. Sheppard: None. N. Chandler: vs. 6.06%, p <0.005). The frequency of the HLA-DQ8 None. H. Ahlfors: None. L. Chitty: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1209 P01.82B P01.83C Comprehensive chromosome screening of human ﬁrst What is the actual risk of couples carriers for the polar bodies and oocytes using four different whole mutation DHCR7:c.964-1G>C? genome ampliﬁcation methods and single-cell next- generation sequencing H. Daum1, V. Meiner1, R. Michaelson-Cohen2, R. Sukenik-Halevy3,4, M. Levy-Zalzberg5, A. Bar-Ziv6, A. Sarosiak1,2, I. Minota1, K. Koziol3, M. Oldak1 A. Weiden7, S. Scher8, M. Shohat4,9,10, J. Zlotogora1 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and 1Department of Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Israel, 2Medical Genetics Institute, Dept. of Obstetrics & Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Novum Fertility Clinic, Gynecology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Hebrew Warsaw, Poland University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Background: Aneuploidy is the most frequent type of Israel,4SacklerSchoolofMedicine,TelAvivUniversity,Tel chromosome aberration and the most signiﬁcant clinically. aviv, Israel, 5Genetic Institute, Soroka, Beer sheva, Israel, Itoccursasaresultofmeioticchromosomalmalsegregation 6The Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba during formation of a haploid oocyte by subsequent Medical Center, Tel hashomer, Israel, 7Dor Yeshorim, extrusion of two polar bodies: polar body ﬁrst (PB1) and Committee for Prevention of Jewish Genetic Diseases, second (PB2). Based on meiosis mechanism, genome of a Jerusalem, Israel, 8Dor Yeshorim, Committee for single oocyte can be deduced by analyzing its siblingpolar Prevention of Jewish Genetic Diseases, Brooklyn, NY, bodies. United States, 9Bio-informatics department, Cancer center, Material and Methods: Next-generation sequencing Sheba Medical center, Tel hashomer, Israel, 10Institute of technology for comprehensive chromosome screening was Medical Genetics, Maccabi HMO, Rehovot, Israel used to assess ploidy status of the oocytes and their sibling PB1. A total of 120 single cells (60 PB1 and 60 oocytes) Introduction:Smith-Lemli-Opitzisanautosomalrecessive were subjected for whole genome ampliﬁcation (WGA) disorder characterized by variable expression including using four different commercially available WGA kits and multiple congenital malformations, dysmorphic features, analyzed using VeriSeq PGS kit on the MiSeq sequencer metabolic derangement and intellectual disability. The (Illumina). Random samples were validated using genomic founder mutation DHCR7:c.964-1G>C was introduced into arrays (aCGH). Aneuploidy detection with the tested kits theIsraelipreconceptionscreeningtestsforAshkenaziJews was evaluated. in2017sincethecarrierfrequencyofthemutationishighin Results: Aneuploidy status was determined for 112 of this population (1.2%). Despite the high carrier rate, the 120 (93,3%) samples. In the group of well-ampliﬁed PB1- diseaseitselfisnotknowntobefrequentinthispopulation. oocyte pairs (33/60) a 97% concordance between the Discrepancy between the carrier and disease frequency chromosomal status of PB1 and the corresponding oocyte raises the question of the actual risks for affected offspring was observed. Differences in WGA kits performance for couples detected by the screening program. including ampliﬁcation uniformity and aneuploidy calling Methods: We performed a literature review of all pub- potential were evaluated and the most optimal kit for PB1 lications available with detailed information regarding genomeWGAwasselected.ResultsfromaCGHvalidation homozygous DHCR7:c.964-1G>C fetuses/patients were of the randomly selected samples showed full consistency included. We also collected clinical data about the couples with the NGS results. identiﬁed in the national screening program, such as Conclusions: NGS-based method used for PB1 genome reproductive history. analysis showed a high predictive potential of PB1 in Results:Outof31homozygousfetuses,sixdiedin-utero deducingploidystatusofthecorrespondingoocyteandisa (IUFD),tenpregnancieswereterminatedduringthesecond promising method for genetic preconception testing of trimester and 15 children were born. All 15 died between oocytes. day one till three months of age. Reproductive history of Supported by: POIR.02.03.02-14- 0092/17 Smith-Lemli-Opitz at-risk couples showed that out of 61 A. Sarosiak: None. I. Minota: None. K. Koziol: None. pregnancies, 32 spontaneous miscarriages were M. Oldak: None. reported (52%). Discussion: Our observations support the previous knowledge that homozygosity for c.964-1G>C in DHCR7 leads to a severe phenotype or early spontaneous abortion.1210 An unexpected observation was the excess of early spon- B. Panthan: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, taneousabortions.Thereasonforthisisnotclearandawaits collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as further studies. grants already received); Modest; Leader Medical Genetics H. Daum: None. V. Meiner: None. R. Michaelson- and Genomics, Co., Ltd.. S. Klumsathian: None. A. Cohen: None. R. Sukenik-Halevy: None. M. Levy-Zalz- Charoenyingwattana: None. W. Chantratita: None. O. berg: None. A. Bar-Ziv: None. A. Weiden: None. S. Trachoo: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- Scher: None. M. Shohat: None. J. Zlotogora: None. borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Leader Medical Genetics and P01.85A Genomics, Co., Ltd.. Developing quantitative real-time PCR for preconception spinal muscular atrophy carrier P01.86B screening in Thai population Detection and validation of subchromosomal aberrations detected as part of routine noninvasive P. Chit ayanan1, B. Panthan2, S. Klumsathian2, prenatal testing A. Charoenyingwattana2, W. Chantratita2, O. Trachoo3,2 M.Sekelská1,A.Izsáková1,K.Kubošová1,P.Tilandyová1, 1Panthupark Genetics Clinic, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Center E. Csekes1, Ž. Kúchová1, R. Lukáčková2, D. Landlová2, for Medical Genomics, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi M. Hýblová2, M. Haršányová3, J. Budiš3, T. Szemes3, Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand, P. Križan2, G. Minárik2 3DepartmentofMedicine,FacultyofMedicineRamathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand 1Trisomy test Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Medirex Inc., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a severe neuromuscular disease and one of the most common Introduction: Noninvasive prenatal testing is based on autosomal recessive diseases in children, caused by analysis of circulating DNA from blood of pregnant homozygous absence of the survival motor neuron gene women. Low coverage whole genome sequencing is able (SMN1).Heterozygousexon7deletionofSMN1isdeﬁned to detect not only most commonly screened chromosomal as a carrier with the reported frequency of 1/40 to 1/50 aneuploidiesbutalsodifferentsubchromosomalaberrations. worldwide.Clinicalpracticeinmanycountriesrecommends Aim:Aimoftheworkwasprospectivestudyofdetection SMA carrier screening for most couples at the and validation of subchromosomal aberrations of fetal ori- preconception stage. ginidentiﬁedaspartofroutinenoninvasiveprenataltesting. Materials and Methods: We developed a quantitative MaterialsandMethods:FromApril2016tillDecember real-time PCR protocol to detect SMN1 exon 7 deletion 2018, more than 8000 samples of pregnant women using (SMADX7™) as a cost-effective method, aiming to per- Illumina NextSeq 500 platform were analysed. Low cov- form carrier screening in 430 Thai individuals visiting erage whole genome sequencing was used in combination preconceptionclinic. Validationofthemethodwasdonein with optimized CNV detection algorithm. 100 positive and negative controls compared to standard Results: In tested cohort of patients different suchromo- DHPLC method. somal aberrations were detected in 32 samples. Half of Results: The result of control testing was 100% con- patients (16) refused conﬁrmatory testing or we were not sistent between real-time PCR and DHPLC. Further popu- abletogetsampleorfeedbackfromthefurthermanagement lation screening revealed the SMA carrier frequency of 1/ of the patient. In second half of samples (16) DNA from 72. amniocenteses were available for conﬁrmatory testing. Of Conclusion: Developing of SMADX7™ is an out- thesecases5ﬁndingswereconﬁrmedand11werenegative standing strategy for SMA carrier screening in Thai popu- after veriﬁcation analyses. In samples with detected aber- lation due to good cost-beneﬁt and rapid turnaround time rationsfetalfractionvariedbetween10,3and18,26%.The within 24 hours. Carrier frequency in our cohort seemed to smallest reported aberration was 1 Mb and the largest one be lower than global frequency; however, additional sub- approx. 80 Mb long. jects are required to be enrolled, aiming to obtain the Conclusions: In this prospective study the possibility of national data that can represent overall carrier frequency. utilization of low coverage genomic sequencing for detec- Grants: Leader Medical Genetics and Genomics, tionofsubchromosomalaberrationsoverthewholegenome Co., Ltd. was conﬁrmed. For proper estimations of sensitivity, spe- P. Chitayanan: A. Employment (full or part-time); ciﬁcity, NPV and PPV larger studies are necessary as Modest; Leader Medical Genetics and Genomics, Co., Ltd.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1211 samples signiﬁcantly differ in crucial factors that are fetal P01.88D fraction, position and size of detected aberration. A molecular strategy increases the PGD accuracy for M. Sekelská: None. A. Izsáková: None. K. Kubošová: Taiwan b-thalassemia population None. P. Tilandyová: None. E. Csekes: None. Ž. Kúchová: None. R. Lukáčková: None. D. Landlová: Y. C. Li1,2,3, Y. C. Chen1, H. H. Shih1, E. H. Cheng1, None. M. Hýblová: None. M. Haršányová: None. J. Y. P. Lin1, Y. P. Pai1, M. S. Lee1,3,4 Budiš: None. T. Szemes: None. P. Križan: None. G. Minárik: None. 1LeeWomen’sHospital,Taichung,Taiwan,2ChinaMedical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 3Chung-Shan Medical P01.87C University, Taichung, Taiwan, 4Chung-Shan Medical The risk of spontaneous abortion in subfertile couples University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan G.C.COZARU1,2,M.Aschie1,2,A.Mitroi1,2,C.Brinzan1,2 β-thalassemia carries over 1.1% prevalent rate in Taiwan and has polymorphism variants coordinated with geogra- 1CEDMOG - “Ovidius” University of Constanta, phy. Both β-thalassemia carrier couple would transmit 1/4 Constanta, Romania, 2“Sf Apostol Andrei” Emergency risk of thalassemia major to their offspring in every Clinical County Hospital of Constanta, Constanta, pregnancy. Thalassemia major patients require lifelong Romania transfusions, iron-chelation therapy and, an expensive support system. These bring a great socioeconomic burden Our research has gone from the observation that women to the suffered family. PGD (preimplantation genetic with a history of subfertility have been shown to have diagnosis) for β-thalassemia is conducted in IVF (in vitro increased rates of subclinical early pregnancy loss, as fertilization) to transfer an embryo without thalassemia detected via human chorionic gonadotropin, relative to major to the uterus. The problem of allele dropout (ADO) women without a history of impaired fertility. andpreferentialampliﬁcationhighlyexistinPGDinvolving Objectives: The purpose of this study was to assess the WGA (whole genomeampliﬁcation) ofblastocystbiopsies. association between subfertility and spontaneous abortion. It had been reported that a combination of Sanger Methods: A total of 122 women in Constanta reported sequencing and QF-PCR of STR markers increased the 384 pregnancies between 2014 and 2018 and were able to detection rate of the mutated β-globin gene in PGD. provide an estimate of the waiting time to conception for However,theuninformativeSTRsandADOofthemutated 276 (71.87% of the 384 eligible pregnancies). We noted gene usually limited the validation of PGD. Moreover, the retrospective data, including sociodemographic character- heterozygosity rate of STRs is highly population different. istics, obstetric and medical history, genetic risk factors, In this study, we veriﬁed several STRs for providing cigarette smoking, caffeine and alcohol consumption, and enoughinformativeSTRsforTaiwanβ-thalassemiapopula- occupational information. Rates of spontaneous abortion tion. Our results showed that six linked STRs (D11S4146, were determined among women with and without sub- D11S1760, D11S1243, D11S4891, D11S2352, and fertility,andadjustedoddsratios(ORs)and95%conﬁdence D11S1871) with highly heterozygous polymorphism and intervals (CIs) were estimated via multiple logistic low recombination rate in Taiwan population and would regression. achieve up to 99% diagnostic validation in PGD for Results: Multivariate logistic regression analyses with β-thalassemia. Furthermore, the multiﬂuorescent PCR of generalizedestimatingequationsindicatedthatspontaneous STRs conductedin a single tube for the linkage analysisof abortion rates were 28.0% in pregnancies preceded by the mutated β-globin gene provided a simple method for subfertility and 17.0% in pregnancies without impaired performingthePGDofβ-thalassemiamajor.Thisstudywas fertility (adjusted OR=1.68, 95% CI=1.36, 2.84). supported from MOST of Taiwan (107-2314-B-040-019), The attributable risk of spontaneous abortion associated CSMU (104-OM-A-102), and CSMU-CCH (CSMUCCH- with subfertility was 6.9%. 102-06). Conclusions: Subfertile women evidence an increased Y.C. Li: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; number of spontaneous abortions. Lee Women’s Hospital. B. Research Grant (principal Research supported by CEDMOG, Ovidius University of investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants Constanta, POS CCE 2.21. Project, (ID 1844, SMIS aswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;Chung-Shan 48750). Medical University. Y.C. Chen: A. Employment (full or G.C.Cozaru:None.M.Aschie:None.A.Mitroi:None. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Lee Women’s Hospital. H.H. Shih: C. Brinzan: None. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Lee Women’s Hospital. E.H. Cheng: A. Employment (full or1212 part-time); Signiﬁcant; Lee Women’s Hospital. Y.P. Lin: Table. Distribution of genes variants A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Lee Women’s Gene Genotypes Basicgroup, Comparison Hospital. Y.P. Pai: A. Employment (full or part-time); (polymorphic n/% group,n/% Signiﬁcant;LeeWomen’sHospital.M.S.Lee:B.Research variants) (n=412) (n=70) Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand Protrombin GG 393/95,39 69/98,57 pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig- (G20210A) GA 19/4,61 1/1,43 niﬁcant; Chung-Shan Medical University. AA 0/0,00 0/0,00 FactorV GG 394/95,63 69/98,57 P01.89A (G1691A) GA 17/4,13 1/1,43 Maternal and paternal genotypes analysis of AA 1/0,24 0/0,00 thrombophilic gene variants in the risk of reproductive disorders in married couples FGB CC 209/50,73 39/55,71 (C148T) CT 180/43,69 28/40,00 Z. I. Rossokha1,2, O. F. Popova1, N. L. Medvedieva1, TT 23/5,58 3/4,29 L. P. Sheiko2, N. G. Gorovenko2 FGB GG 226/54,85 40/57,14 (-455G/A) GA 165/40,05 28/40,00 1State Institution “Reference-centre for molecular AA 21/5,10 2/2,86 diagnostic of Public Health Ministry of Ukraine”, Kyiv, PAI-I 5G/5G 82/19,90 23/32,86 Ukraine, 2State Institution «Genetic and Regenerative (-6755G/4G) 5G/4G 203/49,27 29/41,43 Medicine of the National Academy of Medical Sciences of 4G/4G 127/30,83 18/25,71 Ukraine», Kyiv, Ukraine Introduction: Inherited thrombophilia is well deﬁned. Z.I. Rossokha: None. O.F. Popova: None. N.L. Med- Factor V Leiden mutation and prothrombin G20210A vedieva: None. L.P. Sheiko: None. N.G. genetic variants are classic thrombophilic determinants for Gorovenko: None. clinical manifestation of reproductive disorders. But new geneticvariantsarediscussednow.Theaimofthestudyto P01.90B evaluatetheinﬂuenceofclassicandnewgeneticvariantson Droplet digital PCR multiplexing for fetal aneuploidy reproductive disorders in married couples. detection Materials and Methods: The genetic variants of Factor V(G1691A,rs6025),prothrombin(G20210A,rs1799963), I. Zednikova1, M. Korabecna1, E. Pazourkova1, PAI-I (675 5G/4G, rs 1799889), FGB (C148T, G-455A, rs S. Santorova1, P. Calda2, M. Brestak2,3, A. Horinek1 1800787 and rs 1800790) were analyzed in 206 couples with reproductive disorders (69 with unspeciﬁed infertility/ 1InstituteofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,FirstFacultyof 137 with recurrent pregnancy loss) and 35 couples of Medicine, Charles University and General University comparison group (who gave birth to one or two healthy Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, children). Frequency genotypes analysis was carried out 2DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology,FirstFacultyof withouttakingintoaccounttheorigin(maternalorpaternal) Medicine, Charles University and General University of genotypes. SNP Stats program were used for statistical Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Screening analysis. Center ProﬁG2, Prague, Czech Republic Results: There were found no signiﬁcant differences for prothrombin, Factor V and FGB genes variants among Background: Nowadays, cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) in investigated groups. 5G/5G genotypes were signiﬁcantly maternal plasma is routinely applied for non-invasive decreased among couples with reproductive disorders prenatal testing (NIPT). Detection of the most common (Table). We identiﬁed signiﬁcant dominant inheritance fetal aneuploidies is ordinarily performed using NGS models for PAI-I (5G/4G) gene (χ²=5,16; p=0,023; technology. Low concentration of cffDNA in maternal OR=0,51, 95%CI: 0,29-0,88) for reproductive failure in circulation prevents the utilization of cheaper and simpler couples. technology - droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). The aim of our Conclusions: We suppose that PAI gene has a beneﬁcial studywastoovercomethisproblembytargetmultiplexing. effect on reproductive function due to improved antic- Methods: Three genes on chromosome 21 and chromo- oagulant properties of blood when genotype 5G/5G in some 18 were absolutely quantiﬁed in one ddPCR reaction married couples present or for embryos this genotype are (hexaplex). Targets on different chromosomes were dis- predicted. tinguished using different labelling (FAM/HEX). ExpectedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1213 FAM/HEX ratio for DNA with normal karyotype is 1. In malformation in a fetus with a sib with similar phenotype, case of fetal trisomy of 21 or 18, the ratio will be deﬂected without known genetic cause. We performed trio WES accordingly. Artiﬁcial mixtures of euploid and trisomic analysis using a custom virtual gene-panel (~3,800 OMIM DNA were used for pilot study. genes, excluding late-onset disease genes). Results:DNAwithnormalkaryotypewassystematically Results:WeestablishedanadditionalgeneticWES-based mixed with DNA with trisomy of 21 (0%; 5%; 10%; 20%; diagnosis in nine fetuses, being: syndromes of MIRAGE 40%);chromosome18wasusedasareferencechromosome (SAMD9), Zellweger (PEX1), Walker Warburg in this case. Eight replicates for each mixture were per- (POMGNT1), Noonan (PTNP11), Kabuki (KMT2D), formed.DetectedFAM/HEXratiosalwayscorrespondedto CHARGE (CHD7); two cases of Osteogenesis Imperfecta theexpectedratiosforrespectivemixtures.Eventhelowest type 2 (COL1A1), and one potential diagnosis in a fetus representation of aneuploid DNA (5%) was correctly with hydrops (MYH7). In six out of 25 cases the WES detected. diagnosis aided in perinatal management. The mean turn- Conclusion: After promising results of the initial phase around time was 10 (range 6-15) working days. with the artiﬁcial mixtures, the optimized workﬂow will Conclusion: Our prospective study shows that imple- now be applied for the analysis of plasma of pregnant menting WES as a routine test in the prenatal setting is women. This method could be applicable for detection of challenging, but technically feasible and has a promising trisomy 21 or 18 in the same reaction, as both trisomies diagnostic yield and signiﬁcant clinical relevance. together have never been observed. Supported by the N.Corsten-Janssen: None. J.C.D. Diphoorn: None.K. MinistryofHealthoftheCzechRepublicRVOVFN64165 Bouman: None. J. El Mecky: None. J.B.G.M. Verheij: I. Zednikova: None. M. Korabecna: None. E. None. W.S. Kerstjens: None. A. Scheper: None. R. Pazourkova:None.S.Santorova:None.P.Calda:None. Kinds: None. I.M. van Langen: None. R.J. Sinke: None. M. Brestak: None. A. Horinek: None. R.H. Sijmons: None. B. Sikkema-Raddatz: None. H. Westers: None. C.C. van Diemen: None. P01.91C Clinical implementation of diagnostic whole exome P01.92D sequencing for fetal multiple congenital anomalies on CNVs with unknown signiﬁcance on chromosome 15 in ultrasound prenatal samples N.Corsten-Janssen,J.C.D.Diphoorn,K.Bouman,J.El K. Markova, R. Mansfeldova, V. Becvarova, H. Pekova, Mecky, J. B. G. M. Verheij, W. S. Kerstjens, A. Scheper, T. Marie, M. Spacirova, B. Laposova, J. Starkova, R. Kinds, I. M. van Langen, R. J. Sinke, R. H. Sijmons, V.Sucha,P.Sidova,J.Horacek,M.Koudova,D.Stejskal B. Sikkema-Raddatz, H. Westers, C. C. van Diemen Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, Groningen, Introduction:Chromosomalmicroarrayanalysis(CMA)is Netherlands increasingly used in prenatal diagnostics. It provides better resolution than conventional karyotyping, nevertheless, Introduction:Identifyingthecauseoffetalanomaliesseen CNVswithvariableexpressivityandlowpenetrancerequire on ultrasound provides important information for perinatal a proper interpretation attitude. management, but we can diagnose only ~40% of fetuses Materials and Methods: More than 2200 prenatal sam- using conventional genetic tests (QF-PCR and microarray). ples (AMC, CVS) were examined at our clinic within the Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) may improve diagnostic lasttwoyears.In9.8%samplesananeuploidywasdetected yield, but is challenging due to uncertainties around fetal byQFPCR.TheremainingsampleswereanalyzedbyCMA phenotyping, variant interpretation, ethical/counseling as a ﬁrst-tier test: samples were assessed by array CGH (or issues of incidental ﬁndings and variants of unknown SNP-array) and analyzed with AgilentCytoGenomics soft- clinical signiﬁcance, and the requirement of short turn- ware. Parental samples were analyzed using CMA to spe- around times. In this study, we implemented WES in cify the origin of the identiﬁed aberrations. prenatal care to increase our diagnostic yield. Results: 72 CMA analyzed samples were considered to Materials and Methods: We conducted a prospective be pathogenic (out of them 56 below karyotype resolution) study of rapid trio WES analysis next to conventional while additional 112 cases as variants of unknown sig- genetic tests for twenty-ﬁve fetuses with ultrasound niﬁcance: class 2, 3 and 4 (likely benign, uncertain clinical abnormalities.Inclusioncriteriawereatleasttwocongenital relevance, likely pathogenic) or without subclassiﬁcation. malformations on ultrasound or one congenital Most frequent VOUS were identiﬁed on chromosomes 151214 (19), 16 (8) and X (13). Prominent CNVs were del/dup were VOUS. The proportion of matings who were PV/ 15q11.2 (BP1BP2) and del/dup 15q13.2q13.3 encompass- LPV*PV/LPV was 2.7-3.8% (depending on the panel), ing signiﬁcant genes NIPA1 and CHRNA7, respectively. similar to previous reports. The proportion of PV/ These CNVs are associated with neurodevelopmental dis- LPV*VOUS matings was 17-20%. Considering only exo- orders, autism and behavioral problems. Penetrance is nic, non-UTR VOUS resulted in a decreased proportion of incomplete and expressivity varies greatly. Databases, lit- PV/LPV*VOUS matings to ≈7%. Most (65-70%) PV/ eraturesearchandfamilialgenealogydidnotprovedeﬁnite LPV*VOUS matings were at risk for severe/profoundly- pathogenicity. The most of these CNVs was inherited and severe diseases, while only 6-7% were at risk for mild alltraceablepregnancieswithnormalultrasoundcontinued. diseases. Conclusion: All fetuses with VOUS on chromosome 15 Conclusions: Non-reporting of VOUS in ECS may miss except one had normal ultrasound. CNVs identiﬁed on at-risk couples for severe diseases. Reporting PV/ chromosome 15 except deletion of CHRNA7, were LPV*VOUS couples would triple the proportion of at-risk described as likely benign with respect to prevailing par- couples,evenifconsideringonlyexonic,non-UTRVOUS. ental origin and normal ultrasound. Even if only 10% of VOUS are ultimately reclassiﬁed as K. Markova: None. R. Mansfeldova: None. V. Bec- PV/LPV, reporting PV/LPV*VOUS would increase the varova: None. H. Pekova: None. T. Marie: None. M. yield of ECS by ≈25%. Spacirova:None.B.Laposova:None.J.Starkova:None. H. Fridman: None. D. Behar: A. Employment (full or V. Sucha: None. P. Sidova: None. J. Horacek: None. M. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Igentify. E. Ownership Interest Koudova: None. D. Stejskal: None. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Igentify. S. Carmi: None. E. Levy- P01.93A Lahad: None. Preconception carrier screening: effect of reporting variantsofunknownsigniﬁcanceinpartners ofcarriers P01.94B with clinically signiﬁcant variants Incidence of Y chromosome microdeletion in different world populations: systematic review H. Fridman1,2,3, D. Behar4, S. Carmi2, E. Levy-Lahad1,3 A. Kurtovic-Kozaric1,2, H. Komic2,3, L. Mehinovic2, 1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, M. Kozaric4, I. Eminovic2, Z. Halilovic5 Jerusalem, Israel, 2Braun School of Public Health and CommunityMedicine,TheHebrewUniversityofJerusalem, 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, Department of Clinical Jerusalem, Israel, 3Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew Pathology, Cytology and Human Genetics, Clinical Center University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Igentify, Tirat of the University of Sarajevo,, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Hacarmel, Israel Herzegovina, 2Department of Genetics, Biology Section, Faculty of Science, University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Background: Expanded preconception carrier screening Bosnia and Herzegovina, 3TIMM Laboratory at (ECS) panels can identify at-risk couples for multiple Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, University of Gothenburg, diseases. ECS reports are currently limited to pathogenic/ Gothenburg, Sweden, 4Clinic of Gynecology and likely-pathogenic variants (PV/LPV). Variants of unknown Obstetrics, Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, signiﬁcance (VOUS) are not reported, even though Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 5Laboratory of Human reporting VOUS is routine in genomic and chromosomal Genetics, Department of Clinical Pathology, Cytology and array testing in both postnatal and prenatal settings. This Human Genetics, Clinical Center of the University of policy misses pairings of PV/LPV carriers with VOUS Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina carriers(PV/LPV*VOUS),whomaybeat-risk.Toevaluate theimportanceofthisomission,weexaminedtheratesand Introduction: Y chromosome microdeletions in azoosper- characteristics of PV/LPV*VOUS virtual matings in an miafactor(AZF)sub-regionsofitslongarmarethesecond Ashkenazi-Jewish (AJ) cohort, a population with well- most frequent genetic cause of male infertility. The aim of established preconception screening. Methods: We ana- this study was to analyze data on Y chromosome lyzed 672 AJ genomes (225,456 virtual couples) for microdeletion world-wide. variants in different gene-panels (exons ±10bp): AJ (55 Materials and Methods: A recall search yielded 924 genes), pan-ethnic (168 genes) and combined (180 genes), papers, 73 papers met the inclusion criteria. Risk of bias using an ACMG classiﬁer. was the size of tested population (>100 men) and its Results: Across 180 genes, we identiﬁed 4671 variants, applicationexcluded31studies,yielding42papersforﬁnal among them 144 (3.1%) were PV/LPV and 1963 (42%) analysis.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1215 Results: The mean Y microdeletion frequency for all 4.45% and 3.97%, respectively. The highest frequencies included studies was 8.35% (n=32996), and 6.4% were detected in South Korean (38%) and Syrian (28%) (n=31552) for the studies that passed risk of bias criteria. populations.The lowest frequencies wereinDanish (0.7%) The mean Y microdeletion frequencies per continent and Croatian (0.9%) populations. The frequencies among (Asian,American,EuropeanandAfrican)were9%,6.83%, AZF sub-regions showed the same pattern in almost all ThefrequenciesofdifferentAZFsub-regionmicrodeletionsindifferentworldpopulations Continent Country AZFa AZFb AZFc AZFa+b AZFa+c AZFb+c AZFa+b+c Ref. EUROPE Denmark 0% 1.54% 92.30% 0% 0% 3.08% 3.08% Olesenetal.2017 0% 0% 66.67% 0% 0% 33.33% 0% Boretal.2002 Slovakia 25% 0% 50% 0% 0% 12.5% 12.5% Behulovaetal.2011 Netherlands 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Dohleetal.2002; 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Paracchinietal.2000 Slovenia 10% 0% 50% 0% 0% 20% 20% Peterlinetal.2002 Italy 11.11% 8.08% 65.66% 0% 0% 13.13% 2.02% Ferlinetal.2007 Germany 5.26% 10.53% 78.95% 0% 0% 5.26% 0 Maureretal.2001 Croatia 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% Medicaetal.2005 Turkey 3.81% 3.81% 49.52% 0% 0% 26.67% 16.19% Kumtepeetal.2009 21% 25% 42% 0% 4% 8% 0% Cavkaytaretal.2012 Latvia 0% 0% 60% 0% 0% 0% 40% Puzukaetal.2011 UK 0% 38.46% 38.46% 0% 0% 15.38% 7.70% Mascarenhasetal.2016 Czech 0% 0% 62.50% 0% 0% 37.50% 0% Machatkovaetal,.2002 Sweden 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 100% 0% Österlundetal.2000 Macedonia 0% 0% 88.89% 0% 0% 11.11% 0% Plaseskietal.2006 ASIA Japan 0% 30% 60% 0% 0% 10% 0% Nakashimaetal.2002 China 4.7% 4% 73.30% 0% 0% 11.30% 6.7% Zhuetal.2016 2.22% 13% 75% 0% 0% 9.62% 0% Elfatehetal.2014 2.01% 4.7% 75.18% 0% 1.34% 14.09% 2.68% Zhangetal.2013 India 16.67% 33.33% 33.33% 0% 0% 16.67% 0% Abidetal.2008 22.22% 11.11% 33.33% 0% 0% 33.33% 0% Mitraetel.2008 0% 12.5% 37.5% 37.5% 0% 12.5% 0% Dadaetal.2006 Thailand 0% 33.33% 50% 0% 0% 16.67% 0% Vutyavanichetal.2007 SouthKorea 0% 0% 73.64% 0% 0% 26.36% 0% Choietal.2013 4.95% 7.92% 54.46% 0% 0% 23.76% 8.91% Kimetal.2012 SriLanka 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Wettasingheetal.2012 Jordan 0% 0% 66.7% 0% 0% 33.3% 0% Khabouretal.2014 Kuwait 0% 0% 28.57% 0% 0% 71.43% 0% Mohammedetal.2007 11.1% 0% 55.6% 0% 0% 33.30% 0% Alkhalaf&Al-Shoumer,2010 Iran 0% 0% 50% 0% 0% 50% 0% Saliminejadetal.2012 Pakistan 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Siddiquietal.2013 Palestine 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Shaqalaihetal.2009 SaudiArabia 0% 12.5% 75% 0% 12.5% 0% 0% Hellanietal.2006 Israel 0% 12.5% 87.5% 0% 0% 0% 0% Kleimanetal.1999 MiddleEast 9.09% 42.43% 30.30% 0% 0% 18.18% 0% Alhalabietal.2013 AFRICA Tunisia 0% 10% 30% 0% 0% 30% 30% Rajebetal.2008 0% 0% 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% Hammamietal.2014 Morocco 0% 0% 50% 0% 0% 50% 0% Imkenetal.2007 AMERICA Brazil 8.33% 0% 58.33% 0% 0% 25% 8.33% Pina-Netoetal.2006 US 2.68% 11.41% 52.35% 0% 0% 21.48% 12.08% Stahletal.2010 5% 5% 64% 0% 0% 17% 9% Hofherretal.20111216 studies, with AZFc being most frequent (90.5%), followed Conclusions: We would like to suggest that PAX6 gene by AZFb+c. variants c.991C>T (p.Arg331Ter) and c.392_393delTA (p. Conclusion: Isolated AZFc microdeletion was the most Ile131Thrfs*15) are cause of aniridia for our patients. frequent,exceptforCroatian,Swedish,KuwaitiandMiddle R. Traberg: None. V. Asmoniene: None. D. Cereske- East populations. These results can serve as a basis for vicius: None. M. Sukys: None. creating future guidelines for genetic diagnostics of male infertility. P02.02D A. Kurtovic-Kozaric: None. H. Komic: None. L. The role of next-generation sequencing in the Mehinovic:None.M.Kozaric:None.I.Eminovic:None. differential diagnosis of congenital iris anomalies Z. Halilovic: None. F.Blanco-Kelly,M.Tarilonte,C.Villaverde,S.T.Swaﬁri, A. Arteche, A. Avila-Fernandez, J. Moya, I. Lorda, P02 M. Trujillo-Tiebas, C. Ayuso, M. Corton Sensory disorders (eye, ear, pain) Genetics Department, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz- P02.01C CIBERER, UAM, Madrid, Spain PAX6 gene analysis for aniridia patients: single Lithuanian centre experience in 2017-2018 years period Abnormal development of the iris is a feature of several congenital ocular malformations. Classical aniridia, the R. Traberg, V. Asmoniene, D. Cereskevicius, M. Sukys mostcommonform,isapanoculardiseasecharacterizedby iris and foveal hypoplasia, keratopathy, cataracts and HospitalofLithuanianUniversityofHealthSciencesKauno glaucoma, caused by PAX6 haploinsufﬁciency. The pre- klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania sence of variable expressivity and phenotypic overlapping with other types of anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) Introduction: Aniridia is a very rare congenital panocular hindersthegeneticcharacterizationofatypicalpresentations disorder characterized by complete or partial iris hypopla- of aniridia. Here, we evaluate the usefulness of NGS to sia. PAX6 gene mutations occur in around 90% of aniridia improve the clinical diagnosis of these pathologies. A cases. Two-thirds of aniridia cases are inherited in an cohort of 106 families was studied, including cases with autosomal dominant pattern and 1/3 are sporadic cases. classical aniridia or atypical forms (iris hypoplasia, atrophy Materials and Methods: PAX6 gene analysis was per- or coloboma). The entire PAX6 gene and other 260 genes formed for patients who were diagnosed with isolated and associated with ocular malformations were analyzed using syndromic aniridia. Their ﬁrst line and/or affected family custom targeted NGS and aCGH approaches, as well as members also was analysed. The PAX6 gene was analysed clinical or whole exome and/or Sanger sequencing. About by Sanger sequencing (2-13 exones). If no point mutations 82% of the cases presented likely pathogenic variants or were found, analysis was extended to deletion/ duplication CNVsin5differentgenes.DefectsinPAX6explain75%of search with multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁca- cases, including not only all characterized cases with tion (MLPA) kit (MRC-Holland SALSA MLPA P219 PAX6 classical aniridia, but also 30% of patients with more kit). atypical presentations, in whom LOF or atypical missense Results: 5 families and 3 single cases were tested for andnon-codingvariantswereidentiﬁed,respectively.Other PAX6 gene mutations in 2 years period (2017 - 2018) (20 aniridia-likepatientspresentedpathogenicvariantsinASD- analyses altogether). Six different mutations were found in related genes or variants of uncertain signiﬁcance in 15(75%)cases:1missensemutation,1intragenicdeletion, candidate genes. Molecular analysis of iris malformations 4 nonsense mutations. The 2 truncating mutations presents high diagnostic yield not only in cases with (c.991C>T (p.Arg331Ter) and c.392_393delTA (p. classical aniridia (95%) but also in patients with aniridia- Ile131Thrfs*15)) were newly described. De novo PAX6 like phenotypes (>50%). Our work evidences the clinical gene variant c.991C>T (p.Arg331Ter) was found for utility of differential genetic studies based on NGS in patient, who diagnosed with aniridia and doubled kidney. patients with congenital iris anomalies. PAX6 gene variant c.392_393delTA (p.Ile131Thrfs*15) Grants: ISCIII (PI17_01164, CPII17_00006), FEDER was found for family members with isolated aniridia. and Conchita Rabago Foundation. Members of one family with various clinical presentation F. Blanco-Kelly: None. M. Tarilonte: None. C. Villa- (unilateral aniridia and Peters anomaly, cataracts, optic verde: None. S.T. Swaﬁri: None. A. Arteche: None. A. nerve hypoplasia) shared missense variant of unknown Avila-Fernandez: None. J. Moya: None. I.Lorda:None. signiﬁcance c.422T>C (p.Leu141Pro).Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1217 M. Trujillo-Tiebas: None. C. Ayuso: None. M. T.A. Vasilyeva: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.A. Corton: None. Voskresenskaya: None. N.V. Petrova: None. A.V. Mar- akhonov: None. R.A. Zinchenko: None. P02.03A Genotype-phenotype correlations in congenital PAX6- P02.04B associated aniridia Congenital aniridia caused by new PAX6 variants involving exonic cryptic-splicing sites T.A.Vasilyeva1,V.V.Kadyshev1,A.A.Voskresenskaya2, N. V. Petrova1, A. V. Marakhonov1,3, R. A. Zinchenko1,4 M. Tarilonte, P. Ramos, J. Moya, C. Villaverde, G. Sanz, S. T. Swaﬁri, B. Gener, F. Blanco-Kelly, C. Ayuso, 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian M. Corton Federation, 2Cheboksary branch of S. Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Federal State Institution, Cheboksary, IIS-UniversityHospitalFundaciónJiménezDíaz,Madrid, Russian Federation, 3Far Eastern Federal University, Spain Vladivostok, Russian Federation, 4Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Congenitalaniridiaisapanoculardisease,withaworldwide Federation incidence of 1:50.000-100.000 births, characterized by iris and foveal hypoplasia and additional anomalies in the Objectives: Aniridia is an autosomal dominant severe cornea, anterior segment and lens, leading to low visual panocular disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the acuity. Up to 90% of the aniridia cases carried monoallelic PAX6 gene or large chromosomal aberrations affecting loss-of-function variants causing haploinsufﬁciency of 11p13 region. Aniridia phenotype varies greatly. Based on PAX6, a highly-conserved transcriptional regulator that is the occurrence of several aniridia characteristics in groups critical for normal ocular development. Here, we aimed to of patients with the same type ofPAX6mutation, genotype assess functionally the implication on splicing of different —phenotype correlations were analyzed. exonic and intronic variants of uncertain signiﬁcance Methods: 155 patients from 129 unrelated families were (VUS), mainly located in the PAX6 homeodomain. First, examined in the course of the earlier study, 118 patients novel VUS including synonymous, missense and non- werefound tohaveintragenicpathogenic variantswhile37 canonical splicing variants were identiﬁed in our cohort of others have large chromosomal deletions. Patients were 87 Spanish families with aniridia after classical genotyping allocated into 6 groups according to the type of PAX6 and/or targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) of the mutation: missense, nonsense, frame shifting, splicing, 3′- entire PAX6 locus. No additional pathogenic variants were cis-regulatory region deletions, and all other 11p13 chro- found in other 250 eye developmental genes. Functional mosomedeletions.Dataonsixfrequentlyobservedaniridic splicing assays were performed using in silico predictors, eye anomalies were collected: complete or partial aniridia, in vitro minigenes and, when available, patients-derived cataract, glaucoma, kerathopathy, fovea hypoplasia, and lymphocytes cell lines. We described new spliceogenic nystagmus. Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini—Hochberg mechanisms for PAX6 variants through activating different correction for multiple testing was applied for 2×2 con- exonic cryptic donors as the most plausible cause for tingency tables created to compare occurrence of each congenital aniridia in several families. These included an ocular sign in the group of patients with one type of additional case of parental PAX6 mosaicism, as conﬁrmed mutationsversusthecorrespondingoccurrenceinthegroup by digital-droplet PCR, for a synonymous variant in an with all other mutations. asymptomatic mother with two affected siblings. In Results: Only patients with 3′-cis-regulatory region conclusion, clinical interpretation of silent and non- deletions signiﬁcantly more often develop a distinct and canonical splicing variants represents a real challenge for milder aniridia phenotype without kerathopathy, fovea the genetic counseling. Our study revealed the importance hypoplasiaandnystagmus.Identiﬁedmissenseandsplicing of functional studies to elucidate the role of non-coding mutations were associated with severe aniridia phenotype PAX6 variants underlying ocular development. and in their consequences could not be distinguished from Grants: ISCIII (PI17_01164, CPII17_00006), FEDER the loss-of-function mutations. and Conchita Rabago Foundation Conclusions: Revealed genotype-phenotype correlations M. Tarilonte: None. P. Ramos: None. J. Moya: None. in PAX6-associated aniridia suggests common disease C. Villaverde: None. G. Sanz: None. S.T. Swaﬁri: None. mechanism for all mutations except for 3′-cis-regulatory B.Gener:None.F.Blanco-Kelly:None.C.Ayuso:None. region deletions. M. Corton: None. Supported by grant RSF №17-15-01051.1218 P02.05C M.Brumat:None.A.Morgan:None.M.Cocca:None. Preliminary results from a new GWAS meta-analysis M. Mezzavilla: None. G. Van Camp: None. E. Fransen: point at new loci for age-related hearing loss (ARHL) None. G. Biino: None. U.Ambrosetti: None. D. Toniolo: None. S. Ghiselli: None. P. Gasparini: None. G. M. Brumat1, A. Morgan1, M. Cocca2, M. Mezzavilla2, Girotto: None. G. Van Camp3, E. Fransen4, G. Biino5, U. Ambrosetti6, D. Toniolo7, S. Ghiselli2, P. Gasparini1,2, G. Girotto1,2 P02.06D Multi-level evidence of an allelic hierarchy of USH2A 1Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, variants; hearing loss, auditory processing and speech/ University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal language outcomes and Child Health - IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 3Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and P. A. Perrino1, L. Nedevska2, R. Reader3,4, A. Hill5, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, WGS500 Consortium, A. R. Rendall1, H. S. Mountford2, 4Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of A. N. Buscarello1, N. Lahiri6, A. Saggar6, R. H. Fitch1, Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Institute of Molecular D. F. Newbury2 Genetics, National Research Council of Italy, Pavia, Italy, 6Audiologia, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale 1Department of Psychological Science/Behavioral Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, Neuroscience,UniversityofConnecticut,Storrs,CT,United 7Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, States, 2Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Oxford S. Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Introduction: With the progressive ageing of world Kingdom, 4School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, population,thereisaneedtofurtherinvestigatethegenetic University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, United baseoflate-onsetdisorderssuchasARHL.Withthisstudy, Kingdom, 5Centre for Child & Adolescent Health, we aim to increase our knowledge of this complex disease. University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 6Institute of Materials and Methods: We performed a case-control MolecularandClinicalSciences,UniversityofLondon&St GWAS analysis on 2663 subjects (aged >=50) coming George’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, from Italy, Northern Europe and Caucasus clinically char- London, United Kingdom acterized including the audiometric phenotype. Cases and controls were classiﬁed as previously described Introduction: Hearing and auditory processing are funda- (DOI:10.3109/21695717.2014.911472). Genotype data mental to language development. Genetic mechanisms that were imputed using 1000Gph3 reference panel. Results alter these processes may therefore have secondary effects were pooled together with METAL. Replication of results on emergentlanguage. Inthis work,we considervariations was performed with UK-Biobank data (ie. speech-in-noise acrosstheUSH2Ageneandcharacteriseanallelichierarchy phenotype). Analyses on natural selection in European associatedwithalternateanddistinctclinicalmanifestations populationswereperformedandintegratedhaplotypescores including Auditory Processing Disorder (APD), Develop- (iHS) on signiﬁcant GWAS results were collected. mental Language Disorder (DLD) and Usher syndrome. Results: Meta-analysis identiﬁed some strongly sig- Materials and Methods: This investigation combines niﬁcant loci. To prioritize these genes, signals of selection wholegenomesequencingdatafromafamilyaffectedbya were checked to evaluate the presence of genetic variants severe form of APD and speech dysarthria with genetic that could have some evolutionary role and a stronger characterisation of two large population cohorts; the Avon effect. A signiﬁcant hit on chr5 was detected in a gene/ LongitudinalStudyofParentsandChildren(ALSPAC)and protein (|iHS|score>2) catalysing the conversion of homo- UK10K. To compliment human ﬁndings, a mouse model cysteine to other amino-acids. Signal of selection was pre- with a genetic knockout of the rodent homolog Ush2a was sent in North European populations, but absent in South assessed for auditory processing and vocalizations. European ones. Interestingly, literature showed a relation- Results: Combined human and mouse results show: (1) ship between hyperhomocysteinemia induced by folate heterozygous USH2A disruptions lead to impaired low- deﬁciency and premature hearing loss, prompting further frequency sound perception; (2) low-level hearing impair- investigation and discussion on these results. ments caused by heterozygous disruption of Ush2a Conclusions: As the association signal is mainly driven associate with persistent higher-order acoustic processing byNorthernItalianandEuropeanpopulations,apopulation- deﬁcits and altered vocalizations in mice; and (3) risk var- speciﬁc haplotype involved in folate metabolism should iants of USH2A combined with altered low-frequency also implicated directly or indirectly in ARHL.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1219 hearing thresholds lead to signiﬁcantly worse language PTC-freeCEP290isoforms from themutantallelecarrying outcomes in humans. the c.6869dup in the ﬁbroblasts from P3.1 and P3.2. Conclusions: We identify a complex, interactive genetic However, we detected some correctly spliced CEP290 mechanism under which variants in USH2A contribute to mRNAs transcribed from the second allele carrying the low-frequency hearing loss and alter higher-order auditory c.1824+3A>G mutation and small amounts of the protein processing increasing the risk of language disorder. Since by Western blot analysis. these variants are found in 0.85% of the population, we Conclusion: Here, we report that CEP290 pleiotropy recommend comprehensive genetic screening to enable the involves splicing regulation through different mechanisms early identiﬁcation of carrier individuals alongside speciﬁc that can act individually or in combination and include assessment of low-frequency hearing in individuals at risk. NAS, BES and hypomorphic consensus splice site P.A. Perrino: None. L. Nedevska: None. R. Reader: mutations. None. A. Hill: None. A.R. Rendall: None. H.S. Mount- I.Barny:None.I.Perrault:None.S.Thomas:None.T. ford: None. A.N. Buscarello: None. N. Lahiri: None. A. Attié-Bitach: None. M. Rio: None. C. Hamel: None. H. Saggar: None. R.H. Fitch: None. D.F. Newbury: None. Dollfus:None.S.Defoort-Dhellemmes:None.J.Kaplan: None. J. Rozet: None. X. Gerard: None. P02.07A Expanding the mechanisms underlying CEP290 P02.08B pleiotropy: about 4 cases The role of HCN1 variation in circadian chronotypes I. Barny1, I. Perrault1, S. Thomas1, T. Attié-Bitach1, S. Smieszek1, C. P. S. Polymeropoulos2, M.Rio2,C.Hamel3,H.Dollfus4,S.Defoort-Dhellemmes5, M. Polymeropoulos2 J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1, X. Gerard1 1Vanda Pharmaceuticals, WASHINGTON, DC, United 1Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 2IHU Necker Enfants States, 2Vanda Pharmaceuticals, DC, OH, United States Malades, Paris, France, 3Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Centre de référence To ascertain the genetic risk factors for morningness/ pour les affections génétiques ophtalmologiques CARGO, eveningness phenotypes we conducted a genome-wide Strasbourg, France, 5CHRU de Lille, Lille, France association analysis using 316 whole genome sequencing samples. We have directly tested the association between Introduction: CEP290 is pivotal for the assembly/main- SNPs and MEQ (morning-evening questionnaire). We tenanceofprimaryandmotileciliainawiderangeofcells. computed association test results by linear regression Consistently, CEP290 mutations cause a spectrum of assuming additive allelic effects (covariates: age, gender, ciliopathies ranging from Leber congenital amaurosis andthe3PCs).Wedetectalargeregiononchromosome5 (LCA10) to embryo-lethal Meckel syndrome (MKS). (more than ~400 adjacent SNPs in LD, spanning ~2mb) LCA10 manifests invariably as a congenital and dramati- centered within HCN1, Brain Cyclic Nucleotide-Gated cally severe cone-dominant disease with visual function Channel 1. Regional enrichment yields a p-value of < 10- reduced to light perception. Here, we report 4 individuals 99. It is highly expressed in the brain and potentially with some preserved vision despite biallelism for presum- modulates excitability in the brain and responding to ably severe CEP290 mutations and functional analysis in regulation by cyclic nucleotides, playing a critical role in ﬁbroblastsweperformedtobetterunderstandthemolecular shaping the autonomous activity of single neurons and the bases of CEP290 pleiotropy. periodicity of network oscillations. It has been shown in a Materials and Methods: in silico, mRNA, protein and double-mutant mouse model that lack of HNC1 mediated ciliation analyses were performed in P1 (p.Ile556Phefs*17, feedback in rod photoreceptor cells prolongs rod responses homozygous), P2 (p.Lys170*/p.Glu1364*), P3.1 and P3.2 and saturates the downstream retinal network during bright (c.1824+3A>G/ p.Asn2290Lysfs*6) and controls. light stimulation. The risk allele is effectively correlated Results: mRNA analysis of P1 and P2 mRNA revealed withlowerMEQscorehenceeveningphenotype.Thelocus spontaneousskippingofexonsencompassingthepremature has been shown to be a signiﬁcant (1.6e-09) eQTL for stop codons by mechanisms involving basal exon-skipping HCN1 in GTEX. HCN1 channel is responsible for the (BES) and nonsense-associated altered splicing (NAS) feedback on the rods regulating the dynamic range of light individually or in combination. Protein analysis detected reactivity under dim or intermediate light conditions. We small amounts of a CEP290 protein and unaltered ciliation hypothesizethatifthisfeedbackisnotfunctioningproperly ability compared to controls. In contrast, we detected no an individual may get saturated with even dim light BES or NAS which could have enabled the production of resulting in misperception of the light conditions resulting1220 in a circadian delay. This would suggest that HCN1 prevented additional unnecessary testing and provided the variations may directly impact the ME phenotype. opportunityforanticipatoryguidanceinasubsetofpatients S. Smieszek: None. C.P.S. Polymeropoulos: A. that could be precisely deﬁned. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Vanda Pharma- E. Lenassi: None. S. Ramsden: None. J. Clayton- ceuticals. M. Polymeropoulos: A. Employment (full or Smith: None. S. Douzgou: None. G. Hall: None. V. part-time); Modest; Vanda Pharmaceuticals. Sharma: None. I. Lloyd: None. J.L. Ashworth: None. S. Biswas: None. G.C. Black: None. P. Sergouniotis: None. P02.09C Clinical utility of panel-based genetic testing in infants P02.11A and young children with inherited eye disease Founder haplotype bearing mutation c.1621C>T (p. Gln541*) in the FYCO1 gene causing of autosomal E. Lenassi1, S. Ramsden2, J. Clayton-Smith2, recessive cataract (CTRCT18) in the Sakha Republic of S. Douzgou2, G. Hall2, V. Sharma3, I. Lloyd4, Russia J.L.Ashworth3,S.Biswas3,G.C.Black1,P.Sergouniotis1 N. A. Barashkov1,2, L. S. Vychuzhina1, A. V. Solovyev1,2, 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, F. M. Teryutin1, V. G. Pshennikova1,2, T. E. Burtseva1,2, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s M. I. Tomsky1, F. A. Platonov2, G. P. Romanov2, Hospital,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,3ManchesterRoyal N.N.Gotovtsev1,E.K.Khusnutdinova3,4,O.L.Posukh5,6, Eye Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Great S. A. Fedororva1,2 Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom 1Yakut Scientiﬁc Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Introduction: Advances in ocular genetics have trans- Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2M.K. Ammosov formed our understanding of inherited eye diseases (IEDs) North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian and have led to the development of powerful diagnostic Federation, 3Ufa Federal Research Center of Russian tests. However, integration of these tests into routine Academy Sciences, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, healthcare is frequently ineffective. Providing robust Ufa, Russian Federation, 4Bashkir State University, Ufa, evidence of beneﬁt can accelerate implementation; for Russian Federation, 5Federal Research Center Institute of example,theadoption ofagenetictestismuch morelikely Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, when its clinical utility (i.e. its ability to inﬂuence 6Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian management and health outcomes) has been clearly Federation demonstrated. Here we assess the current clinical utility of genetic testing in paediatric IED. Novel nonsense mutation c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) in the Materials and Methods: Unrelated children (0-5 years FYCO1 gene was previously revealed by whole exome old) with IED were retrospectively ascertained through the sequencing as the main genetic cause of congenital database of the UK North West Genomic Laboratory Hub. autosomal recessive cataract (CTRCT18) in patients from The cohort was consecutively collected and included indi- the Sakha Republic (Eastern Siberia). In this report we vidualspresentingbetween09/2011and08/2018.Allstudy present the results of the c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) carrier participantswereexaminedintertiarypaediatricophthalmic frequency analysis in 424 adult individuals without of genetic clinics and underwent panel-based genetic testing. visual impairments from 7 populations of Eastern Siberia Results: 229 children were evaluated including 33 with (Russians,Yakuts,Evenks,Evens,Dolgans,Yukaghirsand albinism, 83 with bilateral paediatric cataracts, 19 with Chukchi). The highest carrier frequency of this mutation congenital glaucoma, 7 with ectopia lentis and 57 with was found in Yakut population (7.9%), the lowest in inheritedretinaldisorders.Thediagnosticyieldwashighest Evenks (1.7%) and Evens (2.0%), and c.1621C>T (p. for albinism and ectopia lentis and lowest for congenital Gln541*) was absent in Russians, Yukaghirs, Dolgans and glaucoma. Genetic testing altered management (e.g. pre- Chukchi. Common haplotypes for c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) ventedadditionalinvestigationsorledtotheintroductionof were reconstructed as a result of genotyping of 6 STR personalisedsurveillancemeasuresordeterminedeligibility markers ﬂanking the FYCO1 gene in 25 patients homo- for treatment trials) in signiﬁcant subsets of children with zygous for c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) and in 114 patients ectopia lentis, albinism, bilateral cataracts and inherited without this mutation. Common haplotypes bearing retinal disorders. c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) indicate the role of founder effect Conclusions: Genetic testing helped identify an aetiolo- in the spread of this mutation in the Sakha Republic. The gical diagnosis in the majority of children with IED. This highestdiversityofthec.1621C>T-haplotypeswasrevealedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1221 in the Central Yakuts ethno-territorial group. The mutant Conclusion: CES of related subjects from an isolated haplotypes of the Vilyui and Northern Yakuts groups are family with Congenital Cataract identiﬁed a causal NHS probably derived from the c.1621C>T-haplotypes found in mutation and conﬁrmed the mode of inheritance in the theCentralYakutsgroup.Ourresultssuggestthatmutation family as X-linked recessive. This ﬁnding will aid drama- c.1621C>T (p.Gln541*) in the FYCO1 gene causing tically the clinical management of this whole family. CTRCT18 arose about 260±65 years ago (in the middle E. Louizou: None. S. Rapti: None. A. Vasiageorgi: of the XVIII century) and spread among Yakut population None. G. Kapetsis: None. E. Tsitsopoulos: None. C. as a result of founder effect. This study was supported by Yfanti: None. the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russia (#6.1766.2017) and the RFBR (18-05-600035_Arctica). P02.13C N.A. Barashkov: None. L.S. Vychuzhina: None. A.V. A heterozygous likely pathogenic variant in MAF Solovyev: None. F.M. Teryutin: None. V.G. Pshenni- transactivationdomainasacauseofbilateralcongenital kova:None.T.E.Burtseva:None.M.I.Tomsky:None.F. cataract without intellectual disability or seizures A. Platonov: None. G.P. Romanov: None. N.N. Gotovt- sev: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova: None. O.L. Posukh: L. Lovrecic, A. Maver, I. Vrečar, B. Peterlin None. S.A. Fedororva: None. University Medical Center Ljubljana, Clinical Institute of P02.12B Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia ClinicalExomeSequencingrevealsthegeneticcauseina family with congenital cataract Introduction: Congenital cataract is a developmental disorderofthelensresultinginlenscloudinessoropacities. E. Louizou, S. Rapti, A. Vasiageorgi, G. Kapetsis, The hereditary congenital cataracts are genetically hetero- E. Tsitsopoulos, C. Yfanti geneous and can be transmitted under an autosomal dominant, recessive or X-linked inheritance model. The Molecular Genetics Department, Bioiatriki S.A., Athens, MAF gene (OMIM*177075) pathogenic sequence variants Greece inthec-terminalDNAbindingdomainhavebeenshownto cause autosomal dominant isolated congenital cataract Introduction: Cataracts are the principal cause of treatable phenotype. On the other hand, MAF N-terminal transacti- blindnessworldwide.Inheritedcongenitalcataractshowsall vation domain genetic variants are associated with Ayme- types of inheritance patterns in a syndromic and non- Gripp syndrome (OMIM#601088), in which the eye syndromic form. Congenital Cataract is an opaciﬁcation of anomalies are accompanied by intellectual disability, the lens, usually diagnosed at birth and without proper sensorineural hearing loss, seizures, distinctive facial treatment,thevisionneverdevelopsnormally.Inthisstudy appearance, reduced growth and skeletal anomalies. we present a family from Central Greece with six affected Materials and Methods: A female patient, law graduate membersbornwithCongenitalCataract,ﬁvemalesandone by profession, was referred to genetic consultation in her female, all of which had bilateral nuclear cataracts as ﬁrst pregnancy for her history of bilateral congenital cat- newborns. Despite efforts to medically improve their aract. Other medical history was unremarkable, except for condition, many members had a gradual deterioration of milddelayinachievingdevelopmentalmilestonesandmild their vision which led to blindness, before the age of thirty unilateral sensorineural hearing loss. She never needed years old. hearing aid. General examination at 30 years showed nor- Materials and Methods: Clinical Exome Sequencing mal height and distinctive ﬂat facial appearance. Clinical (CES)wasperformedwiththeSophiaGeneticsProtocolon exomesequencingwasusedtotestforcausativevariantsin aMiSeqIlluminaplatform,inoneoftheaffectedprobands. 110 known genes associated with isolated and syndromic Inordertoconﬁrmourﬁndingandtoinvestigatethecarrier cataract. status of most family members, Sanger sequencing was Results: A heterozygous likely pathogenic de novo performed for the region of interest. missense variant c.188C>G (Pro63Arg) in the N-terminal Results: The analysis revealed a possibly pathologic transactivation domain of the MAF gene was identiﬁed. mutation -c.3808C>T(p.Gln1270*) -on the NHS gene, Conclusions:Thisistheﬁrstreportofpathogenicvariant which is located on the X chromosome. The mutation has in the N-terminal transactivation domain of the MAF gene not been previously recorded in any database but the NHS in an individual without intellectual disability/learning dif- gene is known to be the cause of X-linked Congenital ﬁculties, seizures or signiﬁcant hearing loss. Cataract - Nans Hooran Syndrome. L. Lovrecic: None. A. Maver: None. I. Vrečar: None. B. Peterlin: None.1222 P02.15A S. Morovvati1, M. Ajallooeian2, N. Ayoubzadeh3 Important contribution of STRC copy number variations to the development of mild-to-moderate 1Human Genetic Research Center, Baqiyatallah University hearing loss of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2BaqiyatallahUniversityofMedicalSciences,Tehran,Iran, B. Harasimowicz1, D. Ozieblo1,2, H. Skarzynski3, Islamic Republic of, 3Faculty of Biological Sciences, M. Oldak1 TarbiatModaresUniversity,Tehran,Iran,IslamicRepublic of 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate Introduction: Hearing loss (HL) is one of the most School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of commoncongenitalimpairmentswhichoccursoneinevery Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Oto-Rhino-Laryngology thousandchildren.Morethanhalfofthesecasesarecaused Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of bygeneticfactors.Atthepresenttime,morethan150genes Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland have been identiﬁed to be associated with hearing loss. MaterialsandMethods:Inthisstudy,formorethan600 Background: Copy number variations (CNVs) are com- patientsaffectedbydeafness,geneticcounseling was done. mon cause of genetically determined hearing loss (HL). 320patientsselectedforgeneticanalysis.Inﬁrststep,forall CNVs are frequently found in the STRC gene which is selected patients, analysis of GJB2 gene was done. Then, relatedtoautosomalrecessiveHL.DuetopresenceofSTRC for patients who had normal result for GJB2 gene, hearing pseudogene and technological limitation of CNVs detec- loss genetic panel (including 127 genes involved in deaf- tion, large deletions and duplications encompassing STRC ness) was performed using NGS method. Finally, for are still an underestimated contributor to HL development. patients for whom no pathogenic mutation was detected in Material and Methods: A group of 50 patients with their genetic panel, Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was mild-to-moderate HL diagnosed before the age of 10 and done by NGS method. withnoDFNB1pathogenicwasrecruitedforthestudy.All Results: 19 different pathogenic mutations were found patients were tested for CNVs in STRC gene using quanti- GJB2 gene in 92 out of 320 patients (28.75%). Deafness tativecomparativeﬂuorescentPCR(QF-PCR)withprimers genetic panel and WES were performed for 65 and 57 speciﬁc to the STRC gene and its pseudogene followed by patientswithnormalGJB2testrespectively.Pathogenicand multiplex-ligation probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA). likely pathogenic mutations were detected in 75 subjects Results: Genetic prescreen with QF-PCR revealed a including 25 novel mutations. complete deletion of the STRC tested regions in 24% (24/ Discussion: Due to the prevalence of consanguine mar- 100) and partial deletion in 5% of the studied alleles (5/ riages in Iran, autosomal recessive hearing loss is common 100).Thismethodallowedusalsotoidentifytwocomplete in our country. Genetic analysis, especially WES can be and two partial deletion of tested regions in the STRC very helpful in preventing the birth of deaf children. pseudogene. Complete deletions of the STRC gene regions S. Morovvati: None. M. Ajallooeian: None. N. were fully conﬁrmed by MLPA. One additional STRC Ayoubzadeh: None. partial deletion and one duplication were also detected. Considering the genotypes, in 26% (13/50) of HL patients P02.17C homozygous or compound heterozygous CNVs were Gene-wise burden analysis on painful diabetic detected. In 10% (5/50) of patients only simple hetero- neuropathy zygous CNVs was found. Conclusions:ThisstudyshowsthatCNVsinSTRCarea E. Salvi1, M. Marchi1, M. Gerrits2, R. Almomani2, frequent cause of mild-to-moderate hearing loss in Polish I. D’Amato1, R. A. Malik3,4, D. Ziegler5,6, G. J. Bönhof6, patients.ThereisastrongneedtoincludeCNVsanalysisof I. S. J. Merkies2,7, C. G. Faber2, G. Lauria Pinter1,8, STRC gene in the standard HL diagnostic workﬂow. PROPANE study group B. Harasimowicz: None. D. Ozieblo: None. H. Skar- zynski: None. M. Oldak: None. 1Neuroalgology Unit - Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico “Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 2Clinical P02.16B Genetics and Department of Neurology, Maastricht Genetic analysis of 320 Iranian patients affected by University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, deafness using Sanger sequencing and Next Generation 3Institute of Human Development, Centre for Sequencing (NGS) methods EndocrinologyandDiabetes,UniversityofManchesterand Central Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, ManchesterAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1223 Academic Health Science Center, Manchester, United A. erjavec skerget, B. zagradisnik, D. krgović, A. golub, Kingdom, 4Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell J. rebol, A. kravos, N. kokalj vokač Medicine,Doha,Qatar, 5InstituteforClinicalDiabetology, German Diabetes Center, Leibniz Center for Diabetes university Medical Centre Maribor, maribor, Slovenia Research, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany,6Department ofEndocrinology andDiabetology, Introduction: Mutations in the gene encoding protein Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, connexin 26 (GJB2) have been shown as a major Germany, 7Department of Neurology, St. Elisabeth contributor to prelingual, sensorineural, nonsyndromic, Hospital,Willemstad,Curaçao,8DepartmentofBiomedical recessive deafness. One speciﬁc mutation, 35delG, has and Clinical Sciences "Luigi Sacco", University of Milan, accounted for the majority of the mutations detected in the Milano, Italy GJB2 gene in Caucasian populations. The purpose of our study was to evaluate the characterisation and the Introduction:Neuropathicpainisoneofthemostcommon prevalence of all, GJB2, GJB6 and other known mutations complication of diabetic patients. It is a complex trait among affected individuals from North Eastern Slovenia. inﬂuenced by multiple genes and environmental factors. A Materials and Methods: There were 33 individuals debated hypothesis is that many rare variants might diagnosed with hereditary deafness (DF) enrolled in the contribute to the missing heritability unexplained by study. The allele speciﬁc PCR, MLPA technique and the common variants. Since frequencies of rare variants are Sanger sequencing was used to screen the GJB2 coding very low, even with high penetrance, it is challenging to region.NGSsequencingwithOto-GeneSGKit®wasusedin detect association. Burden tests collapse the rare variants 10 probands with bilateral, pre-lingual non syndromic DF within the gene as a single genetic variable. This study withanegativemedicalhistoryrelatedtopotentialcausesof proposes a gene-wise burden test to look for genes with an acquired DF. overrepresentation of variations in painful (PDN) versus Results: The overall diagnostic yield of the DF cohort painless (PLDN) diabetic neuropathy patients. was8/33(24.2%).Thehomozygousmutationc.35delGwas Material and Methods: 107 candidate genes were identiﬁedinfouroutof33patients(12.1%).Byﬁvepatients sequenced by single molecule Molecular Probes-Next mono-allelic mutation c.35delG was detected (15.15%; 5/ Generation Sequencing (MIP-NGS) in 61 PDN and 125 33). Three among them were compound heterozygotes: PLDNpatients.Totestdifferencesinthemutationalburden c.35delG variant compounded with variants: c.109G>A; between PDN and PLDN, we applied SKAT-O test as WTIVS 1+1: G>A; and c.235delC. NGS detected one implemented in EPACTS on all non-synonymous variants homozygous disease-causing variant c.2464C>T in OTOF with a maximum minor allele frequency of 5%. gene in one patient (10%), which is also heterozygote for Results: Comparing the excess of rare variants in PDN the c.35delG. respecttoPLDN,P2RX7andSCN11Ashowedthelowestp- Conclusion: The relative low ratio of individuals homo- values (p=0.01 and p=0.03, respectively) even if they did zygous (12.1%) and heterozygous (15.15%) for the not reach the signiﬁcant Bonferroni threshold. c.35delG mutation suggest that there are other genes Conclusions:Theburdenapproachprovidedbiologically responsiblefornonsyndromicdeafnessintheNorth-Eastern plausible signals that would have remained indistinguish- Slovenianpopulation.Inoneoutof10testedprobandswith able from random noise with the traditional single-variant NGS this was conﬁrmed. analysis, because of high allelic heterogeneity. Our results A. erjavec skerget: None. B. zagradisnik: None. D. could leave the possibility that a combination of protein- krgović: None. A. golub: None. J. rebol: None. A. kra- altering variants in P2RX7 and SCN11A contribute to the vos: None. N. kokalj vokač: None. risk of PDN. The work has been supported by FP7 PRO- PANE (602273) and the H2020-MSCA PAIN-Net P02.19A (721841) Grants. Investigating the genetic architecture of fuchs E.Salvi:None.M.Marchi:None.M.Gerrits:None.R. endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) in a genetically Almomani: None. I. D’Amato: None. R.A. Malik: None. reﬁned cohort of patients D. Ziegler: None. G.J. Bönhof: None. I.S.J. Merkies: None. C.G. Faber: None. G. Lauria Pinter: None. A. N. Sadan1, N. J. Hafford-Tear1, K. Muthusamy1,2, L. Dudakova3, P. Skalicka3,4, P. Liskova3,4, P02.18D A. J. Hardcastle1, S. J. Tuft1,2, N. Pontikos1, Genetic causes of non-syndromic bilateral deafness in A. E. Davidson1 North-Eastern Slovenia1224 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United M. Fjellberg Moldenæs1, N. Dahl Rendtorff2, Kingdom, 2Moorﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United L. Sandbjerg Hindbæk2, Ø. Nilssen1,3, L. Tranebjærg2,4 Kingdom, 3Department of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General University 1Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Tromsø, Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Research Tromsø, Norway, 2The Kennedy Centre, Department of Unit for RareDiseases; First Faculty ofMedicine, Charles Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University hospital, University and General University Hospital in Prague, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic University Hospital of North-Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 4Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Introduction:Fuchsendothelialcornealdystrophy(FECD) Copenhagen, Denmark is a degenerative condition affecting up to 4.5% of the population over the age of 50 years. Symptoms conse- Introduction:Waardenburg-andCHARGEsyndromesare quently result in a reduction in vision. An intronic CTG associated with overlapping clinical manifestations such as triplet-repeatexpansion(termedCTG18.1)situatedinTCF4 hearing impairment and malformations of the semicircular has been signiﬁcantly associated with disease. canals.Thesyndromesareheterogeneous,bothwithrespect Material and methods: DNA samples were obtained to the genes involved and the clinical abnormalities found. from British and Czech FECD patients (n=679). Samples Materials and Methods: Eleven patients from eight were genotyped for CTG18.1 using a short tandem repeat families were shown to have bilateral profound hearing (STR) assay and triplet-primed-PCR. Individuals harbour- impairment with variable additional clinical features. ing bi-allelic non-expanded CTG18.1 alleles (<50 repeats) Completeorpartialagenesisofthesemicircularcanalsgave were analysed by whole exome sequencing (WES) and suspicion of either CHARGE or Waardenburg syndrome. when possible followed up for familial history and deep Results: Genetic testing was carried out which included phenotyping. WES data was interrogated for rare deleter- genes involved in these two syndromes. Here we present ious variants (minor allele frequency [MAF] <0.5% and eight families harboring SOX10 pathogenic variants. The CADD>20) in genes previously associated with corneal patients demonstrated a spectrum of SOX10 mutations of disease and genes with a deﬁned functional role within the which six were novel, six occurred de novo and two were cornea. Samples without an identiﬁable rare causal variant, found to be dominantly inherited. Both familial cases pre- are currently being analysed by a gene burden analysis sented with novel SOX10 mutations. using an internal WES dataset as the control group. Conclusions: The results presented here add six novel Results: 20% (138/679) of the FECD patients had non- pathogenic variants, one missense and four frameshift var- expanded copies of CTG18.1. Interrogation of WES data iants, to the spectrum of SOX10 mutations and associated identiﬁed several candidate disease-associated variants, clinical features involved in Waardenburg syndrome are including COL8A2 and ZEB1 variants in atypical early- described. Grant references: University of Tromsø - The onsetcases.Resultsofthegeneburdenanalysispresenteda Arctic University of Norway. numberofpotentiallynovelgeneswithinthereﬁnedpatient M. Fjellberg Moldenæs: None. N. Dahl Rendtorff: cohort. None. L. Sandbjerg Hindbæk: None. Ø. Nilssen: None. Conclusion: This study reveals the incidence of non L. Tranebjærg: None. CTG18.1-mediatedFECDinourcohortandaimstoprovide insight into the genetic causes of disease within this P02.21C genetically reﬁned patient group. This project is funded by Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) gene the National Eye Research Centre and Rosetrees Trust. panel testing in 200 Danish individuals with primary A.N. Sadan: None. N.J. Hafford-Tear: None. K. non-syndromic hearing impairment Muthusamy: None. L. Dudakova: None. P. Skalicka: None. P. Liskova: None. A.J. Hardcastle: None. S.J. N. D. Rendtorff1, H. G. Karstensen1, L. S. Hindbæk1, Tuft: None. N. Pontikos: None. A.E. Davidson: None. L. Tranebjærg1,2 P02.20B 1The Kennedy Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Institute of Clinical manifestations and novel SOX10 pathogenic Clinical Medicine, Copenhagen, Denmark variants in Danish probands with profound hearing impairment and malformations of the semicircular Introduction: Hearing impairment is the most common canals sensory impairment and is genetically heterogeneous. Identiﬁcation of the causative variants underlying hearing impairment is challenging, since >100 different genes forAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1225 non-syndromic hearing impairment have so far been and one Italian family is homozygous for the c.466G>T, p. reported. (Glu156*) mutation. Materials and Methods: In this study, 200 index Materials and Methods: We report an eight-year-old patients, mostly of Danish origin, with hearing impairment boy of non-consanguineous Danish Caucasian parents with underwent targeted Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) prelingual bilateral moderate sensorineural non-syndromic using hearing impairment gene panels for Illumina plat- hearing loss. Both parents had adult onset non-syndromic forms. Causative variants were conﬁrmed by Sanger hearing loss and several members of the mother’s family sequencing and segregation analysis was performed when also had early-onset hearing loss. Diagnostic whole-exome relevant samples were available. Prior to NGS sequencing, sequencing was performed using DNA from the index on DFNB1 and SLC26A4-related hearing impairment had the NextSeq 500 (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA) using been excluded by Sanger sequencing in most patients. SureSelect CRE Exome Kit v2 (Agilent Technologies Inc., Result: Of the 200 patients sequenced, we were able to Santa Clara, CA). Data analysis was performed by an in- detectcausativevariantsin73cases(37%).Furthermore,in house pipeline limited to 123 known hearing loss genes an additional 12 cases (6%) only one pathogenic variant using VarSeq version 2.0.2 (Golden Helix Inc., Bozeman, was identiﬁed so far. The study emphasizes the genetic MT). The mutation was veriﬁed by direct sequencing. heterogeneity of hearing impairment since causative var- Results: NM_016366.2:c.637+1G>T was found in a iantswerefoundin41differentgenes.Intotal,113different homozygous state in the index. No other causative variants likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants were detected. were identiﬁed. Forty-four variants (38%) were novel (absent from the Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time the literature). NM_016366.2:c.637+1G>T mutation is identiﬁed in a Conclusions: Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing patient of Caucasian descend and the ﬁrst time CABP2- allowedustodetectcausativevariantsin73oftestedcases. related non-syndromic hearing loss is reported in a patient In this cohort, the diagnostic yield was slightly higher in of Northern European descend. Grants: None cases with presumed autosomal recessive hearing impair- A.T. Højland:B. Research Grant (principalinvestigator, ment and in patients with an early onset of hearing collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as impairment. Copy number variation detection studies are grants already received); Modest; The Foundation for Pro- ongoing. Regarding the non-solved cases, selected families motion of Medical Science, The Hede Nielsen Family will be analyzed by whole exome sequencing. Foundation. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, col- N.D. Rendtorff: None. H.G. Karstensen: None. L.S. laboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrants Hindbæk: None. L. Tranebjærg: None. already received); Signiﬁcant; The Obel Family Founda- tion, Jacob Madsen & wife Olga Madsen’s Foundation, P02.22D Doctor Sofus Carl Emil Friis & wife Olga Doris Friis’s First reported Northern European with CABP2-related Foundation, Aase & Ejnar Danielsen’s Foundation, Axel non-syndromic hearing loss Muusfeldt’s Foundation, L. F. Foght’s Foundation, The Augustinus Foundation.H.Okkels:None.M.B. Petersen: A. T. Højland1,2,3, H. Okkels1,4, M. B. Petersen1,3,2 B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already 1Research and Knowledge Center in Sensory Genetics, received);Signiﬁcant;JacobMadsen&wifeOlgaMadsen’s Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, Foundation,TheAugustinusFoundation,DoctorSofusCarl 2Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Emil Friis & wife Olga Doris Friis’s Foundation, Axel Aalborg, Denmark, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Muusfeldt’s Foundation, L.F. Foght’s Foundation. Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 4Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Clinical P02.23A Biochemistry, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Presumed, unknown second mutation in GJB2 Denmark monoallelicpatientsisnotaCNVintheDFNB1(GJB2/ GJB6) region, but it must exist Introduction: Autosomal Recessive Deafness 93 is caused by homozygous mutations in the CABP2 gene located at D. Safka Brozkova, P. Lassuthova, A. Uhrova 11q13.2. Five families with CABP2-related Autosomal Meszarosova, P. Seeman Recessive Deafness 93 have been reported in PubMed. Four families (three Iranian and one Pakistani) are DNA laboratory, Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd homozygous for the NM_016366.2:c.637+1G>T mutation Medical School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague 5, Czech Republic1226 There is a phenotypic variability observed in patients with Introduction: In almost 40% of patients with autosomal different type and localization of KCNQ4 pathogenic recessivehearingloss,biallelicpathogenicmutations inthe variants. To date, only three frameshift mutations were GJB2 gene are detected. For 6% patients with only one describedintheN-terminalcytoplasmicdomainofKCNQ4 pathogenic GJB2 mutation (monoallelic) the second is in ADHL families with late-onset and pure high unknown. Moreover, there is a signiﬁcant excess of frequency HL. monoallelic among hearing loss population (6%) compared MaterialsandMethods:DNAwascollectedfromaﬁve- to the normal hearing population (3%). Therefore we generation family with progressive high frequency ADHL. assumethesecondcausalmutation,yetunknown,inpartof High throughput sequencing on proband’s DNA was per- monallelichearinglosspatientswhichexplaintheirhearing formed. In family members (n=15) segregation analysis of loss. Because of the character of GJB2 mutations, we theidentiﬁedvariantswithHLwasconductedusingSanger expected to ﬁnd the CNV, most likely one deletion within sequencing. Deep genotype-phenotype correlation analysis the critical region. was performed using cross-sectional linear regression test- Materials and Methods: The CNV analysis was per- ing of pure tone audiometry results. formed with SureSelect custom panel covering continuous Results: Genetic testing revealed a novel, probably chr13:20.735.021-21.102.144. Altogether 33 monoallelic pathogenic c.274G>A (p.Glu92Lys) variant in KCNQ4, patients were examined with use of three biallelic GJB2 which fully segregated with HL in the studied family. patientsascontrols.TheCNVanalysiswasperformedwith Detected variant has not been reported in population data- NextGene sw. bases and was classiﬁed as pathogenic. The p.Glu92Lys is Results: The shared 1.6kb large deletion was found in the ﬁrst missense variant identiﬁed in the N-terminal cyto- four monoallelic. Nevertheless, the deletion was not possi- plasmic region of KCNQ4. HL observed in the analyzed ble to conﬁrm with use of another independent method as family was more severe at mid frequencies as compared to SangersequencingorPCR.Eventhehaplotypeanalysisdid the previously published families with truncating variants not reveal any common haplotype in monoallelic. More- located in this domain. over, the NGS of a gene panel of 71 recessive hearing loss Conclusions: Identiﬁcation of KCNQ4 p.Glu92Lys in a genesdidnotrevealcausalmutationinothergeneingroup ADHL family conﬁrms the association between missense of 15 monoallelic. KCNQ4 pathogenic variants and a high frequency HL with Conclusion: Therefore we believe the second unknown similarannualprogressionatmidandhighfrequencies.The and undiscovered mutation which contribute and cause data suggest that the type of KCNQ4 detected variants hearing loss in the substantial part of GJB2 monoallelic provides a better prognostic factor than their topological patients exist, but is probably not the CNV in the critical localization. DFNB1 region. Supportedby:NCNResearchGrantno.2016/22/E/NZ5/ Supported by: Ministry of Health of the CZ - nr 16- 00470 SONATA BIS6. 31921A M. Oldak: None. A. Madejska: None. D. Ozieblo: D. Safka Brozkova: None. P. Lassuthova: None. A. None. M. Leja: None. H. Skarzynski: None. Uhrova Meszarosova: None. P. Seeman: None. P02.25C P02.24B Genetic basis of autosomal dominant hearing loss in First missense variant in N-terminal cytoplasmic region pediatric patients of KCNQ4: analysis of the genotype-phenotype correlation D. Ozieblo1,2, M. Leja1,2, H. Skarzynski3, M. Oldak1 M. Oldak1, A. Madejska1, D. Ozieblo1,2, M. Leja1,2, 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and H. Skarzynski3 Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland, 2Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, Medical 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Oto-Rhino- Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate Laryngology Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland Introduction:AutosomalDominantHearingLoss(ADHL) is the second most common form of inherited hearing loss Introduction: Pathogenic variants in KCNQ4 are a well- with an onset after the second decade of life. Current known cause of autosomal dominant hearing loss (ADHL). knowledge on the genetic aspects of ADHL in PolishAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1227 patientsislimited,whichsigniﬁcantlyaffectsthediagnosis, MaterialsandMethods:Multigenerationalfamilieswith genetic counselling and prevents prediction of disease ADHL were recruited in the study (n=19). Genomic DNA progression. was isolated from whole blood and buccal swabs samples. Materials and Methods: Thirteen families with ADHL In probands’ DNA samples a multigene high throughput diagnosedbefore18yearsofagewereenrolledinthestudy. sequencing was performed. Family segregation analysis of DNA was isolated from peripheral blood or oral cavity the identiﬁed variants was conducted using Sanger swab samples from probands and family members. High- sequencing. All detected variants were analyzed in the throughput genetic analysis using the TruSight One panel context of population databases and literature. Pathogeni- (IlluminaInc.)andtheMiSeqsequencerwascarriedoutfor city of identiﬁed variants was predicted by different com- the probands. To conﬁrm the presence of identiﬁed genetic putational approaches. variants and their segregation with ADHL in individual Results: Genetic testing revealed probably pathogenic families Sanger’s sequencing was performed. variants in almost 63% (12/19) of the analyzed families. Results: Genetic cause of ADHL was identiﬁed in The majority of identiﬁed variants were novel, previously approximately 60% (8/13) of the families. The identiﬁed not reported and hitherto not linked to the disease (7/12). variants were located in ACTG1, COCH, DIAPH1, EYA4, Novel variants were missense changes and all of them KCNQ4, PTPRQ, TBC1D24 and TMC1. Among the iden- (except for two genetic changes located in MYO6) were tiﬁed variants approximately 60% (6/8) were novel. In the found in different genes. remaining families the selected variants did not segregate Conclusions: Our study revealed a high involvement of with ADHL. novel probably pathogenic variants in the development of Conclusions:Ourresultsshowhighgeneticheterogeneity ADHL andconﬁrmed a high heterogeneity of the identiﬁed of ADHL in Polish pediatric patients. Considering frequent geneticchanges.HighthroughputsequencinginHLpatients identiﬁcation of new genetic variants, it is necessary to generates large amount of data that should be interpreted perform thorough clinical examination and segregation carefully and conﬁrmed by family studies. There is also a analysis of the selected variants with ADHL in the largest needforfunctionalvalidationofthedetectednovelvariants. possible number of family members. In patients with no Supportedby:NCNResearchGrantno.2016/22/E/NZ5/ genetic cause identiﬁed, the study area should be extended 00470 SONATA BIS6. and include all protein coding regions or whole genome. D.Ozieblo:None.M.L.Leja:None.A.Sarosiak:None. Supported by: NCN SonataBIS6 grant no. 2016/22/E/ H. Skarzynski: None. M. Oldak: None. NZ5/00470 D. Ozieblo: None. M. Leja: None. H. Skarzynski: P02.28B None. M. Oldak: None. CochlearimplantationoutcomeinpatientswithDFNB1 locus pathogenic variants - implications for precision P02.27A medicine Novelvariantsinknowngenes-resultsofgenetictesting in families with autosomal dominant hearing loss D. Ozieblo1,2, A. Obrycka3, A. Lorens3, H. Skarzynski4, M. Oldak1 D.Ozieblo1,2,M.L.Leja1,2,A.Sarosiak1,2,H.Skarzynski3, M. Oldak1 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Implants and School of Molecular Medicine, Medical University of Auditory Perception, Institute ofPhysiology and Pathology Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Oto-Rhino-Laryngology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 4Oto-Rhino-Laryngology Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw/Kajetany, Poland Hearing, Warsaw, Poland Introduction: Hearing loss (HL) is the most common Introduction: Almost 80% of children with profound disability of human senses and genetic factors play an prelingual hearing loss (HL) have a genetic cause of importantroleinitsdevelopment.AutosomaldominantHL deafness; most often two GJB2/GJB6 (DFNB1 locus) (ADHL)isusuallycharacterizedbypostlingualageofonset recessive pathogenic variants. Cochlear implantation (CI) and progression. To date 63 loci with 45 different genes is a treatment of choice in profound HL patients but only were causally involved in the pathogenesis of ADHL. few studies combine the etiology of HL with CI outcome.1228 Materials and Methods: Patients with profound pre- Introduction: High myopia (HM) is an eye disorder lingual HL who received CI before the age of 2 years and characterized by refractive error (RE) greater than -6.0 had a completed DFNB1 genetic testing were enrolled in diopters (D) with both environmental and genetic factors the study (n=159). LittlEARS questionnaire and relative involved. Although a number of loci, candidate genes, and auditory development delay (RADD) at 6th month after CI sequence variants have been identiﬁed in HM, the general activation were used to assess auditory development. genetic factor explaining the causes of HM has not been Results: Statistically signiﬁcant differences were speciﬁed. The aim of this study was to unravel the role of observed in RADD between patients implanted early epigenetic changes in HM which could explain the relation (before 12 months of age) vs. late (after 12 months of age) between HM and environmental factors. and between patients with a short (≤6 months) vs. long (≥ Materials and Methods: In order to verify if the dysre- 6 months) hearing aids (HAs) experience. Interestingly, in gulated methylation of genes could contribute to the HM the most genetically homogenous patient group with two development, using a genome-wide DNA methylation GJB2 c.35delG pathogenic variants there was no statisti- array, we studied 18 Polish cases (aged 4-12 years, RE cally signiﬁcant difference in RADD between patients between -6.0 and -15.0 D) and 18 matched controls. CpGs implanted early and late and between patients with a short withthehighestfoldchangeorthehighestdifferenceinthe and long HAs experience. methylation level between cases and controls were ana- Conclusions: In children with homozygous GJB2 lyzed. Pathway overrepresentation analyses among hyper- c.35delGpathogenicvariants,applicationofCIbefore12or methylatedgeneswereperformedusingConsensusPathDB. 24 months ofage brings similar outcome.Childrenwithan Results: In total, 1,541 CpGs, representing 1,745 genes, unknown genetic cause of HL should be implanted before were hypermethylated (≥2.0-fold change, FDR p≤0.05, 12 months of age to achieve better results in auditory ROC-AUC ≥0.75) in HM subjects compared to controls. development. Further studies in the non-DFNB1 group are The most hypermethylated CpGs with more than 20% dif- planned to determine the link between genetic background ferenceinthemethylationlevelbetween casesandcontrols of HL and the CI outcome. were located in TIMM50, RAB3C, MICAL3, RWDD4A, Supported by: NCN Grant 2017/27/N/NZ5/02369 XRCC2, and FARP2. Enrichment analysis of hypermethy- D.Ozieblo:None.A.Obrycka:None.A.Lorens:None. lated myopia-related genes set (>5 genes shared, p≤0.01) H. Skarzynski: None. M. Oldak: None. revealed overrepresentation of genes from several path- ways, including signal transduction, transcription, and sig- P02.31A naling pathways as receptor tyrosine kinases, JAK-STAT, HypermethylatedgenesandpathwaysinPolishchildren TGF-beta, EGF-EGFR. with high myopia Conclusions: Methylation of genes and disruption of identiﬁed pathways could contribute to HM phenotype. M. Gajecka1,2, S. Vishweswaraiah3, J. A. Karolak2,1, M. Gajecka: None. S. Vishweswaraiah: None. J.A. M. Mrugacz4, U. Ratnamala5, N. K. Mishra6, C. Guda6, Karolak: None. M. Mrugacz: None. U. Ratnamala: S. S. Chettiar7, K. R. Johar7, U. Radhakrishna3, None.N.K.Mishra:None.C.Guda:None.S.S.Chettiar: J. Swierkowska1 None. K.R. Johar: None. U. Radhakrishna: None. J. Swierkowska: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of Genetics and P02.32B Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan University of Diagnostic yield of whole exome sequencing-based Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of genetic testing for patients with inherited eye diseases Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oakland University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Royal Oak, MI, United K. Wells, K. Kämpjärvi, E. Mårtensson, M. Mehine, States, 4Department of Ophthalmology and Eye J. Känsäkoski, L. Sarantaus, H. Västinsalo, J. Schleit, Rehabilitation, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, I. Saarinen, M. Muona, S. Myllykangas, T. Alastalo, Poland, 5Department of Pharmacology, Creighton J. W. Koskenvuo, S. Tuupanen University, Omaha, NE, United States, 6Department of Genetics, Cell Biology & Anatomy College of Medicine, Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, UnitedStates,7DepartmentofZoology,SchoolofSciences, Genetictestingisessentialinthediagnosisandmanagement Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, India ofinheritedeyediseases(IEDs).However,IEDdiagnostics can be compromised by poorly validated and curated tests. We aimed to develop and validate a high quality wholeAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1229 exome sequencing (WES) based platform and to assess P02.33C diagnostic yield in a large IED cohort. Performance of the New insights into the phenotypic spectrum of PROM1- WES assay with bespoke clinical content, was tested associated retinopathy through next generation sequencing (NGS) of reference samples using the Illumina NovaSeq platform. The assay M. del Pozo-Valero1, I. Martín-Mérida1,2, B. Jiménez- was designed to cover clinically-relevant intronic and Rolando3, A. Arteche1, A. Ávila-Fernández1,2, F. Blanco- difﬁcult-to-sequence regions, and detect copy number Kelly1, R. Riveiro-Álvarez1, C. Van Cauwenbergh4, E. De variants (CNVs). Based on this assay, 23 ophthalmology Baere4, C. Rivolta5, B. García-Sandoval3, M. Cortón1,2, gene panels were curated. The assay showed high average C. Ayuso1,2 sequencing depth (183x) and coverage (99.7% regions covered >20x), and uniform coverage over difﬁcult-to- 1Department of Genetics, Instituto de Investigación sequence regions, including RPGR ORF15. Detection Sanitaria–Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital sensitivity was high for SNVs (0.998), INDELs (0.97), 1- (IIS-FJD-UAM), Madrid, Spain, 2Center for Biomedical exon CNVs (0.93) and 5-exon CNVs (0.99). The Usher Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Syndrome Panel gave the highest diagnostic yield (>80%). Madrid,Spain,3DepartmentofOphthalmology,Institutode The most frequently ordered 266-gene Retinal Dystrophy Investigación Sanitaria–Fundación Jiménez Díaz Panel yielded a diagnosis in 58% (of 1587) cases. University Hospital (IIS-FJD-UAM), Madrid, Spain, Diagnoses were made in a total of 111 genes, the most 4Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University and common genes being ABCA4, USH2A, RPGR, RHO and GhentUniversityHospital,Ghent,Belgium,5Departmentof PRPH2, as well as in newly implicated IEDs genes, and in Computational Biology, Unit of Medical Genetics, custom targeted deep intronic regions. Approximately 3% University of Lausanne, Laussane, Switzerland of patients had a diagnostic CNV. A WES assay with boosted clinical content provides high diagnostic yields for Purpose:Inheritedretinaldystrophy(IRD)referstoagroup IED patients. The genetic variability of diagnoses in our of progressive and degenerative diseases that affect the cohort supports the use of comprehensive NGS panels in photoreceptor cells and lead to visual impairment. One of IED diagnostics, to optimize diagnostic yield and the genes associated with IRD is PROM1. Disease-causing clinical care. PROM1 variants have been associated with different K.Wells:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; phenotypes. The aim was to provide a detailed analysis of Blueprintgenetics.K.Kämpjärvi:A.Employment(fullor the genetic and phenotypic characteristics of the PROM1- part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. E. Mårtensson: associated retinopathy in a large cohort of patients. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Methods: PROM1 screening was performed using clas- genetics. M. Mehine: A. Employment (full or part-time); sicalmoleculartechniquesand/ortargetedNext-Generation- Signiﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. J. Känsäkoski: A. Sequencinginacohortof2216IRDfamilies.Copynumber Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint variation analysis was carried out in unsolved monoallelic genetics.L.Sarantaus:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); cases. Detailed ophthalmic evaluation was performed in 25 Signiﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. H. Västinsalo: A. patients. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Results: Thirty-two families presented PROM1 variants, genetics. J. Schleit: A. Employment (full or part-time); including likely pathogenic and unknown signiﬁcance var- Signiﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employ- iants, 10 of which are novel. Causative variants were ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. M. identiﬁed in 21 families segregating in autosomal recessive Muona: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; (17)ordominant(4)pattern,3ofthemwithfoundereffect. Blueprint genetics. S. Myllykangas: E. Ownership Interest Phenotypic analysis in 25 patients carrying disease-causing (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); PROM1 variants revealed clinical heterogeneity regardless Signiﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. T. Alastalo: E. Ownership of genotype. Most of the patients suffered from cone-rod Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual dystrophy and some patients presented with macular dys- property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. J.W. Kosken- trophy or retinitis pigmentosa, all presenting macular vuo: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or damage. other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. Conclusions: Our study reports the largest and compre- S. Tuupanen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- hensive description of genetic and clinical ﬁndings in niﬁcant; Blueprint genetics. PROM1-retinopathy. The prevalence of PROM1 variants that seems to reliably explain the IRD phenotype in our cohort is about 1%. This study also highlights the great heterogeneity of PROM1-associated phenotypes.1230 Regardless of the initial diagnosis of primary cone or rod Grants: This study was supported by Fundació Privada loss, all patients developed a common macular involve- Cellex(Fi-201501)andFundaciódeRecercadel’Institutde ment, a characteristic phenotypic ﬁnding of PROM1. Microcirurgia Ocular (Fi-201401). M.delPozo-Valero:None.I.Martín-Mérida:None.B. V. Abad-Morales: None. S. Ruiz-Nogales: None. R. Jiménez-Rolando: None. A. Arteche: None. A. Ávila- Navarro: None. P. Méndez: None. M. Riera: None. A. Fernández: None. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. R. Riveiro- Burés-Jelstrup: None. B. Corcóstegui: None. E. Álvarez: None. C. Van Cauwenbergh: None. E. De Pomares: None. Baere: None. C. Rivolta: None. B. García-Sandoval: None. M. Cortón: None. C. Ayuso: None. P02.36B Next generation sequencing in patients with bilateral P02.35A optic atrophy: Leber hereditary optic neuropathy and Contribution of DRAM2 gene in inherited retinal beyond dystrophies with early macular involvement M. Volk1, A. Maver1, A. Fakin2, N. Teran1, M. Jarc V. Abad-Morales1,2, S. Ruiz-Nogales1,2, R. Navarro1,3, Vidmar2, S. Petrović2, M. Hawlina2, B. Peterlin1 P. Méndez1,2, M. Riera1,2, A. Burés-Jelstrup1,3, B. Corcóstegui1,3, E. Pomares1,2 1Clinical institute of medical genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Eye hospital, UMC Ljubljana, 1Fundació de Recerca de l’Institut de Microcirurgia Ljubljana, Slovenia Ocular,Barcelona,Spain,2DepartmentofGenetics,Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular (IMO), Barcelona, Spain, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is caused by 3Department of Retina, Institut de Microcirurgia Ocular missense mutations in the mitochondrial genes (mtDNA) (IMO), Barcelona, Spain encoding complex I subunits of the respiratory chain. However, mutations affecting genes in the nuclear genome Introduction: Macular Dystrophies (MD) are a group of maystrikinglyresembletheclinicalpresentationofLHON. Inherited Retinal Dystrophies (IRD) characterized by the We conducted a study to deﬁne best testing strategy using degeneration of the central retina or macula, principally next generation sequencing in bilateral optic atrophy and formed by cone photoreceptors. Although there are more inconclusivefamilyhistory.Herewereporton30unrelated than55MDgenes,aconsiderablepercentageofthesecases individuals referred to our institution for genetic testing remain unsolved. because of the optic nerve atrophy and clinically suspected Methods: Whole exome sequencing of a cohort of IRD LHON. None of the patients had lesions suggestive for families was performed, analyzing a panel of 300 IRD multiplesclerosisonbrain MRI. Genetic analysis consisted genes in order to determine the genetic pathogenic cause. of mtDNA sequencing followed by clinical exome sequen- Forsomenewmutations,functionalanalyzeswereruledout cing. In two unrelated patients mtDNA sequencing from patients blood samples. identiﬁed typical LHON pathogenic variants Results:ThreenewDRAM2homozygousmutationswere (m.11778G>A, m.3700G>A). Exome sequencing in three identiﬁed in three independent families: one frameshift and unrelated patients revealed OPA1 mutation (c.2489G>A, two splicing variants. All patients shared a singular phe- likely pathogenic variant), compound heterozygous muta- notype, with an early macular involvement followed by a tions in ACO2 (c.2253dupC, VUS and c.719G>C, patho- peripheral degeneration. However, the age of onset and the genic variant) and a de novo mutation in WFS1 evolutionofthepathologyweredifferentineachcase.Ata (c.2480C>T, likely pathogenic variant). Upon genetically molecular level, functional studies revealed alterations in guided clinical review,thelast patient was found toexhibit gene expression differing between patients. signs on macular OCT, typical for Wolfram syndrome. We Conclusions: DRAM2 was ﬁrstly associated to IRD in found possible causative variants in 5 of 30 patients with 2015, and only scanty cases and 10 different pathogenic bilateral optic atrophy and clinically suspected LHON. In mutations have been reported to date. Thus, its function in addition to typical LHON mitochondrial variants we found the retina and the associated phenotypes are still much causative variants associated with autosomal dominant, unknown. In this context, the results obtained signiﬁcantly autosomal recessive and syndromic forms of optic neuro- contribute to the comprehension of the role of this gene in pathy and reclassiﬁed clinical diagnoses. Our results themolecularbasesofIRD,increasingthenumberandtype provide evidence that a combined approach with mtDNA of reported pathogenic variants and their functional effects, and clinical exome sequencing is recommended in cases of and strengthening the DRAM2 genotype-phenotype corre- clinically suspected LHON and negative family history. lations in the retina.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1231 M. Volk: None. A. Maver: None. A. Fakin: None. N. K. Kamenarova: None. S. Cherninkova: None. K. Teran:None. M.JarcVidmar: None. S. Petrović:None. Mihova: None. F. Shakola: None. V. Mitev: None. I. M. Hawlina: None. B. Peterlin: None. Tournev: None. R. Kaneva: None. P02.37C P02.38D Targeted next generation sequencing reveals Burden of missense variants in hearing loss genes in homozygous PDE6C mutation in a pedigree with sporadic Meniere disease macular aplasia A. Gallego-Martinez1, T. Requena1, P. Román-Naranjo1, K. Kamenarova1, S. Cherninkova2, K. Mihova1, J. Lopez-Escamez1,2 F. Shakola1, V. Mitev1, I. Tournev2, R. Kaneva1 1Centro Pﬁzer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de 1Molecular Medicine Centre, Medical University – Soﬁa, Andalucía de Genómica e Investigación Oncológica Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Neurology, University (GENYO), Granada, Spain, 2Department of Hospital Alexandrovska, Medical University – Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Otolaryngology,InstitutodeInvestigaciónBiosanitariaIbs. Bulgaria GRANADA, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain Introduction: Macular, or foveal aplasia refers to the lack of foveal depression with continuity of all neurosensory Introduction: Meniere disease (MD) is a rare inner ear layers in the presumed location of the fovea. It has been disorder deﬁned by episodes of vertigo, sensorineural reported in cases of aniridia, albinism, microphthalmia and hearing loss (SNHL) and tinnitus. MD has been described achromatopsia. Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD), among mostly in sporadic cases, being familial cases around 10% whichmacular aplasia(MA), constituteagroupofdiseases of total observed cases. Between 20-45% of the cases have characterizedbyclinicalvariabilityandpronouncedgenetic bilateralhearingloss.Theaimofthisstudyistoinvestigate heterogeneity.ByusingIRD-panelnext-generationsequen- the burden of rare variants in SNHL genes in sporadic cing,weaimedtoidentifythedisease-causingmutationina cases of MD. large Bulgarian pedigree with MA inherited in autosomal- Methods: We designed a targeted-sequencing panel recessive pattern. including SNHL genes in supporting cells and sequenced Materials and Methods: A large pedigree with MA, 890 Spanish MD patients. The frequency of rare variants mostlikelyachromatopsia,accompaniedbynystagmusand (with a MAF inferior to 0.1) in the gene panel was com- decreased visual acuity presented from birth was recruited pared with three independent datasets as controls for the and DNA from the proband was sequenced using the Illu- gene burden analysis. Interaction model between rare and ® mina platformandTruSightOnesequencingpanel.Protein common variants is proposed for most relevant genes in coding and splice-site variants were ﬁltered in a panel with MD cases. 341 genes related to retinal dystrophies. Results: Patients with sporadic MD showed a signiﬁcant Results: Genetic analysis identiﬁed a homozygous mis- enrichment of missense variants in SNHL genes that was sense variant c.2141T>A (p.Ile714Asn) in a conserved not found in the controls. The list of genes includes GJB2, aminoacidwithinthegeneencodingthecatalyticsubunitof USH1G, SLC26A4, ESRRB and CLDN14. A rare synon- the cone photoreceptor phosphodiesterase, PDE6C. The ymous variant with unknown signiﬁcance was found inthe commonly used prediction tools classiﬁed the PDE6C- MARVELD2 gene in several unrelated patients with MD. c.2141T>A variant to be putatively damaging/deleterious. Conclusions:Thereisaburdenofrarevariationincertain ThereisonlyonePDE6C-c.2141AallelefoundintheNon- SNHL genes in sporadic MD. Furthermore, the interaction Finnish European population suggesting an extremely low ofcommonandrarevariantsinSNHLgenesmayhaveand frequencyforthischange. Segregation studyisinprogress. additive effect on MD phenotype. Conclusions: We have identiﬁed a family affected by Funding: FPS-PI0496-2014, Spain; EF-0247-2017 grant autosomal-recessive dystrophy of the central photoreceptor from Consejeria de Salud, Spain; Luxembourg National system and found homozygous possibly pathogenic variant Research Fund (INTER/Mobility 17/11772209), Lux- in PDE6C, mutations in which have been previously embourg, and 2016-MeniereSociety Grant, UK. reported in patients with autosomal-recessive inherited A. Gallego-Martinez: None. T. Requena: None. P. achromatopsia and early-onset cone photoreceptor dys- Román-Naranjo: None. J. Lopez-Escamez: None. function. Grant references: DUNK01/2/2009 and Grant-D- 109/03.05.20018.1232 P02.39A E. Tavares1, C. Tang1, A. Paterson1, S. Li1, M. Liang1, Burden of rare variants in OTOF gene in familial M. Wilson1, E. Campos1, A. Vincent1,2, E. Héon1,2 Meniere disease 1TheHospitalforSickChildrenResearchInstitute,Toronto, P.Roman-Naranjo1,C.A.Jimenez-Ruiz1,M.C.Moleon2, ON, Canada, 2Department of Ophthalmology and Vision A. Gallego-Martinez1, J. A. Lopez-Escamez1,2 Sciences, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 1CentreforGenomicsandOncologicalResearch(GENYO), Granada, Spain, 2Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto Introduction:NorthCarolinaMacularDystrophy(NCMD) de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs.GRANADA, Hospital is a high penetrance autosomal dominant inherited disease. Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain Thenon-codingSNPsinthelinkageregiononchromosome 6 fall within a DNase I hypersensitive site upstream of Introduction: Meniere disease (MD) is a rare inner ear PRDM13 and which regulates PRDM13 expression during disordercharacterizedbyvertigo,sensorineuralhearingloss development.Thisstudyaimedtounderstandthemolecular (SNHL) and tinnitus. Familial aggregation isfound in 10% basis of NCMD through differential expression analysis. of MD cases with autosomal dominant inheritance and Methods:PSSMscanningwasusedtopredictchangesin several genes already described, such as DTNA, FAM136A bindingofknowntranscriptionfactorsinretinaforthenon- andSEMA3Dgenes.Thus,thegoalofthisstudyistodeﬁne coding variants on chromosome 6. RNA-seq from skin- new candidate genes for familial MD (FMD). derived RNA for three sibling pairs (affected/unaffected Materials & Methods: We recruited 62 FMD cases to each) within a family was done for differential gene perform whole-exome sequencing. Variant calling was expression analysis. performed with GATK. Candidate genes were prioritized Results: These variants introduce a gain of binding sites based on pathogenicity using PhenIX. Single rare variant for two important retinal transcription factors (PAX6 and analysis (SRVA) focused on SNHL genes was performed OTX2)upstreamofPRDM13.Thiscanpotentiallyalterthe using MAF<0.001. Likewise, a gene burden analysis PRDM13regulationinretinaltissue.RNA-seqrevealed~50 (GBA) with MAF<0.05 was performed to analyze the differently expressed genes between the affected and unaf- interaction of common and rare variants. We studied the fected. Although we did not ﬁnd a direct association of relationship between rare and common variants which these genes to the known genes involved in macular dys- modulate gene expression. trophies, GO enrichment analysis showed ~30 statistically Results:Forty-percentofFMDcasescarriedonenovelor signiﬁcant processes with lipid metabolism being most ultrarare likely pathogenic (CADD>15) variant in SNHL signiﬁcant and it was previously linked to age-related genes. Ninety-four rare variants were selected from SRVA. macular dystrophy. A total of 222 rare variants were retrieved with GBA Conclusions: The introduction of PAX6 and OTX2 resulting in a high enrichment of variants in OTOF gene binding sites upstream of PRDM13 can potentially cause (correctedp-value:3x10-4).Fourrarevariantsinourcohort PRDM13 overexpression and may interfere with lipid showed a signiﬁcant association with three common var- metabolism and oxidative stress by increasing the amount iants regulating the expression of OTOF gene. of lipids in the retina. Conclusions:ThereisaburdenofrarevariantsinSNHL Funding: Mira Godard, FFB, McLaughlin Centre. genes. Particularly, the interaction of rare and common E. Tavares: None. C. Tang: None. A. Paterson: None. variantsinOTOFgenemayplayanimportantroleinFMD. S. Li: None. M. Liang: None. M. Wilson: None. E. Funding: Supported by the Luxembourg National Campos: None. A. Vincent: None. E. Héon: None. Research Fund INTER/Mobility/17/11772209 and EF- 0247-2017 from Andalusian Health Government to JALE. P02.43A P. Roman-Naranjo: None. C.A. Jimenez-Ruiz: None. The most common forms of non-GJB2-related M.C. Moleon: None. A. Gallego-Martinez: None. J.A. nonsyndromic (NSHL) and disguised syndromic (SHL) Lopez-Escamez: None. hearing impartment in Russian patients P02.41C O. L. Mironovich1, E. A. Bliznetz1, T. G. Markova2, Differential expression analysis suggests lipid M. R. Latayants2, T. V. Markova1, L. A. Bessonova1, metabolism plays a role in North Carolina Macular M. S. Petukhova1, O. N. Makienko1, D. M. Guseva1, Dystrophy I. V. Anisimova1, O. P. Ryzhkova1, A. V. Polyakov1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1233 1Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal Federation, 2Far Eastern Federal University, Vladivostok, State Budgetary Institution «National Research Center for Russian Federation, 3S. Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Audiology and Hearing Rehabilitation», Moscow, Russian Federal State Institution, Moscow, Russian Federation, Federation 4Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Moscow Regional Research Introduction: Hearing loss is a common disorder, and and Clinical Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation according to the audiological screening in Russia, con- genital hearing impairment affects nearly 3 in every 1000 Objectives: Hereditary ophthalmic pathology is a geneti- livebirths.ApartfromtheGJB2gene,morethan100genes callyheterogeneousgroupofdiseasesthatoccureitherasan responsible for NSHL and more than 400 genes associated isolated eye disorder or as a symptom of hereditary with SHL are known. Currently, massive parallel sequen- syndromes (chromosomal and monogenic). That is why cing(MPS)istheoptimaldiagnosticmethodfornon-GJB2- diagnostic search in some cases of ophthalmic pathology related forms of hearing impairment. could be time- and cost-consuming. The most challenging Materials and Methods: DNA samples of 205 Russian situation could arise when prenatal diagnosis is needed patients with NSHL (without mutations in GJB2 gene) and during ongoing pregnancy. 10 patients with the incoming diagnosis of Pendred, Bran- Materials and Methods: A family is referred to the chiootorenal, Usher and Alstrom syndromes were tested by RCMGforaffectedchildbirthriskprognosisat7-8weekof using custom targeted MPS panel which includes 33 genes gestationbecause theprevious child,six-years-old boy,has of NSHL and SHL. 25 DNA samples were searched for congenital aniridia, glaucoma, retinal detachment, severe abnormal copy numbers with MLPA. psychomotor delay, lack of speech, several ophthalmic Results:Among205patientswithNSHL,pathogenicand surgeries. The affected child had been previously tested for probably pathogenic variants have been identiﬁed in 41 PAX6 mutations and 11p13 copy number variation which cases (20%) in following genes: STRC (10), USH2A (6), revealed no changes. SLC26A4(4),MYO7A(4),OTOF(4),POU3F4(2),TECTA Results: Considering ongoing pregnancy, lack of patho- (2), TMPRSS3 (2), PTPRQ (1), ADGRV1 (1), TMC1 (1), genic changes and precise diagnosis in an affected boy, LOXHD1 (1), ACTG1 (1), MYO15A (1), OTOA (1). Diag- NGSsequencingofclinicallyrelevantgeneswasperformed nostic efﬁciency in patients with SHL was 80% (8/10). In which revealed a novel hemizygous substitution patients with NSHL, syndromic forms have been identiﬁed NM_000266.3(NDP_v001):c.385G>T, p.(Glu129*), in in 9% of total cases (18/205). The majority of causative NDPgeneassociatedwithNorriedisease(OMIM#310600). mutations in STRC and OTOA were large CNVs (80% and Subsequent Sanger validation of the affected boy and his 50%). Mutations c.11864G>A, c.2171_2174delTTTG, mother conﬁrmed identiﬁed substitution inherited in X- c.107A>C in USH2A, STRC, SLC26A4 genes are assumed linked recessive mode. Amniotic ﬂuid testing revealed the to be frequent in Russian patients. fetus is hemizygous for the variant. Complications were Conclusions:Theproportionofdetectedgeneticformsof developed during subsequent interruption of pregnancy hearing loss in Russia is about 12% of all non-syndromic driven by medical necessity. hearing loss. Conclusions: Clinical polymorphism of hereditary oph- O.L. Mironovich: None. E.A. Bliznetz: None. T.G. thalmic pathology could severely complicate the establish- Markova: None. M.R. Latayants: None. T.V. Markova: ment of exact diagnosis and make it time- and cost- None. L.A. Bessonova: None. M.S. Petukhova: None. O. consuming. NGS appears to be the method-of-choice in N. Makienko: None. D.M. Guseva: None. I.V. Anisi- complicated cases which could substantially hasten the mova: None. O.P. Ryzhkova: None. A.V. establishment of diagnosis and genetic risk estimation. Polyakov: None. Supported by RFBR grant № 19-015-00122. A.V. Marakhonov: None. S.A. Repina: None. I.A. P02.44B Akimova:None.M.V.Shurygina:None.T.A.Vasilyeva: Prenatal diagnosis of Norrie disease after exome None. S.I. Kutsev: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. R.A. sequencing of affected proband during ongoing Zinchenko: None. pregnancy P02.45C A. V. Marakhonov1,2, S. A. Repina1, I. A. Akimova1, Screening TYR gene variations in Turkish M. V. Shurygina3, T. A. Vasilyeva1, S. I. Kutsev1,4, oculocutaneuse albinism patients V. V. Kadyshev1, R. A. Zinchenko1,51234 O. HATIRNAZ NG1, E. Yılmaz1, Z. Parlakgüneş2, p. Tyr149Ser K. Yararbaş3, S. Ziylan2, Y. Alanay3, U. Ozbek3 TYR NM_000372.4 p. frameshift 0,0263 CM90077 c.919_925delTCCAGAA Leu140fs* TYR NM_000372.4c.616G>A p. missense 0,0263 rs28940880 1Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University, School of Ala206Thr TYR NM_000372.4c.140G>A p. missense 0,0263 rs61753180 Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, ISTANBUL, Gly47asp Turkey, 2YeditepeUniversity, Medical Faculty, Department TYR NM_000372.4c.61C>T p.Pro21Ser missense 0,0263 rs61753178 TYR NM_000372.4c.661G>T p.Glu221* stopgain 0,0263 novel of Eye Diseases, ISTANBUL, Turkey, 3Acibadem Mehmet TYR NM_000372.4c.1058G>A p. missense 0,0132 rs1415792453 AliAydınlarUniversity,SchoolofMedicine,Departmentof Gly353Glu TYR NM_000372.4c.225T>A p.Tyr85* stopgain 0,0132 rs746208814 Medical Genetics, ISTANBUL, Turkey TYR NM_000372.4c.139G>T p. missense 0,0132 rs796051878 Gly47Cys TYR NM_000372.4c.1430G>A p.Trp477* stopgain 0,0132 rs748052034 Introduction: Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is charac- TYR NM_000372.4c.763C>T p.Gln255* stopgain 0,0132 CM91283 terised by a generalized reduction in pigmentation of hair, TYR NM_000372.4c.715C>T p. missense 0,0132 rs774670098 Arg239Trp skin and eyes and variable ocular ﬁndings including TYR NM_000372.4c.1193A>G p.Glu398G missense 0,0132 CM41866 nystagmus, reduced visual acuity and photophobia. The TYR NM_000372.4c.1255_1256insTTG insertion 0,0132 novel most common mutated gene in OCA is TYROSINASE TYR NM_000372.4c.1036- splicesite 0,0132 novel 9_1041delTAATGAACAGGATTT (TYR). Currently, no data available on the frequency or TYR NM_000372.4c.1036+3A>C splicesite 0,0132 novel molecular background of Albinism in Turkey. TYR NM_000372.4c.308G>C p. missense 0,0132 novel Cyc103Ser Materials and Methods: Forty OCA patients (23 male and 17 female, 3 pairs of siblings) with a median age 19.2 years (min: 6mo-max 70.1 years) were enrolled. Following O. Hatirnaz ng: None. E. Yılmaz: None. Z. Par- DNA isolation, the coding regions of TYR genes were lakgüneş:None.K.Yararbaş:None.S.Ziylan:None.Y. analysed by PCR and direct sequencing. Alanay: None. U. Ozbek: None. Results:Wehavedetected28differentTYRvariationsin 31(77.5%,17homozygous,16compoundheterozygousand P02.46D 1 heterozygous) of the OCA patients (Table1). The most Copy number analysis of the OPN1LW and OPN1MW frequent variants were c.815G>A, p.Trp272* and genes by MLPA c.741C>A, p.Cyc247* with an allele frequency of 0.06. Among28variationsﬁveofthemwerenovel(Table1).The A. S. Hoekstra1, L. Haer-Wigman2, M. Tjon-Pon-Fong2, allele frequencies of two common TYR polymorphisms M. Zegers1, M. Ketema1, R. Vijzelaar1 S192Y and R402Q were 34% and 14.6% respectfully. Conclusion: TYR gene is commonly mutated in OCA 1MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Radboud patientsinTurkey.ThepatientwithonlyheterozygousTYR University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands variant,additiontoother8patientswithnovariationshould be evaluated for other related genes. Further studies with Introduction: X-linkedcone dysfunction disorders suchas new patients and investigation of other melanin related BlueConeMonochromacyandConeDystrophyarecaused genes in TYR negative patients are ongoing. bypathogenicvariantsandrearrangementsinOPN1LWand OPN1MWwhichsharemorethan98%sequencesimilarity. Table 1: TYR variations and their allele frequencies Located in tandem, they are susceptible to meiotic detected in our patients. mispairing, unequal homologous and nonhomologous recombination. This might lead to different copy numbers Gene cNomen pNomen codingeffect allefreq Known/Novel of OPN1LW and/or OPN1MW or the formation of hybrid TYR NM_000372.4c.815G>A p.Trp272* stopgain 0,0658 rs779454147 opsin genes. Because of the frequent exchange, X TYR NM_000372.4c.741C>A p.Cyc247* stopgain 0,0658 rs1185485047 TYR NM_000372.4c.996G>A p. missense 0,0526 CM91273 chromosomes have around one to ﬁve OPN1MW copies, Met332Ile whereas they rarely have more than one OPN1LW copy. TYR NM_000372.4c.1217C>T p. missense 0,0526 CM910385 Pro406Leu Using the current diagnostic tests, it remains difﬁcult to TYR NM_000372.4c.1204C>T p.Arg402* stopgain 0,0395 CM942074 determine the copy number and presence of gene TYR NM_000372.4c.1A>G p.Met1Val missense 0,0395 CM941342 TYR NM_000372.4c.573delA p.Gly191* stopgain 0,0395 rs1364823765 rearrangements in OPN1LW and OPN1MW. TYR NM_000372.4c.613C>A p. missense 0,0395 rs61754362 Methods: A novel multiplex ligation-dependent probe Pro205Thr TYR NM_000372.4c.230G>A p. missense 0,0263 rs61753185 ampliﬁcation (MLPA) assay was developed and tested on Arg77Gln 14 patient samples with a known copy number status of TYR NM_000372.4c.1118C>A p. missense 0,0263 rs617543388 Thr373Lys OPN1LWandOPN1MW.Copynumberandrearrangements TYR NM_000372.4c.816G>C p. missense 0,0263 11116710 Trp272Cys inOPN1LWandOPN1MWwereanalysedinmorethan100 TYR NM_000372.4c.446A>C missense 0,0263 rs797046082 DNA samples.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1235 Results: The copy number of OPN1LW and OPN1MW from family B were diagnosed with optic atrophy in early was conﬁrmed in the 14 patients and could be easily childhood. A missense variant (p.S36L) in the TMEM126A determined in 75 male and female DNA samples and in 45 genewasidentiﬁedinagenepanel-baseddiagnosticsetting clinical samples consisting of affected individuals and car- in both siblings. This missense variant is ultra rare in the riers. Ten patients with hybrid opsin genes were identiﬁed, general population, affects a highly evolutionarily con- including one patient with two hybrid genes. served amino acid and segregates with the disease within Conclusion: The newly developed MLPA assay enables the family. The three probands reported in this study had a determination of the copy number status and identiﬁcation relatively mild clinical course without any evidence of a of gene rearrangements in OPN1LW and OPN1MW. The syndromic (e.g. neurological) comorbidity, which is in line addition of MLPA to routine sequencing of OPN1LW and with previous studies. OPN1MW will improve detection of the cause of X-linked We provide additional evidence for the implication of cone dysfunction disorders. biallelic TMEM126A mutations in arOA. Our ﬁndings A.S. Hoekstra: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- extend both the mutational spectrum and geographic pre- niﬁcant; MRC-Holland. L. Haer-Wigman: None. M. sence of TMEM126A in arOA. Tjon-Pon-Fong:None.M.Zegers:A.Employment(fullor N. Weisschuh: None. M. Synofzik: None. C. Kern- part-time); Signiﬁcant; MRC-Holland. M. Ketema: A. stock: None. S. Schimpf-Linzenbold: None. F. Schuet- Employment(fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant;MRC-Holland. tauf: None. A. Neu: None. K. Kloth: None. R. Vijzelaar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- niﬁcant; MRC-Holland. P02.48B A familial optic atrophy associated with mild P02.47A neurodevelopmental disorder caused by SOX5 Novel mutations in TMEM126A causing non-syndromic haploinsufﬁciency autosomal recessive optic atrophy A. Gouronc1, Y. Perdomo2, L. Maurin2, A. Schalk1, S. El N.Weisschuh1,M.Synofzik2,3,C.Kernstock1,S.Schimpf- Chehadeh3, E. Schaefer3, H. Dollfus2,3, S. Scheidecker1 Linzenbold4, F. Schuettauf5, A. Neu6, K. Kloth7 1Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux 1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany, Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Centre 2Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tuebingen, de Référence pour les Affections Rares en Génétique Germany, 3German Center for Neurodegenerative Ophtalmologique (CARGO), Hôpitaux Universitaires de Diseases,Tuebingen,Germany,4CeGaTGmbHandPraxis Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Service de Génétique für Humangenetik, Tuebingen, Germany, 5Department of Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Hamburg- Strasbourg, France Eppendorf,Hamburg,Germany,6DepartmentofPediatrics, UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg, Introduction: Inherited optic neuropathies (ION) are a Germany,7InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityMedical clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany caused by nuclear or mitochondrial DNA variants. Isolated andsyndromicformsaredescribed.ThemostfrequentION Reports on autosomal recessive optic atrophy (arOA) are are autosomal dominant optic atrophy (ADOA), due to sparse and so far, only one gene has been speciﬁcally OPA1 variant, and Leber hereditary optic neuropathy associated with non-syndromic arOA, namely TMEM126A. (LHON), caused by mitochondrial DNA variant. To date, all reports of TMEM126A mutations are from Materials and Methods: Herein we report on three patients of Maghrebian origin, who all carry an identical patients from a family suffering from bilateral optic neu- nonsense mutation. We report two novel variants in the ropathyandsuggestinganautosomaldominantinheritance. TMEM126A gene from two non-Maghreb patients/families, Twoofthemshowadditionalfeaturessuchasspeechdelay, both resulting in an arOA phenotype. mild learning disabilities and behavior disorders. The The proband of family A was diagnosed with visual loss sequencing of a panel of ION’s genes including the OPA1 inearlychildhoodbutadiagnosisofopticatrophywasonly gene is normal. The SNP array analysis reveals an 82 kb madeat14years.Adiagnosticgenepanelrevealedasplice intragenic heterozygous deletion of the SOX5 gene that donor variant (c.86+2T>C) in the TMEM126A gene. Ana- segregates with the disease. lysis of this variant based on RNA from whole blood Discussion:TheSOX5haploinsufﬁciencyleadstoLamb- revealed a single aberrant transcript lacking exon 2, pre- Shaffer syndrome classically associating global develop- sumably representing a functional null allele. Two siblings mentaldelay,withpredominantspeechimpairment,mildto1236 severe intellectual disability and mild dysmorphic features. mRNA degradation by NMD mechanism. Besides, ﬁve 5ʹ- Some patients have additional features such as brain UTRvariantswerefoundtoleadtoasigniﬁcantdecreasein abnormalities or musculoskeletal anomalies. Optic atrophy the translation efﬁciency, including three of them, which is described in only two patients carrying SOX5 hetero- alsoleadtoaberrantsplicing.Ourfurtheranalysisallowsus zygous de novo variants: a 53 kb intragenic deletion and a tosuggestthemechanismof5ʹ-UTR variantspathogenicity pointvariantresultinginaprematurestopcodon.Thesetwo through disruption of upstream ORF which possibly exists patientsdisplayedamoderatetosevereneurodevelopmental in PAX6 5ʹ-UTR. disorder. Conclusions: Using functional analysis we have con- Conclusion: Here we report on the ﬁrst family of ﬁrmed the pathogenicity of 12 PAX6 noncoding mutations. inherited autosomal dominant optic atrophy due to SOX5 Moreover, ourresultssuggestthe exact mechanism of their heterozygous deletion associated with mild neurodevelop- pathogenic action. mentalfeatures.ThisobservationsuggeststhataSOX5gene A. Filatova: None. T. Vasilyeva: None. A. Mar- analysis could be performed in patients presenting with akhonov:None.R.Zinchenko:None.M.Skoblov:None. optic atrophy associated with developmental disorder even mild. P02.50D A. Gouronc: None. Y. Perdomo: None. L. Maurin: Mutations in PLS1, encoding ﬁmbrin, cause autosomal None. A. Schalk: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. E. dominant non-syndromic hearing loss (ADNSHL) Schaefer:None.H.Dollfus:None.S.Scheidecker: None. A. Morgan1, D. Koboldt2,3, E. Barrie2, E. Crist2,3,4, P02.49C M. Mezzavilla5, F. Faletra5, T. Mosher2,3,4, R. Wilson2,3, PAX6 non-coding sequence variants cause congenital K. Manickam3,4, P. Gasparini1,5, D. Dell’Orco6, aniridia G. Girotto1,5 A. Filatova1, T. Vasilyeva1, A. Marakhonov1,2, 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute for Genomic R. Zinchenko1,3, M. Skoblov1,2 Medicine at Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics at The Ohio 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian StateUniversity,Columbus,OH,UnitedStates,4Divisionof Federation, 2School of Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal Genetic and Genomic Medicine at Nationwide Children’s University, Vladivostok, Russian Federation, 3Pirogov Hospita, Columbus, OH, United States, 5IRCCS Burlo Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 6Department of Neurosciences, Russian Federation Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, Section of Biological Chemistry, University of Verona, Verona, Italy Introduction:Congenitalaniridia(AN)isarareautosomal dominant panocular disorder caused by mutations in the Introduction: NSHL is a common sensory disorder PAX6 gene. A previously conducted molecular genetic characterized by high genetic heterogeneity. Despite huge studyofalargecohortofRussianpatientswithANrevealed effortsingenesdiscovery,almosthalfofpatientsstillfailto several groups of PAX6 nucleotide variants which patho- receive a molecular diagnosis. genicity is not obvious, including variants out of canonical Methods:TwounrelatedADNSHL-familiesofEuropean splicing site dinucleotides, possibly affecting splicing, and ancestry negative for mutations in known deafness-genes 5ʹ-UTR variants. These variants were classiﬁed as VUS or underwent next-generation sequencing. Data were ﬁltered likely pathogenic according to the ACMG recommenda- according to frequency, pathogenicity and pattern of tions. Thus, to validate the pathogenicity of such variants inheritance. To prioritize genes a population-based analysis functional studies are required. was performed (including statistics on natural selection in Materials and Methods: To determine the effect of Europeans and gene constrains from gnomAD database) PAX6 variants on splicing we used a minigene assay. To followed by in silico protein modelling. study 5ʹ-UTR variants we generated luciferase constructs Results: Among the genes found mutated in the two with full-length PAX6 5ʹ-UTR (wt and mutants). The analysedfamilies,interestingly,PLS1showedsignatures of translationefﬁciencywasmeasuredbyluciferaseassay,and natural selection and low observed/expected ratio of both the RNA expression level was evaluated by qPCR. missense and loss of function mutations. Thus, these ﬁnd- Results: Using a minigene assay, seven out of eight ings suggested a level of conservation and allowed to investigated probably affecting slicing variants (six deep prioritize PLS1 in which two novel likely-pathogenic mis- intronic and two exonic) were showed to disrupt normal sensevariantswereidentiﬁed.PLS1encodesﬁmbrin,oneof splicing patterns and result in frame shifting followed by themostabundantactin-bundlingproteinsofthestereocilia.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1237 Recently, it was demonstrated that Pls1-/- mice show a toperformcomprehensivephenotypingincombinationwith moderate/progressive form of HL across all frequencies appropriategeneticdiagnostictestingtoachieveanaccurate (PMID: 25124451). In silico protein modelling displayed diagnosis. This work was supported by GACR 17-12355S. that both variants affect the actin-binding domain-1, and P. Liskova: None. L. Dudakova: None. P. Skalicka: suggestedanoveralldestabilizationoftheproteinstructure, None. A.E. Davidson: None. reducing the protein’s ability to bind F-actin. Conclusion: Present results (genomic data of two inde- P02.52B pendent ADNSHL-families, literature updates, evidence of Molecular genetic study of primary congenital evolutionary constrains and protein modelling results) pro- glaucoma: the mutational analysis of CYP1B1and vide evidence that PLS1 isrequiredfor normal hearing and LTBP2 genes once mutated might cause ADNSHL. The identiﬁcation of PLS1 as a new ADNSHL-gene provides a new possible V. Szabó1, K. Knézy1, M. Csidey1, A. Szigeti1, E. Maka1, target for the development of therapeutic approaches. M. Bausz1, K. Sényi1, Z. Nagy1, G. Holló1, P. Kövy2, A.Morgan:None.D.Koboldt:None.E.Barrie:None. T. Krähling2, A. Tordai3, H. Andrikovics2, A. Bors2 E. Crist: None. M. Mezzavilla: None. F. Faletra: None. T.Mosher:None.R.Wilson:None.K.Manickam:None. 1Semmelweis University, Dept. of Ophthalmology, P. Gasparini: None. D. Dell’Orco: None. G. Budapest, Hungary, 2Central Hospital of Southern Pest - Girotto: None. National Institute of Hematology and Infectious Diseases, Budapest, Hungary, 3Semmelweis University, Dept. of P02.51A Pathophysiology, Budapest, Hungary Coincidental occurrence of Schnyder corneal dystrophy and posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy type 3 Introduction: Purpose of our study was to examine the mutationsofCYP1B1andLTBP2genesinpatientsandtheir P.Liskova1,L.Dudakova1,P.Skalicka1,2,A.E.Davidson3 relatives with primary congenital glaucoma, (PCG) and to evaluate genotype-phenotype correlations. 1First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, PatientsandMethods:molecularanalysisof26children Czech Republic, 2General University Hospital in Prague, of21familieswithPCGwasperformed.Firstweexamined Prague,CzechRepublic,3UCLInstituteofOphthalmology, the common mutation p.Glu387Lys of CYP1B1 gene using London, United Kingdom RFLP technique. In cases where wild-type or heterozygous p.Glu387Lys variant was detected, Sanger-sequencing of Purpose:Toreportthesimultaneousoccurrenceoftworare CYP1B1 was performed. Common p.Arg299Ter corneal dystrophies. (c.895C>T) mutation in LTBP2 gene was also genotyped. Methods:Casereportofa30-year-oldmalewithafamily Wecarriedoutaretrospectiveevaluation,usingclinicaldata historyofposteriorpolymorphouscornealdystrophytype3 as follows: age at diagnosis, ophthalmological status, pre- (PPCD3) was invited for ophthalmic examination. Sanger andpostoperativevisualacuityandintraocularpressureand sequencing of the coding regions and intron/exon bound- pedigree. aries of disease-associated genes, ZEB1 and UBIAD1 was Results: we identiﬁed two mutations in 20 patients performed. (76,92%)inourstudygroup.Thep.Arg299Ter(c.895C>T) Results: The clinical ﬁndings suggested co-occurrence of mutation in LTBP2 gene was found in one family in PPCD3 and Schnyder corneal dystrophy (SCD) in the pro- homozygous form. We identiﬁed the homozygous p. band.Thisdualdiagnosiswassupportedbygeneticﬁndings. Glu387Lys mutation of CYP1B1 gene in 12 members of 8 Hewasidentiﬁedtocarryapreviouslyreportedheterozygous families, in two siblings of one family we found two nonsense mutation in ZEB1; c.2157C>G, p.(Tyr719*), and a deletions causing frameshift (p.Arg355Hisfs*69/p. novel heterozygous missense mutation in UBIAD1; His401Leufs*24), compound heterozygous mutations c.569T>C; p.(Ile190Thr). The mother of the proband only describedintheliteraturebeforewereidentiﬁedinfurther5 carried the c.2157C>G ZEB1 variant and slit-lamp examina- families. No causative mutation was detected in 6 families tion of her corneas showed endothelial lesions characteristic (28,57%)neitherinCYP1B1gene,norinexaminedposition ofPPCD3.Thesisteroftheprobandcarriedthec.569T>Cin of LTBP2 gene. UBIAD1 and had corneal crystal deposition in her anterior Conclusion: No genotype-phenotype correlations were stroma consistent with the diagnosis of SCD. foundinourstudygroupwithPCG,onecouldnotconclude Conclusion: This case illustrates the coincidental occur- onthegroundsofgenotypeofclinicalcourseandprognosis. rence of two rare and genetically distinct corneal dystro- This is the ﬁrst study investigating the mutations of phiesinasinglepatient.Furthermore,ithighlightstheneed1238 CYP1B1 gene and the p.Arg299Ter (c.895C>T) in LTBP2 family and the previously reported families, CPAMD8- gene of PCG in Hungary. associated ASD should be taken into consideration as a V.Szabó:None.K.Knézy:None.M.Csidey:None.A. differential diagnosis for PCG. Szigeti: None. E. Maka: None. M. Bausz: None. K. H. Verdin: None. I. Balikova: None. J. Van De Velde: Sényi: None. Z. Nagy: None. G. Holló: None. P. Kövy: None. P.G. Kestelyn: None. B.P. Leroy: None. E. De None. T. Krähling: None. A. Tordai: None. H. Andri- Baere: None. kovics: None. A. Bors: None. P02.54D P02.53C Whole exome sequencing and linkage analysis of Expanding the CPAMD8-associated eye disease extended pedigrees to identify glaucoma susceptibility spectrum to primary congenital glaucoma: lessons genes learned from a large consanguineous family with pseudodominance P.Graham1,J.Peralta1,2,N.Blackburn1,2,J.Blangero1,2, M. Wirtz3, A. Hewitt1, D. Mackey4, K. Burdon1, H. Verdin1, I. Balikova1,2,3, J. Van De Velde1, J. Charlesworth1 P. G. Kestelyn2, B. P. Leroy1,2, E. De Baere1 1MenziesInstituteforMedicalResearch,Hobart,Australia, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, 2South Texas Diabetes and Obesity Institute, Brownsville, Belgium,2Department ofOphthalmology, GhentUniversity TX, United States, 3Casey Eye Institute, Portland, OR, and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, United States, 4Lions Eye Institute, Perth, Australia 3Department of Ophthalmology, Children Hospital Queen Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium The use of next generation sequencing in extended pedigreeshassigniﬁcantpotentialforidentifyingfunctional Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is deﬁned as an variants linked with complex disease. We are using whole isolated trabeculodysgenesis that occurs in the ﬁrst three exome sequencing (WES) of ﬁve large, complex families yearsoflifeandismostoftencausedbybiallelicmutations from Tasmania (Australia) and Oregon (USA) to identify in CYP1B1. Other early-onset, developmental glaucomas susceptibility genes for primary open-angle glaucoma mayarisesecondarytodevelopmentalmalformationsofthe (POAG), the leading cause of irreversible blindness world- anteriorsegmentoftheeye,andoccuraspartofananterior wide. Extended pedigrees, enriched for POAG, provide a segment dysgenesis (ASD) disorder. Consequently, these powerfultooltosearch forrareandprivategenetic variants overlapping phenotypes may challenge the diagnosis inﬂuencing the disease, where enrichment of rare variants of PCG. occurs as a function of segregation from the founders. The Here we studied a highly consanguineous Jordanian families in this study range in size from 48 to 201 pedigree with over 17 affected individuals in three gen- individuals (28 to 91 sequenced) and span 5 to 7 erations,displayingaclinicaldiagnosisofPCG.Inaddition generations. These families are being used to locate to PCG, the proband also presented with iris atrophy, quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for intraocular pressure ectropion uveae and corectopia. Moreover, the familial (IOP), an important glaucoma endophenotype. Variance historyrevealedthepresenceofotherocularmanifestations components linkage analysis of IOP was conducted on the in the family including cataracts, lens luxation and iris WESdata from249individuals andwe identiﬁedQTLson abnormalities. Using homozygosity-based ﬁltering of chromosomes 2,3,6,7 and 15. The chromosome 2 locus exome data, we identiﬁed a homozygous frameshift variant (2q22.2-24.3)spans a20millionbase pair region.Threeof inCPAMD8:c.785_788del,p.Tyr262Serfs*17.Thisvariant the ﬁve families independently contribute linkage informa- is not present in population databases and segregates with tion to this peak, which is a novel locus for both IOP and the phenotype in the family. Recently, CPAMD8 was POAG. Further analysis is being undertaken to identify reportedasthecauseforauniqueautosomalrecessiveASD genes with family speciﬁc, potentially deleterious variants; that is characterized by bilateral iris hypoplasia, ectopia whichwillbevalidatedinlargePOAGcase/controlcohorts. lentis, corectopia, ectropion uveae, and cataracts, clinical Finding genes involved with POAG susceptibility will features also observed here. Interestingly, two affected increase our understanding of the biological pathways siblings who were initially diagnosed with PCG received a involved with the disease process and from that, diagnostic clinical diagnosis of megalocornea in retrospect. In con- tools and more effective treatments can be developed. clusion, we identiﬁed the molecular cause underlying a P. Graham: None. J. Peralta: None. N. Blackburn: PCG phenotype in a large consanguineous family using None. J. Blangero: None. M. Wirtz: None. A. Hewitt: combined homozygosity-mapping and WES. Based on thisAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1239 None. D. Mackey: None. K. Burdon: None. J. chromosome and encodes phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate Charlesworth: None. synthetase 1 (PRS-1). We illustrate the clinical variability associated with decreased PRS-1 activity, ranging from P02.55A mildisolatedhearinglosstosevereencephalopathy.Oneof PRPS1loss-of-function variants, from isolated hearing the variants we identiﬁed has already been reported with a loss to severe congenital encephalopathy phenotype similar to our patient’s, whereas the other three were unknown. The clinical and biochemical information S. marlin1,2, O. Mercati1, M. Abi Warde3, G. Lina- weprovidewillhopefullycontributetogaininsightintothe Granade4, M. Rio5, S. Heide6, P. de Lonlay7, I. Ceballos- correlation between genotype and phenotype in this rare Picot8, M. Robert9, V. Couloigner10, J. Beltrand11, condition, in females as well as in males. Moreover, our N. Boddaert12, D. Rodriguez13, A. Rötig14, H. Prokisch15, observation of a new family in which hemizygous males S. Lyonnet2, N. Loundon10, J. Kaplan16, J. Bonnefont17, display hearing loss without any neurological or ophthal- A. Munnich18, C. Besmond18, L. Jonard1,17 mological symptoms prompts us to suggest analysing PRPS1in cases of isolated hearing loss. 1Centre de Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Institut S. marlin: None. O. Mercati: None. M. Abi Warde: Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, None. G. Lina-Granade: None. M. Rio: None. S. Heide: France, 2Laboratoire d’Embryologie et de Génétique des None. P. de Lonlay: None. I. Ceballos-Picot: None. M. Malformations Congénitales, INSERM UMR 1163, Institut Robert: None. V. Couloigner: None. J. Beltrand: None. Imagine, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, N.Boddaert:None.D.Rodriguez:None.A.Rötig:None. 3Département de NeuroPédiatrie, CHU, Strasbourg, H. Prokisch: None. S. Lyonnet: None. N. Loundon: France, 4Service d’Otorhinolaryngologie et chirurgie None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Bonnefont: None. A. Mun- cervico-faciale Pédiatrique, CHU, Lyon, France, nich: None. C. Besmond: None. L. Jonard: None. 5Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 6Département de P02.56B Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, BiallelicsequenceandstructuralvariantsinRAX2area Paris,France,7CentreRéférencedesMaladieshéréditaires novel cause for autosomal recessive inherited rod- du Métabolisme, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, dominated retinal disease Paris, France, 8Laboratoire de Biochimie Métabolomique et Protéomique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, S.VandeSompele1,C.Smith2,M.Karali3,4,M.Corton5,6, Paris, France, 9Service d’Ophtalmologie pédiatrique, K. Van Schil1, F. Peelman7, T. Cherry8, T. Rosseel1, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, H. Verdin1, J. Derolez1, T. Van Laethem1, K. N. Khan9, 10Service d’Otorhinolaryngologie et chirurgie cervico- M. McKibbin9, C. Toomes2, M. Ali2, A. Torella3, faciale Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP- F. Testa10, B. Jimenez11, F. Simonelli10, J. De Zaeytijd12, HP, Paris, France, 11Service Endocrinologie, Gynécologie J. Van den Ende13, B. P. Leroy1,12,14, F. Coppieters1, et Diabétologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants C. Ayuso5,6, C. F. Inglehearn2, S. Banﬁ3,4, E. De Baere1 Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 12Département de Radiologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent AP-HP; UMR 1163, Institut Imagine, Université Paris University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Section of Descartes, Paris, France, 13Service de NeuroPédiatrie, Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Hôpital Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 14Laboratoire University of Leeds, St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, de Génétique des maladies Mitochondriales, INSERM United Kingdom, 3Medical Genetics, Department of UMR1163, Institute Imagine, Université Paris Descartes, PrecisionMedicine, Università degli Studi della Campania Paris, France, 15Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy, 4Telethon Institute of Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 16Laboratoire Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy, 5Genetics de Génétique Ophtalmologique INSERM UMR1163, Department,InstitutodeInvestigaciónSanitaria-Fundación Institute Imagine, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 6Center France, 17Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital of Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, Madrid,Spain,7FlandersInstituteforBiotechnology(VIB), 18Université Paris Descartes, Institut Imagine, Paris, Department of Medical Protein Research, Faculty of France Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 8Center for Developmental Biology and Wedescribetwosporadicandtwofamilial cases with loss- Regenerative Medicine, Seattle Children’s Research of-function variations in PRPS1, which is located on the X Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 9Department of1240 Ophthalmology, St. James’s University Hospital, Leeds, Coppieters: None. C. Ayuso: None. C.F. Inglehearn: United Kingdom, 10Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary None. S. Banﬁ: None. E. De Baere: None. Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental Sciences, Università degli Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, P02.57C Naples, Italy, 11Department of Ophthalmology, Fundación Investigation of the role of a homozygous mutation in Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, BBS10 in non syndromic retinal degeneration 12Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 13Center for A. V. Vig1,2, E. Tavares2, O. Kehelwathugoda1,2, Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, A. Mollica1,2, J. Maynes2,1, A. Vincent2,1, E. Heon2,1 Belgium, 14Division of Ophthalmology, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States 1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada RAX2 encodes a homeobox-containing transcription factor, in which four monoallelic pathogenic variants have been Introduction: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is rare auto- previously described in autosomal dominant cone- somalrecessivedisorder,characterized byretinaldegenera- dominated retinal disease. Here, exome sequencing in a tion, obesity, digital anomalies, genito-urinary defects, and European cohort with inherited retinal disease (IRD) variable cognitive impairment. It is part of a broader (n=2086) revealed biallelic RAX2 sequence and structural pleotropic class of diseases called ciliopathies. Ciliopathies variants in ﬁve unrelated European index cases, displaying are caused by mutations in genes that play important roles non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa in the function of cellular signaling organelles called cilia. (ARRP)withanageofonsetrangingfromchildhoodtothe BBS10 encodes a chaperonin–like protein that mediates mid 40s (average mid 30s). Protein structure modeling of assemblyoftheBBSome,whichtransportsvesiclestocilia. the novel recessive missense variants points to loss-of- BBS10 is one of the most frequently mutated BBS genes, function while a dominant-negative effect is predicted for accounting for approximately 16% of cases. the previously reported dominant RAX2 alleles. Structural Methods:A29yofemalefromaconsanguineousfamily variants were ﬁne-mapped to disentangle their underlying had non-syndromic cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) and did not mechanisms and haplotyping of c.335dup in two cases have any mutation identiﬁed using standard of care clinical suggests a common Belgian ancestry. One additional genetic testing. Whole exome sequencing was performed. unrelated Belgian ARRP patient carried the same Candidate variants were assessed based on family segre- c.335dup allele in the absence of a second RAX2 coding gation, predicted effect on protein structure and function, or structural variant, suggesting a role for non-coding amino acid conservation, and population frequency. variantsinRAX2associatedARRP.Toconclude,wefound Results: Whole genome sequencing revealed a novel biallelic pathogenic variants in RAX2 to be associated with homozygous mutation in BBS10. The variant is rare and ARRP, revealing RAX2 as a novel gene for recessively segregated in the family. It occurs at a residue which is inherited rod-dominated retinal diseases. The identiﬁcation highly conserved among chaperonins. Based on modelling of RAX2 biallelic pathogenic variants in ﬁve families of ofBBS10secondarystructure,itispredictedthatthevariant Europeanoriginindicatesthatthisgenemayunderlieanon- could 1) affect multimer assembly or 2) alter how ATP negligiblefraction ofARRPcasesofother populationsthat hydrolysis induces the protein conformation changes that still lack a molecular diagnosis. The RAX2 mutational are vital to chaperone function. spectrum was broadened from sequence to structural Conclusions: We have identiﬁed a rare homozygous variants (SVs). Finally, the identiﬁcation of pathogenic variant we presume signiﬁcant in BBS10 in a patient with structural variants in RAX2 stresses the importance of SV non-syndromic CRD. We are exploring the functional assessment in WES and WGS data in IRD. consequences of thevariant through phenotyping a patient- Funding: BOF15/GOA/011; BOF/01D04716; FWO/ derived ﬁbroblast cell line. 1145719N; FWO/1802215N; Italian Telethon Foundation Funding: FFB, Mira Godard, McLaughlin Centre, ORF S.Van deSompele: None.C.Smith:None.M.Karali: A.V. Vig: None. E. Tavares: None. O. Kehelwathu- None. M. Corton: None. K. Van Schil: None. F. Peel- goda: None. A. Mollica: None. J. Maynes: None. A. man: None. T. Cherry: None. T. Rosseel: None. H. Vincent: None. E. Heon: None. Verdin:None.J.Derolez:None.T.VanLaethem:None. K.N. Khan: None. M. McKibbin: None. C. Toomes: P02.58D None.M.Ali:None.A.Torella:None.F.Testa:None.B. Clinical utility of a custom NGS panel in routine Jimenez:None.F.Simonelli:None.J.DeZaeytijd:None. evaluation of retinal dystrophies J. Van den Ende: None. B.P. Leroy: None. F.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1241 I. Hernan, E. Borràs, M. Gamundi, B. Mañé, V. García- Prompt, comprehensive genetic diagnosis of RD can assist Prieto, B. Delàs, M. Carballo in risk assessment, symptom management and selection of theappropriatetargetedtreatment.Thegenetictestingneeds Hospital de Terrassa (CST), Terrassa, Spain to take into account sequence alterations and copy number variants(CNVs).Weevaluatedtheratesandcharacteristics Introduction: Retinal dystrophies (RD) are a broad group of CNVs in 2754 patients tested using a comprehensive of clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders RD panel. affecting the retina. The non-syndromic forms of RD can DNA from patients was sequenced by targeted OS-Seq be attributed to mutations in more than 100 genes. using the Illumina NextSeq500 sequencing platform or the Consequently, next generation sequencing (NGS) technol- IDT xGEN Exome Research Panel using the Illumina ogies are among themost promising approaches toidentify NovaSeqplatform. CNVs weredetectedbyCNVkitandan mutations in RD patients. in-house developed deletion caller. Materials and Methods: A cohort of patients including CNVsin47genesmatchingthepatient’sphenotypewere independent cases with various forms of RD, especially reported in 4.6% of the cases. Of the CNVs, 71.1% were Retinitis Pigmentosa and Stargardt disease were analysed. partial gene deletions, 13.3% whole gene deletions, 3.1% To identify the RD causative gene, a custom SureSelect oneexondeletions,and0.8%partialexondeletions.11.7% capturepanel(Agilent) targeting 104genesassociated with of the identiﬁed CNVs were duplications (partial or whole non-syndromic retinal disease was developed. NGS librar- gene). 88.3% of CNVs were likely pathogenic or patho- ies were run on Illumina MiSeq or HiSeq Sequencer. genic,11.7%werevariantsofuncertainsigniﬁcance.Ofthe Analyses, annotation, ﬁltration and variant curation were likely pathogenic and pathogenic CNVs, 73.4% were done using GeneSystems software (Sistemas Genómicos). diagnostic. USH2A and PRPF31 were enriched in CNVs Whenitwaspossible,segregationanalysisofthecandidate compared to other genes. Notably, CNVs were identiﬁed variant was performed in additional family members by also in genes in which CNVs are not commonly reported, Sanger sequencing. e.g. ABCA4 and RPE65. Results: A pathogenic variant was identiﬁed in 25 RD These results highlight the importance of comprehensive patients (58%), including novel mutations in ABCA4, genetic testing for the diagnosis of retinal dystrophies. We CACNA1F,EYSandPRCDgene.In7patients,avariantof identiﬁed CNVs ranging from one exon to whole gene unknownsigniﬁcancewasdetected;afunctionaltestwould deletions in multiple genes. In addition, we detected a be necessary to assess their clinical signiﬁcance. relative high percentage of copy number duplications that Conclusions: Five novel variants have been identiﬁed as warrant further investigation. acausativemutationforRDusingthecustomcapturepanel. L. Guidugli: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- ThedesignedNGSassayachievesadetectionrateofalmost niﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.S.Tuupanen:A.Employment 60% and provides an adequate routine assay for genetic (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. analysis of patients with retinal disease. Mehine: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; I.Hernan:None.E.Borràs:None.M.Gamundi:None. BlueprintGenetics.K.Kämpjärvi:A.Employment(fullor B.Mañé:None.V.García-Prieto:None.B.Delàs:None. part-time);Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.L.Koskinen:A. M. Carballo: None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Wells: A. Employment (full or part-time); P02.59A Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Känsäkoski: A. Copy number variants (CNVs) identiﬁed by Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint comprehensive genetic testing of inherited retinal Genetics. M. Valori: A. Employment (full or part-time); dystrophies Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employ- ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.M. L. Guidugli1, S. Tuupanen1, M. Mehine1, K. Kämpjärvi1, Muona: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; L. Koskinen1, K. Wells1, J. Känsäkoski1, M. Valori1, Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila: A. Employment (full or I. Saarinen1, M. Muona1, E. Sankila2, S. Myllykangas1, part-time); Modest; Blueprint Genetics. S. Myllykangas: J. W. Koskenvuo1, T. Alastalo1 A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent 1BlueprintGenetics,Helsinki,Finland,2HelsinkiUniversity or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland Genetics. J.W. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter- Retinal dystrophies (RD) are disorders that damage the est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop- photoreceptors in the retina and cause visual impairment. erty); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A.1242 Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent Genetics. J. Känsäkoski: A. Employment (full or part- or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Wells: A. Genetics. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Schleit: A. Employment (full or part-time); P02.60B Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.M.Valori:A.Employment Prevalence and characteristics of RPGR ORF15 (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P. Sal- variants in patients with inherited retinal dystrophies menperä: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock J. Sistonen1, S. Tuupanen1, K. Kämpjärvi1, P. Siivonen1, options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; M. Mehine1, J. Känsäkoski1, K. Wells1, J. Schleit1, Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila: A. Employment (full or M. Valori1, P. Salmenperä1, E. Sankila2, E. Salminen1, part-time); Modest; Blueprint Genetics. E. Salminen: A. T. Alastalo1, J. Koskenvuo1, S. Myllykangas1 Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); 1BlueprintGenetics,Helsinki,Finland,2HelsinkiUniversity Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest Eye Hospital, Helsinki, Finland (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Introduction: The exon ORF15 in RPGR is a mutational Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint hotspot for X-linked retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP). How- Genetics.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent ever, it generally performs poorly in standard sequencing- or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint basedassaysduetoahighlyrepetitivepurine-richsequence. Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part- ToaddresstheclinicalimportanceofRPGRORF15andthe time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter- lack of high-quality next generation sequencing (NGS) est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop- -based diagnostics, we aimed to develop a comprehensive erty); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. clinical test for inherited retinal dystrophies. Materials and Methods: We optimized a whole exome P02.61C sequencing workﬂow with the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 Prevalence and genetic characteristics of RPE65- platform to cover 266 retinal dystrophy-associated genes, associated retinal disease includingthedifﬁcult-to-sequenceregioninRPGRORF15. WeevaluatedtheperformanceofRPGRsequencingin1587 J. Tommiska1, T. Alastalo2, K. Kämpjärvi1, L. Guidugli2, unselected patient samples. J. Känsäkoski1, K. Wells1, H. Västinsalo1, M. Kaare1, Results: In our clinical cohort, the overall diagnostic L. Sarantaus1, P. Salmenperä1, M. Gentile1, S. Bruce1, yield was 58%. A molecular diagnosis in RPGR was E. Sankila3, J. W. Koskenvuo1, S. Myllykangas1, identiﬁed in 5.7% (90/1587) of the patients. The 90 S. Tuupanen1 pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants consisted of 63 fra- meshift (70.0%), 21 nonsense (23.3%), three missense 1BlueprintGenetics,Helsinki,Finland,2BlueprintGenetics, (3.3%), and two consensus splice site (2.2%) variants, and SanFrancisco,CA,UnitedStates,3HelsinkiUniversityEye one gross deletion (1.1%). Seventy-one out of 90 (79%) Hospital, Helsinki, Finland pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were detected in the ORF15,ofwhich28(39%)wereinthedifﬁcult-to-sequence RPE65 variants are associated with severe retinal diseases central region between residues p.824 and p.1077. Female including Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and retinitis patients accounted for 24% of the diagnostic cases. pigmentosa (RP). Recent advancements in targeted therapy Conclusions: Our results highlight the importance of have incentivised genetic diagnostics and increased the RPGRORF15sequencinginretinaldystrophypatients.The efforts to identify RPE65 patients eligible for therapy. We high-quality NGS-based assay enables rapid and reliable evaluated the prevalence of RPE65 variants in 2240 retinal molecular diagnostics of RPGR ORF15, and enhances the dystrophy patients by using next-generation identiﬁcation of patients for ongoing gene therapy trials. sequencing (NGS). J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Methods:PatientswithLCA,RP,rod-conedystrophy,or niﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.S.Tuupanen:A.Employment earlyonsetretinaldystrophyweretestedataCLIAcertiﬁed (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. laboratory 2016 - 2018. Analysis was done using in-house Kämpjärvi:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; developed and validated NGS, bioinformatics and clinical Blueprint Genetics. P. Siivonen: A. Employment (full or interpretation. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Mehine: A.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1243 Results: Of 18 patients (0.8%) with RPE65-related dis- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint ease, 7 (38.8%) had LCA, 4 (22.2%) had RP, 6 (33.3%) Genetics. wereaffectedwithsevereearlyonsetretinaldystrophy,and one (5.5%) had congenital stationary night blindness P02.62D (CSNB). The median age at molecular diagnosis was 13 Identiﬁcation of pathogenic mutations in genes involved years (range 1 - 60 years). Of the 35 disease-associated in non syndromic hearing loss and Usher syndrome RPE65 variants 18 (51%) were missense, 10 (29%) protein truncating, 5 (13%) splice site variants, and 2 (5.7%) copy F. Cesca1,2, E. Bettella1,2, R. Polli1,2, E. Leonardi1,2, number variants (CNVs). Two (11.1%) patients carried a M. C. Aspromonte1,2, M. Bellini1,2, A. Sensi3, S. Bigoni4, CNV: a single exon deletion and a deletion of the whole P. Scimemi5,6, R. Santarelli5,6, A. Murgia1,2 RPE65 gene, respectively. Twelve (67%) patients had at least one loss-of-function variant. One patient had the 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment, c.1430A>G, p.(Asp477Gly) variant associated with auto- Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, University somal dominant disease and displayed an atypical of Padua, Padua, Italy, 2Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca form of RP. Pediatrica (IRP), Città della Speranza, Padua, Italy, 3U.O. Conclusions:RPE65hasasigniﬁcantroleinLCAandis Medical Genetics Romagna, M. Bufalini Hospital, Cesena, important in differential diagnostics of retinal dystrophies. Italy,4Medical GeneticsUnit,FerraraUniversityHospital, Our results also highlight the importance of high-quality Ferrara, Italy, 5Audiology and Phoniatric Service, genetic diagnostics covering both sequence variants and DepartmentofNeurosciences,UniversityofPadua,Padua, CNVs for optimized diagnosis and clinical care. Italy, 6Santi Giovanni e Paolo Hospital, ULSS3 J. Tommiska: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Serenissima, Venice, Italy niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Non-syndromic hearing loss is characterized by a vast Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other geneticheterogeneity;somesyndromicformshaveonsetas intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. isolated deafness and then evolve later in life, as Usher Kämpjärvi:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; syndrome.WedevelopedanNGStargetedgene-panelof59 Blueprint Genetics. L. Guidugli: A. Employment (full or genes using the Ion Torrent PGMTM platform combined part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Känsäkoski: withacustomizedbioinformaticpipelinefortheanalysisof A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint DNA samples from clinically highly selected subjects with Genetics. K. Wells: A. Employment (full or part-time); sensorineural hearing loss, negative for GJB2 mutations/ Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. H. Västinsalo: A. GJB6 deletions. Among the 158 subjects tested, 64 were Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint found to carry pathogenic variants (41%) that in 18 cases Genetics. M. Kaare: A. Employment (full or part-time); (28%) altered genes involved both in NSHL and Usher Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. L. Sarantaus: A. syndrome(ADGRV1,CDH23, MYO7A, PCDH15,USH1C, Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint USH2A); 13 of these subjects were under 15 years of age Genetics. P. Salmenperä: A. Employment (full or part- and were largely referred for NSHL. 7/18 positive-subjects time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter- carried mutation in CDH23, the most frequently mutated est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop- gene in our cohort. We achieved a diagnosis of Usher erty); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gentile: A. syndrome type I in three subjects (3 y.o.; 6 y.o.; 16 y.o.) Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint with congenital profound hearing loss, retinal anomalies/ Genetics.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent retinitis pigmentosa and/or history of motor delay, who or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint carried mutations in CDH23, MYO7A and PCDH15. Usher Genetics. S. Bruce: A. Employment (full or part-time); syndrome type II was diagnosed in a 12 y.o. boy referred Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila: A. Employ- for congenital bilateral mild hearing loss and subsequently ment (full or part-time); Modest; Blueprint Genetics. J.W. found to have early signs of retinal alteration. 13 novel Koskenvuo:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; likelypathogenicmutationswereidentiﬁedinNSHL/Usher Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock genes; 1 splice-site mutation has been further characterized options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; at the RNA level. We demonstrate the importance and Blueprint Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full efﬁcacyofintegratingthepowerfulNGStechnologywitha orpart-time);Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.E.Ownership comprehensive careful clinical evaluation, to reach an Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual earlier diagnosis and provide important prognostic and property);Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.S.Tuupanen:A. follow-up information.1244 F. Cesca: None. E. Bettella: None. R. Polli: None. E. Conclusions: We identiﬁed a novel heterozygous dele- Leonardi: None. M.C. Aspromonte: None. M. Bellini: tion of ACTG2 explaining the patient’s phenotype. Muta- None. A. Sensi: None. S. Bigoni: None. P. Scimemi: tions in ACTG2 cause visceral myopathy. The None. R. Santarelli: None. A. Murgia: None. microdeletion also included DGUOK. Mutations in DGUOK lead to autosomal recessive deoxyguanosine kinase deﬁciency causing neurological symptoms and liver P03 dysfunction.Nootherpathogenicmutationswereidentiﬁed Internal organs & endocrinology (lung, kidney, liver, in DGUOK. To the authors’ knowledge, no deletions in gastrointestinal) ACTG2 have previously been reported causing visceral myopathy. P03.01A M.Kraatari:None.H.Kokkonen:None.M.Mäkinen: VisceralmyopathyduetoanoveldeletionoftheACTG2 C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of gene: a case report drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Amgen. S. Tur- unen: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, M. Kraatari1,2,3, H. Kokkonen2,4, M. Mäkinen2,5, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Abbvie. J. Moila- S. Turunen6, J. Moilanen1,2,3, O. Kuismin1,2,3 nen: None. O. Kuismin: None. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University P03.02B Hospital, Oulu, Finland, 2Medical Research Center, Oulu Thegeneticbackgroundinagroupof56Polishpatients University Hospital, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, with suspected Alport syndrome 3PEDEGO Research Unit, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 4Northern Finland Laboratory Centre NordLab, P.Halat-Wolska1,E.Ciara1,L.Obrycki2,J.Antoniewicz2, Oulu, Finland, 5Cancer and Translational Medicine K. Gadomska-Prokop2, J. Kosińska3, M. Rydzanicz3, Research Unit, Department of Pathology, University of D. Siestrzykowska1, P. Stawiński3,4, B. Chałupczyńska1, Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 6Department of Children and D. Jurkiewicz1, P. Kowalski1, M. Pelc1, D. Piekutowska- Adolescents, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland Abramczuk1, K. Iwanicka-Pronicka1,5, P. Iwanowski1, J. Lesiak2, A. Łuba2, A. Niemirska2, A. Rogowska6, Introduction: ACTG2-related disorders are a part of D. Wicher1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, R. Grenda2, visceral myopathy, a rare hereditary myopathic degenera- K. Chrzanowska1, R. Płoski3, M. Litwin2 tion of gastrointestinal and urinary tracts causing chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction. Visceral myopathy is char- 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,TheChildren’sMemorial acterized by impaired intestinal function and motility Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of resulting in severe abdominal pain, malnutrition and even Nephrology, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, death. Inter- and intrafamilial variability is present. Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Diagnostic criteria include absence of mechanical obstruc- WarsawMedicalUniversity,Warsaw,Poland,4Department tion and histological examination of intestinal biopsies. of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Materials and Methods: We report a 10-year-old boy Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Audiology and referred to Oulu university hospital in March 2016 due to Phoniatrics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, pseudo-obstruction of the small intestine. Previously, per- Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Ophthalmology, The sistent ductus arteriosus was closed operatively and diag- Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland nosisoffunctionalgrowthhormonedisturbancewasplaced. He had suffered from periodic abdominal pain, vomiting Introduction: Alport syndrome (AS) is a clinically and andslowweightgainfrominfancy.Hisclinicalpicturewas genetically heterogeneous nephropathy caused by patho- severe and he was completely dependent on parental genic variantsinCOL4A3-COL4A5.Whilemost(80%) AS nutrition. Clinical suspicion of visceral myopathy was cases are X-linked, approximately 15% and 5% are aroused. autosomal recessive or difﬁcult to differentiate from thin Results: Deletion/duplication analysis of ACTG2 identi- basement membrane nephropathy (TBMN) dominant ﬁed a heterozygous likely pathogenic deletion encompass- forms. Digenic inheritance among COL4A3-COL4A5 or ing the entire ACTG2. Chromosomal microarray showed a their concomitance with other glomerulopathy or chronic heterozygous microdeletion 2p13.1 of 84 kb including the kidney disease (CKD) related genes, has been recently exons2-9ofACTG2andentireDGUOK.Thedeletionwas proposedtoexplainthevariablephenotypicexpressionand not identiﬁed in the parents and thus, was considered de incomplete penetrance frequently observed in AS patients. novo.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1245 Materials and Methods: NGS analysis of 55 glomer- in COL4A3 and COL4A4. All affected individuals develop ulopathy and CKD related geneswas performed in a group renal failure, usually as young adults. of 56 unrelated Polish patients with suspected AS. Carriers of a single autosomal mutation develop Thin Results: In all patients clinical diagnosis was conﬁrmed Basement Membrane Nephropathy (TBMN) associated at the molecular level. Overall, 17 known and 32 novel, with ‘benign familial haematuria’. We analysed a cohort of likely pathogenic alterations in COL4A3-COL4A5 were 119 individuals (29 probands and 85 relatives identiﬁed by identiﬁed. The inheritance was X-linked in 73% of cases, cascadetesting)withheterozygousmutationsinCOL4A3or remaining9%autosomalrecessiveand18%weredominant COL4A4 identiﬁed by Next Generation Sequencing and AS/TBMN. Changes were randomly distributed across all assessed genotype/phenotype correlations. 70% had hae- COL4A3-COL4A5 coding regions, however we revealed a maturia, 38% developed proteinuria, 21% had chronic recurrent COL4A5 variant c.1871G>A in twelve patients. kidney disease and 10% reached end stage renal disease. Additionally, four patients with this alteration had likely 36% of our cohort had a single mutation in COL4A4 pathogenic variant in COL4A3, HNF1B or MYH9, which c.2906C>G p.(Ser969Ter), representing 18% of cases of may modify disease’s severity. proteinuria. 50% of these patients developed proteinuria Conclusions: The results of this study broaden the gen- compared with 31% of patients with other mutations. The otypic spectrum ofAS,whichwillfacilitate futureresearch riskofeGFRfallingbelow60ml/minincreasedfrom6%to on the genotype-phenotype correlations. Multiple-gene 8% in patients with the COL4A4c.2906C>G p.(Ser969Ter) sequencing is an effective approach to obtain genetic mutation. Single COL4A3/4 mutations are recognised sus- information in AS, particularly about the mode of inheri- ceptibility factors for developing proteinuria, hypertension tance which is important for counselling and may help to and renal disease in later life, but these risks have pre- predicttheclinicalcourse,especiallyforthosepatientswith viously not been quantiﬁed. It is recommended that all mild, non-speciﬁc or atypical phenotype. patients with a single COL4A3/4 mutation should have Partially supported: CMHI-M29/18 annual checks of blood pressure and urine, with a low P. Halat-Wolska: None. E. Ciara: None. L. Obrycki: threshold for prescribing an ACE inhibitor, and this is None. J. Antoniewicz: None. K. Gadomska-Prokop: important for those with the high-risk genotype. None. J. Kosińska: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. D. In conclusion, this is the largest study ever performed of Siestrzykowska: None. P. Stawiński: None. B. Chałupc- the implications of carrying a single autosomal COL4A3/4 zyńska: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. P. Kowalski: None. mutationandourﬁndingsclarifytheriskofrenaldiseasein M. Pelc: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. K. this population. Iwanicka-Pronicka: None. P. Iwanowski: None. J. A.Cianﬂone:None.H.Storey:None.F.Flinter:None. Lesiak: None. A. Łuba: None. A. Niemirska: None. A. F. Forzano: None. Rogowska: None. D. Wicher: None. M. Krajewska- Walasek: None. R. Grenda: None. K. Chrzanowska: P03.04D None. R. Płoski: None. M. Litwin: None. Molecular genetic analysis in patients with clinically suspected autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease P03.03C Genotype/phenotype correlations in carriers of a single L. Obeidova1, V. Elisakova1, T. Seeman2, J. Reiterova3, autosomal COL44A3 and COL4A4 mutation J. Vcelak4, J. Stekrova1 A. Cianﬂone1,2,3, H. Storey4, F. Flinter1, F. Forzano1 1InstituteofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,FirstFacultyof Medicine, Charles University and General University 1Clinical Genetics department, Guy’s & St Thomas’ NHS Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Department ofPaediatrics,2ndFacultyofMedicine,CharlesUniversity of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetic in Prague and Motol University Hospital in Prague, and Maternal and Infantile Sciences (DINOGMI), Prague,CzechRepublic,3DepartmentofNephrology,First University of Genova, Genova,Italy,3Ospedale Policlinico Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and San Martino IRCCS-Medical Genetic Unit, Largo R. Benzi General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech 10, Genova, Italy, 4Molecular Genetics, Viapath, Guy’s Republic, 4Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Hospital, London, United Kingdom Republic Alport’s syndrome is complex: 85% cases show X linked Introduction: Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney inheritancewithpathogenicmutationsinCOL4A5and15% disease (ARPKD) is a severe form of chronic kidney autosomal recessive inheritance with pathogenic mutations disease, frequently diagnosed prenatally or in an early age.1246 ARPKD is primaly caused by mutations in the PKHD1 disability. But feeding difﬁculties, constipation, and other gene, nevertheless, phenotype of polycystic kidneys GI problems were also reported. Whether these symptoms clinically resembling ARPKD can be caused by mutations are due to primary impairment or a secondary effect of in number of other genes, such as HNF1β, PKD1, PKD2, alteredbehaviourorsideeffectsofpsychotropicmedication NPHPetc.Thus,themoleculargeneticanalysiscanbevery remains unclear. useful in differential diagnosis of ARPKD in patient. The We investigated the GI tract of patient-relevant Foxp1 resultsofmoleculargeneticanalysisinelevenpatientswith +/-mice. These mice have a lower body weight than wild clinically suspected ARPKD, who did harbor mutations in type animals and show altered feeding behaviour. Foxp1 other genes than PKHD1, are presented. was expressedin all GI sections and was reduced in Foxp1 Materials and Methods: The molecular analysis was +/-mice compared with WT. A pronounced atrophy of the carried out using next-generation sequencing method with tunica muscularis was detected in the oesophagus and enrichment capture-based and amplicon-based library pre- colon, caused by reduced muscle cell proliferation. Nitric paration. The panel of approximately 80 genes associated oxide-inducedrelaxationoftheloweroesophagussphincter with the formation of polycystic kidneys was analyzed. was impaired and achalasia conﬁrmed in vivo by mano- Results:Themostfrequentmutationsfoundinourgroup metry. Several Foxp1 targets previously identiﬁed by ofpatientswerevariantsintheTMEM67gene(5patients). microarray analysis in the brain were signiﬁcantly deregu- In three patients, mutation in PKD1 was detected (in one lated in the oesophagus of Foxp1+/- mice. The total gut patientincombinationwithPKHD1mutationintrans).Two transit was signiﬁcantly prolonged. Spatiotemporal maps patients harbored combination of two mutations: (1) muta- depicting the colonic contraction patterns revealed strongly tion in PKHD1 and TMEM237, (2) PKHD1 mutation and disturbed contractility and peristalsis. Overall, our ﬁndings deletion of 3 exons in the NPHP3 gene. In one patient, provide the ﬁrst evidence that GI disturbances in patients deletion of whole HNF1β gene was identiﬁed. with FOXP1 autism spectrum disorder may be caused by Conclusions: Because of an etiologic heterogeneity of impaired gut motility and achalasia, driven by FOXP1- polycystic kidney disease phenotype, the complex muta- dependent deregulation of genes. Furthermore, this is the tional analysis, encompassing analysis in other genes ﬁrst report of achalasia being caused by a heterozygous (especially TMEM67), should be used for reliable differ- gene deletion. ential diagnosis. Supported by the grant projects GAUK H. Fröhlich: None. M. Kollmeyer: None. M. Stuhlin- 1015, PROGRES- Q25/LF1 and RVO VFN64165 ger:None.V.Linz:None.D.Groneberg:None.A.Reigl: L. Obeidova: None. V. Elisakova: None. T. Seeman: None.E.Zizer:None.A.Friebe:None.B.Niesler:None. None. J. Reiterova: None. J. Vcelak: None. J. G. Rappold: None. Stekrova: None. P03.06B P03.05A HLA and non-HLA susceptibility genes to childhood Gastrointestinal dysfunction in autism spectrum steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome in the Japanese disorder: New insights from the Foxp1+/-mouse with population altered gut motility and achalasia X. Jia1, T. Horinouchi2, Y. Hitomi1, Y. Kawai1, K. Nozu2, H. Fröhlich1, M. Kollmeyer1, M. Stuhlinger1, V. Linz1, C.Nagano2,T.Yamamura2,M.Nagasaki3,K.Tokunaga1, D. Groneberg2, A. Reigl2, E. Zizer3, A. Friebe2, K. Iijima2 B. Niesler1, G. Rappold1 1Dept Human Genetics, Grad Sch Medicine, Univ Tokyo, 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Tokyo, Japan, 2Dept Pediatrics, Grad Sch Medicine, Kobe Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Univ, Kobe, Japan, 3Dept Integrative Genomics, Tohoku Germany, 2Institute ofPhysiology, University ofWürzburg, Medical Megabank, Tohoku Univ, Sendai, Japan Würzburg, Germany, 3Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany Idiopathic nephrotic syndrome (INS) is the most common cause of kidney disease in children, about 80% of pediatric Gastrointestinal (GI) dysfunction is common in individuals patients respond to steroid treatment and are classiﬁed as with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), but these symptoms steroid-sensitive NS (SSNS). Previous genome-wide asso- are often overlooked and it is still not clear how GI ciation studies (GWASs) have identiﬁed HLA-DR/DQ as dysfunction relates to the core features of ASD. thepredominantriskfactorsofchildhoodSSNS.Ourgroup FOXP1 syndrome is characterized by autistic traits, such reported the ﬁrst GWAS for childhood SSNS in Japanese. as social deﬁcits, language impairment, and intellectual Genome-wide signiﬁcant associations were identiﬁed inAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1247 HLA-DR/DQregionanddisease-associatedHLAallelesand #227810) linked to GLUT2 deﬁciency. Two boys are haplotypeswerefurtherclariﬁed(JAmSocNephrol,2018). affected by both Cockaine and GLUT2 deﬁciency. To identify other loci contributing to susceptibility to Fanconi-Bickels syndrome is related to SLC2A2 muta- childhood SSNS, especially in non-HLA regions, we tions (3q26) and glucose transporter protein-2 (GLUT2) performed an extended GWAS with a larger number of defect. The typical clinical picture is characterized by samples. Discovery stage including 897 patients with hepatorenalglycogenaccumulationresultinginhepato-and childhood-onset SSNS and 2,807 adult healthy controls nephromegaly. In this family the patients with SLC2A2 wascarriedoutintheJapanesepopulation,genotypedusing mutationshowgrowthretardation,majorhepatomegalyand Affymetrix ‘Japonica Array’. Whole-genome imputation renalfailure.Thehomozygousmutation isintronic:lVS9-1 was conducted using a phased reference panel of 2,049 g>a /IVS9-1g>a. healthy Japanese individuals (2KJPN panel). Quality In Cockaine syndrome, 2 genes are affected ERCC6 and control was performed to exclude the samples with low ERCC8. Here a new homozygous pathogenic variation has calling rate (<97%) and the variants with low genotyping been identiﬁed in ERCC8 (5q12.1): c.730C>T (exon 9) rate (<97%), minor allele frequency (MAF) <0.5% and (Calmel N et al. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016). ERCC8 Handy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) test p-value <1×10-5. encodes the CSA protein involved in DNA repair. The Association analysis was conducted using logistic regres- patients aging 15 to 28 years in the family show neonatal sion with the adjustment of gender and principal compo- photosensibility, growth retardation, dysmorphic features, nents. In this discovery GWAS, the most signiﬁcant lypoatrophy,intellectualdeﬁciency,lateonsetdeafnessand association was detected in HLA-DR/DQ region as we tremor. The RRS test (Recovery RNAsynthesis afterDNA reported before (P=2.98×10-32, odds ratio (OR)=0.34). damage) was altered and UDS test (unscheduled DNA Furthermore,tworegionsonchromosome19and18showed synthesis) was normal. ERCC8 is involved in Cockaine genome-wide signiﬁcant associations (p=3.28×10-18, Syndrome and UV-Sensitive syndrome, both very rare in OR=1.95; p=5.38×10-9, OR=1.65). Replication studies Europe (1/200000 and 1/1000000 respectively). were successfully performed in other Asian sample sets. The occurrence of several genetic pathology in the same X. Jia: None. T. Horinouchi: None. Y. Hitomi: None. familyisnowmorefrequentlypresented.Wereportherethe Y. Kawai: None. K. Nozu: None. C. Nagano: None. T. association of two very rare syndromes affecting most Yamamura: None. M. Nagasaki: None. K. Tokunaga: children in a unique family. None. K. Iijima: None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None. N. Calmels: None. H. Thorn: None. C. Poirsier: None. M. Spodenkiewiscz: None. E. P03.07C Gouy: None. L. Le Collen: None. R. Santer: None. B. Two genetic disease in one family: Cockaine Syndrome Digeon: None. A. Doe: None. A. Lebre: None. A. Leh- (ERCC8) and Fanconi Bickels (SLC2A2) mann: None. C. Obringer: None. V. Laugel: None. G. Thieﬁn: None. M. Doco-Fenzy1, N. Calmels2, H. Thorn1, C. Poirsier1, M. Spodenkiewiscz1, E. Gouy1, L. Le Collen1, R. Santer3, P03.08D B. Digeon4, A. Doe5, A. Lebre1, A. Lehmann6, Apparently isolated congenital hyperinsulinism due to C. Obringer7, V. Laugel7, G. Thieﬁn8 KDM6A mosaic pathogenic variant 1Service de Génétique, CHU-Reims, Reims, France, M. Yacobi Bach1, E. Elkon Tamir2, S. Ben Shachar1, 2Service de génétique, strasbourg, France, 3genetic, O. Eyal3 Hambourg, Germany, 4Service de Pédiatrie, CHU-Reims, Reims, France, 5Service de Neurologie, CHU-Reims, 1Genetics institute, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Pediatric Reims, France, 6Genome center Sussex university, Endocrinology institute, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Pediatric Cambridge,UnitedKingdom,7ServicedeGénétique,CHU- Endocrinology institute, Tel Aviv, Israel Strasbourg, strasbourg, France, 8Service de Gastroentérologie, CHU-Reims, Reims, France Introduction: Kabuki Syndrome- KS is a syndrome with multiple congenital anomalies. It is characterized by We report a rare consanguinous family suffering from 2 dysmorphic facial features, craniofacial and skeletal congenitalautosomicrecessivegeneticdisease.Theparents anomalies, dermatoglyphic abnormalities, mild to moderate are cousins and have 7 children. 3 boys and 1 girl show cognitive decline, and postnatal growth deﬁciency. Con- Cockainesyndrome(OMIM#216400)and3children(1girl genitalhyperinsulinismasthepresentingfeatureofKS,was and 2 boys) show Fanconi-Bickels symptoms (OMIM described in 10 affected individuals. The gene KDM6A is responsible for KS in approximately 5% of patients.1248 KDM6A mosaicism was reported in at least one patient candidate genes was done to specify the functional effects with typical KS manifestations. of the mutations. The variants found in potential candidate Case report: A 20-month-old girl diagnosed with iso- genes were validated and segregated by re-sequencing. lated,persistentcongenitalhyperinsulinismresponsiveonly After prioritisation of the best candidate gene, re- to Diazoxide treatment. She has no dysmorphic features, sequencing of this candidate gene in a cohort of 30 spora- normal development, and no structural anomalies. Mole- dic cases is warranted. cular Analysis of the coding regions and exon/intron Results: The ﬁltering of WES-data identiﬁed four rare boundaries of 16 genes responsible for congenital hyper- homozygous variants in ZNF512 (p.His90Arg), SMC6 (p. insulinism was performed on a clinical basis by targeted Thr679Met),BRE(p.Ser11Cys)andGCKR(p.Arg149Lys). nextgenerationsequencing.Amosaicpathogenicvariantin Conclusions: We suggest novel recessive candidate thegeneKDM6Ac.514C>Tp.Arg172Terwasdetectedinat genes for congenital chylothoraces. Re-sequencing in a least 20%. of the cells. No other variants were identiﬁed. cohort of 30 sporadic cases with congenital chylothoraces Discussion: It has been suggested previously that female and functional studies in zebraﬁsh of the most promising patients with KDM6A mutations have milder phenotypes candidate genes is pending. than males. This is the ﬁrst report of KDM6A pathogenic S. Schneider: None. A.C. Hilger: None. H. Thiele: variant causing isolated congenital hyperinsulinism in an None. J. Altmüller: None. A. Müller: None. H. apparentlyhealthygirl.Itislikelythatthecombinationofa Reutter: None. mosaic state of variant and female gender resulted in con- genital hyperinsulinism. We suggest the gene KDM6A will P03.11C be included in the molecular studies of isolated congenital A novel homozygous nonsense mutation (p.R516X) in hyperinsulinism. the SLC5A5 gene causing congenital hypothyroidism M.YacobiBach:None.E.ElkonTamir:None.S.Ben Shachar: None. O. Eyal: None. F.B.Isik1,M.D.Sozuguzel1,B.K.Aydin2,C.Parlayan1, M. Yildiz2, H. Cangul1 P03.10B Genetic Drivers of Congenital Chylothoraces 1Istanbul Medipol University, istanbul, Turkey, 2Kanuni SultanSüleymanTrainingandResearchHospital,istanbul, S. Schneider1,2, A. C. Hilger1,2, H. Thiele3, J. Altmüller3, Turkey A. Müller2, H. Reutter1,2 Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is the most common 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, neonatal endocrine disorder with an incidence of 1 in 3500 Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital, livebirthsand2%ofCHcaseshavefamilialorigin.Unless University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Cologne Center for a timely treatment is introduced, CH causes mental Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany retardationandgrowthdelay.Morethan10causativegenes havebeendescribedforthepathogenesisofinheritedCHto Introduction: Congenital chylothoraces (CCT) are rare date.InthisstudyweinvestigatedaMendeliancauseofCH fetal conditions, occurring in 1/10,000 pregnancies. Its in a consanguineous family with 2 affected children. Both clinical course varies from small thoracic effusions to life‐ casesshowedshortstature,mentalretardationandboneage threatening thoracic compression and secondary hydrops retardation. Next generation sequencing analysis of 16 fetalis. Primary CCT result from malformations of the candidate CH genes identiﬁed a homozygous nonsense thoracic lymphoid system, secondary CCT result from change (p.R516*, c.1546C>T) in the SLC5A5 gene cardiacanomaliesorinﬂammatorydisease.Previousstudies (NM_000453.2) in both cases. We conﬁrmed the presence suggest underlying genetic causes and found several genes of this variant by Sanger sequencing and both parents and to be mutated in some patients with lymphatic disorders. the unaffected sibling carried this variant at heterozygous The aim of this study is to investigate new genetic drivers state, underlying the co-segregation of the variant with the for primary CCT. disease status in the family. Moreover, this variant was not Methods: We applied whole-exome sequencing (WES) present in 400 ethnically matched control chromosomes. p. in two affected sibling pairs and their healthy parents. To R516*variantintheSLC5A5geneisnotcurrentlylistedas identify disease causing variants we applied standardized a mutation in clinical databases. Since (i) it introduces a ﬁltering of WES-data. First, we ﬁltered for autosomal- prematurestopcodoninthegene;(ii)co-segregateswiththe recessive and autosomal-dominant novel variants. Second, disease status in the family and (iii) is not present in 400 the predicted deleteriousness and the conservation of the ethnically matched control chromosomes, here we report it mutations was controlled. Third, further research on the as a novel mutation causing congenital hypothyroidism.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1249 F.B. Isik: None. M.D. Sozuguzel: None. B.K. Aydin: P03.13A None. C. Parlayan: None. M. Yildiz: None. H. Application of next-generation sequencing in the search Cangul: None. ofgeneticcausesforTaiwanesepatientswithsyndromic disorders of sex development P03.12D Molecular analysis of CYP21A2 gene in 100 patients M. Tsai with Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21- hydroxylase deﬁciency DepartmentofPediatrics,NationalChengKungUniversity Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan E. Fylaktou1, A. Sertedaki1, E. Charmandari1,2 Objective: This study aimed primarily to establish a rapid 1Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, andhigh-throughputgenetictestforsyndromicdisordersof First Department of Pediatrics, National and Kapodistrian sex development (DSD). Meanwhile, the applicability and University of Athens, Medical School, ‘Aghia Sophia’ effectiveness of next-generationsequencing wereevaluated Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Division of in searching for the remaining unknown causative genes of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Biomedical Research this inherited disease. Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece Methods: Patients with clinically diagnosis of DSD with additional dysmorphic features were recruited. We applied Introduction: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due the ﬁlter-based hybridization method as the main strategy to 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency is an autosomal recessive for whole exome sequence (WES) enrichment. The ampli- condition in which mutations of the cytochrome P450 21- ﬁedexomeswerehybridizedagainsttheDNAlibrariesand hydroxylase gene (CYP21A2) result in decreased synthesis sequenced subsequently. We ﬁnally used the integrated of glucocorticoids and often mineralocorticoids. The computing programs to call the genetic variants for DSD. clinical spectrum of the disease ranges from most severe, Results: We enrolled a total of 10 syndromic DSD to mild forms depending on the degree of 21-hydroxylase patients.Targetedampliconsweresmoothlygeneratedwith activity. adequate capture efﬁciency (coverage 98% of exons and Materials and Methods: Seventy-one cases (69 referred 100% >30 read depths). Among them, we found 2 patients forCAHand2forprenataldiagnosis),aswellas29siblings compatiblewithCHARGEsyndrome(oneisc.1480C>T,p. of carriers/patients with CAH, were tested for CYP21A2 Arg494X and the other is c.6571G>A, p.Glu2191Lys in gene mutations. Long range PCR was employed to selec- CHD7 gene), one with Robinow syndrome tively amplify the CYP21A2 gene against its pseudogene, (c.1571delCGGGTGGGGCAGCGfs in DVL1 gene), one followed by Sanger sequencing. MLPA analysis was with OPHN1 syndrome (c.1171T>A, p.Arg391Trp in undertaken for samples with an indication of duplication/ OPHN1 gene), and one with FG syndrome (c.1864C>T, p. deletion of the gene. Glu622Lys in FLNA gene). Results: Thirty patients with CAH were compound het- Conclusion: We identiﬁed a number of genetic variants erozygotesorhomozygotes,whilefortywereheterozygotes accounting for syndromic DSD in Taiwanese population. forCYP21A2genemutations.Oneoftheprenatalcaseswas Withidentiﬁcationofthesecausativegenes,itextendedour compound heterozygote, while the other was simple het- current understanding of sex development and related erozygoteforCYP21A2genemutations.Themostcommon congenitaldisorders.Furtherfunctionalveriﬁcationofthese mutations detected were as follows: p.V281L (25%), p. variants may be needed on the cell line models. P30L(14%),I2SpliceSite(10%),p.I172N(4%),p.Q318X Funding: This research was funded by the research (2%), p.P482S (3%), p.P453S (13%) and *13G>A 3' UTR grants awarded by the National Cheng Kung University (7%).Fourparentswithnoclinicalsymptomswerefoundto Hospital (NCKUH-10702001 and NCKUH-10307006). be compound heterozygotes for the non-classic form of M. Tsai: None. CAH. Eight samples harbored genomic rearrangements in one or both alleles of the gene. P03.14B Conclusion: Molecular analysis of the CYP21A2 gene is Splice site mutation in GRHPR gene in Iranian family essential for proper management of patients with CAH due with ESRD and nephrocalcinosis to 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency, as well as for genetic coun- seling and prenatal diagnosis. R. Miri Moosavi1, S. Saber1, A. Ebrahimi1, E. Fylaktou: None. A. Sertedaki: None. E. T. Malakoutian2 Charmandari: None.1250 1Jordan medical and genetic laboratory, Tehran, Iran, fasting hyperglycemia which is often discovered inciden- Islamic Republic of, 2Department of Nephrology, tally during routine medical screening. Hasheminejad Kidney Center, Iran University of Medical Materials and Methods: After clinical examination, 56 Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of patients with stable hyperglycemia, small 2 hour increment in OGTT, positive family history of type 2 or gestational Introduction:End-stagerenaldisease(ESRD)occurswhen diabetes and negative pancreatic antibodies were tested for your kidneys clearly begin to shut down. Both genetic and GCK-MODY. The promoter, whole coding region and epigenetic increase risk of ESRD. A three-to nine-fold ﬂankingintronicregionsoftheGCKgenewereanalyzedby greater risk of ESRD is observed in individuals with a Sanger sequencing. Pathogenicity of identiﬁed mutations family history of ESRD, so role of genetic study is was veriﬁed in reference databases for mutations related important nowadays. with GCK-MODY. Materialand Method:A 43-year-old, Iranian man were Results:17 different mutationsinGCK genewerefound detected ESRD with nephrocalcinosis (multiple stones). in 32 patients. Most of the mutations were in exon 7 (six According to nephrologist decision, primary hyperoxaluria mutationsin16patients)andinexon9(ﬁvemutationsin5 was considered so that was candidate for kidney and liver patients). The most common mutation was p.Thr228Met in transplant. So, genetic analysis was requested to approve exon 7 found in 8 patients from 4 different famillies. One mentioned diagnosis. Whole exome sequencing (WES) test patient was apparently homozygous for mutation p. was performed to ﬁnd variants responsible for renal Gly170Asp,butitstruehomozygosityisnotyetconﬁrmed, disorder. it can be a result of an allele dropout due to SNP in the His parents had consanguineous marriage. His father and primer region. In one patient we detected a novel variant two sisters suffered from nephrocalcinosis. According to c.806T>G, p.Phe269Cys in exon 7. results of WES test and analysis all genes responsible to Conclusions:GCK-MODYisfrequentlyunderdiagnosed renal disorder, one likely pathogenic/pathogenic variant and inadequately treated. Treatment is rarely necessary if (c.735-1G>A) in splice site region was found in GRHPR the mild hyperglycemia remains stable. gene. This gene is responsible for primary hyperoxaluria A. Merkler: None. A. Špehar Uroić: None. N. Krnić: type 2 with an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. None. H. Ljubić: None. D. Caban: None. A. Acman Clinical manifestations in patients were same as Men- Barišić: None. D. Kaštelan: None. J. Sertić: None. tioned disease, after examining of clinical data. Familial segregation was done and his father and two sisters are P03.16D carrier of this variant. Liver transplant might be considered Novel variants in DHH gene identiﬁed with 46,XY within kidney transplant in this case. gonadal dysgenesis Conclusion: Genetic analysis should be considered in renal failure to do the best management in therapy. A. Aghayev1, G. Toksoy1, S. Poyrazoglu2, B. Karaman1, R. Miri Moosavi: None. S. Saber: None. A. Ebrahimi: S. Avcı1, Z. Yavas Abalı2, U. Altunoglu1, F. Bas2, None. T. Malakoutian: None. F. Darendeliler2, S. Basaran1, Z. Uyguner1 P03.15C 1Dept. Med. Genet., Istanbul Med. Faculty, Istanbul GCK mutations in Croatian MODY patients University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Dept. Ped. Endocrinology, IstanbulMed.Faculty,IstanbulUniversity,Istanbul,Turkey A. Merkler1, A. Špehar Uroić1, N. Krnić1, H. Ljubić1, D. Caban1, A. Acman Barišić1, D. Kaštelan1,2, J. Sertić1,2 Introduction: Desert Hedgehog (DHH) a member of the hedgehog family, is located in 12q13.1 and acts on early 1University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, testicular development, testis cord formation and differ- 2University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia entiation of fetal Leydig cells. To date, six homozygous mutations have been described in DHH in 46,XY patients Introduction: Maturity onset diabetes of the young conferring phenotypes ranging from partial to complete (MODY) is clinically and genetically heterogeneous group gonadal dysgenesis, associated with of without of diabetes inherited in autosomal dominant manner. It polyneuropathy. usually occurs in adolescence or young adulthood and Materials and Methods: We investigated three patients accounts for at least 1-3% of all diabetes. GCK-MODY is from two families with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, for one of four most common type of MODY with estimated pathogenicsequencealterationsin31associatedgenes,with prevalence of 1:1000. It is characterized by mild, stable in-house-designed next generation sequencing (NGS) tar- getedgenepanel,usinganIonTorrentplatform.UltrasoundAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1251 and histopathological examination of the gonads with an E3 ubiquitin ligase, EDD1 in the cell. By utilizing electrophysiological examination of peripheral nerves were various cell culture models, we demonstrate that HBx and performed. Protein modeling was done to predict the effect TIP60 form a complex with EDD1. Interestingly, this of the missense mutations. hackingofTIP60protein,enablesincreasedproliferationof Results: We have identiﬁed three different homozygous hepatocytes, as conﬁrmed by various growth assays and mutations, one in two siblings, c.[1146G>A];[1146G>A], mechanistically by increased expression of TERT and (p.[Trp382*];[Trp382*]), and two in singleton case, decreased levels of TIP60 protein. Additionally, tissue c. [71G>C;1063C>T];[71G>C;1063C>T], (p.[Gly24Ala; microarray analysis(TMA)of HBV-positive malignant Arg355Cys];[Gly24Ala;Arg355Cys]). One of the siblings tumor samples demonstrate a strong correlation between presented with penoscrotal hypospadias, bilateral inguinal TIP60 and EDD1 levels,furthersupporting our hypothesis. testes,Mullerianstructureevidentonbiopsy,noresponseto WethereforeproposeTIP60asoneofthecellulartargetsin HCG at one-year and raised as female initially. Second HBx mediated viral infection and to utilize small molecule sibling presented micropenis, bilateral inguinal testes, no inhibitors against the identiﬁed ubiquitin-ligase in HBx- Mullerian structure, response was normal to HCG at age mediatedHBV-carcinogenesis.Inconclusion,ourstudyhas 14 days and raised as male. In addition, both patients suf- identiﬁedarelativelyunknownroleofHBx,itsdestabiliza- fered from polyneuropathy. Third patient presented at age tion of an epigenetic writer and the mechanism involved in 19 days with penoscrotal hypospadias, bilateral inguinal thisphenomenon.ThisworkwassupportedbyMOEgrants testes,noMullerianstructure,lowAMHandraisedasmale. (MOE AcRF Tier 1 T1-2012 Oct-04 and T1-2016 Apr-01) Conclusions: DHH mutation should be analyzed in and CSI(R-713-006-014-271). SH is supported by NUS- patients with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis for diagnosis and Research Scholarship awarded by NUS Yong Loo Lin the presence of potential neuropathy and gonadal tumors. School of Medicine. A. Aghayev: None. G. Toksoy: None. S. Poyrazoglu: S. Hora: None. N. Kumari: None. D. Rajagopalan: None.B.Karaman:None.S.Avcı:None.Z.YavasAbalı: None. L. Hooi: None. T.B. Toh: None. K.K. Lee: None. None.U.Altunoglu:None.F.Bas:None.F.Darendeliler: W.S. Teo: None. T. Tan: None. P.L. Chen: None. E.K. None. S. Basaran: None. Z. Uyguner: None. Chow: None. H.P. Koefﬂer: None. S. Jha: None. P03.17A P03.18B HBx destabilizes TIP60 in HBV-induced hepatocellular Next generation sequencing approach for determining carcinoma the molecular basis of familial hematuria S. Hora1,2, N. Kumari1, D. Rajagopalan1, L. Hooi1, O. Beltcheva1, K. Kamenarova1, K. Mihova1, A. Boueva2, T. B. Toh1, K. K. Lee1, W. S. Teo1, T. Tan2, P. L. Chen1, D. Roussinov3, G. Zlatanova3, V. Lazarov4, P. Miteva3, E. K. Chow1, H. P. Koefﬂer1, S. Jha1,3 M. Gaydarova3, B. Deliyska4, V. Mitev1, R. Kaneva1 1Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, Singapore, 1Molecular Medicine Center, Dept. of Medical Chemistry Singapore, 2Department of Biochemistry, National and Biochemistry, Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, Bulgaria,2NephrologyandDialysisClinics,SBALDB“Dr. 3Department of Biochemistry, National University of Lisichkova”, Varna, Bulgaria, 3SBAL Pediatric Diseases, Singapore, Sinagpore, Singapore Nephrology and Hemodialysis Clinic, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University -Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, TIP60(TAT-interactive protein of 60 kDa),is a lysine 4Nephrology Clinic, University Hospital “Queen acetyltransferase (KAT5) and acts as a haplo-insufﬁcient Giovanna”, Medical University - Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria tumor suppressor in multiple cancer-types. TIP60 isknown to be destabilized by different onco-viruses and this Introduction: Hematuria is a non-speciﬁc symptom of intrigued us to inspect its role in another onco-virus kidneyorurinarytract pathology. Thepresenceofbloodin pathogenesis, hepatitis B virus (HBV). HBV, the leading the urine could be due to trauma, infections, systemic cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 6th most disease, disorders of the coagulation or genetic mutations common cancer in the world. Among the four overlapping affecting the development and function of particular cell open reading frames of HBV, the HBV X gene (HBx) is andtissuetypes.Thepresenceoffamilyhistoryisindicative consideredthecausativeagentformalignanttransformation of a hereditary condition such as disorders of the basement associated with HBV infection. In this conference I am membrane, complement or podocytes. Differential diag- going to discuss data that show TIP60 being targeted by nosis of hematuria is crucial for successful treatment of the HBx,aproto-oncogeneofHBVproteasomally,byutilizing underlying condition.1252 Materials and Methods: Illumina TruSight One Materials and Methods: A 57-year-old patient with Sequencing Panel was used for mutation screening in 8 congenitaloculocutaneousalbinism, thrombocytopathy and families with multiple members with hematuria. The index lateonsetacceleratedpulmonaryﬁbrosiswasreferredtoour patients were referred with initial diagnoses of glomerulo- clinic.Negativefamilyhistoryofthesesymptomssuggested pathy, thin basement membrane nephropathy, uric acid autosomal-recessive mode of inheritance. We performed nephropathy, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, tubu- NGS analysis of proband-parents trio. Whole-exome lointerstitial nephritis and/or chronic kidney disease. libraries were prepared according to the Nimblegen Seq- Results: Using next generation screening we determined CapEZExomev3protocol andsequencingwas performed the genetic cause of hematuria in Bulgarian families. onNextSeq500forallofthem.Furthermore,weperformed Pathogenic variants were found in the type IV collagen in silico analysis of a virtual gene panel, including HPS1, (autosomalrecessiveanddominantvariantsinCOL4A4,X- AP3B1, HPS3, HPS4, HPS5, HPS6, DTNBP1, BLOC1S3, linked in COL4A5) and complement genes. Both missense and PLDN. and splice mutations, known pathogenic and novel variants Results: Whole-exome sequencing identiﬁed a com- were found. A potential role of heterozygous C1QC muta- poundheterozygousgenotypeinHPS1geneintheproband. tions in the pathogenesis of G3 glomerulopathy was We identiﬁed a pathogenic frameshift variant c.1189delC observed. (p.Gln397Serfs*2), resulting in a premature stop codon, Conclusion:Clinicaldiagnosisofhereditaryhematuriais associated with HPS. Furthermore, we identiﬁed a rare, oftenhinderedbyphenotypevariability,lackofinformation previously undescribed nonsense variant, c.1507C>T (p. fordiseaseprogressioninolderfamilymembers,difﬁculties Gln503*), resulting in a premature stop and mRNA in obtaining biopsy samples, etc. Addition of massive par- degradation. Presence of both variants was veriﬁed by allel sequencing of large gene to the diagnostic procedure Sanger sequencing. The following molecular-genetic ana- would allow timely and precise determination of the lysis of parents conﬁrmed their heterozygous carrier status. molecular cause of the disease. Conclusions: Compound heterozygous mutations in Grant references: D-73/2018; DUNK 01/2/2009 HPS1 in the proband lead to disruption of HPS1 gene and O. Beltcheva: None. K. Kamenarova: None. K. clinicalmanifestationofHermansky-Pudlaksyndromewith Mihova:None.A.Boueva:None.D.Roussinov:None.G. severe pulmonary ﬁbrosis leading to respiratory failure and Zlatanova: None. V. Lazarov: None. P. Miteva: None. death. This study was supported by Czech Ministry of M. Gaydarova: None. B. Deliyska: None. V. Mitev: Health (grant AZV 16-29447A) and Masaryk University None. R. Kaneva: None. (grant MUNI/A/1105/2018). J. Trizuljak: None. M. Doubková: None. A. Hraz- P03.19C dírová:None.Z.Vrzalová:None.I.Blaháková:None.L. A rare diagnosis: Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome in a Radová: None. Š. Pospíšilová: None. M. Doubek: None. patient with pulmonary ﬁbrosis, oculocutaneous albinism and thrombocytopathy P03.20D Genetic testing for hereditary hemorrhagic J. Trizuljak1,2, M. Doubková3, A. Hrazdírová3, telangiectasia diagnosis: identiﬁcation of new ENG and Z.Vrzalová2,I.Blaháková2,L.Radová2,Š.Pospíšilová1,2, ACVRL1 mutations in Italian families M. Doubek1,2 F. Cro’1, C. Lapucci1, E. Buscarini2 1Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, 1Synlab Italia - Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Central European Institute of Castenedolo,Italy,2Hospital"Maggiore"ASST-European Technology, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Reference Network (ERN) HHT, Crema, Italy Pulmonary Diseases and Tuberculosis, University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic Introduction: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by Introduction: Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) is an mucocutaneous telangiectasias, epistaxis and visceral arter- autosomal recessive disorder associated with oculocuta- iovenousmalformations(AVMs).HHT-type-1iscausedby neous albinism, bleeding diathesis, granulomatous colitis, ENG gene mutations and it is characterized by a high and highly penetrant pulmonary ﬁbrosis in some subtypes, incidence of pulmonary and cerebral AVMs. Type-2 is Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in caused by ACVRL1 gene mutations and it is associated HPS1,HPS3,HPS4andseveralothergenesleadtoclinical with hepatic AVMs. Mutations in SMAD4 gene cause manifestation of the disease. Juvenile Polyposis/HHT syndrome. Here we report twoAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1253 cases with suspected HHT-1 and HHT-2 in which new Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is characterized by absence ENG and ACVRL1 mutations where found. of enteric ganglia, primarily in the distal colon. Approxi- MaterialsandMethods:DNAwasextractedfromblood mately 18% of patients have additional anatomical samples of patients with suspected HHT. ENG, ACVRL1 malformations or associated neurodevelopmental disorders, and SMAD4 genes were analyzed by Next Generation including autism and intellectual disability. A subset of Sequencing and results were conﬁrmed by Sanger these patients have a known genetic syndrome in which Sequencing. HSCR has a variable expression or penetrance. In others, Results: Case-1: mutation c.780_781insCCTACG (p. the genetic etiology is unknown and we hypothesize that Ser260_Trp261insProTh) on ENG gene was identiﬁed in a rare Copy Number Variation (CNV) impacts their disease 16-year-old boy with epistaxis, PAVM and HHT-1 family development. Indeed, rare Copy Number (CN) losses were history. This mutation hasn’t been reported yet. Genetic signiﬁcantlyenrichedinpatientswithHSCRandadditional testing was also performed in patient’s three brothers and anomalieswithoutaknowncausalvariant(n=23,p=3.64E- twocousins.Themutationwasidentiﬁedinonebrother(4- 7),andnotinisolatedHSCR(n=20,p=0.700)orinHSCR years-old,experiencingbleedingepisodes)andbothcousins patients with a known RET or other causal variant (n=15, (9 and 7 years-old). Two brothers (15 and 9 years-old, p=0.705). Of the HSCR patients with additional anomalies without any HHT symptoms) resulted negative. Case-2: tested, at least ﬁve (three males and two females) had a mutationc.1327T>G(p.Cys443Gly)onACVRL1genewas largedenovoCNVandonemaleinheritedanX-linkedCN identiﬁedina45-years-oldwomanwithsevereliverAVMs loss. Patients with a known causal variant had a signiﬁcant and enlisted for transplantation, rare epistaxis and no HHT lower burden of the known HSCR predisposing risk family history. The mutation, consistent with clinical sus- haplotypes (P=0.0232), and isolated HSCR patients a pect of HHT-2, hasn’t been described yet. higherburden(P=0.0277)comparedtopatientswithHSCR Conclusions: Here we report new ENG and ACVRL1 and additional anomalies without a known causal variant. mutationsthoughttobecausativeofhereditaryhemorrhagic The rare CN losses identiﬁed are enriched for dosage telangiectasia.Furtherclinicalevaluationoncarrierandnot- sensitive genes, expressed in the developing mouse enteric carrier relatives will be performed. nervous system (ENS; p=1.760E-10): SLC8A1, DDR1, F. Cro’: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GNL1, GABBR1, MAPK8, UFD1L, FHIT, AKT3, TUBB, Synlab Italia. C. Lapucci: A. Employment (full or part- TBX2,BCAS3andUSP32.Additionally,thelatterfour,had time); Signiﬁcant; Synlab Italia. E. Buscarini: None. rare putative deleterious variants in HSCR patients without a deleterious CNV, conﬁrming our hypothesis that rare P03.21A CNV contributes to syndromic HSCR with unknown Enrichment for large deletions encompassing genes genetic etiology. expressedintheentericnervoussysteminHirschsprung K.C. MacKenzie: None. C.S. Tang: None. J.D. Wind- disease patients with additional associated anomalies ster: None. T. Le: None. B.M. de Graaf: None. R. van der Helm: None. Y. van Bever: None. C.E.J. Sloots: K.C.MacKenzie1,C.S.Tang2,J.D.Windster1,3,T.Le4,5, None. C. Meeussen: None. D. Tibboel: None. A. de B.M.deGraaf1,R.vanderHelm1,Y.vanBever1,C.E.J. Klein: None. R.M.H. Wijnen: None. S. Lyonnet: None. Sloots3,C.Meeussen3,D.Tibboel3,A.deKlein1,R.M.H. M.Garcia-Barcelo:None.P.K.H.Tam:None.M.Alves: Wijnen3, S. Lyonnet4,6,5, M. Garcia-Barcelo2, P. K. H. None. A. Brooks: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: None. E. Tam2, M. Alves1, A. Brooks1, R. M. W. Hofstra1, Brosens: None. E. Brosens1 P03.22B 1Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre – Sophia The impact ofNRG1expressions and methylation on Children’s Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department multifactorial Hirschsprung disease in Indonesia of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 3Paediatric Surgery, Gunadi1, A. Kalim2, N. Budi2, N. Arﬁan2, E. Purnomo3, Erasmus Medical Centre – Sophia Children’s Hospital, K. Iskandar3 Rotterdam,Netherlands,4ParisDescartes-SorbonneParis Cité University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France, 1Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing, 5Laboratory of embryology and genetics of congenital Universitas Gadjah Mada/Dr. Sardjito Hospital, malformations, INSERM UMR1163, Paris, France, Yogyakarta,Indonesia,2FacultyofMedicine,PublicHealth 6Service de Génétique, Necker Enfants Malades University and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta, Hospital,, Paris, France Indonesia, 3Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and1254 Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada/UGM Academic Hospital, Yogyakarta, Indonesia Background and aims: Lipid metabolism is under circadian control and long-term disturbance can lead to Background: Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a complex metabolic syndrome. Herein we test the hypothesis that genetic disorder characterized by absence of ganglion cells variants rs738409 (p.I148M) in PNPLA3 and rs58542926 inthegastrointestinaltract.Ourpreviousstudyrevealedthat (p.E167K) in TM6SF2 associated with pathogenesis of NRG1 rare variant frequency in Indonesian HSCR patients Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease also represent novel is <1%. Therefore, we wished to investigate NRG1 hypercholesterolemia-associated variants. We propose that expression and methylation effect on HSCR pathogenesis bothnon-synonymousvariantsassociatewiththechangeof in Indonesia. circadian behavior in hepatic cells and contribute to the Methods: NRG1 type I (HRGα, HRGβ1, HRGβ2, development of the hypercholesterolemia. HRGβ3, HRGγ and NDF43 isoforms), type II and type III MaterialsandMethods:DNAsamplesfromaSlovenian expressions in both ganglionic and aganglionic colon of general screening programme of preschool children, age of HSCR patients and control colons were analysed by real- 5, with known total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol diag- timepolymerasechainreaction(RT-PCR).Next,wetreated nosed with FH were obtained (N=121). The frequency of the extracted gDNA from HSCR patients’ and control variants rs738409 and rs58542926 were compared to Eur- colons with sodium bisulfate and analyzed the methylation opean individuals from 1000 Genomes and Exome variant pattern of NRG1 exon 1 with methylation-speciﬁc PCR. server databases. With CRISPR/Cas9 technology we gen- Results: NRG1 expressions were up-regulated in HSCR eratedHepG2 cellswithdifferent PNPLA3and/or TM6SF2 patients colon compared with control (type I: 13.81±1.79 genotypes and assessed the metabolic, expression and pro- vs.15.22±1.22 vs. 17.78±1.27; type II: 13.93±1.52 vs. liferation aspects. 15.67±1.52 vs. 16.57±1.02; type III: 11.98±2.86 vs.16.24 Results: An association between the PNPLA3 rs738409 ±2.28 vs. 17.51±1.48, respectively), with p-value of 0.02, and TM6SF2 rs58542926 minor allele with hypercholes- 0.03 and 0.01, respectively. Furthermore, HRGβ1/HRGβ2 terolemia has been identiﬁed if compared to European expressionsalmostreachedasigniﬁcantdifferencebetween males from 1000 Genomes (OR=1.451, 95%CI=1.093- ganglionic and control colons (13.07±1.32 vs. 14.75±1.26, 1.926, p<0.01; OR=0.3583, 95%CI=0.1536-0.8358, p=0.09). Most HSCR patients (80%) and controls (75%) p<0,05) and European Americans from EVS database revealed partially methylated NRG1. NRG1 methylation (OR=1.491, 95%CI=1.075-2.097, p<0.05; OR=0.3621, levels were lower in the ganglionic and aganglionic than 95%CI=0.1603- 0.8181, p<0,01). HepG2 cells were found control colons, however did not reach a signiﬁcant level homozygous for rs738409 minor allele and rs58542926 (p=0.31 and 0.13, respectively). majorallele.Wecurrentlyevaluatethecircadianexpression Conclusions:WeshowstheaberrantNRG1expressionin of both genes and the effect of cholesterol on genotypes of Indonesian HSCR patients and might not be due to DNA genetically modiﬁed cell lines. methylation. Moreover, our study provides further insights Conclusions: We propose both polymorphisms as a into the contribution of aberrant NRG1 expression in the novel hypercholesterolemia-associated genetic variant that HSCR pathogenesis. disrupts the circadian rhythm and contribute to elevated Gunadi: None. A. Kalim: None. N. Budi: None. N. plasma lipids. Arﬁan: None. E. Purnomo: None. K. Iskandar: None. Acknowledgement: Slovenian Research Agency pro- gram grant P1-0390 and graduate fellowship. P03.23C U.Kovac:None.J.Kovac:None.E.Malicev:None.E. The circadian aspect of PNPLA3 p.I148M and TM6SF2 A. Jasper: None. K. Trebušak Podkrajšek: None. T. p.E167K in hypercholesterolemia Battelino: None. K.K. Ryckman: None. D. Rozman: None. U. Kovac1, J. Kovac2, E. Malicev3, E. A. Jasper4, K. Trebušak Podkrajšek1,2, T. Battelino2,1, P03.24D K. K. Ryckman4, D. Rozman1 Large deletions are an underappreciated cause of hyperinsulinism 1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University Medical Centre Ljubljana, University T. W. Laver1, M. N. Wakeling1, R. Caswell1, B. Bunce2, Children´s Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3University of J. A. L. Houghton2, K. A. Patel1, K. Hussain3, S. Ellard1, Ljubljana, Blood Transfusion Centre of Slovenia, S. Flanagan1 Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4University of Iowa, Department of Epidemiology, Iowa, IA, United StatesAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1255 1Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Exeter, UniversityHospital,Madrid,Spain,3HospitalUniversitario United Kingdom,2Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 3Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar In the last decade, the number of Idiopathic Central Precocious Puberty (ICPP) cases has decreased thanks to Introduction: Hyperinsulinism is a disorder where dysre- the discovery of mutations in different genes. The gulated insulin secretion leads to hypoglycaemia. 50% of identiﬁcation of loss of function of the maternal imprinted patients do not have a mutation in a known gene. Large gene MKRN3 is the principal genetic cause of ICPP1-12. contiguous gene deletions have been reported as an More recently DLK1 has also been discovered as another extremely rare cause of hyperinsulinism but are not imprinted gene implicated in the pathogenesis of ICPP13. routinely screened thus these may be an underappreciated Aims of the study: 1) To analyze the presence of cause of the disorder. pathogenic variants in 13 genes related to GnRH pathway; We aimed to assess the contribution of large deletions to 2) To evaluate the diagnostic yield of the coding region the aetiology of hyperinsulinism. analysis of MKRN3; 3) To determine the presence of copy Materials and Methods: Using off-target CNV (copy numbervariation(CNV)ofDLK1andMKRN3genes;4)To number variant) calling from targeted next generation exclude uniparental disomy (UPD) of chromosome14. sequencing data we screened 865 patients with hyper- PatientsandMethods:patientswithICPPweregathered insulinism for large deletions (>1Mb). from 2015 to 2018. In 20 patients we analyzed the clinical Results: We identiﬁed causative contiguous gene dele- exome ﬁltered by 13 genes that included MKRN3. Addi- tions in 16/865 patients in our cohort. 13 were previously tionally,inanother11patientsweanalyzedMKRN3coding reportedtocausehyperinsulinism:Xchromosomedeletions regionbySangersequencing.Inallpatientsweanalyzed:a) (Turner syndrome) (n=3), 9p deletions (n=9) and a 16p DLK1 coding region by Sange sequencing; b) CNVs of deletion (n=1). We also identiﬁed 3 patients with over- MKRN3 and DLK1 by MLPA technique; c) UPD of chro- lapping de novo deletions on chromosome 20. These were mosome 14 using STRs markers. the only novel large (>1Mb) de novo deletions within the Results: from the 31 patients recruited we found two cohort. They are a new cause of hyperinsulinism. likely pathogenic variants in MKRN3 in one sporadic case Conclusions: 2% of patients in our cohort had causative and in one familial case. large contiguous gene deletions. This is likely to be an Conclusion: MKRN3 gene is the most frequent genetic underestimate of the prevalence of large deletions in cause both sporadic and familial ICPP so we propose it as hyperinsulinismassome patientswillhavehadcytogenetic the ﬁrst one to be screened in the genetic approach of testing prior to referral for hyperinsulinism genetic testing. patients with ICPP. Large deletions are a rare but signiﬁcant cause of hyper- N.V. Ortiz Cabrera: None. R. Riveiro Álvarez: None. insulinism and should be screened for as part of genetic M.A. López Martínez: None. J. Cruz Rojo: None. L. panel tests for the disease. We also highlight a novel cause GarzónLorenzo:None.T.GavelaPérez:None.P.Pérez of hyperinsulinism: 20p11.2 deletions. Segura: None. I. Aragón Gómez: None. L. Soriano Funding: Wellcome Trust and the Royal Society Guillén: None. M.J. Trujillo Tiebas: None. (105636/Z/14/Z and WT098395/Z/12/Z). T.W.Laver:None.M.N.Wakeling:None.R.Caswell: P03.26B None. B. Bunce: None. J.A.L. Houghton: None. K.A. Complex indel variant calling in a repetitive genomic Patel: None. K. Hussain: None. S. Ellard: None. S. region Flanagan: None. S. L. Wilkinson1, M. Edwards1, S. John1, F. Honti1, P03.25A J. Mackintosh2, D. J. Morris-Rosendahl1,3 Searching for genes related to idiopathic central precocious puberty (ICPP) in a Spanish cohort 1Clinical Genetics and Genomics Laboratory, Royal Brompton and Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London, N. V. Ortiz Cabrera1,2, R. Riveiro Álvarez2, M. A. López United Kingdom, 2Respiratory Medicine, Royal Brompton Martínez2, J. Cruz Rojo3, L. Garzón Lorenzo3, T. Gavela and Hareﬁeld NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Pérez2, P. Pérez Segura2, I. Aragón Gómez2, L. Soriano Kingdom, 3Genomic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Guillén2, M. J. Trujillo Tiebas2 Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom 1Hospital InfantilUniversitario NiñoJesús, Madrid,Spain, 2Health Research Institute-Jiménez Díaz Foundation1256 Introduction: Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) represents a 4Faculty of Sport, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, collection of many different pulmonary disorders that Slovenia, 5Research Unit for Comparative Microbiome interfere with the tissue and space surrounding the alveoli, Analysis, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research causing irreversible damage. We performed genetic testing Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, on a patient diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis 6Laboratory for Machine Inteligence, Faculty of Electrical who also had telomere lengths in the 1st centile. Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Materials and Methods: Next-Generation sequencing 7Slovenian NMR Centre, National Institute of Chemistry, was performed on patient DNA using our in-house Respi- Ljubljana, Slovenia, 8Department of Environmental gene™ panel of 172 genes. An in-house bioinformatics Physiology, Swedish Aerospace Physiology Centre, Royal pipeline, conﬁgured to interpret genes associated with rare Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 9Group for respiratory conditions, was used to classify SNVs Genetics, Animal Biotechnology and Immunology, and CNVs. Department of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty, Results: Initial analysis did not detect any potentially University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 10Faculty of pathogenic variants in genes associated with ILD in the Civil and Geodetic Engineering, University of Ljubljana, patient.AnotherlaboratoryreportedaRTEL1splicevariant: Ljubljana,Slovenia,11CenterforClinicalNeurophysiology, c.1266+3A>G.Furtherinvestigationusingdifferentvariant Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, callers detected a 78bp deletion at the RTEL1 exon 15/ Slovenia intron 15 boundary. Sanger sequencing and Tapestation analysis conﬁrmed the patient to be heterozygous for the Introduction: We explored pathophysiological conse- 78bp deletion. This deletion is classiﬁed as a VUS, but we quences of inactivity and hypoxia on human physiology consider it more likely pathogenic than benign. The c.1266 and intestinal microbiota in healthy males during the +3A>Gvariantshowedanallelicbalanceoflessthan40%, randomized crossover design of run-in (5 day) and and our results suggest it is an artefact caused by bioin- experimental phases [21-day normoxic bedrest (NBR), formatic misalignment of the complex repeat region. hypoxic bedrest (HBR) and hypoxic ambulation (HAmb) Conclusion: Complex and repetitive genomic regions (hypoxic ~4000 m simulated altitude)] in a strictly still prove challenging for routinely-used variant calling controlled laboratory environment, with balanced ﬂuid softwareandSangersequencing.Theerrorinvariantcalling and dietary intakes and 24/7 medical surveillance. may have resulted in a missed genetic diagnosis in this Materials and Methods: Incorporating system medicine patient. Increasing intronic ﬂanking regions for bioinfor- approach, intestinal transit spanning constipation, matic analysis when performing targeted sequencing and eosinophil-derivedneurotoxin,bile acids,dietcomposition, ‘training’ of bespoke bioinformatic pipelines will improve intestinal electrical conductivity, indole etc., along with detectionofcomplexvariantsintheexon/intronboundaries NMRmetabolomics,wereassessed.Furthermore,structure, and beyond. diversity and function of intestinal microbiota using shot- S.L. Wilkinson: None. M. Edwards: None. S. John: gun metagenomics were investigated. Finally, all observa- None.F.Honti:None.J.Mackintosh:None.D.J.Morris- tionswereintegratedandanalyzedincorrelationtonegative Rosendahl: None. physiological symptoms, related to obesity and metabolic syndrome in same participants. P03.27C Results: Inactivity negatively affected fecal consistency Changesinhumanphysiologyinresponsetothree-week and in combination with hypoxia aggravated the state of gut inactivity or how your training trains your microbiome inﬂammation. On the other hand, many of the microbial parameters were shown to lag behind the changes in human R. Šket1,2, T. Debevec3,4, S. Kublik5, M. Schloter5, physiology and intestinal environment, since signiﬁcant N. Treichel5, B. Murovec6, D. Makuc7, K. Pečnik7, changesinbacterialcommunityweredelayeduntilweekfour J. Plavec7, I. Mekjavić3, O. Eiken8, J. Kovač1, in HBR only, where members of the genus Bacteroides and Z. Prevoršek9, B. Stres2,10,11 proteins involved in iron acquisition and metabolism, cell wall,capsule,virulenceandmucindegradationwereenriched. 1University Medical Centre Ljubljana Slovenia,Divisionof Conclusions: Our multi-omics approach suggest a time- Paediatrics, Unit of Special Laboratory Diagnostics, dependent and complex interplay between the host physiol- Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Group for Microbiology and ogy (including apparent constipation), immunity (inﬂamma- Microbial Biotechnology, Department of Animal Science, tion), controlled diet, intestinal environment variables and Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, microbiome physiology during the acute cessation of exer- Slovenia, 3Department of Automation, Biocybernetics and cise. Funding: PlanHab project (Grant no. 284438) and Robotics, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Young Research Fellowship to RŠ (SRA#37426).Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1257 R.Šket:None.T.Debevec:None.S.Kublik:None.M. thenuclearfamily. WBandIHCstudies revealed markedly Schloter:None.N.Treichel:None.B.Murovec:None.D. reduced CARMIL2 expression in patient cells compared to Makuc: None. K. Pečnik: None. J. Plavec: None. I. controls. Comprehensive in vitro immunological analyses Mekjavić: None. O. Eiken: None. J. Kovač: None. Z. demonstratedseverelyreducedregulatoryT-cells(T )with reg Prevoršek: None. B. Stres: None. impaired CD4+ T cell proliferation and T generation. reg CyTOFanalysisrevealedsigniﬁcantshiftsintheinnateand P03.28D adaptiveimmunecellsofthepatientcomparedtoulcerative A novel homozygous CARMIL2 variant leads to colitis patients and healthy controls. infantile-onset colitis and gastrointestinal eosinophilic Conclusions: Pathogenic bi-allelic CARMIL2 variants disease without recurrent infections cause an immunodeﬁciency syndrome characterized by recurrent infections and skin lesions, occasionally with A. Kurolap1,2, O. Eshach Adiv1,2,3, L. Konnikova4,5,6, concurrent diarrhea. This study expands our knowledge on L. Werner7, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui8, M. Steinberg2, the immune landscape alterations caused by CARMIL2 V. Mitsialis5,6, A. Mory2, M. Y. Nunberg7, S. Wall5, defectsandunderscorestheroleofCARMIL2asacandidate R.Shaoul1,3,J.D.Overton8,A.R.Shuldiner8,Y.Zohar1,9, gene for early-onset inﬂammatory and eosinophilic GI T. Paperna2, S. B. Snapper5,6,10, D. S. Shouval7, H. Baris disease. The predominant GI manifestations in the patient Feldman1,2 warrant further study of CARMIL2 function in the gut. A. Kurolap: None. O. Eshach Adiv: None. L. Konni- 1The Bruce and Ruth Rappaport School of Medicine, kova:None.L.Werner:None.C.Gonzaga-Jauregui:A. Technion, Haifa, Israel, 2The Genetics Institute, Rambam Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 3Pediatric Pharmaceuticals Inc.. M. Steinberg: None. V. Mitsialis: Gastroenterology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, None. A. Mory: None. M.Y. Nunberg: None. S. Wall: Israel, 4Devision of Newborn Medicine, Department of None. R. Shaoul: None. J.D. Overton: A. Employment Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 5Division of Inc. A.R. Shuldiner: A. Employment (full or part-time); Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc.. Y. Zohar: Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 6Harvard None. T. Paperna: None. S.B. Snapper: B. Research Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 7Pediatric Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand Gastroenterology Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children’s pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig- Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, niﬁcant; NIH grants HL59561, DK034854, and AI50950; 8RegeneronGeneticsCenter,Tarrytown,NY,UnitedStates, the Helmsley Charitable Trust; and the Wolpow Family 9Institute of Pathology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Chair in IBD Treatment and Research. D.S. Shouval: B. Haifa, Israel, 10Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or and Endoscopy, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, consultant and pending grants as well as grants already MA, United States received); Signiﬁcant; The Israel Science Foundation and Jefferey Modell Foundation grants. H. Baris Introduction: Infantile-onset colitis refers to inﬂammatory Feldman: None. gastrointestinal (GI) disorders manifesting before the two years of age. Nearly 100 genes have been implicated in P03.29A syndromespresenting withearly-onsetcolitis.Weaimedto Clinicalutilityofgenepanelsequencingfordiagnosisof decipher the genetic basis of severe infantile colitis and early-onset chronic kidney disease eosinophilicGIdiseasewithoutrecurrentinfectionsina10- years-old boy, and subsequently characterize his GI and A. Domingo Gallego1, M. Pybus1, G. Bullich1, P. Ruiz1, immunological phenotypes. L. Lorente-Grandoso1, M. Furlano1, G. Fraga2, Materials and Methods: We used trio whole exome G. Ariceta3, M. Borregán3, J. Piñero-Fernández4, sequencing(WES)forpathogenicvariantdiscovery.Protein L. Rodríguez-Peña4, I. Llano-Rivas5, R. Sáez6, expression was studied using western blot (WB) analysis L. Guirado1, R. Torra1, E. Ars1 and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Immunological workupincludedinvitroT-cellstudies,ﬂowcytometryand 1Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital de la CyTOF analyses. Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Vall Results: WES revealed a rare homozygous variant in d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Universitario CARMIL2: c.1590C>A; p.Asn530Lys. The variant was Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 5Hospital predicted pathogenic and co-segregated with the disease in1258 Universitario Cruces, Bizkaia, Spain, 6Hospital Donostia, Introduction: Rare variants in telomere metabolism San Sebastián, Spain associated genes have recently been shown to be important contributors to idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF), regard- Introduction: Inherited kidney diseases (IKD) are the lessofthefamilyhistory.Weaimedtovalidatetheresultin leading cause of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in the ﬁrst an independent cohort of IPF patients. three decades of life and encompass a broad range of Methods:Wecalculatedthatinordertohave80%power nephropathies. to detect at least one IPF patient with a causative mutation Methods:Targetednextgenerationsequencingwithhigh inatelomere metabolism associatedgene,iftheprevalence sequencingdepthofalargeIKD-genepanelwasperformed of mutations is the same as in the above referenced study in426patientswithearly-onsetCKD(<30years),including (13.2%),wehadtosequence11patientsforthepresenceof patientswith:1)congenitalabnormalitiesofthekidneyand mutations in those genes. To get a random sample we urinary tract (CAKUT) (n=89) (with bilateral anomalies included 11 consecutive IPF patients, regardless of their and/or extrarenal defects and/or familial CAKUT), 2) renal familyhistoryofIPF,attheircontrolvisitatourUniversity cystic ciliopathies (n=180), 3) suspected inherited glo- Clinic. All patients had IPF diagnosis according to ATS/ merular disease (n=129) and 4) renal tubulopathies/ ERS/JRS/ALAT guidelines. Sequencing of telomere meta- nephrolithiasis/nephrocalcinosis (n=28). bolism associated genes was performed on the Illumina Results: Causative mutations were found in 64% (271/ platform. 426)ofpatients:42%(37/89)withCAKUT,76%(137/180) Results: Demographic statistics of our sample were with renal cystic ciliopathies, 60% (77/129) with suspected comparable to other IPF demographics with regard to age inherited glomerular disease and 71% (20/28) with renal (mean age = 71.2 years), IPF family history (1/11 (9.1%)) tubulopathy/nephrolithiasis/nephrocalcinosis. Copy number and sample male predominance (8/11 (72.7%)). In 2 out of variants were detected in 11% of all genetically diagnosed 11 (18.2%) patients, none of which had a family history of patients (29/271). Pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in 57 IPF and were therefore classiﬁed assporadic IPF cases, the different genes,10ofwhich(COL4A3,COL4A4,COL4A5, causative variant was found (NM_001283009(RTEL1): HNF1B,NPHP3,PAX2,PKD1,PKD2,PKHD1andTSC2) c.326_329del (p.I109fs); NM_001193376(TERT): explained 75% (203/271) of patients. c.1374delC(p.W459fs)).Despitesufﬁcientcoverage(mean Conclusion: Our IKD-gene panel allowed a precise coverage = 121X) we didn’t conﬁrm the causative variant molecular diagnosis in nearly two-thirds of patients with in the only patient with a family history of IPF in our early-onsetCKD.Thehighdiagnosisyieldofourapproach cohort. can be explained by 1) the efﬁcient detection of copy Conclusions: Causative variants in telomere metabolism number variants and variants in complex genomic regions, associatedgenesplayasigniﬁcantrolealsoinsporadicIPF. such as PKD1 gene, due to the high sequencing depth and J. Šelb: None. M. Rijavec: None.K. Osolnik: None. P. 2)thestrictclinicalinclusioncriteriatofavorgenetictesting Korošec: None. in patients with likely monogenic cause of nephropathy. Funding:InstitutodeSaludCarlosIII/FEDER(PI16/01998, P03.31C PI18/00362). A new form of hereditary iron overload unlinked to A. Domingo Gallego: None. M. Pybus: None. G. Bul- known hereditary hemochromatosis genes lich: None. P. Ruiz: None. L. Lorente-Grandoso: None. M.Furlano:None.G.Fraga:None.G.Ariceta:None.M. D. Wallace, N. Subramaniam Borregán: None. J. Piñero-Fernández: None. L. Rodrí- guez-Peña: None. I. Llano-Rivas: None. R. Sáez: None. IHBI, School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland L. Guirado: None. R. Torra: None. E. Ars: None. University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia P03.30B Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is normally caused by Large effect of rare variants with large effect sizes in homozygosity for pathogenic mutations in the HFE (sporadic) IPF (homeostatic iron regulator) gene. Other autosomal reces- sive forms of HH are associated with mutations in genes J. Šelb, M. Rijavec, K. Osolnik, P. Korošec involvedin iron homeostasisincluding hemojuvelin (HJV), hepcidin (HAMP) and transferrin receptor 2 (TFR2). University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases Autosomal dominant forms of iron overload are associated Golnik, Golnik, Slovenia with mutations in the cellular iron exporter ferroportin (SLC40A1), with a single case linked to a mutation in the 5’UTRoftheH-ferritingene(FTH1).WedescribeafamilyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1259 with apparent autosomal dominant iron overload with remaining healthy tissues. Several surgical techniques have characteristics similar to the classical form of ferroportin been developed for such purpose, including partial disease. The condition is characterised by elevated serum hepatectomy (PH), intraoperative portal vein ligation ferritin levels with normal or mildly elevated transferrin (PVL),andassociatedliverpartitionandportalveinligation saturation. Perls’ Prussian blue staining of liver biopsy for staged hepatectomy (ALPPS). Indeed, while clinical sections in two affected individuals show prominent iron outcomes are somewhat comparable, different procedures deposition in both Kupffer cells and hepatocytes. Sequen- show clinically distinct recovery patterns. The observable cing of the coding sequences and splice sites of genes clinicaldifferenceslikelymirrorsomeunderlyingvariations known to cause HH revealed no mutations in the proband. in the patterns of gene activation and regeneration Whole genome SNP genotyping was performed on 15 pathways. members of the pedigree. Linkage analysis showed Materials and Methods: We provided a comprehensive haplotypes on regions of chromosomes 1, 3, 12, 18 and comparative analysis of the gene regulation in regenerating 19 that were shared among the four most clearly affected rat livers temporally spaced at 24h and 96h after PH, PVL, members of the pedigree but not present in the three most and ALPPS using the next-generation RNA sequencing clearly unaffected members. These regions encompass a transcriptomics analysis. total of 93 megabases, approximately 3% of the human Results: The time-dependent factors appear to be the genome and contain over 1500 canonical genes. Impor- most important determinant of post-injury alterations of tantly,thesegenomicintervalsdonotcontaintheSLC40A1 gene expression in liver regeneration. Early transcriptomic geneindicatingthataffectedmembers ofthisfamilydonot changes that were found in all three procedures included have a variant form of ferroportin disease. cellcycleassociatedgenesandimmune-responseactivation D. Wallace: None. N. Subramaniam: None. genes as well as transcription factors, DNA replication regulators, G1/S-transition regulators, and cytokinesis. P03.32D Conclusions: The functional pathway and gene network Transcriptome proﬁling in regenerating rat liver after analyses revealed both unique and overlapping molecular partialhepatectomy,portalveinligation,andassociated mechanisms and pathways for each surgical procedure. liver partition and portal vein ligation for staged Identiﬁcationofmolecularsignatures,suchasgene-to-gene hepatectomy interactions, regenerative signaling pathways, speciﬁc to each surgical procedures further our understanding of key D. Colak1, O. Al-Harazi1, I. H. Kaya2,3, O. M. Mustafa1, regulators of liver regeneration as well as patient popula- F. Meng4,5, A. M. Assiri5,6,2, D. K. Dhar4,5,7, tions that are likely to beneﬁt from each procedure. Fund- D. C. Broering4,2 ing: This study is funded by KFSHRC Research Grants (2110006 and 2180030 to DC). 1Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Scientiﬁc Computing D.Colak:None.O.Al-Harazi:None.I.H.Kaya:None. Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research O.M.Mustafa:None.F.Meng:None.A.M.Assiri:None. Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, D.K. Dhar: None. D.C. Broering: None. 2College of Medicine, AlFaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Scientiﬁc P03.33A Computing Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital Biallelic LZTR1 mutation in a patient with non-classical and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Department Noonan phenotype ofSurgeryandOrganTransplantationCenter,KingFaisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi L. Tiberi1, A. La Barbera2, A. Provenzano2, P. Reho2, Arabia, 5Comparative Medicine Department, King Faisal E. Bosi2, M. Bozzola3, S. Giglio2,4 Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 6Institute for Research and Medical Consultations, 1medical genetics unit Department of Experimental and ImamAbdulrahmanBinFaisalUniversity,Dammam,Saudi Clinical Biomedical Sciences "Mario Serio" University of Arabia, 7Institute for Liver and Digestive Health, Florence, Florence, Italy, 2medical genetics unit Regenerative Medicine & Fibrosis Group University Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical College London, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Sciences, Florence, Italy, 3Pediatrics Unit University of Kingdom Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy Introduction:Liverhasphenomenalcapacitytoregenerate, which has been shown clinically where diseased liver parts Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant, multi- are removed to preserve and stimulate the growth of the systemic disorder caused by dysregulation of the RAS/1260 mitogenactivatedproteinkinase(MAPK)pathway.Hetero- typical clinical inclusion criteria. Patients in the database zygous variants in 11 known genes account for approxi- who provided all answers to the MODY calculator ques- mately 80% of cases. Whole exome sequencing (WES) tionnaire --106 GCK-MODY and 92 HNF1A-MODY-- studies recently identiﬁed the existence of a recessive form were included. The control group was established with 85 ofNoonansyndromecausedbybiallelicpathogenicLZTR1 T1DM individuals and it does not include any T2DM variants,howeverinformation onthephenotypesofLZTR1 patients due to insufﬁcient number of sub-35-year-old patients and functional properties of the mutations are T2DM cases in our outpatient clinic --as required in the limited. We report a 15-year-old boy with typical facial calculator model. features of NS in the absence of congenital heart defects, Results: The mean predictive value using the calculator cardiomyopathy, skin anomalies and intellectual disability. was 63.1% for GCK-MODY and 44.92% for HNF1A- The patient had been treated with growth hormone (GH) MODYpatients.Thisisincontrastwiththemeancalculator betweenages11and15withoutanyeffectongrowth.WES predictive value of 4.82% for T1DM patients. Only two revealed compound heterozygosity for a missense LZTR1 T1DM patients out of 85 obtained a calculator predictive variantc.2102C>G;p.Pro701Arginheritedfromhishealthy valuehigherthan25%--theminimumsuggestedcriteriafor father and a missense variant c.2062C>G: p.Arg688Gly genetic testing referral. Only 11 GCK-MODY patients and NM_006767 inherited from his mother. We identiﬁed the 33 HNF1A-MODY patients received a sub-25% score. variant inherited from his mother by exome reanalyses Sensitivity and speciﬁcity for both types of MODY were modifying pipelines parameters. Both variants were in the 77.78% and 97.65% respectively. GCK-MODY when BTB domain of LTZR1. Mutations in LZTR1, already compared to HNF1A-MODY obtained better sensitivity. known to be causal in familial schwannomatosis type 2, Conclusion: The model based on the Hattersley's group have been recently involved in some patients with calculator reliably indicated genetic testing for GCK- autosomal dominant and recessive Noonan syndrome in MODY patients among our sub-population of Polish which clinical manifestations include cardiomyopathy and patients. The obtained results for HNF1A-MODY patients intellectual disability. This is the ﬁrst case in which only were also satisfactory. facialfeatures,shortstatureandnoresponsetoGHtherapy M. Szopa: None. D. Ucieklak: None. I. Solecka: None. are reported. Recently LZTR1 was associated to sporadic I. Solecka: None. S. Mrozinska: None. J. Hohendorff: cerebral tumors so it is necessary a careful clinical None. M. Sani: None. M. Malecki: None. observation in order to consider GH treatment in patients carrying LZTR1 variants. P03.35C L.Tiberi:None.A.LaBarbera:None.A.Provenzano: AssessmentofgenesknowntobeassociatedwithMODY None. P. Reho: None. E. Bosi: None. M. Bozzola: None. by next-generation sequencing S. Giglio: None. O. Cilingir1, B. Durak Aras1, E. Simsek2, D. Cınar1, P03.34B M. A. Temena1, S. Arslan1, H. Bas1, E. Erzurumluoglu1, UtilityofMODYprobabilitycalculatoramongHNF1A- S. Artan1 and GCK-MODY Polish patients (a retrospective analysis) 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Eskısehır, Turkey, M. Szopa, D. Ucieklak, I. Solecka, I. Solecka, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, S. Mrozinska, J. Hohendorff, M. Sani, M. Malecki Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Eskısehır, Turkey JUMC, Krakow, Poland MODY (Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young) is a autosomal dominant heterogeneous form of diabetes Introduction: The most common form of monogenic mellitus which mainly affects children and young adults. diabetes is MODY. An easy-to-use MODY prediction The defect in beta cell function is the cause of MODY. model for identifying genetic-test indicated patient cases There are several known subtypes of MODY and each was developed in 2012: www.diabetesgenes.org/content/ subtype occurs by pathogenic variants of different genes. mody-probability-calculator. The aim of this study was to Approximately 80% of MODY occurs by GCK and validate the utility of this tool with MODY patients in the HNF1A pathogenic variants in European population, but Polish population. different ethnics may have different rates of subtypes. This Materials and Methods: Our MODY patient database study aimed to explain the genetic architecture of MODY- was established 18 years ago at the Department of Meta- suspected 132 Turkish patients. In this study, genes known bolic Diseases, JUMC, Krakow, Poland and was based on to be associated with MODY (SLC161,KLF11,G6PC2,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1261 Genes Mutations Genotype Classiﬁcation n Frequencies(%) GCK p.Arg191Trp(c.571C>T) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51 p.Gln38Pro(c.113A>C) Heterozygous Pathogenic 1 0,75 p.Arg191Gln(c.572G>A) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51 p.Thr228Met(c.683C>T) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51 p.Asp364Glyfs) Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75 (c.1090_1091insGCTGCGACCCTCGACCACCG)Novel p.Ala380Thr(c.1138G>A) Heterozygous VUS 2 1,51 p.Arg37Trp(c.109C>T) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51 p.Val227Met(c.679G>A) Heterozygous Pathogenic 1 0,75 BLK p.Ala71Thr(c.211G>A) Heterozygous VUS 6 4,54 p.Asp166fs(c.497delA) Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75 PDX1 p.Pro33Ala(c.97C>G) Heterozygous Pathogenic 2 1,51 RFX6 p.Glu75Gln(c.223G>C) Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75 c.2393+8T>C Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75 G6PC2 p.Tyr207Ser(c.620A>C) Heterozygous DAP 2 1,51 HADH p.Phe92Cys(c.275T>G) Heterozygous VUS 5 3,78 HNF1A p.Ala15Thr(c.43G>A) Heterozygous VUS 1 0,75 HNF1B p.His336Asp(c.1006C>G) Heterozygous Pathogenic 1 0,75 PDX1 p.Pro33Thr(c.97C>A) Compound PathogenicVUS 1 0,75 HADH p.Gly34Ser(c.100G>A) Heterozygous RFX6 p.Glu75Gln(c.223G>C) Compound VUS 1 0,75 HNF4A p.Gln10Terp(c.28C>T) Heterozygous VUS G6PC2 p.Tyr207Ser(c.620A>C) Compound DAP 1 0,75 HNF4A p.Gln10Terp(c.28C>T) Heterozygous VUS G6PC2 p.Tyr207Ser(c.620A>C) Compound DAP 1 0,75 INSR p.Val1012Met(c.3034G>A) Heterozygous VUS SLC16A1 p.Tyr359Ser(c.1076A>C) Compound VUS 1 0,75 GCK p.Thr229Met(c.686C>T) Heterozygous Pathogenic PAX4HNF4A c.539-5C>T Compound VUS 1 0,75 p.Ile463Val(c.1387A>G) Heterozygous VUS WILDTYPE 93 70,45 TOTAL 132 100 HADH,MOG,ZFP57,RFX6,GCK,PAX4,BLK,GLIS3,NEUR O. Cilingir: None. B. Durak Aras: None. E. Simsek: OG3,GLUD1,INS,KCNJ11,ABCC8, HNF1A,PDX1,HNF1B, None. D. Cınar: None. M.A. Temena: None. S. Arslan: INSR,NKX2-2,HNF4A,FOXP3) were sequenced by using None. H. Bas: None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. S. IonTorrent S5 and runs were then analyzed with bioinfor- Artan: None. maticspipeline.Of132patients,pathogencic,VUS(variant- unknown-signiﬁcance), and DAP(disease-associated poly- P03.36D morphism) were detected in 39 patients. Additionally, a Molecular characterization of a cohort of MODY new variant identiﬁed in GCK is classiﬁed as pathogenic patients from the North of Portugal according to ACGM criteria and this variant was deter- mined as de novo with the segragation analysis. The most F. E. D. R. Laranjeira1, I. Ribeiro1,2, A. Amado3, common pathogenic variants were seen in GCK and the E. Pinto1, J. Vilaverde3, A. R. Soares4, S. Rocha1, resultsareshownonthetable.Thenovelvariantdetectedin A. Carvalho3, S. Teixeira3, J. Dores3,2, C. Amaral3, GCKresultsinprematurestopcodonbecauseofframeshift I.Palma3,C.Reis4,M.T.Pereira3,C.Freitas3,C.Soares4, mutation. The pathogenic variants detected in different M. J. Oliveira3, R. Almeida3, G. Soares4, A. Fortuna4,2, genes revealed that NGS method is suitable to test genetic D. Quelhas1,2, H. Cardoso3,2 ethiology of multigenic diseases like MODY. Table: Mutations and frequencies (%) in 39 patients.1262 1Unidade de Bioquímica Genética, Centro de Genética (HNF1A), 4 Alpha (HNF4A) and 1 Beta (HNF1B) in Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young in Croatia Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigação Biomédica (UMIB), D. Caban1,2, A. Merkler1, H. Ljubić1, A. Špehar Uroić1, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, N. Krnić1, M. Čavlović Naglić3, L. Smirčić-Duvnjak3, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de D. Kaštelan1, J. Sertić1,4 Endocrinologia,CentroHospitalarUniversitário doPorto, Porto, Portugal, 4Serviço de Genética Médica, Centro de 1University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, GenéticaMédicaJacintodeMagalhães,CentroHospitalar 2University of Applied Health Sciences, Zagreb, Croatia, Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal 3Merkur University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia, 4University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia Introduction: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a group of monogenic disorders of autosomal Introduction: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young dominant transmission resulting from a primary defect in (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes that is insulin secretion, associatedwithpancreatic β-cell dysfunc- characterized by an early onset (usually before 25 years), tion. It is the cause in approximately 2% of diabetic autosomal dominant mode of inheritance and a primary patients, butit isfrequently misdiagnosed astype 1 ortype defect in pancreatic β-cell function. MODY is a common 2 diabetes. Although fourteen different genes have been form of monogenic diabetes and it may account for 1% to implicated, mutations in the glucokinase gene, GCK, and 2% of all diabetes cases in Europe. Many people with genes coding for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1α, 1β and 4α MODY are misdiagnosed with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. (HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A, respectively), are the most MaterialsandMethods:Alladultsubjectswithdiabetes common causes of MODY, accounting for up to 70% of onset under age of 45 years and currently older than 18 mutated alleles. years. Other inclusion criteria are: evidence of endogenous Methodology: 112 patients with criteria for MODY type insulin secretion (fasting or random C-peptide ≥ 0.2 nmol/ diabetes, from adults Endocrinology or Genetics consulta- L) and negative glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies tion, underwent molecular genetics testing at UBG. Mole- (GADA), islet cell autoantibodies (ICA) and islet tyrosine culargeneticsstudieswereperformedbySangersequencing phosphatase 2 (IA2). We analysed 44 patients for HNF1A- ofoneormoreofthefollowinggenes,accordingtoclinical MODY, 14 patients for HNF4A-MODY and 8 patients for suspicion: HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A and HNF1B. HNF1B-MODY. For identiﬁcation of mutations in the Results: We presentthe molecular characterization of 24 codingandpromoterregionofanalyzedgenes,weusedthe patients where a deﬁnite or probable causing mutation was Sanger sequencing method. identiﬁed, thus 21%. Fourteen (58%) are HNF1A-MODY, Results: We identiﬁed six different mutations in nine eight (33%) are GCK-MODY and two (8%) are HNF1B- patients for subtype HNF1A-MODY. These mutations are MODY.Eighteendifferentmutationswereidentiﬁed-10in located in exons 2, 3, 4 and 6, but the greatest number are HNF1A, 6 on GCK and 2 on HNF1B - including 3 novel found in exon 4, p.Gly292Argfs*25. For subtype HNF1B- mutations: c.1146_1156del and c.1422_1424delGCCin- MODYweidentiﬁedonemutation,p.Val458Glyinexon7. sCAG in HNF1A and c.863T>C on GCK. No HNF4A-MODY gene mutations were identiﬁed in any Conclusions: The prevalence of HNF1A-MODY and of patients analyzed. GCK-MODY in our cohort is much lower than the values Conclusions:CorrectlyidentifyingMODYhasimportant described. The MODY spectrum in Portugal is expected to implications for treatment, surveillance of complications be different from the one reported in other populations and andassociated extra-pancreatic disorders, andidentiﬁcation willberevealedafterthestudyofremainderMODYgenes. of affected and at-risk family members. F.E.D.R. Laranjeira: None. I. Ribeiro: None. A. D. Caban: None. A. Merkler: None. H. Ljubić: None. Amado: None. E. Pinto: None. J. Vilaverde: None. A.R. A. Špehar Uroić: None. N. Krnić: None. M. Čavlović Soares: None. S. Rocha: None. A. Carvalho: None. S. Naglić: None. L. Smirčić-Duvnjak: None. D. Kaštelan: Teixeira: None. J. Dores: None. C. Amaral: None. I. None. J. Sertić: None. Palma: None. C. Reis: None. M.T. Pereira: None. C. Freitas: None. C. Soares: None. M.J. Oliveira: None. R. P03.38B Almeida: None. G. Soares: None. A. Fortuna: None. D. MODY genes HNF1A, GCK and HNF4A pathogenic Quelhas: None. H. Cardoso: None. variant spectrum in pediatric patients P03.37A M. Šukys, V. Ašmonienė, R. Traberg, D. Čereškevičius Mutations in the Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 AlphaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1263 Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, and Chemical Engineering, Western Norway University of Kauno klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania Applied Sciences, Bergen, Norway Introduction: Maturity onset diabetes of the young Introduction: Variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor- (MODY) is a rare form of diabetes which is caused by 1alphagene(HNF1A)cancauseMaturity-OnsetDiabetesof pathogenicvariantinoneofthethirteenknownresponsible the Young (MODY3). MODY3 patients, who are often genes, but mostly in 3 genes: HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A. misdiagnosed as type1/type2 diabetes, are important to Correct diagnosis might allow change treatment, especially identify, since they can beneﬁt from sulfonylurea treatment when it is mistaken for type 1 diabetes. Here we analyzed ratherthaninsulin.Theaimofthisstudywastofunctionally genetic variants in Lithuanian pediatric patients with investigate possible pathogenic effects of 11 HNF1A suspected monogenic diabetes. variants from the Norwegian MODY registry, in order to Materials and Methods: We performed GCK, HNF1A, provide a precise diagnosis and treatment. HNF4A genes Sanger sequencing for pediatric patients (0- Materials and Methods: The Norwegian MODY reg- 18 years old) for whom there was mild hyperglycemia or istry includes 2125 individuals with suspected MODY. were diagnosed type 1 diabetes with negative antibody HNF1A variants (Sanger identiﬁed) were investigated by markers (glutamic acid decarboxylase, insulin and transactivation (luciferase assay), protein expression insulinoma-associated-2 antibodies) in the year 2017-2018. (immunoblotting), DNA binding (electrophoretic mobility Results:32patientswereanalyzedforall3genes,orone shift assay) and nuclear localization assays. ofthemdependingonclinicalsituation.50%ofthemhadat Results:AllHNF1Avariantsinvestigatedwereclassiﬁed least second degree relative with anamnesis of diabetes or as variants of uncertain signiﬁcance. Variants p. hyperglycemia. For 8 of the patients we found GCK non- (Ala116Thr),p.(Lys222del)andp.(Asn266Ser)showedlow synonymous heterozygous variants which were previously transcriptional activity (15-36%). p.(Ala116Thr) and p. reportedaspathogenic.2patientshadheterozygousvariants (Lys222del) demonstrated low DNA binding (23% and in HNF1A: one with frameshift variant c.872dupC and 17%), and impaired nuclear localization. Moreover, p. another nonsynonymous variant c.809A>C which was not (Lys222del) exhibited low protein expression (26%). Car- reported earlier. This variant changes amino acid in DNA riersoffunctionallyimpairedvariantsmanifestedwithearly binding region (p.Asn270Thr), cosegregates in patients diabetes-onset (<25 years). The autoantibody status was family as patients father and grandmother (father‘s line) negative or not tested. Carriers of p.(Ala116Thr) and p. were diagnosed with diabetes. Also, as multiple in silico (Lys222del) had a family history of diabetes. The p. predictors showed as pathogenic variant, we ascertained (Ala116Thr)-carrier had earlier been treated with sulfony- variant as likely pathogenic. lurea with no optimal effect. Her sister (also carrier), is Conclusion: In our study, only 1/3 of patients were treated successfully with sulfonylurea. The p.(Lys222del) provenforcarryingadiseasecausingalleleofallsuspected and p.(Asn266Ser) patients are currently treated with insu- MODY patients. One patient had novel variant with no lin/metformin, and should be considered shifted to sulfo- previous report. nylurea. The remaining variants were either functionally M. Šukys: None. V. Ašmonienė: None. R. Traberg: normal or moderately impaired. None. D. Čereškevičius: None. Conclusions: Functional investigation of HNF1A var- iants should support precision medicine in MODY3 P03.39C patients. Functional characterization of HNF1A variants Grants: Helse Vest, Norwegian Diabetes Association, identiﬁedintheNorwegianMODYdiabetesregistrycan foundation of K.G. Jebsen implement precision medicine in diabetes clinics I.Aukrust:None.A.Kaci:None.P.Svalastoga:None. J. Molnes: None. L. Bjørkhaug: None. P.R. I. Aukrust1,2, A. Kaci2,3, P. Svalastoga2, J. Molnes1,2, Njølstad: None. L. Bjørkhaug4, P. R. Njølstad2,3 P03.40D 1Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University New generation sequencing as an effective method of Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2Center for Diabetes Research, diagnosing patients with various form of monogenic Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, diabetes Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Pediatrics and Adolescents, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, M. Borowiec1, K. Antosik1, P. Mludzik1, A. Zmyslowska2 Norway, 4Department of Biomedical Laboratory Sciences1264 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Objectives: Nephronophthisis is an autosomal recessive Lodz, Lodz, Poland, 2Department of Pediatrics, disease genetically very heterogenous. Currently is Diabetology, Endocrinology and Nephrology, Medical described25genesresponsibleforupto70%ofthedisease University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland from which 30-40% is caused by NPHP1 gene deletion. The main symptoms are kidney degeneration and ﬁbrotic Introduction:Monogenicformsofdiabetesrepresent5-7% tissueformation,leadinginrenalfailureofteninchildhood. of all diabetes types. They are a heterogeneous group of Other less common symptoms include growth retardation, disorders caused by mutations in single genes, most of anemiaandmetabolicchanges.Thediseaseiscausedbythe which regulate the pancreatic β cells function. The aim of presenceoftwocausalmutationsfromparents,formationof the study was to determine the genetic background in disease de novo is rare. We describe three families their patients referred to the Outpatient Genetics Clinic of the children have a deﬁned clinical diagnosis of Centre for Monogenic Diabetes in Lodz, Poland. nephronophtisis. Materials and Methods: The study group consisted of Methods:WetestedDNAisolatedfromperipheralblood 379 patients with suspected monogenic diabetes aged from and the molecular analysis of genes associated with 3 months to 38 years diagnosed from February 2017 to nephronophthisis was performed by MLPA and custom January 2019. They were referred based on the age of designed NGS. Found causal mutations were veriﬁed by diagnosis, family history, autoantibodies status, preserved Sanger sequencing. insulin secretion, different clinical course of diabetes or Results: By the analysis of 3 patients with clinical coexistence of other symptoms. The next generation diagnosis of nephronophtisis we found homozygous causal sequencing(NGS)methodwasperformedusingadesigned mutations in two of them and two different heterozygous panel of 35 genes (SureSelect, Agilent) and the following causal mutations (compound heterozygote) in one of them. platforms and programs: Variant Studio (Illumina®), Phe- Conclusion: Molecular genetic testing conﬁrmed a clin- nIX (Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin) and IGV (Broad ical diagnosis of nephronophtisis in all three patients. Institute). Follow-up segregation of causal variants in the patients’ Results: Various forms of monogenic diabetes were families identiﬁed healthy carriers of these variants and in conﬁrmed in 75/379 (19.8%) of patients. 40 pathogenic one family we conﬁrmed the diagnosis in affected siblings. variants of the GCK gene (MODY2), 8 variants of the The knowledge of causal mutations is important not only HNF1A gene (MODY3), 7 variants of the HNF4A gene for conﬁrmation of the diagnosis, but also for healthy car- (MODY1), 7 variants of the BLK gene (MODY11), 7 var- riers in case of pregnancy planning and possible prenatal iants of the KCNJ11 gene (PNDM - permanent neonatal testing. diabetes mellitus), 5 variants of the HNF1B gene (RCAD - J. Indrakova: None. N. Havranova: None. M. Dvor- renal cysts and diabetes syndrome) and 1 variant of the akova:None.I.Uhliarikova:None.J.Rydlova:None.M. ABCC8 gene (PNDM) were identiﬁed. Zelinova: None. R. Kremlikova Pourova: None. J. Las- Conclusions: The NGS method seems to be effective tuvkova: None. A. Boday: None. diagnostic tool for patients with monogenic diabetes. Sup- ported by the grants No 2015/19/B/NZ5/02243, 502-03/2- P03.43C 159-02/502-24-307 and 502-03/2-159-02/502-24-306. PEMT, PCYT1 A and B polymorphisms in children M. Borowiec: None. K. Antosik: None. P. Mludzik: with obesity None. A. Zmyslowska: None. P. Tutac1, N. Andreescu1, A. Mihailescu1, D. Tiugan1, P03.41A V. Seraﬁm1, C. Zimbru1, C. Paul2, I. Velea2, Analysis of genes associated with the development of M. Niculescu1, M. Puiu1 nephronophthisis 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes, J. Indrakova1, N. Havranova1, M. Dvorakova1, Center of Genomic Medicine, Timisoara, Romania, I.Uhliarikova1,J. Rydlova1,M.Zelinova2, R. Kremlikova 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes, Pourova2, J. Lastuvkova3, A. Boday1 Pediatrics Discipline, Timisoara, Romania 1AGELLaboratories,NovyJicin,CzechRepublic,2Charles Introduction:VariationsinPCTY1AandBgenesassociate univerzity2ndFacultyofMedicineandUniversityHospital with alterations of PCTY1 expression and of phosphati- Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk's Hospital in dylcholine (PC) synthesis. PC, the major glyceropho- Usti nad Labem, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic spholipid in eukaryotic cells, can be synthesized by three pathways: the de-novo pathway, also known as KennedyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1265 pathway,theLandscycleandthephosphatidylethanolamine Introduction: Circulating cell-free DNA (ccfDNA) analy- methyl transferase (PEMT) pathway. PC biosynthesis is sis has been lately used as a minimally invasive method in required for normal very low-density lipoprotein secretion cancer diagnostics. Currently, there is a scarce amount of from hepatocytes and generation of arachidonic acid information on adenoma derived ccfDNA. We examined (ARA); its inhibition may lead to excess storage of lipids the possibility to detect pituitary adenoma (PA) derived within liver, contributing to the development of obesity- ccfDNA, by performing targeted NGS on ccfDNA using associated hepatosteatosis. semiconductor sequencing. Aim: Whether PCTY1A, PCTY1A B and PEMT gene Materials and Methods: Blood samples used were polymorphisms in obese children associate with obesity- obtained from ﬁve NFPA patients before PA surgery. Six- related somatometric and biochemical parameters. teen tumor speciﬁc mutations each in unique gene (dis- Materialand Method: 200 obese children, aged 7to 18 covered in exome sequencing) were targeted in ccfDNA. yearsold;BMI>+2SD;abdominalcircumferenceabovethe Results: Sequencing coverage was 6191X on average 90th percentile; +/- HTA and dyslipidemia or insulin (range444-13026).Intwomutationsites(twopatients)the resistance. PCTY1A (rs 1580820) and PCTY1B (rs alternate allele was in less than in 10% of reads: RYR1 (G/ 4898190), PEMT(rs1109859, rs12103822, rs16961845, A,2.27%),MPRIP(C/T,3.65%).Fivemutations(fromtwo rs4244593, rs4479310, rs7214988, rs7946, rs8068641, patients) had the alternate allele close to 50% of reads: rs936108, rs13342397, rs6502603) were analysed using VPS13D (C/T, 48%), LDLRAD2 (C/T, 47%), SPEN (A/G, next generation sequencing. 49%), GPATCH4 (C/T, 58%), G6PC2 (C/G, 46%). The Results: PCTY1A, PCTY1B and PEMT rs1109859 var- alternate allele was in less than in 0.1% of reads in nine iations were positively correlated with glycemia, choles- mutations, however, the estimated background alternate terol, HDLc, total LA, ARA, BMI, cardiac frequency, and allele rate in non-mutation sites also was below 0.1%. arterialandsystolicbloodpressure.PCTY1AandPCTY1B Conclusions: Results indicate that while it is possible to polymorphisms were correlated with plasma choline, and detect somatic mutations found in adenoma in ccfDNA possiblywithplasmabetaineand5-methyltetrahydrofolate. using semiconductor sequencing the source of mutated Conclusion: Genetic variations involved in choline ccfDNA molecules should be further researched. Mutation metabolism were associated with alterations in choline, rate in 50% of reads could be due to somatic mosaicism or folate, and cholesterol metabolism in obese children, and due to increased tumor cell apoptosis/necrosis in these could play important roles in the severity of associated patients. metabolic alterations. Acknowledgement: This work was Research was supported by the European Regional performed at The Center of Genomic Medicine, POSCCE Development Fund project no.1.1.1.1/16/A/066: “Mole- Project, SMIS:48749, and funded by POC Project Nutri- cular markers of pituitary tumor development, progression Gen, SMIS:104852. and therapy response”. P. Tutac: None. N. Andreescu: None. A. Mihailescu: H. Niedra: None. K. Megnis: None. R. Peculis: None. None. D. Tiugan: None. V. Seraﬁm: None. C. Zimbru: V. Rovite: None. I. Balcere: None. I. Konrade: None. J. None.C.Paul:None.I.Velea:None.M.Niculescu:None. Stukens: None. V. Pirags: None. J. Klovins: None. M. Puiu: None. P03.45A P03.44D Exome sequencing of non-functioning pituitary Detection of adenoma derived circulating cell-free DNA adenomas reveal tumors with high amount of somatic of human pituitary adenoma using semiconductor mutations and previously reported genes sequencing R. Pečulis1, V. Rovīte1, H. Niedra1, I. Balcere2, H. Niedra1, K. Megnis1, R. Peculis1, V. Rovite1, J. Nazarovs3, J. Stuķēns3, I. Konrāde2, V. Pīrāgs1,3,4, I. Balcere2, I. Konrade2, J. Stukens3, V. Pirags1,3,4, J. Kloviņš1 J. Klovins1 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga East Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga East Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 3Pauls Stradiņš Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 3Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 4University of Latvia, Faculty of Medicine, Riga, Latvia, 4University of Latvia Faculty of Medicine, Riga, Latvia Latvia Introduction: The most commontype ofpituitary diseases is pituitary adenomas (PA). Although not undergoing1266 metastasis, PAs are responsible for increased mortality and mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC). We studied genetic morbidity. Genetic causes of PAs are known in a minority relationshipbetweenpatients’germlineDNA,tumourtissue of cases: several genes are implicated in familial PA. somaticDNA,DNAofPS andMSC obtained from culture Somatic mutations in GNAS and USP8 are cause in to trace origin of each type of cultured cells. subgroups of sporadic GH and ACTH secreting PA, Materials and Methods: PA patients were enrolled to respectively. Exome and genome sequencing is used to nationalbiobank-GenomeDatabaseofLatvianPopulation study PA genetics nowadays, but is hampered by hetero- from Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital where geneity of PAs. transsphenoidal surgery of PA was performed for all MaterialsandMethods:Exomes(TruSeqRapidExome patients. Exomes (Illumina TruSeq_Rapid_Ex- TargetedRegions v1.2) of normal - tumor DNA pairs of ome_TargetedRegions_v1.2) of germline, tumour somatic, seven non-functioning PA patients were sequenced using PS and MSC were sequenced using Illumina NextSeq with Illumina NextSeq. Data were analysed using Isaac-Starling 75bppairedendreads.Sequencingdatawereanalyzedwith pipeline. Somatic mutations were reviewed with IGV2.2.4. Illumina Basespace Enrichment App (v3.0.0) aligning to Sangersequencingvalidationwasperformedforasubsetof human HG19 reference genome using Isaac Genome mutations covering all PA patients. AlignmentSoftware,variantscalledwithStarlingalgorithm Results: Various somatic mutation rate was observed in and variants annotated with Illumina Annotation Engine. the exomes of sequenced tumors. Two PAs were hyper- Filtered variants were reviewed using IGV 2.3.14. mutatedwith272and671somaticmutations.OtherﬁvePA Results: PAs contain low amount of tissue speciﬁc hadalowsomaticmutationratebetweenoneto12somatic mutations(median4,range2-6).Somaticmutationsofthe mutation per exome. VPS13D in hypermutated tumor and primarytumourcanbedetectedintherespectivePS,butnot RYR1 had somatic mutations and had been reported con- in the respective MSC. Genetic alterations of MSCs corre- taining somatic mutation previously in GH secreting ade- sponded to mutations in PA patients’ germline DNA. nomas. Somatic mutations in G6PC and SMARCAD1 Conclusions: Using exome comparison we were able to previously have been detected in adenomas of different trace origin of PS and MSC cell cultures, showing that location. genome of PS represents genome of PA while MSC most Conclusions: Some PAs contain a signiﬁcantly higher likely represent normal cells of pituitary or surrounding amount of somatic mutations than expected from non- tissues. metastasizing tumor. Somatic mutations in genes reported V.Rovite:None.R.Peculis:None.I.Mandrika:None. previously in connection with PA provide research targets R. Petrovska: None. K. Megnis: None. I. Balcere: None. for upcoming studies. The study was supported by ERDF J.Stukens:None.I.Konrade:None.A.Breiksa:None.J. grant 1.1.1.1/16/A/066. Nazarovs: None. V. Pirags: None. J. Klovins: None. R.Pečulis:None.V.Rovīte:None.H.Niedra:None.I. Balcere: None. J. Nazarovs: None. J. Stuķēns: None. I. P03.47C Konrāde: None. V. Pīrāgs: None. J. Kloviņš: None. Improved mapping quality and coverage in highly homologous PKD1 gene enable high diagnostic yield in P03.46B ADPKD Tracingoriginofculturedpituitaryadenomacellsusing “omics" analysis S.Valo1,J.Tallila1,M.Kaare1,H.Jalanko2,J.Sistonen1, A. Korppoo1, K. Gall3, M. Muona1, P. Salmenperä1, V. Rovite1, R. Peculis1, I. Mandrika1, R. Petrovska1, M.Gentile1, S.Myllykangas1,T.Alastalo3,J.Koskenvuo1 K. Megnis1, I. Balcere2, J. Stukens3, I. Konrade2, A. Breiksa3, J. Nazarovs3, V. Pirags1,3,4, J. Klovins1 1BlueprintGenetics,Helsinki,Finland,2HelsinkiUniversity Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Blueprint Genetics, 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study centre, Riga, San Francisco, CA, United States Latvia, 2Riga Eastern Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 3Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Introduction: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney Latvia, 4University of Latvia Faculty of Medicine, Rigs, disease (ADPKD) is an adult-onset multisystem disorder Latvia characterized by cysts in the kidneys and liver. It is estimated that PKD1 explains 85% and PKD2 15% of Introduction:Pituitaryadenomas(PA)arebenigntumours ADPKD cases. Genetic testing has become an important of the anterior pituitary that cause increased mortality and factorinthemanagementofADPKD.However,analysisof morbidity. Cell cultures derived from PA tissue can form PKD1 is technically challenging due to its large size, high freeﬂoatingaggregatescalledpituispheres(PS)oradherent GC-contentandduplicationoftheﬁrst33exonswithahighAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1267 degree of homology to pseudogenes (PKD1P1-P6). We P03.48D evaluated the diagnostic yield and performance of our In- Detection of DZIP1L mutations by whole exome house panels for cystic kidney disease. sequencing in two consanguineous families with Materials and Methods: Next-generation sequencing polycystic kidney disease (NGS) was performed using the IDT xGEN Exome Research Panel with addedcustomprobes and theIllumina J. M. Hertz1, P. Svenningsen2, H. Dimke3, NovaSeq 6000 platform. This assay provides improved M. B. Engelund1, H. Norgaard4, A. Hansen5, mapping quality and coverage of PKD1 compared to other N. Marcussen6, H. C. Thiesson7, B. L. Jensen3, NGS methods assessed in our laboratory. M. J. Larsen1 Results:PKD1providedbothhighmeancoverage(199x) and excellent mapping quality with 99.5% of the target 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University nucleotidescovered atleast20x.Inthestudycohortof131 Hospital, Odense C, Denmark, 2Department of index patients, a genetic diagnosis was established in 52% CardiovascularandRenalResearch,InstituteofMolecular ofcaseswithdiseasecausingvariantsdetectedin7different Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense C, genes. In 63% of the diagnostic cases the disease causing Denmark, 3Department of Cardiovascular and Renal variant was identiﬁed in PKD1. Interestingly, 84% (n=36) Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of of the variants were located in the duplicated region of Southern Denmark, Odense C, Denmark, Odense C, PKD1. Denmark, 4Department of Pediatrics, Rigshospitalet, Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that our in-house Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Vestergade 21, Koge, Denmark, NGS platform is well-suited for clinical diagnostics with 6Department of Clinical Pathology, Odense University comprehensive coverage in difﬁcult-to-sequence regions of Hospital,OdenseC,Denmark,7DepartmentofNephrology, PKD1.Themethodprovidesacost-effectivediagnostictool Odense University Hospital, Odense C, Denmark to simultaneously diagnose various types of mutations. S. Valo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Autosomalrecessivepolycystickidneydisease(ARPKD)is BlueprintGenetics.J.Tallila:A.Employment(fullorpart- an early onset cystic renal disease with an incidence of time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Kaare: A. about 1 per 20,000 live births. It is most frequently caused Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint bymutationsinthePKHD1gene,encodingﬁbrocystin,but Genetics. H. Jalanko: A. Employment (full or part-time); mutationsinothercilia-relateddiseasegenesmaymimicthe Modest; Blueprint Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment phenotype. In 2017, Lu et al. reported homozygous (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. A. mutations in DZIP1L located at 3q22.1, encoding the basal Korppoo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; body protein DAZ interacting protein 1-like protein Blueprint Genetics. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part- (DZIP1L) in seven children with ARPKD from four time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Muona: A. unrelated and consanguineous families. DZIP1L is located Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint at the basal body of the primary cilium, and impaired Genetics. P. Salmenperä: A. Employment (full or part- functionofDZIP1Lisassociatedwithadefectintheciliary time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter- trafﬁckingofpolycystin-1andpolycystin-2.Sofar,noother est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop- DZIP1Lmutationshavebeenreported,andARPKDcaused erty); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gentile: A. by DZIP1L mutations is a rare form of polycystic kidney Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint disease.We performed whole exome sequencing in two Genetics.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent consanguineousfamilieswiththreechildrenwithpolycystic or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint kidney disease, and identiﬁed two different and not Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part- previously reported DZIP1L mutations in homozygous time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter- form: c.193T>C; p.(Cys65Arg), and c.216C>G; p. est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop- (Cys72Trp). All three children are phenotypically charac- erty); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. terized by enlarged echogenic kidneys with poor cortico- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint medullary differentiation. No liver cysts were detected. Genetics.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent Liver stiffness were evaluated in two of the children by or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint transient elastography, and with normal result. Functional Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part- analyses of the p.Cys72Trp mutation indicate that this time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Inter- variant causes a disruption of a localization signaling or est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual prop- interaction domain of DZIP1L. erty); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J.M. Hertz: None. P. Svenningsen: None. H. Dimke: None. M.B. Engelund: None. H. Norgaard: None. A.1268 Hansen: None. N. Marcussen: None. H.C. Thiesson: P03.50B None. B.L. Jensen: None. M.J. Larsen: None. Preparing for genomics: a retrospective audit of a metropolitan renal genetics clinic P03.49A Genetic analysis in pulmonary arterial hypertension E. I. Krzesinski1,2, Y. B. Prawer1,2, M. J. P. Regan1, Sicilian patients: preliminary results A. Yeung1,2,3, M. F. Hunter1,2 I. Loddo, F. Barbera, M. Beretta, A. Callari, L. Martino, 1Monash Genetics, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia, D. Di Carlo, P. Conaldi, P. Vitulo 2Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, Melbourne,Australia,3VictorianClinicalGeneticsService, ISMETT Mediterranean Institute for Transplantation and Melbourne, Australia Advanced Specialized Therapies (ISMETT), Palermo, Italy Introduction: Hereditary kidney conditions are rare but Background: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a account for a signiﬁcant burden on hospitals in both adults progressive and fatal disorder associated with high and children. Monash Health is a KidGen/ Australian pulmonary artery pressure. Most heritable PAH (75%) is Genomics Health Alliance/Melbourne Genomics Health caused by a pathogenic variant in BMPR2, pathogenic Alliance ﬂagship recruitment site, aiming to assess the variants in other genes are considerably less common (1- impact of multidisciplinary renal-genetic clinics on patient 3%). care while providing access to whole exome Genetic testing enables early diagnosis and offers an sequencing (WES). opportunity for family screening. Materials and Method: This three year audit (2015- Materials and Methods: We designed a target sequen- 2017) of renal patients referred to the Monash Health cing custom panel that includes 15 genes of interest. genetics service provides a picture of the renal genetics Genetic counselling was offered to every patients. landscape at the outset of renal ﬂagship WES testing. The To identify genetic mutations and help make a precise electronic medical record was searched using renal key- diagnosis and family screening, we performed genetic words; each ﬁle was manually assessed for inclusion and testing by NGS in six patients with PAH. exclusion criteria. Data collection included referrer speci- Results:Inthreepatientsweidentiﬁedvariantsclassiﬁed alty,condition,familyhistory,inheritancepattern,typeand according to ACMG Guidelines. cost of genetic testing and impact of genetic testing on In a 47 years old female affected by familial PAH, we management and reproductive options. identiﬁed a heterozygous nonsense variant (c.2617C>T) p. Results: Through keyword matching 676 patients were Arg873* in BMPR2 gene, classiﬁed as pathogenic. identiﬁed, 86 met inclusion criteria; 59 (69%) were pro- Ina31yearsoldfemaleaffectedbyPAHwithPulmonary bands with a primary renal condition and 35 (40.1%) were Capillary Hemangiomatosis, we identiﬁed a homozygous referred by a nephrologist. Cystic renal disease was the frameshift pathogenic variant (c.2666_2667insAATC) p. commonestreasonforreferral.Genetictestingwasarranged Lys891Aspfs* in EIF2AK4 gene, classiﬁed as pathogenic for 50 patients of whom 21 (42%) had informative results. and never described before. Diagnosis rate improved from 2015 to 2017; cost per In a 55 years old male affected by Pulmonary Arterial informative patient diagnosis was $2499. Hypertension, we identiﬁed a heterozygous missense var- Conclusion: Audit provides a snapshot of the utility of iant (c.1151T>A) p.Val384Asp in SMAD9 gene, classiﬁed clinical genetics input in a renal genetics context at the as likely pathogenic and never described before. All var- outset of improved WES access. Fourteen referred patients iants were conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. were unaffected providing them with reproductive reassur- Genetic counselling and molecular analysis was offered ance. Diagnosis rate improved from 2015 to 2017 as more to high-risk relatives. molecular diagnoses were obtained, thus improving patient Conclusions: Our study conﬁrm that NGS Target rese- management. quencingrepresents avaluabletool inPAHgenetictesting. E.I. Krzesinski: None. Y.B. Prawer: None. M.J.P. Analyses of PAH casual genes have a great help to clinical Regan: None. A. Yeung: None. M.F. Hunter: None. diagnosis and deep implications in patients management and disease treatment. P03.51C I. Loddo: None. F. Barbera: None. M. Beretta: None. Molecular genetic analysis of Steroid Resistant A. Callari: None. L. Martino: None. D. Di Carlo: None. Nephrotic Syndrome: Detection of a novel mutation P. Conaldi: None. P. Vitulo: None. A. Shojaei1, N. Serajpour1, B. Karimi2, P. Khosravi2Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1269 1Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, phenotypes of IBD in terms of disease extension, disease Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, severity and extraintestinal manifestations (EIM). EIM in Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Medical Genetic IBDarefrequentandmaysigniﬁcantlyimpactthequalityof laboratory, Shahid Akbarabad hospital, Iran University of patients life. Our aim was to investigate two TNF-alpha Medical science, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of gene SNPs for association with clinical manifestations in IBD patients. Background: Nephrotic syndrome is one of the most Materials and Methods: The study included 142 IBD common kidney diseases in childhood. About 20% of patients (78 CD, 43M/35F and 64 UC, 40M/24F), all of children are steroid-resistant NS (SRNS) which progress to Romanian origin. EIM were documented in 34 patients (20 end-stage renal disease (ESRD). More than 53 genes are CD, 14 UC). The two SNPs of TNF-alpha gene rs361525 associated with SRNS which represent the genetic hetero- (-238G/A) and rs1800629 (-308G/A) were genotyped by geneity of SRNS. This study was aimed to screen disease TaqMan Allelic Discrimination Assay (7300 Real-Time causing mutations within NPHS1 and NPHS2 and evaluate PCR System, Applied Biosystems by Thermo Fisher Sci- new potential variants in other genes. entiﬁc, USA). Association tests for each polymorphism Method: In ﬁrst phase of study, 25 patients with SRNS wereperformedwith DeFinettionlinesoftware(http://ihg2. were analyzed for NPHS1 (exon 2, 26) and all exons of helmholtzmuenchen.de/cgi-bin/hw/hwa1.pl) and p values NPHS2 genes by Sanger sequencing. In the second phase, ≤0.05 were considered signiﬁcant. Results. We found a whole exome sequencing was performed on 10 patients signiﬁcant association between -308A variant and the pre- with no mutations in NPHS1 and NPHS2. senceofEIMinbothulcerativecolitis(p=0.0002,OR8.51) Result:WESanalysisrevealedanovelmutationinFAT1 and Crohn’s disease (p=0.002, OR 5.19). For UC, -238A (c.10570C>A; Q3524K). We identiﬁed 4 pathogenic allele and the GA genotype were more frequent in patients mutations, located in exon 4 and 5 of NPHS2 gene in 20% with EIMthan inpatientswithoutEIM(p=0.01,OR27.03 of patients (V180M, P118L, R168C and Leu156Phe). Also and p=0.0009, OR 30.13 respectively). No other associa- our study has contributed to the descriptions of previously tions with clinical phenotype were observed. known pathogenic mutations across WT1 (R205C) and Conclusion: TNF-α polymorphisms inﬂuence clinical SMARCAL1 (R764Q) and a novel polymorphism manifestations of IBD in Romanian patients. These results in CRB2. should be conﬁrmed on larger patients cohorts. Grant sup- Conclusion: Our study concludes that mutations of exon port: IDEI 311/2007. 4and5NPHS2genearecommoninIranianandsomeother O.M. Popa: None. C. Tieranu: None. M. Bojinca: ethnic groups. We suggest conducting WES after None. I. Tieranu: None. M. Diculescu: None. NPHS2 screening and further comprehensive studies to identify the most common genes in the development of SRNS,whichmighthelpinClinicalimpactonmanagement P04 in patients with SRNS. Skeletal, connective tissue, ectodermal and skin A. Shojaei: None. N. Serajpour: None. B. Karimi: disorders None. P. Khosravi: None. P04.01A P03.52D Comprehensive re-assessment of causality of ABCC6 TNF-alpha gene polymorphisms inﬂuence disease missense variants associated with pseudoxanthoma phenotype in inﬂammatory bowel disease elasticum O. M. Popa1, C. Tieranu2, M. Bojinca1, I. Tieranu1, S. Verschuere1,2, P. Coucke1,2, O. M. Vanakker1,2 M. Diculescu1 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy 'Carol Davila', Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Biomolecular Bucharest, Romania, 2Elias University Emergency Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium Hospital, Bucharest, Romania Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an Introduction: Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha is a autosomal recessive ectopic mineralization disorder caused major proinﬂammatory cytokine involved in the immune by ABCC6 mutations. Inconsistencies in variant interpreta- response in inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD). IBD is tion raised the question whether all variants reported in composed of two main subtypes, namely Crohn’s disease literature or variant databases are truly disease-causing. (CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC). There are multiple Especially for missense substitutions it is challenging to1270 predict the impact on protein function. We therefore re- heart disease, skeletal malformations, and characteristic evaluated pathogenicity of all ABCC6 missense variants. facies. Materials and Methods: The score-based variant clas- Materials and Methods: Patients with de novo hetero- siﬁcation system Sherloc was used to analyze 234 variants zygous missense variants in ABL1 were identiﬁed via trio from literature, ClinVar and in-house patient screenings. WESthroughtheDDDStudywithSangerconﬁrmationvia Clinical and functional evidence were scored according to UK regional genetics laboratories. Clinical assessments of the rules and guidelines of Nykamp et al. (2017). patients were carried out via regional clinical genetics ser- Results: Comprehensive classiﬁcation revealed 74% vices. To investigate ABL1 kinase activity in vitro, variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS), 12% likely HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmid constructs pathogenic, 10% pathogenic, 3% benign and 1% likely encoding wild-type or mutant ABL1 cDNA. Phosphoryla- benign variants. VUS classiﬁcation was further reﬁned into tion of ABL1-speciﬁc substrates was measured by immu- truly uncertain variants (69% of VUS) and those leaning noblotting and potential for reversal investigated by towards likely benign (1% of VUS) or likely pathogenic treatment with imatinib. Bio-informatic analysis of gene- (30% of VUS). Taking the latter into account, 44% of wide conservation and germline/somatic variation was ABCC6variantsis(likely) pathogenicwhenconsideringall performed. available population, clinical, experimental and in silico Results: We identiﬁed three unrelated patients with de data. This is signiﬁcantly different from ClinVar, where novo pathogenic missense variants in ABL1, including two 87% of ABCC6 missense variants are allegedly pathogenic novel variants. All variants cluster in the myristoyl-binding and only 11% VUS. pocket of ABL1 – a region critical for auto-inhibitory reg- Conclusions: Our results underline that variant classiﬁ- ulation of the kinase domain, which is subject to high cationshouldbedonesystematicallyandwithcaution,asit missense constraint and evolutionary conservation. All has important consequences for patients and heterozygous patients recapitulate the phenotype of the ABL1 develop- carriers. The high number of VUS conﬁrms the need for mentalsyndrome.FunctionalstudiesofmutantABL1kinase functional testing to prove or refute their causality before activity are ongoing and will be presented. returning them to patients. Conclusions: We describe three new cases with patho- S. Verschuere: None. P. Coucke: None. O.M. genic ABL1 missense variants causing skeletal malforma- Vanakker: None. tionsandcongenitalheartdisease.Mutationsclusteraround themyristoylbinding-pocketofABL1,suggestingagain-of- P04.02B function mechanism due to loss of auto-inhibition. De novo pathogenic ABL1 variants cluster in a A.J.M. Blakes: None. E. Gaul: None. W. Lam: None. myristoyl-binding pocket N. Shannon: None. A. Chase: None. A.G.L. Douglas: None. A. J. M. Blakes1, E. Gaul2, W. Lam3, N. Shannon4, A. Chase2, DDD Study, A. G. L. Douglas1,2 P04.03C Rare loss-of-function variants in the Epidermal 1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital Differentiation Complex predispose individuals to Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, Atopic Dermatitis Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, S. P. Smieszek, C. Polymeropoulos, G. Birznieks, Southampton, UK, Southampton, United Kingdom, 3South M. Polymeropoulos East of Scotland Clinical Genetics Service, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh, UK, Vanda Pharmaceuticals, Washington, DC, United States Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Clinical Genetics Service, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Hucknall Theepidermaldifferentiationcomplex(EDC)includesover Road, Nottingham, UK, Nottingham, United Kingdom ﬁfty genes encoding proteins involved in keratinocyte development. Of these genes, ﬁlaggrin (FLG) located on Introduction: ABL1 is a proto-oncogene encoding a chromosome 1 q21, is the most studied in the context of nonreceptortyrosinekinase.Itisbestknowninthesomatic skinbarrierdysfunction.Weinvestigatedthefrequencyand BCR-ABL fusion gene associated with chronic myeloid effectofrareloss-of-function(LOF)variantsinpatientsofa leukaemia. Recently, Wang et al. described two germline clinical study, VP-VLY-686-2102 (randomized, double- missense variants in ABL1 causing an autosomal dominant blind, placebo-controlled, in patients with chronic pruritus developmental syndrome (OMIM 617602) with congenital associated with AD) with 117 whole genome sequencing (WGS) samples. We have shown that 45/117 AD patientsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1271 carry signiﬁcantly more, rare loss-of-function (LOF) inheritance pattern and variable expressivity. We applied mutations in the SFTP family of genes as compared to large-insertjumpinglibrariestolocalizethebreakpointsand 55/316 in a control population (p-value = 0.000004). This conﬁrmed these results with Sanger sequencing to char- group of EDC LOF (stopgain, frameshift) rare variants acterize breakpoints of a t(2;7)(p21;p15), followed by gene (EDC-LR) consists of 20 variants observed in the 45 AD expression studies to explore the functional impact of the patients resulting in a calculated Odds Ratio of 2.96 and a rearrangement. Sequencing revealed ﬁve breakpoints, dis- Relative Risk of 2.38. Among the detected LOF variants, rupting two genes, HDAC9 and MACC1. We discovered there are 25 cases of FLG LOF mutations as deﬁned by altered expression of TWIST1 located downstream of R501X(rs61816761),2282del4(rs558269137),otherLOFs HDAC9. Our results suggest that an inversion in the inFLGaswellasLOFsinFLG2,HRNR,LCE4A,LCE5A, HDAC9-TWIST region in 7p21.1 affects regulation of TCHH, TCHHL1 and other members of the EDC. We TWIST, thereby producing a skeletal dysplasia with examine the regional accumulation of rare LOF variants in intrafamilial variable expressivity. These analyses suggest FLG region. For the entire EDC, we obtained a p-value of that the mechanism of this rearrangement might involve 4.7e-20, much lower than for FLG alone p-value of 4.5e-6, alterationofregulatorysequenceslocatedatadistanceincis indicative of an even greater effect when analyzed jointly that dysregulate TWIST and insinuate HDAC9 as a new (entire family vs. FLG alone) in the AD context. The disease locus producing craniosynostosis. identiﬁed LOF variants within the region can serve as B. Turkgenc: None. R.P. Aguilar: None. B. Curral: biomarkers as well as help delineate the genetic proﬁle in None. C. Lowther: None. E. Schields Wilch: None. M. AD patients. Talkowski: None. C. Morton: None. S.G. Temel: None. S.P. Smieszek: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Vanda Pharmaceuticals. C. Polymeropoulos: A. P04.05A Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Vanda Pharma- Novel variant in PRKAR1A associated with ceuticals.G.Birznieks:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); brachydactyly type E without hormone resistance Modest; Vanda Pharmaceuticals. M. Polymeropoulos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Vanda A. Pereda1, K. Heath2,3,4, J. Wu5, I. Valenzuela-Palafoll6, Pharmaceuticals. S. S. Taylor5,7, G. Perez de Nanclares1 P04.04D 1Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, BioAraba National A balanced translocation t(2;7)(p21;p15) in three Research Institute, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 2Institute of generations: Genome sequencing offers an opportunity Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital to understand molecular etiology of Saethre-Chotzen/ Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autonóma de Madrid, Robinow-Sarouf syndromes IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 3Skeletal dysplasia Multidisciplinary Unit (UMDE), Hospital Universitario La B.Turkgenc1,R.P.Aguilar2,3,B.Curral3,4,C.Lowther3,4, Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, E. Schields Wilch3, M. Talkowski3,4,5, C. Morton2,3,5,6, 5Department of Pharmacology, University of California at S. G. Temel7 San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States, 6Area de Genètica Clínica i Malalties Minoritàries. Hospital Vall 1Acibadem Diagnostic Center, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Brigham d'Hebron,Barcelona,Spain,7DepartmentofChemistryand and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Biochemistry, University of California at San Diego, San 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, Diego, CA, United States 4Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Introduction: Protein kinase A (PKA) is a tetramer MA,UnitedStates,6UniversityofManchester, Manchester, containing a regulatory (R) subunit dimer locking 2 UnitedKingdom,7UniversityofBursa,FacultyofMedicine, catalytic (C) subunits. The most abundantly expressed R- Department of Medical Genetics, Bursa, Turkey subunitisPRKAR1A,composedofadimerizationdomain, an inhibitory site, and 2 cAMP-binding domains (CNB:A; Recent developments in genomic analyses have facilitated CNB:B), each containing a phosphate binding cassette theprecisemapping oftranslocation breakpointsassociated (PBC). Inactivating mutations in PRKAR1A cause acrody- withMendeliandisorderstodecipheriftherearrangementis sostosis with hormonal resistance (ACRDYS1). likely to contribute to the observed phenotype. We Patients and Methods: We present a case of a 15 year- evaluated the phenotypic consequences of an apparently old girl with clinical suspicion of pseudopseudohypopar- balanced translocation in a family affected by craniosynos- athyroidism based on brachydactyly type E, severe sco- tosis and limb malformations presenting with a dominant liosis, and short stature without hormone resistance. Her1272 mother presented a similar phenotype. After discarding ofanaffectedfetusrevealedanabnormalproliferativezone alterations in GNAS, PTHLH, IHH and GDF5 (Sanger and a broad hypertrophic zone. To conﬁrm the role of sequencing, MS-MLPA/MLPA), a skeletal dysplasia NGS Kiaa0753 in skeletal ciliopathies, we used the zebraﬁsh panel was performed. model.Phenotypingofzebraﬁshlarvaecarryinganonsense Results: A heterozygous novel variant in PRKAR1A mutation in homozygosity showed that mutant larvae pre- [NM_002734.4:c.592G>C; p.(Gly198Arg)], bioinformati- sentedwithcurvedbody,atypicalciliopathyphenotype,as callypredictedaslikelypathogenic,wasidentiﬁed.Familial well as abnormal cartilage patterning. kiaa0753-null zeb- studies conﬁrmed cosegregation (mother harbored; healthy raﬁshdonotsurvivebeyondtheﬁrstweekofdevelopment, grandparents did not harbor). Gly198 precedes the PBC of suggesting that loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in CNB:A and its substitution to Arg is predicted to affect kiaa0753 are embryonic lethal. Interestingly, these functionbecause:(1)itmightaffectcAMPbindingtoCNB: kiaa0753-null larvae show loss of cilia and abnormal cell A, as the long side-chain of arginine will crash with its rearrangements, helping us understand how LoF mutations neighboring residues (inactivating mutation); (2) the intro- in kiaa0753 affect cell organisation and embryonic devel- duction of the longer side-chain into the tight PBC space opment. In aggregate, our results show that Kiaa0753 is couldchangeitsconformationleadingtoanalteredbinding importantfortheearlyembryodevelopmentinzebraﬁsh,in between the C and the R (activating/inactivating mutation). accordance with the phenotypes seen in patients. Future Conclusions: PRKAR1A variants can lead to phenotypes plans involve using this disease model to develop treat- milder than ACRDYS1 depending on the affected protein ments for patients with KIAA0753 mutations. domain. Incomplete or partial PKA inactivation could lead R.Vaz:None.A.Hammarsjö:None.F.Taylan:None. to an isolated non-severe brachydactyly without hormone D. Chitayat: None. G. Grigelioniene: None. A. resistance. Lindstrand: None. Funding: Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI16/00073); Basque Department of Health (GV2016/111105). P04.07C A. Pereda: None. K. Heath: None. J. Wu: None. I. p63 establishes epithelial enhancers at craniofacial Valenzuela-Palafoll: None. S.S. Taylor: None. G. Perez development genes involved in orofacial clefting de Nanclares: None. E. Lin-Shiao1,2, J. Welzenbach3, Y. Lan1,2, P04.06B K.A.Alexander1,2,Z.Zhang1,2,M.Knapp4,E.Mangold3, KIAA0753 mutations in skeletal ciliopathies: unveiling M. Sammons1,2, S. L. Berger1,2, K. U. Ludwig3 disease mechanisms 1DepartmentofCellandDevelopmentalBiology,University R. Vaz1, A. Hammarsjö2, F. Taylan1, D. Chitayat3, of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, G. Grigelioniene2, A. Lindstrand2 2Epigenetics Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Insitute of Human 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Center Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Germany, 4Insitute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Sweden, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Epidemiology, School of Medicine, University of Bonn, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet; Bonn, Germany Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Division of Clinical and Metabolic Transcription factor p63 is a key mediator of epidermal Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick commitment, development, and differentiation. In humans, Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada point mutations in the p63 coding region lead to develop- mental defects, including syndromic orofacial clefting. Skeletalciliopathiesareaheterogeneousgroupofdisorders Notably, common risk variants located intronically in p63 caused by mutations in more than 25 genes, such as contribute also to the risk of nonsyndromic cleft lip with/ KIAA0753. Mutations in KIAA0753 have been associated without cleft palate (nsCL/P), the most frequent isolated with Joubert syndrome, orofaciodigital syndrome, and formoforofacialclefting.Todate,ourknowledgeislimited moderate to fetal lethal skeletal dysplasia with narrow about the role of p63 in human craniofacial development, thorax and abnormal metaphyses. due in part to a lack of tractable models. Here we We have previously reported patients with biallelic fra- investigated the role of p63 in human craniofacial meshift and nonsense mutations in this gene. We have also development, and in the pathogenesis of nsCL/P. Using shown that KIAA0753 is expressed in normal fetal human an inducible trans-differentiation model and systematic growthplateandimmunohistochemistryofthegrowthplate epigenomicsequencing(includingATAC-seqtogetherwithAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1273 ChIP-seq of p63 and H3K27ac) we show that p63 radiological and genetics data, phosphocalcic balance, establishes enhancers at craniofacial development genes to markers of bone remodeling and bone densitometry data modulatetheirtranscription.Speciﬁcsubstitutionmutations of45CCDpatientsaged9monthsto60.8years(median= in the DNA binding or SAM protein interaction domain of 15.4 years). 7% of patients evaluated had at least one p63 respectively eliminate or reduce establishment of these fracture without trauma (3/45). 32% (13/41) patients have enhancers. Furthermore, using large-scale GWAS data we secondaryhyperparathyroidism,arecognizedriskfactorfor showthatenhancersestablishedbyp63arehighlyenriched osteopenia due to increased bone resorption induced by for SNPs associated with nsCL/P. These orthogonal parathyroid hormone and 20% (8/41) patients have vitamin approaches indicate a strong molecular link between p63 Ddeﬁciency(25-OHD<20ng/mL).TheanalysisofBMD enhancer function and nsCL/P, illuminating molecular shows that the Z-score at the lumbar level of 38.7% of mechanisms underlying this developmental defect and patients(12/31)islessthan-2DS.Theseresultsindicatethe revealing vital regulatory elements and new candidate need for active prevention of osteoporosis and fractures in causative genes. patients with CCD, ensuring at an early age of sufﬁcient E. Lin-Shiao: None. J. Welzenbach: None. Y. Lan: intakes calcium and vitamin D, but also regular physical None. K.A. Alexander: None. Z. Zhang: None. M. activitytoallowoptimal/maximalbonemassacquisitionin Knapp:None.E.Mangold:None.M.Sammons:None.S. adulthood. L. Berger: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. A. Lavillaureix: None. C. Michot: None. G. Baujat: None. G. Maruani: None. M. Polak: None. M. De la P04.08D Dure-Molla: None. J. Souberbielle: None. E. Koumakis: Cleidocranial dysplasia: natural history of bone None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. manifestations P04.09A A. LAVILLAUREIX1,2, C. Michot2, G. Baujat2, A novel mutation in COL2A1 leading to G. Maruani3, M. Polak4, M. De la Dure-Molla5, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita J. Souberbielle6, E. Koumakis7, V. Cormier-Daire2 Y. Kendir Demirkol1, Ö. Akgün Doğan1, M. Say2, 1Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre de référence T. Kızılboğa Akgün3,4, L. Doğanay4 "Maladies Rares" CLAD-Ouest, CHU Rennes - Université Rennes1,Rennes, France, 2Service deGénétiqueClinique, 1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Health Sciences Centre deRéférence Maladies Osseuses Constitutionnelles, University, Umraniye Education and Research Hospital, APHP-HôpitalNecker-EnfantsMalades-InstitutImagine İstanbul, Turkey, 2Bioinformatic Team, Gen-Era - INSERM UMR 1163 - Université Paris Descartes Diagnostic, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Molecular SorbonneParisCité,Paris,France,3Serviced'explorations Biology and Genetics, İstanbul Technical University, fonctionnelles, AP-HP - Hôpital européen Georges- İstanbul, Turkey, 4GLAB (Genomic Laboratory) Health Pompidou, Paris, France, 4Service d'endocrinologie, Sciences University, Umraniye Education and Research gynécologie et diabétologie pédiatrique, APHP - Hôpital Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Service d'Odontologie,AP-HP-HôpitalRothschild,Paris,France, Introduction: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita 6Laboratoired'explorationsfonctionnelles,APHP-Hôpital (SEDC, OMIM# 183900) is a rare autosomal dominant Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 7Service de inherited chondrodysplasia. SEDC is characterised by Rhumatologie, APHP, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France dwarﬁsm and skeletal abnormalities caused by mutations oftheCOL2A1gene,whichpreventbonegrowth.Themost Cleidocranialdysplasia(CCD)isarareautosomaldominant common features of SEDC are skeletal deformities such as skeletal dysplasia whose most characteristic signs are the short-trunk dwarﬁsm, odontoid hypoplasia, cervical spine delayed closure of cranial sutures with wide fontanelle at subluxation,scoliosis,kyphosis,lumbarlordosis,coxavara, birth, hypoplastic or aplastic clavicles, a short height and genu valgum, clubfoot, pes planus and metaphyseal multiple dental anomalies. The natural history of CCD is changes. Cervical cord compression is the most hazardous poorly known. Isolated cases of patients with multiple skeletal deformity in patients with SEDC which requires fractures or osteoporosis have been described, without special attention and management. Here, we present a evaluating the other risk factors for bone fragility. The mother and a son with SEDC due to a novel heterozygous purposeofthisstudyistoevaluatebonemineralizationand mutation in SEDC. the occurrence of fractures inpatients with CCD, children Material andMethods:Thepatientwastheﬁrstchildof and adults. In an observational study, we collected clinico- non consanguineous parents, born at 33 gestation week a1274 birth length of 39 cm (3-10th centile). Postnatal he was to ACMG/AMP classiﬁcation. As glycine substitutions are hospitalized in intensive care unit due to respiratory insuf- typical for SEMD-S patients, it is highly probable that the ﬁciency. Physical examination revealed facial dysmorphic identiﬁed variant is causative of the SEMD-S phenotype. features and short neck. The mother has disproportionate Conclusion: To our knowledge, this missense variant in short stature, facial dysmorphic features and operation scar COL2A1 has not been reported before. It extends the due to hip dislocation. Her X ray showed platyspondyly, mutational spectrum allowing for better genotype/pheno- kyphosis, scoliosis, coxa vara and ﬂattened epiphyses. type correlation in patients with SEMD-S. Molecular Results: Next-generation sequencing was performed on genetic analysis is helpful for the diagnosis of skeletal Illumina MiSeq (v1.9) platform using the virtual panel for dysplasias with overlapping phenotypes. skeletal dysplasia consisting of 130 genes. The novel het- M.Kero:None.A.Meašić:None.A.Bobinec:None.I. erozygous variant in COL2A1 (c.2006G>C) was detected Sansović: None. I. Barišić: None. bothsonandmother.Segregationwithinthemothersfamily showed the mutation was denova. P04.12D Conclusions:SEDCisarareskeletaldysplasia.Targeted Deﬁning the clinical features associated with variants in exomeanalysishasgreatimportanceinthefastandaccurate COL4A2: case report and review of the literature setting in the diagnosis and avoid serious neurological deﬁcits and or mortality. A.Hanson-Kahn1,K.Vlessis1,E.J.Smith2,M.Manning1 Y. Kendir Demirkol: None. Ö. Akgün Doğan: None. M. Say: None. T. Kızılboğa Akgün: None. L. 1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, Doğanay: None. 2Stanford Children's Health, Palo Alto, CA, United States P04.10B COL4A2 encodes the α2 chain of type IV collagen, which Novel variant in COL2A1 gene causing assemblesintoheterotrimerswithCOL4A1chainstoforma spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia Strudwick type component of the basal membrane. Heterozygous variants (SEMD-S) inCOL4A2havebeendescribedinfewerthan20familiesin association with familial cerebrovascular disease manifest- M. Kero, A. Meašić, A. Bobinec, I. Sansović, I. Barišić ingasporencephalyandintracerebralhemorrhage.Seizures, cortical malformations, lens opacities, hematuria and Children´s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia elevated creatine kinase have been reported. We present a 4-1/2 year old male with ischemic stroke and deep vein Introduction: Collagenopathies type IIare rare autosomal- thrombosis, intracranial hemorrhage, systemic arterial dominant conditions characterized by skeletal dysplasia, involvement (tapering of the abdominal aorta, occlusion short stature and sensorial defects. More than 400 of the left common iliac artery, small right iliac artery and heterozygous mutations in type II collagen gene COL2A1 collateralsoftheupperextremities)andmildlydilatedaortic have been identiﬁed, but only 5 of them are found in root and ascending aorta. Whole exome sequencing patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia Strudwick reported a maternally inherited variant in COL4A2 type (SEMD-S), a rare phenotype of intermediate severity. (c.1396G>A, p.G466S). This variant is not reported in WepresentafemalepatientwithSEMD-Sphenotypeanda ClinVarbutisreportedingnomADwithanallelefrequency novel mutation in the COL2A1 gene. of 5.0x10-5. In silico models predict this variant to be Patients and Methods: The patient presented at birth damaging. The patient’s mother is asymptomatic; brain with severe short trunk-short limb dwarﬁsm, short chest, MRI,echocardiogramandophthalmologyexaminationsare coxa vara, clubfoot, cleft palate, conductive hearing loss being coordinated. While intracranial hemorrhage has also andmildexternalhydrocephalus.Metaphysealirregularities beenseeninotherpatientswithCOL4A2variants,systemic permittedclinicaldifferentiationfromSEDcongenita.Now, arteriopathy and mild enlargement of the aortic root have attheageof7years,herstatureissigniﬁcantlyreducedand notbeenpreviouslydescribed.Wereviewtheliteratureand a waddling gait, genu valgum and lumbar lordosis devel- further deﬁne the clinical features associated with variants oped. Hands and feet are normal. The genomic DNA from in COL4A2 to include arteriopathy and aortic root blood leukocytes of the patient was isolated and Next dilatation. Generation Sequencing (NGS) analysis was done focusing A. Hanson-Kahn: None. K. Vlessis: None. E.J. Smith: on about 200 genes associated with skeletal dysplasias. None. M. Manning: None. Results: NGS revealed a novel heterozygous missense variant (c.2177G>A, p.Gly726Asp) in exon 33 of the COL2A1 gene, categorised as likely pathogenic accordingAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1275 P04.13A P04.14B Next generation sequencing in neonates presenting with IL11RA and pansynostosis collodion baby syndrome A. Topa1,2, A. Rohlin2, L. Lovmar2, G. Stenman1, A.Bobinec1,A.Meašić1,M.Kero1,I.Sansović1,S.Ožanić L. Kölby3 Bulić2, N. Pustišek2, S. Murat-Sušić3, I. Barišić1,2 1Department of Pathology and Genetics, University of 1DepartmentofMedicalGeneticsandReproductiveHealth, Gothenburg, The Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Children's Hospital Zagreb, Scientiﬁc Centre of Excellence Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska for Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Department of University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, Plastic Surgery, University of Gothenburg, The 2Division of Dermatology, Children's Hospital Zagreb, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg, Sweden University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Department of Dermatology and Venerology, University Thegeneticbackgroundofcraniosynostosisiscomplexand Hospital Centre Zagreb, University of Zagreb School of implicates multiple signaling pathways. The role of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia interleukin 11 receptor, alpha (IL11RA), a cell-derived cytokine, has been evidenced in the pathogenesis of Introduction: Collodion baby (CB) is a rare condition multiple synostosis with autosomal recessive inheritance characterized by the presence of parchment or-cellophane- pattern (Craniosynostosis and dental anomalies, like collodion membrane encompassing the whole body. OMIM#614188).ACrouzon-likeappearancewithdifferent CB is a genetically heterogeneous disorder that usually typesofcraniosynostosishasbeenobserved.Severalcausal presents with lamellar ichthyosis (LI) or congenital missense and truncating variants have been reported. We ichthyosiform erythroderma (CIE). Other less common present three additional cases with homozygous novel disorders as self-improving collodion ichthyosis, Netherton pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in IL11RA syndrome, Gaucher disease type 2, Chanarin-Dorfman (NM_001142784.2: c.598C>A, p.Pro200Thr; c.696C>A, syndrome, ectodermal dysplasia or Sjögren Larsson syn- p.Tyr232*; c.866A>G, p.His289Arg). All three patients drome may also be responsible for this phenotype. presented with high intracranial pressure, a Crouzon-like Materials and Methods: Clinical exome sequencing phenotype and early closure of all cranial sutures (pansy- (CES)wasperformedin4patientswithreferraldiagnosisof nostosis). Our cases, together with previous reports of CB using Illumina TruSight One Kit. IL11RA-related pansynostosis, suggest a key regulator role Results: CES analysis revealed mutations in ALOX12B, for IL11RA in the morphogenesis and maintenance of SPINK5, NIPAL4 and TGM1 genes. In patient 1 (P1), we patency of all cranial sutures. found a homozygous mutation in the ALOX12B gene, A.Topa:None.A.Rohlin:None.L.Lovmar:None.G. known to cause self-improving collodion ichthyosis. This Stenman: None. L. Kölby: None. was consistent with a rapid resolution of almost all skin lesions. P2 and P3 developed Netherton syndrome. In P2 P04.15C compound heterozygous mutations in the SPINK5 gene Diagnosticvalue oftargetednext-generation sequencing conﬁrmed the diagnosis. In P3 no causative genetic varia- in craniosynostosis tionswerefound.InP4,presentingwithCBevolvingtoLI, wedetectedtwoheterozygousvariants,oneinNIPAL4gene E. M. Olech1, A. Sowińska-Seidler1, D. Popiel2, (likely pathogenic) and other in TGM1 (uncertain G. Koczyk2,3, M. Socha1, J. Walczak-Sztulpa1, signiﬁcance). A. Materna-Kiryluk1,2, A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2, R. Posmyk4, Conclusion:ClinicalevolutionofCBishardtopredictas R. Śmigiel5, A. Dawidziuk1, A. Jamsheer1 clinical presentation and severity may vary from mild to life-threatening. CES provided a timely and precise diag- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of nosis in most of our patients which is important for treat- Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Centers for Medical mentplanning,diseaseprognosisandgeneticcounsellingof Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Plant affected families. Genetics (PAS), Department of Biometry and A.Bobinec:None.A.Meašić:None.M.Kero:None.I. Bioinformatics, Poznan, Poland, 4Podlaskie Center of Sansović: None. S. Ožanić Bulić: None. N. Pustišek: Clinical Genetics, Bialystok, Poland, 5Department of None. S. Murat-Sušić: None. I. Barišić: None. Pediatric Propedeutics and Rare Diseases, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland1276 Background: Craniosynostosis (CS), the premature fusion 1Genometrics Section, Computational and Statistical of one or more cranial sutures, occurs either as an isolated Genomics Branch, Division of Intramural Research, malformation or in a syndromic form, representing a NHGRI, NIH, Baltimore, MD, United States, 2Department genetically heterogeneous and clinically variable group of of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Sacramento, disorders. Routine diagnostic screening of common CA, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, Seattle craniosynostosis-associated genes enables to establish Children's Craniofacial Center, University of Washington, genetic aetiology in 21% to 62% depending on the size of Seattle, WA, United States, 4MRC Weatherall Institute of the study, ethnicity of the population, and range of the Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe molecular analysis. Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Clinical Genetics Materials and Methods: We performed targeted next- Service, Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford generationsequencinginagroupof60patientsmanifesting University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, CS with negative results of molecular screening. We have United Kingdom, 6West Midlands Regional Clinical designedacustomhybridisation-basedpanel,encompassing Genetics Service and Birmingham Health Partners, 61 genes and 11 SNPs chosen based on current knowledge Birmingham Women’s and Children’s Hospitals NHS about variants involved in craniofacial development using Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, online databases. We sequenced captured and indexed 7Department ofClinical Genetics, Liverpool Women's NHS libraries on Ion Torrent S5 sequencing system. Foundation Trust,, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 8Clinical Results: This approach revealed pathogenic variants or Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, probably pathogenic variants among patients presenting United Kingdom, 9National Institute of Pediatrics, Soﬁa with different forms of CS. We found pathogenic and Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 10Molecular Medicine probably pathogenic variants or variants of unknown sig- Center, Department of Medical Chemistry and niﬁcance within the ALX4, BMP4, CYP26B1, EDN3, Biochemistry,MedicalFaculty,MedicalUniversityofSoﬁa, EFNB1, EFTUD2, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, IFT122, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 11National Genetic Laboratory, University IFT140, IHH, MEGF8, RECQL4, RUNX2, SKI, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, TCF12 genes. Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 12Department Conclusion: We present an NGS targeted gene panel of Neurosurgery, University Hospital 'St. Ivan Rilski', approachasavaluablediagnostictoolinthegenetictesting Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 13Department of patients presenting with craniosynostosis. of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of This work was supported by the grants from the Poznan California Davis,, Sacramento, CA, United States, University of Medical Sciences, Poland 502-14-11261860- 14Department of Neurosurgery, University of California 41259 and the Polish National Science Centre, Poland Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 15Neuroscience UMO-2016/23/N/NZ5/02577 to Ewelina M. Olech, and Research Australia, University of New South Wales, UMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/00270 to Aleksander Jamsheer Sydney, Australia, 16Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, E.M. Olech: None. A. Sowińska-Seidler: None. D. The Catholic University Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy, Popiel: None. G. Koczyk: None. M. Socha: None. J. 17Department of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Walczak-Sztulpa: None. A. Materna-Kiryluk: None. A. The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, Latos-Bieleńska: None. R. Posmyk: None. R. Śmigiel: 18Department of Pediatrics, Stead Family Children’s None. A. Dawidziuk: None. A. Jamsheer: None. Hospital, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 19Gene and Environment Interaction Section, P04.16D NHGRI, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, A genome-wide association study implicates BMP7 as a 20Epidemiology Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD, risk factor for nonsyndromic metopic craniosynostosis NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 21Division of Genetics, WadsworthCenter,NYSDepartmentofHealth,Albany,NY, C. M. Justice1, A. Cuellar2, K. Bala2, J. A. Sabourin1, United States, 22Department of Nutritional Sciences, M. L. Cunningham3, A. O. M. Wilkie4, J. M. Phipps4, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United States Y. Zhou4, K. Crawford4, D. Cilliers5, J. E. V. Morton6, A. Weber7, L. C. Wilson8, E. Simeonov9, R. Kaneva10, Craniosynostosis(CS)arisesfromprematureclosureofone N. Yaneva11, K. Georgiev12, A. Busarski12, C. Senders13, ormorecranialsutures.Previously,weobservedthatBMP2 M. Zwienenberg14, T. Roscioli15, M. Barba16, (rs1884302) and BBS9 (rs10262453) were independently W. Lattanzi16, K. Conway17, V. Shefﬁeld18, L. Brody19, associated with sagittal nonsyndromic CS (sNCS). In this J. Mills20, D. Kay21, R. Sicko21, R. Tittle22, A. F. Wilson1, study, we conducted a genome-wide association study P. A. Romitti17, S. A. Boyadjiev2, the National Birth (GWAS) for metopic NCS (mNCS). In an international Defects Prevention Study sample of 228 non-Hispanic white case-parent trios, threeAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1277 variants were genome-wide signiﬁcant: rs781712 1MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, (P=4.788x10-9;oddsratio(OR)=2.407)intronictoSPRY3; University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, rs6127972 (P=5.611x10-9; OR=2.257) intronic to BMP7; 2Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, and rs62590971 (P=4.046x10-8; OR=0.380) located ~155 Sacramento,CA,UnitedStates,3DepartmentsofPathology kbupstreamfromTGIF2LX.Theassociationforrs6127972 and Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, University Medical was replicated in an independent sample (194 unrelated Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Shefﬁeld mNCS cases, 333 controls, P=0.0042, OR=1.45) and in a Clinical Genetics Service, Shefﬁeld Children's NHS meta-analysis,P=3.11x10-9(OR=1.45).Rs1884302and Foundation Trust, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, 5West rs10262453, identiﬁed as risk factors from our previous Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and sNCS GWAS, were also genotyped in our mNCS samples. Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham Women’s and Rs10262453 was borderline signiﬁcant in the mNCS Children’s Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, discovery and replications cohorts (P=9.216x10-5, United Kingdom, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, OR=1.716), (P=0.0003, OR=1.62) respectively, and had Liverpool Women's NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, a meta-analysis P=1.330x10-7(OR=1.62). Notably, the C UnitedKingdom,7ClinicalGeneticsService,GreatOrmond allele for this variant was over-transmitted in mNCS Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 8Craniofacial probands, whereas the A allele was over-transmitted in Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, John sNCS probands. Functional assessment of rs6127972 using Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Department western blot and ELISA showed no difference in BMP7 of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Erasmus MC, expression or protein levels in synostotic metopic versus University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, opensutures.Datafromluciferasestudiessuggestedthatthe Netherlands, 10National Institute of Pediatrics, Soﬁa locus may act as a repressor element with the risk allele Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 11Institute of Anatomy exerting stronger repression. Zebraﬁsh transgenic analysis and Cell Biology, The Catholic University Sacred Heart, produced inconclusive results. Our ﬁndings implicate the Rome, Italy, 12Genomics England, London, United BMP/TGFβsignalingpathwayinmidlineNCSandsupport Kingdom, 13William Harvey Research Institute, Queen the role of BBS9 locus in the etiology of metopic Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom craniosynostosis. [Grants NIH X01HG008936 and R01DE016886] Incompletepenetranceisacomplicatingfactorindiagnosis C.M. Justice: None. A. Cuellar: None. K. Bala: None. and makes genetic counselling very challenging. Usually J.A. Sabourin: None. M.L. Cunningham: None. A.O.M. the mechanisms explaining the non-penetrance are not Wilkie: None. J.M. Phipps: None. Y. Zhou: None. K. understood, with few epistatically-interacting genetic fac- Crawford: None. D. Cilliers: None. J.E.V. Morton: tors described in humans. One recent example of such a None.A.Weber:None.L.C.Wilson:None.E.Simeonov: “two-locus” model is the proposal by Timberlake et al None.R.Kaneva: None. N.Yaneva:None.K. Georgiev: (eLife,2016)ofaninteractionofSMAD6variantsinmidline None. A. Busarski: None. C. Senders: None. M. Zwie- craniosynostosis (premature fusion of the metopic and/or nenberg: None. T. Roscioli: None. M. Barba: None. W. sagittal cranial sutures of the skull) with a common Lattanzi:None.K.Conway:None.V.Shefﬁeld:None.L. polymorphism near BMP2, to explain frequent non- Brody: None. J. Mills: None. D. Kay: None. R. Sicko: penetrance in the parent transmitting the SMAD6 variant. None. R. Tittle: None. A.F. Wilson: None. P.A. Romitti: We aimed (i) to validate the ﬁndings in an independent, None. S.A. Boyadjiev: None. largercohort, and (ii) to delineate the phenotype associated withSMAD6variants.WeperformedNGS-basedresequen- P04.17A cing of multiplexed PCR products of SMAD6 in 800 BMP2 or not BMP2? A SMAD6-related question in unsolved patients with any type of craniosynostosis, and craniosynostosis genotypedthers1884302BMP2polymorphisminSMAD6- positive individuals. We identiﬁed 18 different rare E. Calpena1, A. Cuellar2, K. Bala2, S. M. A. damaging SMAD6 variants (2.25% overall), with the Swagemakers3, N. Koelling1, S. J. McGowan1, highest prevalence in metopic synostosis (~6%) and a M. Balasubramanian4, J. E. V. Morton5, A. Weber6, ~23-fold enrichment of loss-of-function variants compared L. C. Wilson7, D. Johnson8, S. A. Wall8, S. R. F. Twigg1, to gnomAD data (P<0.00001). This conﬁrms that SMAD6 I. M. J. Mathijssen9, E. Simeonov10, W. Lattanzi11, variants increase the risk of craniosynostosis (especially F. Boardman-Pretty12,13, S. A. Boyadjiev2, A. O. M. metopic). Combining these data with a further 6 indepen- Wilkie1,8 dently identiﬁed variants, 17/24 were transmitted from an unaffected parent but the BMP2 genotype did not correlate with presence/absence of craniosynostosis. Hence further1278 work is needed to identify the factors accounting for classiﬁcation due to clinical variability. Furthermore, genes reduced penetrance of SMAD6 variants - both in craniosy- which reside in or are disrupted by rare CNVs represent nostosis,andinthepanoplyofotherphenotypes(including candidate genes for craniosynostosis. congenital heart disease, thoracic aortic aneurysm and In addition to sequencing approaches CNV screening intellectual disability), with which SMAD6 variants have methods like aCGH should be included in the genetic been associated. testing algorithm for craniosynostosis patients. This will E.Calpena:None.A.Cuellar:None.K.Bala:None.S. enable diagnosis in a signiﬁcant portion of yet unsolved M.A. Swagemakers: None. N. Koelling: None. S.J. syndromic as well as non-syndromic cases. McGowan: None. M. Balasubramanian: None. J.E.V. E. König: None. E. Kunstmann: None. A. Quattlän- Morton: None. A. Weber: None. L.C. Wilson: None. D. der: None. T. Schweitzer: None. E. Klopocki: None. Johnson:None. S.A. Wall:None. S.R.F.Twigg: None. I. M.J. Mathijssen: None. E. Simeonov: None. W. Lat- P04.19C tanzi:None.F.Boardman-Pretty:None.S.A.Boyadjiev: Biallelic loss of function mutations in CSGALNACT1 None. A.O.M. Wilkie: None. cause a mild skeletal dysplasia with joint laxity P04.18B R. Meyer1, M. Begemann1, A. Schulze2, A. Kochs3, Chromosomal rearrangements and CNVs identiﬁed in I. Kurth1, M. Elbracht1 craniosynostosis cases 1Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, E. König1, E. Kunstmann2, A. Quattländer3, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Orthopedic Surgery, T. Schweitzer4, E. Klopocki1 RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 3Praxis für Orthopädie und Unfallchirurgie, Aachen, Germany 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,Würzburg,Germany,2Praxis für Humangenetik, Würzburg, Germany, 3Kinderarztpraxis Biallelic loss of function mutations in CSGALNACT1 were Volkach,Volkach,Germany,4DepartmentofNeurosurgery, recently proposed to cause a prenatal onset mild skeletal Section of Pediatric Neurosurgery, University Hospital of dysplasia with joint laxity in a single 3.5 years old female Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany patient. The phenotype in this patient reﬂects the skeletal dysplasia of Csgalnact1-/- mice and resembles the clinical Craniosynostosis,theprematurefusionofcranialsutures,is andradiographicpictureofamilderspectrumofDesbuquois acommonbirthdefect(~1:2500newborns)occurringeither dysplasia (Vodopiutz et al., 2017). CSGALNACT1 encodes asanisolatedorsyndromicform.Singlenucleotidevariants chondroitin sulfate N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-1 (SNVs) in known craniosynostosis genes i.e. FGFR2, (CSGalNAcT-1, ChGn-1) which has a critical role in the FGFR3 and TWIST1 account for only 20% of cases. biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate. Besides these SNVs, a signiﬁcant subgroup (15%) of Here we report on a 12 years old boy born from patients with syndromic craniosynostosis show chromoso- consanguineous parents with a mild skeletal dysplasia, mal rearrangements. Due to the small number of patients short stature (-3SD), and joint laxity. Psychomotor devel- with identical chromosomal aberrations reported in the opment was normal. Whole exome sequencing revealed a literature,itisoftendifﬁculttodeterminethecriticalregion/ homozygous 1bp-deletion in CSGALNACT1 (c.372del, p. gene which contributes to the phenotype and perform a (His125Thrfs*9)). Segregation analysis conﬁrmed both speciﬁc diagnostic analysis. Thus, aCGH was chosen as parents as heterozygous carriers. The identiﬁed variant is genome-wideCNVscreeningapproachforidentiﬁcationof neither reported in gnomAD and dbSNP nor in the CNVs in a cohort of 33 craniosynostosis patients. literature.Itleads toaframeshift andprematurestop codon In total we detected likely pathogenic CNVs in 18% of and, thus, with high probability to loss of function of the our cohort. These CNVs encompass known craniosynos- corresponding protein. This is the second report of a tosis genes like MSX2 and TCF12 and novel craniosynos- patient with biallelic loss of function mutations in tosis candidate genes, respectively. Three patients carried CSGALNACT1 which underlines its role in mild skeletal unbalanced translocations and in additional three cases we dysplasia, short stature, and joint laxity without obvious detected interstitial gains and losses. Clinically these additional organ manifestations and normal psychomotor patientspresentedwithisolatedaswellassyndromicforms development. of craniosynostosis. R. Meyer: None. M. Begemann: None. A. Schulze: Our results emphasize the importance of chromosomal None. A. Kochs: None. I. Kurth: None. M. rearrangements and CNVs as a genetic cause of craniosy- Elbracht: None. nostosis, particularly in case of unclear syndromeAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1279 P04.20D P04.21A Prenatal diagnosis of Desbuquois dysplasia by whole Vascular ehlers-danlos syndrome exome sequencing before the occurrence of speciﬁc ultrasound signs N. Agaoglu1, Y. Kendir Demirkol2, O. Akgun Dogan2, M. Say3, T. Kizilboga Akgun1, H. Doganay1 C. Houdayer1, F. Boussion2, A. Ziegler1, S. Blesson3, C. Bris1, A. Toutain3, F. Biquard2, A. Guichet1, 1GLAB (Genomic Laboratory) Health Sciences University, D. Bonneau1,4, E. Colin1,4 Umraniye Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey,2DepartmentofPediatricGenetics,HealthSciences 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers University, Umraniye Education and Research Hospital, University Hospital, ANGERS, France, 2Department of Istanbul, Turkey, 3Bioinformatic Team, Gen-Era Obstetrics and Gynecology, Angers University Hospital, Diagnostic, Istanbul, Turkey ANGERS, France, 3Department of Genetics, Tours UniversityHospital,TOURS,France,4MitovascLab,Team, Introduction: Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is an Institut MitoVasc, UMR CNRS 6015, INSERM U1083, autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder caused by Angers University, Angers, France mutations in COL3A1 and COL1A1. It is considered as the mostsevere form ofEhlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) dueto Osteochondrodysplasiaisagroupofhereditarydisordersof the high mortality rate associated with the fragility of theconnectivetissue,bonesorcartilagethatimpairskeletal arteries and internal organs. Common symptoms include developmentwithaprevalenceofabout2per10000births. thin, translucent skin; easy bruising; characteristic facial The genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity of this group of appearance; and fragile arteries, muscles and internal disordersistremendousinvolvingmorethan300genesthat organs. Treatment and management options are limited are responsible for more than 450 distinct conditions. One and focused on preventing serious complications. Here we of them, Desbuquois syndrome dysplasia (DBQD) is a rare presenta5yearsoldfemalewithvasculartypeEDSdueto skeletal osteochondrodysplasia characterized by severe a novel heterozygous mutation COL3A1. micromelic dwarﬁsm, joint laxity with multiple joint Materials and Methods: The patient was the ﬁrst child dislocations, speciﬁc radiographic ﬁndings features and ofnon-consanguineoushealthyparents,bornattermwitha facial dysmorphism. DBQD is a very severe and often birthweightof2600gr(3-10thcentile).Easlybruisingeven sometime lethal form of micromelic dwarﬁsm. We report with small traumas have been noticed from the infancy here a case for which whole exome sequencing allowed to period. She also had difﬁculty in wound healing. Physical performanearlyprenataldiagnosisbeforetheoccurrenceof examination revealed wide forehead, deep-set eyes, thin characteristic ultrasound signs. Indeed, at 21 WG, the translucent skin with multiple bruising and atrophic scars, ultrasound scan conﬁrmed that the fetus was very likely joint laxity, and profound superﬁcial veins. affected with an osteochondrodysplasia because all bio- Results: Next-generation sequencing was performed on metric parameters were below -4 SD associated with Illumina MiSeq(v1.9) platform using the virtual panel for bilateral vertical talus. However, it was impossible, at that collagenopathy consisting of 51 genes. The heterozygous time, to pinpoint the exact diagnosis. Using exome variant in COL3A1(c.3563G>A) was detected. Segregation sequencing,weevidencedtwovariantsinCANT1,thegene within the family showed that the variant is de-novo. responsible for DBDQ. The parents were informed that the Conclusions: Although vascular type EDS is a rare fetus was very likely affected with DBQD at a gestational genetic disease, it should be kept in mind in patients with ageof24weeks.Thepresentcase,istoourknowledge,the easy bruisable skin and atrophic scar. Accurate and early ﬁrst oneinwhoma molecular prenataldiagnosis ofDBQD diagnosis have great importance in preventing serious life is performed in the absence of relevant family history and threating complications. before the appearance of evocative sonographic features. It N. Agaoglu: None. Y. Kendir demirkol: None. O. highlights the utility of prenatal exome sequencing in Akgundogan:None.M.Say:None.T.Kizilbogaakgun: performing a precocious diagnosis for severe fetal None. H. Doganay: None. conditions. C. Houdayer: None. F. Boussion: None. A. Ziegler: P04.23C None.S.Blesson:None.C.Bris:None.A.Toutain:None. Homozygous mutations of EGFR gene as a cause of F.Biquard:None.A.Guichet:None.D.Bonneau:None. lethal syndrome with progeroid features in two Roma E. Colin: None. families1280 J. Laštuvková1, P. Hitka2, S. Mazurová3, M. Magner3, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University M. Tesařová3, V. Stránecký3, V. Čejnová1 Hospital, Odense C, Denmark, 2H C Andersen Childrens Hospital,OdenseUniversityHospital,OdenseC,Denmark, 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,MasarykHospitalinUsti 3Center for Rare Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, nadLabem,Krajskazdravotni,a.s.,UstinadLabem,Czech Aarhus C, Denmark Republic, 2Clinic of Neonatology Faculty of Health Care Studies Jan Evangelista Purkyně University in Usti nad The parents of a girl born with Tessier no. 4 facial clefting Labem and Krajska zdravotni, a.s., Masaryk Hospital in soughtgeneticcounsellingconcerningrecurrenceriskinthe Usti nad Labem, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic, next pregnancy. The pattern of the facial clefting and a 3Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine First constriction ring on the right leg raised the suspicion of MedicalFaculty,CharlesUniversityinPragueandGeneral amniotic band to be the cause. Trio exome analysis was University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, performed to best possible rule out other causes. A Czech Republic maternally inherited substitution of glycin to serin in the triple helix domaine (COL3A1:c.2689G>A;p.Gly897Ser) EGFR gene encodes an epidermal growth factor receptor wasidentiﬁedintheCOL3A1-gene,raisingthesuspicionof which is important in cell proliferation and differentiation. vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. The family history was Sofar,onlyrarereportsofgermlinemutationsintheEGFR without vascular catastrophes, but one affected had severe gene as a cause of monogenic disease in children are bleedingafteragynecologicalsurgery.Somecarriersofthe available. Our patient was a young pregnant woman of variant had easy bruising, whereas others did not. It is well Roma origin. Her previous pregnancy was complicated by knownthatsubstitutionsofglycintoserininthetriplehelix polyhydramnios and IUGR and her daughter was born in domaine lead to a better prognosis and a milder phenotype the 31st week of pregnancy, birth weight 660g. Child had than other glycin substitutions in vascular Ehlers-Danlos no organ malformation but very fragile skin and died after Syndrome, which most likely explains the mild vascular 46 days because of multiorgan failure. The current phenotype in this family. This case reminds us that some pregnancywasalsocomplicatedbyseverepolyhydramnios, collagendiseasesincrease therisk of amniotic banding,the there were hyperechogenic kidneys and bowels and IUGR. risk being estimated to approximately 1 %. The other way The boy was born in the 30th week with birth weight of round, the risk of a collagen disease in case of amniotic 760g. The boy had progeroid features with lack of banding is to the best of our knowledge unknown. We subcutaneous fat and very thin and fragile skin. He died suggest that genetic analysis for selected collagen diseases in 34 days because of metabolic dysbalance. Whole exome should be done in case of amniotic banding. sequencing revealed presence of homozygous mutation C.R. Fagerberg: None. R.M. Schmidt: None. S. Far- c.1283G>A (p.Gly428Asp) in the EGFR gene in both holt: None. K.P. Sørensen: None. deceased siblings, both parents are heterozygous carriers. Thirteen years ago, we examined Roma family in which 3 P04.26B children died in early infancy with very similar clinical Natural exon skipping reveals that antisense features. The diagnosis of Netherton syndrome was oligonucleotide-mediated exon skipping should be considered,butwasn'tconﬁrmed.Withournewexperience directed at the recessive type of dystrophic we tested mutation of EGFR gene in one ofthese deceased epidermolysis bullosa children.Homozygousmutationc.1283G>Awasconﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. Mutations of EGFR gene should be J. Bremer1, E. H. van der Heijden1, D. S. Eichhorn2, consideredinadifferentialdiagnosisofprogeroidsyndrome R. Meijer3, H. H. Lemmink1, H. Scheffer3, R. S. Sinke1, especially in Roma families. Our report describes features M. F. Jonkman2, A. M. G. Pasmooij2, P. C. Van den of these children. Dedication: RVO-VFN 64165/2012 Akker1 J. Laštuvková: None. P. Hitka: None. S. Mazurová: None. M. Magner: None. M. Tesařová: None. V. Strá- 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center necký: None. V. Čejnová: None. Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Groningen, University Medical P04.24D Center Groningen, Department of Dermatology, Tessier no. 4 facial cleft leading to the diagnosis of Groningen, Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, familial vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands C. R. Fagerberg1, R. M. Schmidt2, S. Farholt3, K. P. Sørensen1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1281 Introduction:Dystrophicepidermolysisbullosa(DEB)isa Genetics (PAS), Department of Biometry and devastating genetic blistering disease affecting skin and Bioinformatics, Poznan, Poland mucous membranes. DEB is caused by pathogenic variants intheCOL7A1geneencodingtypeVIIcollagen,andcanbe Background: Facial dysostoses (FD) encompass rare and inherited dominantly or recessively. The structure of heterogeneouscongenitalcraniofacialanomaliessubdivided COL7A1 makes it an attractive candidate for exon- into mandibulofacial dysostoses (MFDs) and acrofacial skipping therapy. Recently, we demonstrated promising dysostoses (AFDs). Both MFDs and AFDs result from proof-of-principle for antisense oligonucleotide (AON)- impaired migration of neural crest cells to the pharyngeal mediatedexon-skipping as a systemic therapeutic approach arches and the face during embryogenesis. The main forDEB.However,itisunclearwhatphenotypiceffectmay clinical featuresobservedinaffectedpatientsaremaxillary, be expected from exon-skipping and which patient groups malar and mandibular hypoplasia, cleft palate, and/or ear may beneﬁt the most. defects. In AFDs, limb defects are present as an additional Patients and Methods: To answer these questions, we feature. studied new clinical and molecular data on seven patients Materials and Methods: To determine the molecular from the Dutch EB registry and reviewed the literature on aetiology of FD, we performed a custom ampliﬁcation- pathogenic COL7A1 variants inducing ‘natural exon- basedpanelof37genes(145.5kb,761amplicons)bynext- skipping’. generation sequencing on Ion Torrent S5 sequencing sys- Results: We found that the natural skipping of certain tem. We analysed a group of 25 patients affected by vari- exons led to disease in a heterozygous state, while the able forms of FD and validated clinically relevant variants skippingofotherexonsonlyledtodiseaseifcombinedwith byconventionalsequencinginbothaffectedindividualsand a pathogenic variant on the other COL7A1 allele. The their parents. dominant DEB phenotypes associated with heterozygous Results:Testingwithtargetednext-generationgenepanel exon-skipping could not be distinguished from dominant revealed pathogenic or probably pathogenic variants in 14 phenotypes caused by heterozygous COL7A1 variants not out of 25 patients presenting with different forms of FDs. inducing exon-skipping. Phenotypes associated with reces- We found either novel or known variants within the sive exon-skipping mutations were, however, on average ALDH1A1, ALX1, DHODH, EFNB1, EFTUD2, FGFR1, relatively mild in the spectrum of recessive DEB. SF3B4, SRCAP, TCOF1, and ZSWIM6 genes. Conclusions: For dominant DEB, AON-mediated exon- Conclusion:Weprovedtheefﬁciencyandclinical utility skipping is unlikely to make a clinical difference. In con- ofthe designed gene panel. The targeted strategy presented trast, we anticipate that exon-skipping has the potential to here is a suitable and helpful approach in the genetic induce a clinicallyrelevant improvementof the devastating diagnostics of variable forms of FD. recessive DEB phenotype, especially the types caused by This work was supported by the grant from the Poznan bi-allelic null variants. University of Medical Sciences, Poland 502-14-11261860- Grants and Fellowships: Clinical Fellowship ZonMW 41259 to Ewelina M. Olech. and grant from the Polish (90715614, PvdA) National Science Centre, Poland UMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/ J. Bremer: None. E.H. van der Heijden: None. D.S. 00270 to Aleksander Jamsheer Eichhorn:None.R.Meijer:None.H.H.Lemmink:None. E.M. Olech: None. D. Popiel: None. G. Koczyk: None. H. Scheffer: None. R.S. Sinke: None. M.F. Jonkman: A. Materna-Kiryluk: None. M. Badura-Stronka: None. None. A.M.G. Pasmooij: None. P.C. Van den M. Wiśniewska: None. A. Latos-Bieleńska: None. A. Akker: None. Jamsheer: None. P04.27C P04.29A Targetednext-generation sequencing in the diagnosisof Novel mutations in autosomal dominant inherited facial dysostoses syndromes with cutaneous manifestations E. M. Olech1, D. Popiel2, G. Koczyk1,3, A. Materna- E. Borràs, I. Hernan, M. A. Pol, F. Corella, Kiryluk1,2, M. Badura-Stronka1,2, M. Wiśniewska1,2, M. J. Gamundi, B. Mañé, M. Carballo A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2, A. Jamsheer1,2 Hospital de Terrassa (CST), Terrassa, Spain 1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Centers for Medical Introduction: Molecular diagnosis provides useful infor- Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Plant mation for disease prognosis and genetic counseling, especially when cutaneous changes are result from an1282 underlying hereditary tumor syndrome. We present four Materials and Methods: We have observed clinical and solved cases of autosomal dominant hereditary disorders genealogical examination of two patients (14 month-old displaying skin manifestations. boy and 11 month-old girl) with unusual phenotypes: the Materials and Methods: The cases consist on a 28 yo evaluation conﬁrmed following symptoms: generalized woman with multiple trichoepitheliomas (Brooke-Spiegler muscle hypotonia, progressive kyphoscoliosis, and joint syndrome); a 10 yo girl with connective tissue nevi and hypermobility. Echocardiogram and hearing was normal. osteopoikilosis (Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome); and two Boy’s ultrasound scan showed expansion of the axillary patients with multiple cutaneous leiomyomas (Reed syn- vein and girl’s one showed ectasia of the internal jugular drome),a31yowomanwithcutaneous/uterineleiomyomas vein.Patientsunderwentgenetictestingviahigh-throughput and renal cancer and a 38 yo man with cutaneous leio- sequencing followed by capillary Sanger sequencing. myomas whose mother and sister had uterine lesions. All Results: In 2 patients from 2 unrelated Russian families had a family history of the condition compatible with an identiﬁed homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion within a 5C- autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Disease-associated nucleotide repeat in exon 3 (c.362dupC, NM_017946.2) of genes were analysed using PCR and direct sequencing and theFKBP14gene,causingaframeshiftpredictedtoresultin deletions/duplications were detected by MLPA. a premature termination codon (Glu122ArgfsTer7). Their Results: Pathogenic mutations were identiﬁed in all unaffected parents were heterozygous of the mutation. cases, three of them being novel. Patients with Brooke- Conclusion:Cliniciansshouldgivemoreconsiderationto Spiegler and Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome had non-sense rare genetic syndromes, especially inthe case of symptoms mutationsinrespectivelyCYLD(p.Gly282Ter)andLEMD3 from different clinical areas. Genotype/phenotype associa- (p.Trp581Ter), while Reed syndrome patients carried tion studies will be necessary to elucidate further the cause completeorpartialFHdeletions.Thisnovelpartialdeletion of the variability of the disease severity. As it has early extends1.9kbanditsbreakpointsarelocatedwithinexon2 clinical manifestations, FKBP14-related EDS is still a and intron 2, disrupting the FH gene. Genetic counseling challenge and the key issue for its effective follow-up that was performed and relatives at risk were offered direct includescardiovascularmonitoringthatiscerebral,thoracic, molecular testing. Positive cases were further examined by abdominal MRA, and cervical dynamic radiograph. The imaging techniques to assess the presence of other lesions 362dupC mutation was linked to the same haplotype in all or malignancies. individuals despite their geographically diverse origins, Conclusions: Molecular testing conﬁrmed the hereditary suggesting a possible founder event syndromes initially diagnosed and allowed to adopt ade- V. Rumyantseva: None. I. Girba: None. N. Scherba- quate prevention and treatment measures in those positive kova: None. N. Samoilova: None. E. cases with an increased risk of internal cancer. Zaklyazminskaya: None. E. Borràs: None. I.Hernan:None. M.A.Pol: None. F. Corella:None.M.J.Gamundi:None.B.Mañé:None.M. P04.31C Carballo: None. Bi-allelic mutations in LSS, encoding lanosterol synthase, cause autosomal-recessive hypotrichosis P04.30B simplex TwocasesEhlers-Danlossyndrome,kyphoscoliotictype, 2 caused by FKBP14 mutation M. Romano1, A. Tafazzoli1, M. Mattern1, S. Sivalingam1, S. Wolf1, A. Rupp2, H. Thiele3, J. Altmüller4, V. Rumyantseva1, I. Girba1, N. Scherbakova1, P. Nürnberg4, J. Ellwanger5, R. Gambon6, A. Baumer7, N. Samoilova1, E. Zaklyazminskaya1,2 N. Kohlschmidt8, D. Metze9, S. Holdenrieder2, R. Paus10, D. Lütjohann11, J. Frank12, M. Geyer13, M. Bertolini14, 1Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery, Moscow, P. Kokordelis1, R. C. Betz1 Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Technical University Munich, Introduction: FKBP14-related Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Munich, Germany, 3Cologne Center for Genomics, (EDS) is an extremely rare recessive connective tissue University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Center for disorder. The poor prognosis is anticipated due to typical Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, features of the syndrome and possible potentially life- Cologne, Germany, 5Dermatological Practice, Munich, threatening vascular complication in childhood and atlan- Germany, 6Pediatric Practice Feldstrasse, Thusis, toaxial instability. Switzerland, 7Institute for Genetic Medicine, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 8Institute of Clinical Genetics,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1283 Bonn, Germany, 9Department of Dermatology, University None. M. Geyer: None. M. Bertolini: None. P. Kokor- of Münster, Münster, Germany, 10Centre for Dermatology delis: None. R.C. Betz: None. Research, University of ManchesterInstitute of Human Genetics, ManchesterInstitute, United Kingdom, 11Institute P04.32D for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, Phenotypic presentations of Hajdu-Cheney syndrome University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 12Department of according to age - 5 distinct clinical presentations Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 13Institute L. Graversen1, M. Handrup2, M. Irving3, H. Hove4, of Innate Immunity, Department of Structural Immunology, B. Diness5, L. Risom5, D. Svaneby6, M. Aagaard6, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 14Monasterium I. Vogel1, H. Gjørup7, M. Davidsen8, M. Hellfritzsch9, Laboratory - Skin and Hair Research Solutions GmbH, P. Gregersen1 Münster, Germany 1Department of clinical genetics, Aarhus University Hypotrichosis simplex (HS) is a rare form of hereditary Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Pediatrics and Adolescent alopecia characterized by childhood-onset of diffuse and Medicine, Centre for Rare Diseases, Aarhus University progressivescalpandbodyhairloss.Althoughresearchhas Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 3Guy’s and St Thomas NHS identiﬁed a number of causal genes, genetic etiology in Trust,London,UnitedKingdom,4CentreforRareDiseases, about 50% of HS cases remains unknown. The present Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, report describes the identiﬁcation via whole exome 5Department of clinical genetics, Copenhagen University sequencing of ﬁve different mutations in the gene LSS in Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department of clinical three unrelated families with unexplained, potentially genetics, Hospital Lillebaelt, Vejle, Denmark, 7Center for autosomal recessive HS. Affected individuals showed OralHealthinRareDiseases,DepartmentofMaxillofacial sparse to absent, lanugo-like scalp hair, sparse and brittle Surgery, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, eyebrows, sparse eyelashes and body hair. The LSS gene 8Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Aarhus University encodes lanosterol synthase (LSS), which is a key enzyme Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 9Department of Radiology, inthecholesterolbiosyntheticpathway.Thispathwayplays Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark an important role in hair follicle biology. After localizing LSSproteinexpressioninthehairshaftandbulbofthehair We present ﬁve Danish individuals with Hajdu-Cheney follicle, the impact of the mutations on keratinocytes was syndrome (HJCYS) (OMIM #102500), a rare multisystem analyzed using immunoblotting and immunoﬂuorescence. skeletal disorder with distinctive facies, generalised osteo- Interestingly, wild-type LSS was localized in the endoplas- porosisandprogressivefocalbonedestruction.Infourcases mic reticulum (ER), whereas mutant LSS proteins were positive genetic screening of exon 34 of NOTCH2 localizedinpartoutsideoftheER.Aplausiblehypothesisis supported the clinical diagnosis; in one of these cases, that this mislocalization has potential deleterious implica- mosaicismwasdemonstrated,which,toourknowledge,has tions for hair follicle cells. Immunoblotting revealed no notpreviouslybeenreported.Inonecasenogenetictesting differences in the overall level of wild-type and mutant was performed since the phenotype was deﬁnite, and the protein. Analyses of blood cholesterol levels revealed no diagnosisinthemotherwasgeneticallyconﬁrmed.Theage decrease in cholesterol or cholesterol intermediates, thus of the patients differs widely from seven to 56 years, supporting the previously proposed hypothesis of an allowing a natural history description of the phenotype alternative cholesterol pathway. The identiﬁcation of LSS associated with this ultra-rare condition. The evolution of as causal gene for autosomal recessive HS highlights the the condition is most apparent in the incremental bone loss importance of the cholesterol pathway in hair follicle leading to osteoporosis and the acro-osteolysis, both of biology,andmayfacilitatenoveltherapeuticapproachesfor which contribute signiﬁcantly to disease burden. hair loss disorders in general. L. Graversen: None. M. Handrup: None. M. Irving: M. Romano: None. A. Tafazzoli: None. M. Mattern: None. H. Hove: None. B. Diness: None. L. Risom: None. None. S. Sivalingam: None. S. Wolf: None. A. Rupp: D.Svaneby:None.M.Aagaard:None.I.Vogel:None.H. None.H.Thiele:None.J.Altmüller:None.P.Nürnberg: Gjørup: None. M. Davidsen: None. M. Hellfritzsch: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other None. P. Gregersen: None. intellectual property); Modest; ATLAS Biolabs GmbH. J. Ellwanger: None. R. Gambon: None. A. Baumer: None. P04.33A N.Kohlschmidt:None.D.Metze:None.S.Holdenrieder: Design of a candidate smMIPS sequencing study in None. R. Paus: None. D. Lütjohann: None. J. Frank: patients with hereditary angioedema of unknown cause (U-HAE)1284 C. Mathey1, C. Stieber1,2, K. U. Ludwig1, A. Maaser1, Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme, Université de S. Heilmann-Heimbach1, M. M. Nöthen1,2 Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 5INSERM U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, UPMC Université Paris 06 UMR S1127, 1Institute ofHuman Genetics,University of Bonn School of Sorbonne Université Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, épinière, ICM F-75013, PARIS, France, 6Université de 2CenterforRareDiseasesBonn,UniversityofBonn,Bonn, Lorraine, Inserm, DCAC, Vascular Medicine Division and Germany Regional Competence Center for Rare Vascular and Systemic Autoimmune Diseases, Centre Hospitalier Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare, potentially life- RegionalUniversitairedeNancy,Nancy,France,7INSERM threatening disease with an estimated prevalence of U970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Centre, Paris, 1:50,000 characterized by recurrent episodes of subcuta- France, 8Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de neous or submucosal swellings. Transmitted as an auto- Bordeaux et Laboratoire MRGM, INSERM U1211, somal dominant trait, there are ﬁve types of HAE with Université de Bordeaux, Centre de Référence known genetic defects. While HAE with decreased C1- Neurogénétique, Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de InhibitorcanbeexplainedbymutationsinSERPING1,only Bordeaux, France, Bordeaux, France about 20-25% of the cases of HAE with normal C1- Inhibitor can be explained by mutations in FXII. But two Background: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an recently discovered mutations in ANGPT1 and PLG have autosomal recessive disorder characterized by ectopic been linked to two further forms of HAE with normal C1- mineralization and fragmentation of the elastic ﬁbers of Inhibitor. Despite these successes in identifying causes of connective tissues. ABCC6 has been the only identiﬁed HAE, there still remains a signiﬁcant fraction of patients gene, but up to 18% of cases remain genetically unsolved with the diagnosis of so called HAE with unknown cause withoneornopathogenicvariantinABCC6(Legrandetal, (U-HAE).Aimingtoidentifypotentialnewdisease-causing 2017).The correspondingnegativeFrench PXEcases were genes that may play a role in the development or clinical genetically explored for new PXE gene(s). heterogeneity of HAE, we performed multiplex targeted Methods: Exome sequencing was performed in one sequencing using the single-molecule molecular inversion ABCC6 negative PXE family with additional features, to probes (smMIPs). Our smMIPs panel comprises 29 genes search for pathogenic variants. We identiﬁed a candidate that were prioritized by systematic literature research and gene (CG) in a congruent metabolic pathway, and pathway analysis and are mainly related to known disease- sequenced 46 additional ABCC6 negative PXE index cases causing genes and pathways in HAE. The panel was (IC). An in vitro biochemical assay was carried out to established on a MiSeq platform where we achieved a determine the pathogenicity of identiﬁed missense variants coverage ≥100x for 95% of all exons in 27 out of andaclinicaldescriptionofpositivecaseswasperformedto 29 selected genes. Sequencing in our patient cohort of reﬁne their phenotypic spectrum. 125 HAE patients with U-HAE is currently ongoing on a Results: Out of 47 PXE IC, 3 harbored 2 pathogenic IlluminaHiSeqplatformandresultswillbepresentedatthe variants in our CG. Histologically-conﬁrmed skin lesions, upcoming conference. and diminished visual acuity due to maculopathy evoked C. Mathey: None. C. Stieber: None. K.U. Ludwig: the diagnosis of PXE. The association with neurological None. A. Maaser: None. S. Heilmann-Heimbach: None. symptoms was strikingly present in the 3 cases, evoking a M.M. Nöthen: None. phenotype of PXE “plus” neurological symptoms. Bio- chemical analyses conﬁrmed loss of activity of the corre- P04.34B sponding mutated enzyme. ExpandingthephenotypeofPseudoxanthomaelasticum Conclusion:OurCGismutatedin6.4%ofourunsolved with hereditary spastic paraplegia PXE cases and should be systematically sequenced in sus- pected PXE cases with neurological ﬁndings: spastic para- A. LEGRAND1,2, A. Mesnil3, C. Durand4, C. Tesson5, plegia, dystonia, cognitive impairment, peripheral S. Zuily6, X. Jeunemaitre3,7,2, C. Goizet8, J. Albuisson3,7,2 neuropathy and brain MRI abnormalities. The mechanism leading to overlapping phenotypes for these 2 genes 1INSERM U970 Paris Cardiovascular Research Centre, remains to be explored to explain their role and link in PARIS, France, 2Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne mineralization. Paris Cité,facultédeMédecine,Paris,France, 3Assistance A.Legrand:None.A.Mesnil:None.C.Durand:None. Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges C. Tesson: None. S. Zuily: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None. Pompidou, Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires C. Goizet: None. J. Albuisson: None. Rares, PARIS, France, 4INSERM U1211, LaboratoireAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1285 P04.35C cortical dysplasia; only few presented with linear depig- Post-zygotic MTOR mutations and Ito hypomelanosis: mentation. Here, we report clinical manifestations in phenotypic spectrum and ultrastructural 12 sporadic cases with Ito hypomelanosis and post- characterization zygotic mutation of MTOR. We performed exome analysis or ultra-deep targeted V. Carmignac1,2, A. Sorlin3,2, V. E. R. Parker4, sequencing of MTOR gene on hypopigmented skin biopsy, E. Blanchard-Laumonnier5,6, C. Mignot7,8, M. Aubriot- and performed precise clinical reappraisal. In two patients, Lorton9, J. Courcet2, Y. Duffourd2, P. Kuentz10, we analyzed the phenotype histologically and D. Rodriguez11, R. G. Knox12, A. Boland13, R. Olaso13, ultrastructurally. V. Darmency14, C. Quelin15, S. Odent15, D. Amram16, We identiﬁed 9 MTOR post-zygotic mutations including M. Chevarin2, c. Vincent-Delorme17, B. Catteau18, six novel. Two were recurrent. Clinically, patients had L. Guibaud19, A. Arzimanoglou20, D. Bessis21, blaschkolinear hypopigmentation (11/12), epilepsy (9/12), D. Geneviève22, J. Deleuze13, R. Semple23, C. Philippe2,24, macrocephaly (8/12), hemi-hypertrophy (7/12), and severe L. Faivre2, J. Rivière25, P. Vabres1 intellectualdisability(7/12),2haveiriaheterochromia, and one nephromegaly. Primary ﬁbroblasts (p.Glu2419Lys) 1MAGEC-Mosaique Dijon, CHU Dijon-Bourgogne, Dijon, showed activation of PIK3K-AKT pathway. Skin biopsies France, 2INSERM UMR1231-GAD team, Dijon, France, showed a decreased number of melanocytes melanosome 3Genetic Department - CHU Dijon-Bourgogne, Dijon, immaturity in melanocytes and a decreased number of France, 4University of Cambridge Metabolic Research melanosomes in keratinocytes in hypopigmented areas. Laboratories, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Service Although somatic MTOR mutations have already been d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, UF de Biologie reported in Ito's hypomelanosis, this is the ﬁrst clinical- Cellulaire et Microscopie Electronique, Tours, France, genetic characterization of this association. Neurologically, 6INSERMU1259«MorphogenèseetAntigénicitéduVIHet there are analogies with SKS and hemimegalencephaly. des virus des hépatites », Tours, France, 7Service de Reduction of intrakeratinocyte melanosomes had already neuropédiatrie et pathologie du développement, Hôpital been reported in Ito's hypomelanosis, but without genetic Trousseau,, Paris, France, 8Département de Génétique et study results as well as in hypochromic spots of tuberous Centre de Référence Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes sclerosis (TS), which is due to mutations of mTOR Rares,GroupeHospitalierPitié-Salpêtrière,Paris,France, repressor TSC1/2. We found that tuberous sclerosis and 9Service de Pathologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, MTOR-related hypomelanosis shared common pathophy- 10GeneticDepartment-CHUBesançon,Besançon,France, siologyprocess,withalackofmaturationofmelanosomes. 11Service de neuropédiatrie et pathologie du Importantly, no renal involvement known in TS has been développement, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, identiﬁed in cases with MTOR mutations. Therapeutic use 12University of Cambridge Metabolic Research of rapamycin, a MTOR inhibitor, is therefore possible. Laboratories, Institute of Metabolic Science, Cambridge, V. carmignac: None. A. Sorlin: None. V.E.R. Parker: France, 13Centre National de Génotypage, Institut de None. E. Blanchard-Laumonnier: None. C. Mignot: Génomique, CEA, Evry, France, 14Pediatric and medical None. M. Aubriot-Lorton: None. J. Courcet: None. Y. genetics, Dijon, France, 15clinical genetics, CHU Rennes, Duffourd: None. P. Kuentz: None. D. Rodriguez: None. Rennes, France, 16clinical genetics, CH Créteil, Créteil, R.G. Knox: None. A. Boland: None. R. Olaso: None. V. France, 17Medical genetics- CHU Lille, Lille, France, Darmency: None. C. Quelin: None. S. Odent: None. D. 18Dermatology departement-CHU Lille, Lille, France, Amram:None.M.Chevarin:None.C.Vincent-Delorme: 19pediatricandfoetalimagerydepartment,HCLlyon,Lyon, None. B. Catteau: None. L. Guibaud: None. A. Arzi- France, 20ESEFNP, HCL Lyon, Lyon, France, manoglou:None.D.Bessis:None.D.Geneviève:None.J. 21Dermatology departement-CHU Montpellier, Deleuze: None. R. Semple: None. C. Philippe: None. L. Montpellier, France, 22Medical genetics department, CHU Faivre: None. J. Rivière: None. P. Vabres: None. Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 23University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of P04.36D Metabolic Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Molecular analysis of ALPL gene in Russian cohort of 24UF6254-CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 25Mc Gill patients with suspected hypophosphatasia University, Montréal, QC, Canada M. Fedyakov1, Y. Eismont1, T. Ivaschenko2, I. Sosnina3, Germline MTOR mutations are associated with Smith- E. Snegova3, A. Sarana1,4, S. Scherbak1,4, O. Glotov1,2 Kingsmore syndrome (SKS), whereas somatic mutations are reported in patients with hemimegalencephaly/focal1286 1City Hospital 40, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, 2D.O.Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Parkville, Australia, 4Department of Medicine, Austin Reproductology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, Hospital, University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, Australia, 3Consultative and diagnostic center for children, Saint- 5Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Saint-Petersburg State Heidelberg, Australia, 6Department of Medical Imaging, University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Australia, 7Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville, Introduction: Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare heritable Australia metabolic disorder characterized by defective mineraliza- tionofboneand/orteethinthepresenceofreducedactivity Background:MaffucciSyndromeisarare,highlyvariable, of unfractionated serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The somaticmosaic condition,causedbyrecurrentmutationsin overallprevalenceofsevereHPPisrangefrom1/100000to eitherIDH1orIDH2.Featuresincludebenignenchondroma 1/300 000. Mild forms of HPP are more frequent than andspindle cellhaemangioma,witharecognizedincreased severe forms - expected prevalence can reach 1/6000 in risk of various malignancies. Fewer than 200 cases have Westernpopulations.Russianprevalenceofmildandsevere been reported, therefore accurate estimates of malignancy HPP is still unknown. Genetic analysis provides determin- risk are difﬁcult to quantify and recommended surveillance ing of diagnosis in cases with suspected HPP. guidelines are not available. IDH1 and IDH2 mutations are Materials and Methods: We analyzed genomic DNA also implicated in a variety of other benign and malignant samples from 112 unrelated individuals with signs of HPP tumours. Recently, the FDA approved speciﬁc IDH1 and (low and/or recurrent low levels of ALP, low growth, IDH2 inhibitors for use in individuals with relapsed acute recurrent fractures and others). Primers’ system for Sanger myeloid leukaemia. sequencing was designed and validated for 2-12 exons of Methods: An adult male was assessed via the Austin ALPL gene. First exon of this gene was excluded because Health Clinical Genetics Unit, after he presented with soft it’s non-coding and GC-rich region. palpable lesions on the left upper limb. Imaging and his- Results:Studiedgroupincluded66malesand46females topathology raised the possibility of Maffucci syndrome. (mean age 9yo, range from 1 month to 66yo). Low ALP DNAwasextractedfromperipheralbloodlymphocytesand (age- and sex-dependent reference range) was founded in from surgically resected tissue. Sanger sequencing and 79% (89/112). We detected 15 pathogenic mutations (13% Droplet-digital PCR analysis of the IDH1 gene was detection rate): 13 in heterozygous and 2 in compound- performed. heterozygous. 3 novel missense variants were founded. Results: Imaging and histopathology results were vir- Most frequent variant was p.E191K in exon 6. The pre- tuallypathognomonicofMaffuccisyndrome.Weidentiﬁed valence of this mutation was 6,25% (7/112) in our study a recurrent, somatic mosaic c.394C>T (p.R132C) mutation whereas gnomAD prevalence is 0,25%. in exon 5 of IDH1, in DNA derived from haemangioma Conclusions: We presented the data of prevalence mild tissue (~ 17% mutant allele frequency) that was absent in HPP in Russian cohort of patients with suspected HPP. DNA derived from blood. This mutation is a well- Mild HPP was founded in 87% positive cases (13/15). established cause of Maffucci syndrome. Variant p.E191K in ALPL is common for Russian Conclusion: We present an instructive case of a rare population. condition,andexplorethepotentialtherapeuticbeneﬁtsand M.Fedyakov:None.Y.Eismont:None.T.Ivaschenko: risks of IDH1 and IDH2 inhibitors in this disorder. None. I. Sosnina: None. E. Snegova: None. A. Sarana: Funding: NHMRC Program Grant (1091593):I.E.S., None. S. Scherbak: None. O. Glotov: None. Project Grant (1079058):M.S.H., Practitioner Fellowship (1006110):I.E.S., R.D Wright Career Development Fel- P04.37A lowship (1063799):M.S.H. Recurrent somatic IDH1 mutation in an adult with N.J. Brown: None. Z. Ye: None. C. Stutterd: None. A. Maffucci syndrome Schneider: None. S. Mullen: None. S. Mandelstam: None. I.E. Scheffer: None. M.S. Hildebrand: None. N. J. Brown1,2,3, Z. Ye4, C. Stutterd2,3, A. Schneider4, S. Mullen4,5, S. Mandelstam3,5,6, I. E. Scheffer3,4,7, P04.38B M. S. Hildebrand4 FBN1 gene mutations in 26 Hungarian patients with suspected Marfan syndrome or related ﬁbrillinopathies 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, MCRI, Parkville, Australia,2DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,AustinHealth, Heidelberg, Australia, 3Royal Children’s HospitalAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1287 L. Madar1, K. Szakszon2, G. Pﬂiegler3, G. P. Szabó2, P04.39C B. Brúgós3, N. Ronen1, J. Papp4, K. Zahuczky4, Identiﬁcation of a novel two-exon deletion of FBN1gene E. Szakos4, G. Fekete5, É. Oláh2, K. Koczok1, I. Balogh1 inapatientwithMarfan syndromeandhomocystinuria 1Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory G. Buki1,2, K. Hadzsiev1,2, L. Pinter1,2, B. Melegh1,2, Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, J. Bene1,2 Debrecen, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 1University of Pecs, Medical School, Clinical Center, 3Division of Rare Diseases, Department of Internal Department of Medical Genetics, Pecs, Hungary, Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, 2Szentagothai Research Center, University of Pecs, Pecs, Debrecen, Hungary, 4Department of Pediatrics, Borsod- Hungary Abaúj-Zemplén County University Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary, 52nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal University, Budapest, Hungary dominant multi-system disorder of connective tissue with high clinical heterogeneity. Some characteristic features of Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal thesyndrome,suchasectopialentis,long-boneovergrowth, dominant connective tissue disorder with cardiovascular, a high arched palate, a crowded dentition, scoliosis, ocular and musculo-skeletal system involvement. FBN1 kyphosis and arachnodactyly overlap with those seen in genemutationsleadtoMFSandrelatedﬁbrillinopathies.In homocystinuria. Co-occurrence of these disorders can be this work we describe clinical and molecular data of 26 observedinanumberofpatients.MFSismainlycausedby unrelated individuals with suspected MFS who were mutations in the ﬁbrillin-1 gene (FBN1), mapped to referredtoourlaboratoryforFBN1genemutationanalysis. chromosome 15q21.1. Majority of classic MFS patients Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA samples and in bear small alterations, however, a smaller number of onecaseRNAsampleisolatedfromdermalﬁbroblastswere patientshavelargergenomicrearrangementsinFBN1gene. analyzed by next generation sequencing (NGS) and Sanger Materials and Methods: After negative results of sys- sequencing methods. tematicsequencingofFBN1,TGFBR1andTGFBR2genes, Results: We identiﬁed 23 causative or potentially cau- an MLPA (P065-P066 MRC-Holland) analysis was per- sative (including variants of uncertain signiﬁcance) FBN1 formed in a 21 years old female patient suffering from variants, seven of them was novel (~30%). About 30% of Marfan syndrome based on Ghent criteria and the cases were sporadic. Missense mutations were detected homocystinuria. in 69.6% (16/23), the majority of them were located in one Results: In contrast to the generally detected large dele- of the cbEGF motifs and ~70% of them substituted con- tions, a novel two-exon deletion (exon 46-47) has been served cystein residues. Small deletions/duplications observed in our patient. This results in the loss of 31-32nd accounted for 13% of the cases (3/23), while splice site calcium binding EGF-like domain which is responsible for variants were identiﬁed in 17.4% (4/23). In three unrelated the development of classic Marfan phenotype. patients a low frequency (<1%) recurrent silent variant Conclusions: Less than 10% of the disease causing (c.3294C>T (p.Asp1098=) was identiﬁed. FBN1 mRNA mutations are copy number alterations, in which single or analysisshowed thatthemutation doesnotlead toaberrant multipleexondeletionscanbedetectedbyMLPAinacost- splicing, based on available data the variant was classiﬁed effective manner even in the NGS era. Our case points out as benign. the importance of testing the MFS patients for homo- Conclusions:FBN1mutationswereassociatedwithMFS cystinuria, since an elevated level of homocysteine is inthemajorityofthepatients,intwocaseswithsevereand associated with the risk of severe cardiovascular manifes- early onset manifestation of the syndrome. tations,thoughatpresentonlyafewguidelinesrecommend Funding: this study was supported by the Ministry of testing for homocystinuria. National Economy, Hungary, Grant/Award Number: G.Buki:None.K.Hadzsiev:None.L.Pinter:None.B. GINOP‐2.3.2‐15‐2016‐00039. Melegh: None. J. Bene: None. L. Madar: None. K. Szakszon: None. G. Pﬂiegler: None. G.P. Szabó: None. B. Brúgós: None. N. Ronen: P04.40D None. J. Papp: None. K. Zahuczky: None. E. Szakos: A ﬁbrillinopathy the marfanoid-progeroid- None.G.Fekete:None.É.Oláh:None.K.Koczok:None. lipodystrophy syndrome - in mother and daughter I. Balogh: None. A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak, M. Gos, E. Obersztyn1288 DepartmentofMedicalGenetic,InstituteoftheMotherand 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof Child, Warsaw, Poland Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Introduction: Marfanoid-progeroid-lipodystrophy syn- University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Institute of drome (MPLS) is a very rare genetic disorder with clinical Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, featuresoverlappingthoseofcongenitalMarfansyndrome- Germany, 4Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn, ocular, cardiovascular and skeletal manifestations, proger- Germany,5InstituteofHumanGenetics,PhilippsUniversity oidsyndromes-progeroidappearanceofthefaceandbody Marburg,Marburg,Germany,6CologneExcellenceCluster not associated with other manifestation of early aging and forCellularStressResponsesinAging-AssociatedDiseases lipodystrophy with the extreme congenital lack of sub- (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany cutaneous fat tissues not associated with metabolic disturbances. To our knowledge only seven patients with Introduction: Nonsyndromic cleft lip with/without cleft this syndromewere reportedso far. In allpatients mutation palate (nsCL/P) is a common facial malformation with in exon 64 of the FBN1 gene was detected. multifactorial etiology. The majority of genetic risk loci PatientsandMethods:Wepresentclinicalevaluationof map to non-coding regions of the genome, suggesting that mother and daughter in whom the same mutation the underlying pathomechanisms act through regulatory Trp2756Ter in exon 64 of the FBN1 gene was detected effectsongeneexpression.Onepotentialmechanismmight using next generation sequencing method (NimbleGen be posttranscriptional gene regulation by micro RNAs SeqCap Target Enrichment Roche) with panel of genes (miRNA). FornsCL/P,asuitable cellular modelarehuman associated with craniosynostosis genes (developed in the neuralcrestcells(hNCCs),themesenchymalprecursorcells Department of Medical Genetics of the Institute of the that give rise to the majority of cranial cartilage and bones. Mother and Child in Warsaw, Poland). Methods and Results: We combined array-based Results: Both patients have marfanoid habitus with miRNA proﬁling in hNCC with in-house GWAS data to overgrowth, myopia, archnodactyly, pectus excavatum, identify candidate miRNAs for nsCL/P. This analysis hyperextensible joints, scoliosis, dysmorphic features with revealed miR-149-3p as strong candidate for nsCL/P progeroid facial appearance associated with congenital involvement, based on consistent hNCC-expression across lipodystrophy. Scaphocephalic head’s shape observed replicatesandthepresenceofassociatedriskvariantswithin especially in daughter was probably a result of wide fon- its genomic region. Next, we aimed at characterizing the tanelles and disturbances in cranial sutures fusion in molecular mechanisms of miR-149-3p in the context of childhood. Mental and motor development in both were craniofacialdevelopment.Invitro,wemodiﬁedmiRNA149 within normal limits. abundance levels in cultured hNCC by overexpression and Conclusions: This is the second report presenting the inhibition assays and monitored the migration behavior of patient with MPLS and cranial suture development dis- hNCC using scratch assays. We found that inhibition of turbances. This syndrome should be included in the dif- miR-149-3p signiﬁcantly increases cellular migration of ferential diagnosis of Marfan syndrome and progeroid- hNCC compared to untreated hNCCs. RNA-Seq data at lipodystrophy syndromes coexisting with disturbances in different time points revealed differential expression of cranial suture development. GPC1 and BMP7. To follow up these ﬁndings, in vivo Supported from IM&Ch intramural grant no. OPK-510- analyses are currently performed in the zebraﬁsh. 18-48 Conclusion: Through integration of large-scale genetic A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: None. M. Gos: None. E. data and expression patterns in relevant cell types we here Obersztyn: None. identiﬁed a novel regulatory mechanism that is involved in craniofacial development and might be related to the etiol- P04.41A ogy of nsCL/P. Identiﬁcation and characterization of microRNA-149, a R. Hollstein: None. L.G. Stüssel: None. M. Laugsch: candidate for orofacial clefting None. F. Haeberlein: None. L.M. Hochfeld: None. J. Welzenbach:None.J.Schröder:None.F.Thieme:None. R. Hollstein1, L. G. Stüssel1, M. Laugsch2,3, A. Heimbach: None. T. Hess: None. J. Gehlen: None. S. F. Haeberlein4, L. M. Hochfeld1, J. Welzenbach1, Heilmann-Heimbach: None. E. Mangold: None. A. J. Schröder1, F. Thieme1, A. Heimbach1, T. Hess1,5, Rada-Iglesias: None. B. Odermatt: None. K.U. J. Gehlen1,5, S. Heilmann-Heimbach1, E. Mangold1, Ludwig: None. A. Rada-Iglesias2,6, B. Odermatt4, K. U. Ludwig1 P04.43C Detection of a new AluY insertion in the NF1 geneAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1289 C. Schmidt1, W. Brechan1, K. Tveten2, T. I. Nordtveit3, J. Fazaal1, J. Welzenbach1, A. Heimbach1, C. Maj4, R. Østern1, O. Bojovic3 J. Hausen3,4,5, R. Raff1, A. Hoischen6,7,8, M. Dixon9, A. Rada-Iglesias10,11, M. Bartusel10,11, A. Rojas- 1Department of Medical Genetics, St. Olavs Hospital, Martinez12, K. Aldhorae13, B. Braumann14, T. Kruse14, Trondheim, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, C. Kirschneck15, H. Reutter16,1, S. Nowak1, L. Gölz17,18, Telemark Hospital Trust, Skien, Norway, 3Department of M. Knapp5, P. Krawitz4, M. M. Nöthen1, M. Nothnagel2, Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, T. Becker19, K. U. Ludwig1, E. Mangold1 Norway 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof Introduction: Neuroﬁbromatosis type I (OMIM# 162200) Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, is a common autosomal dominant disorder associated with 2Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 3Core variants in the NF1 gene. The spectrum of pathogenic UnitforBioinformaticsAnalysis,UniversityofBonn,Bonn, variants is large, up to 30% affect splicing. Our diagnostic Germany, 4Institute for Genomic Statistics and procedure combines analysis of genomic DNA and cDNA. Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, School of Medicine & By cDNA analysis we were able to detect a previously University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Institute of undescribed Alu insertion that was not detected by next Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, generation sequencing (NGS). University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 6Department of Patient and Methods: A 44-year-old patient presented Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, with café-au-lait spots, multiple subcutaneous nodules, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Department of Internal Medicine, vertebral neuroﬁbroma, multiple iris hamartoma and chor- Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, oidal nevi. DNA was ﬁrst analyzed by a targeted capture- Netherlands, 8Radboud Institute for Molecular Life based NGS-panel (NF1, NF2 and SPRED1) and MLPA Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, analysis(NF1andNF2)withnormalresults.Heparinblood Netherlands, 9Manchester Academic Health Sciences was used for cDNA analysis. Genetic analysis was per- Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United formed on RNA extracted from short term lymphocyte Kingdom, 10Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne culture; puromycine was used to prevent mRNA decay. (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Result:cDNAsequencingrevealedadeletionofexon26 11CologneExcellenceClusterforCellularStressResponses (r.3315_3496del, p.(Tyr1106Leufs*28); in Aging‐Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of NM_001042492.2). Extended DNA-analysis of exon 26 Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 12Tecnologico de Monterrey, and ﬂanking regions by Sanger sequencing showed inser- School of Medicine, and Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo tion of a truncated AluY transposable element in exon 26: Leon, Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Ciencias de c.3337_3338insAluY,3327_3337dupATTTATGAACC. la Salud, Monterrey, Mexico, 13Orthodontic Department, The insertion leads to disruption of the 3’ acceptor splice College of Dentistry, Thamar University, Thamar, Yemen, siteinexon26,deletionofexon26resultsinreadingframe 14Department of Orthodontics, University of Cologne, shift and premature stop codon. Retrospective analysis of Cologne, Germany, 15Department of Orthodontics, NGS data indicated a loss of coverage in this speciﬁc University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, region. 16Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital, Conclusion: While NGS is a powerful method it has University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 17Department of limitationsindetectionofmoreuncommonvariants.InNF1 Orthodontics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, genetic diagnostics, cDNA sequencing remains the gold 18Department of Orthodontics, University of Bonn, Bonn, standard for mutation detection, speciﬁcally for variants Germany, 19Institute for Community Medicine, University affecting splicing. of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany C. Schmidt: None. W. Brechan: None. K. Tveten: None. T.I. Nordtveit: None. R. Østern: None. O. Non-syndromiccleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/ Bojovic: None. P) is a common congenital malformation and has a multifactorialetiology.Todate,40genome-widesigniﬁcant P04.46B risk loci for nsCL/P have been identiﬁed, but these explain Whole-exome sequencing and large-scale re-sequencing less than 40% of the genetic liability. Epidemiological in nonsyndromic cleft lip with/without cleft palate observations suggest that a fraction of the unidentiﬁed identify novel susceptibility genes heritability might be explained by rare dominant de novo mutations (DNMs) in genes involved in craniofacial N. Ishorst1, L. Henschel1, F. Thieme1, D. Drichel2, development. If highly penetrant, such DNMs may be of S. Sivalingam3,4,5, S. L. Mehrem1, A. C. Fechtner1, relevanceinadiagnosticsettingandforgeneticcounselling.1290 We performed whole-exome sequencing in 50 trios Introduction: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common (discovery cohort) and identiﬁed 33 rare protein-altering joint disease worldwide. OA is a highly heterogeneous DNMs in 33 “candidate genes”, two of them previously condition, with a wide range age of onset. Non-syndromic found associated with nsCL/P (CDH1, TRMO). Of note, early-onset OA (EO-OA) is very rare and mainly familial. this is the ﬁrst study in nsCL/P trios using DNMs for can- Strict inclusion criteria for EO-OA are based on: XRays didate gene identiﬁcation. evidence,bodymassindex(BMI)≤30,ageofonset≤40y, The “candidate genes” were subjected to resequencing ≥ 1 joint site involved and positive familial history. with single molecule molecular inversion probes in 1,010 Although multifactorial mode of inheritance is common in nsCL/P patients from European, Arabian, and Mexican OA, EO-OA are mainly monogenic conditions. Based on ancestryand1,574population-matchedcontrols(replication thesedata,weaimedtostudythemonogeniccausesofnon- cohort). Of the total callset of 2,956 variants, 373 were syndromic EO-OA in French patients. absent from controls and showed CADD≥15 and Materials and Methods: From 2013 to 2018, clinician MAF≤0.1% in public reference datasets. As a ﬁrst step, we experts in the ﬁeld of skeletal dysplasia referred EO-OA performed segregation analysis in the European cohort. patients to our Montpellier competence center, which Here, we could identify further DNMs in four of the genes assessed the diagnostic and excluded chondrodysplasia, (CSMD1, MDN1, ANK1, PAXIP1). In those genes we also basedonclinicalandradiologicaldata.Forgeneticanalysis, found co-segregating variants (MDN1, CSMD1) and one we usedeitherSanger sequencingoranNGScustompanel compound heterozygous index (MDN1). RNA sequencing approach. datasets conﬁrmed expression of MDN1, ANK1 and Results: We recruited 40 EO-OA patients, with a mean PAXIP1 in relevant embryonic mouse tissues and human ageofonsetofarticular painat23years,rangingfrom7to neuralcrestcells,makingthosegenespromisingcandidates 60 years. Pathogenic or a likely pathogenic heterozygous for functional follow-up. mutations were identiﬁed in 14/40 cases (35%), with 11/14 N.Ishorst:None.L.Henschel:None.F.Thieme:None. COL2A1 mutation (78.6%). We also observed a genetic D. Drichel: None. S. Sivalingam: None. S.L. Mehrem: heterogeneity involving COL11A2, COL9A3, and surpris- None. A.C. Fechtner: None. J. Fazaal: None. J. Wel- ingly a homozygous pathogenic variation in SLC26A2. zenbach: None. A. Heimbach: None. C. Maj: None. J. Familial segregation of COL2A1 pathogenic variants was Hausen: None. R. Raff: None. A. Hoischen: None. M. observed for 6 cases. Dixon:None.A.Rada-Iglesias:None.M.Bartusel:None. Conclusions: We conﬁrmed that COL2A1 is the most A. Rojas-Martinez: None. K. Aldhorae: None. B. Brau- common genetic cause of familial EO-OA. However, at mann: None. T. Kruse: None. C. Kirschneck: None. H. leastthreeothergenesareinvolveinEO-OA.Therefore,we Reutter: None. S. Nowak: None. L. Gölz: None. M. recommendtoscreengenesinvolvedincartilagematrixand Knapp: None. P. Krawitz: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. homeostasis. M. Nothnagel: None. T. Becker: None. K.U. Ludwig: V. Ruault: None. D. Genevieve: None. F. Blotman: None. E. Mangold: None. None. P. Blanchet: None. A. Fabre: None. M. Fradin: None.B.Isidor:None.C.Jorgensen:None.D.Lacombe: P04.47C None.M.LeMerrer:None.S.Moutton:None.S.Odent: Genetic distribution of early onset osteoarthritis in a None. G. Plessis: None. E. Sanchez: None. S. Sigaudy: series of 40 patients None. F. Tran Mau Them: None. M. Willems: None. I. Touitou: None. M. Barat-Houari: None. V. Ruault1, D. Genevieve1, F. Blotman1, P. Blanchet1, A. Fabre1, M. Fradin2, B. Isidor3, C. Jorgensen1, P04.48D D. Lacombe4, M. Le Merrer5, S. Moutton6, S. Odent2, Mutations in osteoarthritis susceptibility genes cause G. Plessis7, E. Sanchez1, S. Sigaudy8, F. Tran Mau joint shape variation detectable during ontogeny in Them6, M. Willems1, I. Touitou1, M. Barat-Houari1 zebraﬁsh 1CHU, Montpellier, MONTPELLIER, France, 2CHU, E. Kague1, F. Turci2, Y. Yang2, S. Cross3, E. Lawrence1, Rennes, RENNES, France, 3CHU, Nantes, NANTES, L. McGowan1, J. Moss1, P. Royal2, C. L. Hammond1 France, 4CHU, Bordeaux-GH Pellegrin, BORDEAUX, France, 5CHU Paris - Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 1University of Bristol, The School of Physiology, PARIS, France, 6CHU, Dijon, DIJON, France, 7CHU, Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Biomedical Sciences, Caen, CAEN, France, 8CHU, Marseille, MARSEILLE, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2University of Bristol, School of France Physics, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3University of Bristol,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1291 Wolfson Bioimaging Facility, Biomedical Sciences, Bristol, fractures, blue sclera, tooth abnormalities, short stature and United Kingdom skeletal deformity. The diversity of clinical features and its severity varies between patients, even within a single Osteoarthritis (OA) is a joint degenerative disease and family, ranging from severe perinatal lethal to a mild form. leading cause of pain and disability worldwide. Joint shape The aim of this project was to determine genetic hetero- is commonly used to predict OA. GWAs have rapidly geneity versus clinical variability observed in patients increased the number of OA associated genes. Despite few affected by OI. geneswerelinkedtoshapevariation,evidenceforcausality MaterialsandMethods: NGSusingcustompanelof34 and functionality or their effect on joint shape are still genes with conﬁrmed and probable signiﬁcance in OI lacking.Therefore, there isan unmet need todeveloprapid pathogenesis was performed. The study included 118 and alternative screening platforms to test OA genes. We patients, aged 1-44 years, presenting a broad spectrum of use the zebraﬁsh jaw joint (JJ) to investigate the impact of clinical manifestation. Based on bioinformatic analysis, OA genes and ageing on joint shape variation. 3D selected variants were veriﬁed with Sanger sequencing in a morphometrics showed shape abnormalities in aged JJ, group of 77 patients. accompanied by OA histopathological signs. Interestingly, Results: We have identiﬁed COL1A1 mutations in 47 such modiﬁcations were prematurely found in OA mutants patients, COL1A2 in 24 patients and mutations in 3 non- (chsy1, col9a1, col11a2, and wnt16). We investigated if collagenousgenesin6patients.Atotalof41differentpoint shape changes would be detected during JJ ontogeny by mutations in COL1A1 and 20 in COL1A2 were found. testing a broader list of OA mutants (chsy1, col9a1, Respectively15and11havenotbeenreportedindedicated col11a2,gdf5,barx1,mcf2l,dot1l,wnt16andncoa3)using Osteogenesis Imperfecta Variant Database. We also repor- confocalimagingoflarvaeimmunostainedforcollagentype ted patient with a deletion spanning 25 exons in COL1A1 2 followed by 2D and 3D analysis. Distinct classes of OA gene. Thus far expected lethality of particular domains in proteins leaded to signiﬁcant shape variation in larvae, collagen type I genes revealed to be dubious, as we iden- mostly explained by abnormal cell behaviour and collagen tiﬁed 11 patients aged 1,5 to 38 years with pathogenic distribution. Dramatic shape variation caused joint move- mutations situated in these regions. ment impairment. We tested whether the use of mosaics, Conclusions: Inter- and intrafamilial phenotype varia- CRISPR G0s, could be sufﬁcient to detect shape and cell bility in OI makes genetic counseling based on clinical changes. Surprisingly, wnt16 mosaics and wnt16-/- dis- symptoms challenging and proves panel targeted rese- played similar cellular and shape changes in larvae and quencing is a powerful and useful diagnostic tool. Young adults. By developing computational tools to facilitate 3D Scientist Grant 2016/IV/57-MN analysis we delivered a powerful and rapid screening K. Sałacińska: None. L. Rutkowska: None. I. Pinkier: platform to test OA genes. Versus Arthritis (grants None. D. Salachna: None. A. Rusińska: None. E. Jaku- 19497, 21161) bowska-Pietkiewicz: None. A. Jamsheer: None. L. E. Kague: None. F. Turci: None. Y. Yang: None. S. Jakubowski: None. A. Gach: None. Cross:None.E.Lawrence:None.L.McGowan:None.J. Moss: None. P. Royal: None. C.L. Hammond: None. P04.50B Genotype and phenotype in 201 Portuguese patients P04.49A withosteogenesisimperfecta-unusualmolecularresults Genetic heterogeneity in Polish patients with challenge genetic counseling Osteogenesis Imperfecta A. M. Travessa1, P. Dias1, M. Aza-Carmona2, K. Sałacińska1, L. Rutkowska1, I. Pinkier1, D. Salachna1, J. Rosmaninho-Salgado3, T. Saraiva4, A. Grangeia5, A. Rusińska2, E. Jakubowska-Pietkiewicz2, A. Jamsheer3, M. Amorim6, M. Gonçalves-Rocha7, G. Araújo8, L. Jakubowski1, A. Gach1 H. Santos1, M. Rodrigues1, A. Medeira1, I. Cordeiro1, J. Dupont1, O. Moldovan1, A. Beleza3, J. Sá3, 1Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital Research Institute, J. M. Saraiva3, L. Ramos3, M. Venâncio3, S. Maia3, Łódź,Poland,2DepartmentofPropaedeuticsofPaediatrics S. Fernandes3, G. Soares4, J. P. Freixo6, F. Díaz2, and Metabolic Diseases, University Teaching Hospital, C. Barreiros9, C. de la Torre2, A. Bandeira10, Łódź,Poland,3DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,University J. Campagnolo11, F. Godinho9, M. Cassiano-Neves12, of Medical Science, Poznań, Poland V. Tavares13, F. Teixeira8, T. Kay6, R. Oliveira5, A. Fortuna4, S. B. Sousa3, K. E. Heath2, A. B. Sousa1 Introduction: Osteogenesis Imperfecta is a rare genetic disorder of connective tissue characterized by numerous1292 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, and FKBP10-related cases had recognizable phenotypes. Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário TheidentiﬁcationofahomozygousvariantinCOL1A2and Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, heterozygous variants in autosomal recessive genes com- Lisbon, Portugal, 2Institute of Medical & Molecular plicate genetic counselling. No variant was identiﬁed in Genetics (INGEMM) and Skeletal dysplasia 6.5% of probands. Multidisciplinary Unit, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La A.M. Travessa: None. P. Dias: None. M. Aza-Car- Paz, UAM, & CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Medical mona:None.J.Rosmaninho-Salgado:None.T.Saraiva: Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e None. A. Grangeia: None. M. Amorim: None. M. Gon- Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Centro de çalves-Rocha: None. G. Araújo: None. H. Santos: None. Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães, Centro M. Rodrigues: None. A. Medeira: None. I. Cordeiro: Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Oporto, Portugal, None. J. Dupont: None. O. Moldovan: None. A. Beleza: 5Serviço de Genética Médica, Centro Hospitalar de São None.J.Sá:None.J.M.Saraiva:None.L.Ramos:None. João, Oporto, Portugal, 6Unidade de Genética Médica, M.Venâncio:None.S.Maia:None.S.Fernandes:None. HospitalDonaEstefânia,CentoHospitalarLisboaCentral, G. Soares: None. J.P. Freixo: None. F. Díaz: None. C. Lisbon, Portugal, 7Unidade de Genética Médica, Hospital Barreiros: None. C. de la Torre: None. A. Bandeira: deBraga,Braga,Portugal,8ServiçodePediatria,Hospital None. J. Campagnolo: None. F. Godinho: None. M. Dr. Nélio Mendonça, Funchal, Portugal, 9Associação Cassiano-Neves: None. V. Tavares: None. F. Teixeira: PortuguesadeOsteogéneseImperfeita,Sacavém,Portugal, None. T. Kay: None. R. Oliveira: None. A. Fortuna: 10Serviço de Pediatria and Centro de Referência para None. S.B. Sousa: None. K.E. Heath: None. A.B. Doenças Metabólicas, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Sousa: None. Porto, Oporto, Portugal, 11Serviço de Ortopedia Infantil, HospitalDonaEstefânia,CentoHospitalarLisboaCentral, P04.51C Lisbon, Portugal, 12Serviço de Ortopedia Infantil, Hospital Nextgenerationsequencingperformanceinosteogenesis CUF, Lisbon, Portugal, 13Serviço de Reumatologia, imperfecta Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal S. Monnot1,2, G. Baujat1,2, C. Michot1,2, J. Litzler1, Introduction: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare A. Tourre1, J. Bonnefont1,2, J. Steffann1,2, V. Cormier- genetic bone fragility disorder. Although mutations in Daire1,2 COL1A1/2 account for 90% of cases, up to 17 different geneswereassociatedwithOI.Ouraimwastocharacterize 1Department of genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, the clinical and mutational spectrum of OI in Portugal and 2INSERM UMR1163, Paris Descartes University, Imagine to correlate genotype and phenotype. Institute, Paris, France Materials and Methods: Clinical data of 201 OI indi- viduals (135 adults, 58 children, and 8 fetuses) from 157 Osteogenesisimperfecta(OI)isaconnectivetissuedisorder families were collected through clinical evaluation and/or characterized by bone fragility. An important clinical medical records analysis. Sanger and/or different NGS heterogeneity exists ranging from severe antenatal letal based strategies and MLPA (COL1A1/2) were used for form to mild postnatal affection. For now, 19 genes are molecular analysis. known to be responsible for OI: 3 dominant autosomal Results: One hundred thirty-seven individuals had mild, forms (COL1A1, COL1A2 and IFITM5), 14 recessive 31 moderate, 24 severe, and 9extremely severe OI. Atotal autosomal forms and 2 X-linked forms (PLS3, MBTPS2). of123differentvariants(65novel)wereidentiﬁed.Variants Importance of a proper molecular diagnosis for genetic in COL1A1 (n=91, including one multi-exonic deletion) counselingledustodesignapaneloftargetedresequencing and COL1A2 (n=29, including one homozygous case) of the 19 gene coding regions, substituting for the former accountfor85.1%ofallmolecularlydiagnosedfamilies(66 Sanger analyses. Some genes implicated in differential withquantitativeand48withqualitativevariants),followed diagnoseslikehypophosphatasiaoroverlappingphenotypes by SERPINF1 (n=4), LRP5 (n=4), IFITM5 (n=3), wereadded,increasingto39thetotalnumberofgenes.All FKBP10 (n=3), WNT1 (n=2), CRTAP (n=1), TMEM38B requests were submitted to the Reference Center for (n=1), P3H1 (n=1), PPIB (n=1), and BMP1 (n=1). Constitutional Bone Diseases with clinical and radiological Interestingly, heterozygous variants in severe autosomal details. Libraries were prepared using capture technology recessive OI genes were found in 3 patients with mild OI. (SureSelectXT Custom - Agilent) and medium throughput Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst large-scale study on OI in sequencingonaNextSEqsequencer(Illumina).Since2015, Portugal.Inaccordancewithotherpopulations,quantitative 368mutationswereidentiﬁedin517patients(71%):187in variantspredominateinmildCOL1A1/2cases,andIFITM5 the COL1A1 gene (50%), 98 in the COL1A2 gene (26%),Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1293 15inIFITM5(4%),48inrecessivegenesresponsibleforOI Netherlands, 14Dept. of Endocrinology, Erasmus Medical (13%), 3 in X-linked gene. All these mutations were Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. The results are discussed during a feedback meeting with clinicians and biologists. Introduction: Our Genomediagnostics laboratory in This panel allows efﬁcient screening for all OI genes, Amsterdam UMC offers targeted NGS analysis of genes leading to time and cost-savings. Using a panel strategy involved in Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) and other avoid incidental ﬁndings. The main limit is the occasional connective tissue disorders. OI is characterized by bone difﬁculty to determine the pathogenicity of the identiﬁed fragility and fractures, bone deformities, short stature, variant.Wholeexomesequencinganalysiscanbeproposed dentinogenesis imperfecta, hearing loss, and blue sclerae. for patient without mutation. The phenotype is highly variable, from mild to perinatal S. Monnot: None. G. Baujat: None. C. Michot: None. lethal. Osteoporosis is a common, multifactorial disorder, J.Litzler:None.A.Tourre:None.J.Bonnefont:None.J. characterized by reduced bone-mass and fractures. A few Steffann: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. genes have been associated with (early-onset) monogenetic non-syndromic osteoporosis (OP). Here we present the P04.52D results ofthe analysis of a panel of 19OI/OP-related genes Diagnostic yield of NGS analysis of a panel of in 550 patients referred with OI, OP or a related disorder. Osteogenesis imperfecta-related genes in 550 patients MaterialandMethods:Asolution-basedenrichmentkit with Osteogenesis imperfecta, (early-onset) was designed tocapture exons and splice sites of the target nonsyndromic osteoporosis and related disorders genes. Data were analysed using an in-house pipeline and Cartagenia, and an NGS-based CNV analysis tool. 68% of A. Maugeri1, E. Voorhoeve1, N. M. Appelman-Dijkstra2, the patients (mean age 37y) had osteoporosis and/or frac- A. T. H. van Dijk3, F. S. van Dijk4, E. M. W. Eekhoff5, tures; no additional OI-related features were reported (OP- M. W. Elting1, A. van Haeringen6, A. Harsevoort7, cohort).23%ofthepatients(meanage22y)hadatleastone M. Isrie1, G. J. M. Janus7, R. T. de Jongh5, J. M. van de other OI-related symptom reported (OI-cohort). Results Kamp1, M. C. van Maarle8, C. L. M. Marcelis9, M. E. H. Diagnosiswasmolecularlyconﬁrmedin67%ofthepatients Simon10, S. Simsek11, C. T. R. M. Stumpel12, in the OI-cohort, versus 6% in the OP-cohort. In the OP- P. A. Terhal10, H. E. Veenstra-Knol13, M. C. Zillikens14, cohort, a suspicious VUS was identiﬁed in 12% of the E. J. Meijers-Heijboer1,8, E. A. Sistermans1, patients. Variant distribution among genes was different M. M. Weiss1,8, G. Pals1, D. Micha1 between OI- and OP-cohorts. Conclusions: As expected, the yield of genetic testing 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije was signiﬁcantly higher in the OI-cohort versus the OP- Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, cohort. However, the proportion of patients with a (poten- 2Department of Endocrinology, Leiden Universitary tial)geneticcauseintheOP-cohortisrelevantandwarrants MedicalCenter,Leiden,Netherlands,3Dept.ofPaediatrics, further investigation of these patients. University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, A. Maugeri: None. E. Voorhoeve: None. N.M. Appel- 4London North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, man-Dijkstra: None. A.T.H. van Dijk: None. F.S. van London North West Healthcare NHS Trust, Harrow, Dijk: None.E.M.W.Eekhoff:None.M.W. Elting: None. London,UnitedKingdom,5Dept.ofInternalMedicine,sect. A.vanHaeringen:None.A.Harsevoort:None.M.Isrie: Endocrinology, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit None. G.J.M. Janus: None. R.T. de Jongh: None. J.M. Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Dept. of Clinical van de Kamp: None. M.C. van Maarle: None. C.L.M. Genetics, Leiden Universitary Medical Center, Leiden, Marcelis: None. M.E.H. Simon: None. S. Simsek: None. Netherlands, 7Dept. of Orthopaedics, Isala Clinics Zwolle, C.T.R.M. Stumpel: None. P.A. Terhal: None. H.E. Zwolle, Netherlands, 8Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Veenstra-Knol: None. M.C. Zillikens: None. E.J. Mei- Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, jers-Heijboer: None. E.A. Sistermans: None. M.M. Netherlands, 9Dept. of Human Genetics, Radboud Weiss: None. G. Pals: None. D. Micha: None. University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Dept. of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, P04.53A Netherlands, 11Dept. of Internal Medicine, Noordwest Between LSD and skeletal dysplasia - a rare case of Ziekenhuisgroep,Alkmaar,Netherlands,12Dept.ofClinical Touraine-Solente-Golé syndrome caused by new Genetics and GROW-School for Oncology and mutation Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 13Dept. of Genetics, H. M. Kathom1, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, T. Todorov2, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, A. Todorova21294 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics CathepsinCgene.Patientsmainlysufferfrompalmoplantar Hospital, Medical University Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, keratosis, periodontitis, and early loss of teeth. The present 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory "Genica", Soﬁa, study is concerned with the dental management of PLS Bulgaria patients through periodontal and prosthetic intervention. Materials and Methods: Nine PLS patients were inclu- Introduction: Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy ded in this study. The patients were referred to our Oro- (PHO), also known as pachydermoperiostosis (PDP) or dental Genetics Clinic complaining of early loss of the Touraine-Solente-Golé syndrome, is a rare genetic osteo- deciduous dentition and were in different stages of perma- arthro-dermopathic syndrome with familial and idiopathic nent teeth eruption. Our management protocol included; forms differentiating it from secondary (pulmonary) conventional scaling and root planning every 3 month, hypertrophic osteoarthropathy. Though the diagnosis can diode laser curettage and pocket sterilization monthly ses- bemadeonthebasisoftheclassicclinicalandradiological sions and construction of a removable prosthesis to restore ﬁndings, it is often missed due to variable presentations the lost teeth. Pocket depth, bleeding index and mobility PHO is characterized by digital clubbing, periostosis, was assessed every 6 month during the 2-year period of acroosteolysis, painful joint enlargement, and skin mani- the study. festations that include thickened facial skin, a thickened Results: All patients showed good response to the laser scalp,andcoarsefacialfeatures.Thedisorderhasestimated treatment. Gingival inﬂammation was controlled with less prevalenceof0.16%,andusuallymanifestsinadolescence, bleeding,decreasedmobilityofteethandnoteethwerelost occurring almost exclusively in males, with a M: F ratio over 2 years. However, panoramic radiographs showed of 7:1. bone loss in the pocket areas. MaterialsandMethods:Wepresenta15yearsoldboy, Conclusion: Laser pocket disinfection was effective in from Afghanistan, born to consanguine parents who pre- reducing gingival tissue inﬂammation, yet the progressive sented for the ﬁrst time in our department with painful bone loss was a concerning outcome that needs further swelling of hands, feet, and face, coarse facial features, investigations. hypertrichosis,shortandbroadpalms,andsoles.Hereports Y.M. Khalil: None. M.R. Abouzeid: None. M.A. Abd on elder brother with similar swelling, and alopecia. Radi- Elkader: None. P.M. Abdelmassieh: None. ological examinations show wide and thick metacarpals, short distal phalanges, square-like vertebras. P04.55C Results:Manytestswereperformedtoruleoutlysosomal Abnormalactivationofmutatedcomplement1subunits storage disorders, and skeletal dysplasia. After performing C1r/C1s in periodontal Ehlers-Danlos syndrome an NGS-analysis (clinical exome sequencing), the patient was found to carry, in homozygous state, a new mutation R. Gröbner1, E. Brunner1, R. Redolﬁ1, A. Amberger1, (c.290G>A) in SLCO2A1 gene causing PHO type 2. H. Stoiber1, N. Thielens2, C. Gaboriaud2, I. Kapferer- Conclusions: PDP type 2 has diverse radiological and Seebacher1, J. Zschocke1 clinical features. It may remain undiagnosed for long time and progress until there are signiﬁcant facial, joint, and 1Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institut de digitaldeformitiesthatﬁnallymakethepatientseekmedical Biologie Structurale, Grenoble, France attention. H.M. Kathom: None. D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. T. Introduction: Periodontal Ehlers–Danlos syndrome Todorov: None. A. Todorova: None. (pEDS) is a connective-tissue disorder characterized by early severe periodontitis and various joint and skin P04.54B manifestations. Most EDS types are caused by mutations Dental Management Experience for Patients Suffering in collagens or protein-modifying enzymes. In contrast, from Papillon-Lefévre Syndrome periodontal type is caused by heterozygous missense or in- frame insertion/deletion mutations in C1R or C1S, indicat- Y. M. Khalil1, M. R. Abouzeid1, M. A. Abd Elkader1,2, ing a previously unknown connection between the inﬂam- P. M. Abdelmassieh1 matory complement pathway and connective tissue homeostasis. pEDS is autosomal dominant and involves 1national research center, giza, Egypt, 2Misr International gain-of-function effects; loss-of-function variants in C1R/ University, Cairo, Egypt C1S are asymptomatic when heterozygous and can cause a lupus-like phenotype when homozygous. Introduction: Papillon–Lefévre syndrome (PLS) is a rare Methods and Results: In-vitro overexpression in autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation of the HEK293T cells demonstrated that all pathogenic C1RAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1295 variants except a mutant in the C1q binding motif cause Mutation analysis was performed using NGS panel, abnormal intracellular processing and secretion of enzy- homozygosity mapping, then candidate gene approach. matically active serine protease. Unlike C1r wild type, Results: the ﬁrst family included a 15 years male who mutations in the CUB1 and CCP1 domains of C1r show presented with repeated fractures around 10 times/year, intracellularretentionoftheN-terminalfragment.Mutations deformities and severe kyphoscoliosis (clinical severity in the CUB2 domain cause secretion of aggregated N- score; CSS 17). The second family had a 9 years old girl terminal fragments, whereas CCP2 domain mutations milder in severity with 1-2 fractures/year (CSS 14). Both induce a new cleavage site. Importantly, the C-terminal patientshadnojointcontractures.Theywereshortandhad catalytic fragment from all C1r mutants was secreted and Wormian bones in their skull x-rays and osteoporosis con- enzymatically active in the supernatant. Western blot ana- ﬁrmed by DEXA. Molecular testing for both patients lysis of patient-derived skin and gingival ﬁbroblasts con- revealedhomozygousdonor splicesitemutationinPLOD2 ﬁrmed aberrant activation and secretion of mutated C1r in intron 12(c.1358+5G>A). The mutation was hetero- eveninthepresenceofC1sandC1inhibitor.C1sactivation zygous in the parents. was conﬁrmed by in-vitro complement activation assays. Conclusion: This study and previous reports from other Conclusion: pEDS is caused by gain-of-function muta- centers identiﬁed different PLOD2 mutations with repeated tions that cause abnormal activation of complement 1 fractures and variable severity but without contractures and independent of microbial triggers. We hypothesize that thisexpandsthephenotypicspectrumofPLOD2associated secreted catalytic fragments cleave extracellular matrix mutations. Accordingly, it’s important to reconsider the proteins with adverse consequences on connective tissue current classiﬁcation to include BS as a variant of OI sub- homeostasis. types rather than being a separate syndrome. Funded by FWF I-2909-B30. G.A. Otaify: None. V. Ruiz-Perez: None. P. Lapun- R. Gröbner: None. E. Brunner: None. R. Redolﬁ: zina: None. S. Temtamy: None. M.S. Aglan: None. None. A. Amberger: None. H. Stoiber: None. N. Thie- lens:None.C.Gaboriaud:None.I.Kapferer-Seebacher: P04.58B None. J. Zschocke: None. Clinical and molecular characteristics of GNAS inactivation disorders observed in 18 Korean patients P04.57A Genotype of Bruck syndrome with phenotype of J. Ko, S. Han, Y. Lee, C. Shin, S. Yang, B. Lim, T. Cho Osteogenesis Imperfecta, separate syndromes or expansion of the spectrum SeoulNationalUniversityHospital,Seoul,Korea,Republic of G. A. Otaify1, V. Ruiz-Perez2, P. Lapunzina2, S. Temtamy1, M. S. Aglan1 The GNAS gene on chromosome 20q13.3 is a complex, imprintedlocusregulatedinatissue-speciﬁcmanner.GNAS 1Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and inactivation disorders are a heterogeneous group of rare Genome Research Division, National Research Centre, disorders caused by mutations and methylation defects. Cairo, Egypt, 2Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas, These are divided into pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientiﬁcas, types 1a and 1b, pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain (PPHP), and progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH), depending on the presence or absence of hormone Introduction: Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is heteroge- resistance, Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), nousgroupofdisorderswithincreasedbonefragility.Bruck and ectopic ossiﬁcation. This study analyzed the clinical Syndrome (BS) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characteristics and molecular genetic backgrounds of 18 characterized by OI with congenital contractures due to Korean patients from 16 families with a genetically mutations in FKPB10 and PLOD2 genes (BS1 and BS2 conﬁrmed GNAS defect. Auxological parameters, AHO respectively). FKPB10 mutations were found to cause phenotypes, types of hormonal resistance, family history, moderately severe OI type XI and PLOD2 was reported and molecular genetic disturbances were reviewed retro- before to cause fractures without contractures. Herein we spectively. Nine (90%) patients with PHP1a showed present two patients from two Egyptian families with resistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH) and all patients recurrent fractures but without joint contractures having showed elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels PLOD2 mutations. at diagnosis. Eight (80%) patients were managed with Materials and Methods: two unrelated Egyptian con- levothyroxine supplementation. Three of six patients with sanguineous families with repeated fractures were studied. PHP1bhadelevatedTSHlevels,butnoneofwhomneeded1296 levothyroxine medication. AHO features were absent in abdominalmineralizationregardlessofgenotype,indicating PHP1b. Patients with PPHP and POH did not show any putative toxicity. hormone resistance. Among the 11 families with PHP1a, Conclusions: We conﬁrmed the Cmg52-/- mineralization PPHP, and POH, eight different (three novel) mutations in phenotype to be a good read-out for compound screening. theGNASgenewereidentiﬁed.Amongthesixpatientswith Our data suggests a role for VK1 in PXE pathogenesis PHP1b, two were sporadic cases and four were familial though further validation is required. The STS data under- cases. This, the largest single-center series study of GNAS scorestheimportanceofpropercontrolsandthatcompound inactivation disorders in Korea, summarizes the detailed screening data need to be interpreted cautiously. clinical and molecular genetic characteristics of these M. Van Gils: None. A. Willaert: None. P.J. Coucke: diseases. Identiﬁcation of molecular genetic backgrounds, None. O.M. Vanakker: None. along with clinical phenotypes, enables appropriate man- agement and proper genetic counseling. P04.61A J. Ko: None. S. Han: None. Y. Lee: None. C. Shin: Retinoic acid catabolism defects affecting skeletogenesis None. S. Yang: None. B. Lim: None. T. Cho: None. and resembling craniosynostosis syndromes P04.59C I. Chacon Fonseca1, R. Babul-Hirji1, E. Campos2, Compound screening for PXE using zebraﬁsh abcc6a P. Kannu1 mutant models: a proof-of-concept study 1DivisionofClinicalandMetabolicGenetics,Toronto,ON, M. Van Gils1,2, A. Willaert1,2, P. J. Coucke1,2, Canada,2TheHospitalforSickChildrenResearchInstitute, O. M. Vanakker1,2 Toronto, ON, Canada 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Introduction: Homozygous missense mutations in the Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Biomolecular CYP26B1 gene, have been described in very few indivi- Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium duals with phenotypes ranging from a lethal generalised skeletal dysplasia characterised by severe skull defects and Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an craniosynostosis, radiohumeral fusions, oligodactyly and ectopic mineralization disease due to biallelic ABCC6 narrow thorax to a milder presentation described in one mutations. As no curative therapy is available, we adult affected by multiple craniosynostosis, characteristic characterized a zebraﬁsh abcc6a CRISPR/Cas9 knockout facies, radiohumeral joint limitation, hearing loss and model (Cmg52) for drug screening purposes, identifying intellectual disability. The enzyme coded by CYP26B1 is spinal hypermineralization as an early, quantiﬁable pheno- involvedinretinoicacidcatabolismandregulatesitsprecise type. As a proof-of-concept we tested our screening temporo-spatial gradient during embryogenesis. Case pre- workﬂow on two compounds (80μM Vitamin K1 [VK1] sentation: We describe a healthy non-consanguineous and 30μM Sodium Thiosulfate [STS]), both implicated couple with 2childrenwith distinctivecraniofacialfeatures in PXE. including turribrachycephaly, shallow orbits, malar hypo- Materials and Methods: Following Cmg52+/- incross, plasia,low-setandprotrudingears,smallmouth,highpalate Cmg52+/+, Cmg52+/-and Cmg52-/- embryoswere collected. with crowding teeth and pointy chin. Both siblings have At 3 days post-fertilization (dpf), embryos are distributed bilateral conductive hearing loss, arachnodactyly, reduced per 20 in baskets. From 3-10dpf, 60 embryos are treated movement of the radio-ulnar joints and mild to moderate with 8ml compound in 1x E3-medium and refreshed daily. learning disability. Their phenotype resembles that of the Followingeuthanasiaat10dpf,embryosareﬁxed,bleached reported adult. andstainedformineralization.Photosaretakenofembryos Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed both sibs under identical conditions and via ImageJ mineralization is inherited two missense mutations in trans affecting quantiﬁed. DNA is extracted from embryos and miner- CYP26B1. Variant c.353C>T (p.P118L) was paternally alization values are linked to respective genotypes for sta- inherited, not previously described and not seen in large tistical analysis. population cohorts, and variant c.701G>A (p.R234Q),with Results: VK1 signiﬁcantly reduced spinal mineralization frequency of 0.06% in large databases, was maternally inCmg52-/-([Mean±SD]Controls:19.371±12.794;VK1: inherited.Bothvariantswerepredictedtohaveadeleterious 10.322 ± 5.519; P<0.05). STS-treated larvae had no spinal impact on the protein structure. mineralization or higher mortality compared to controls. Conclusion: Our patients add to the wide phenotypic However, 33% of STS-treated animals had spotty constellation seen with CYP26B1 pathogenic variants. We infer that higher retained enzyme activity is non-lethal andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1297 mostly associated with skeletal and neurological features D.Cocciadiferro:None.E.Agolini:None.L.Sinibaldi: including characteristic craniofacial features resembling None. M.C. Digilio: None. A. Dotta: None. M. Castori: craniosynostosis, hearing loss and intellectual disability. None. A. Novelli: None. Funding source: Rare disease Foundation microgrant. Year 2018 #2803. P04.63C I. Chacon Fonseca: B. Research Grant (principal Chipping away the challenges of diagnostic genomics investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants applications for short stature as well as grants already received); Modest; Rare disease Foundation. R. Babul-Hirji: None. E. Campos: None. P. D. N. Azmanov1,2, G. M. Arscott1, M. B. Abraham3,4, Kannu: None. J. Miller2, C. Connell2, G. Pathak5, S. Townshend5, B. Kamien5, A. Siafarikas3,4, G. Baynam4,5,6, J. Beilby1, P04.62B C. S. Choong2,3,4 The splicing variant c.1815G>A in KIAA0586 is associated with a phenotype overlapping short rib 1DepartmentofDiagnosticGenomics,PathWest,Nedlands, polydactyly and oral facial digital syndrome Australia, 2Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia, D. Cocciadiferro1, E. Agolini1, L. Sinibaldi2, 3Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Perth M. C. Digilio2, A. Dotta3, M. Castori4, A. Novelli1 Children’s Hospital, Nedlands, Australia, 4Division of Paediatrics, Medical School, University of Western 1LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics,BambinoGesùChildren's Australia,Crawley,Australia,5GeneticServicesofWestern Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Australia, King Edward Memorial Hospital, Subiaco, Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Australia, 6Western Australian Register of Developmental Neonatal Surgery, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Anomalies, King Edward Memorial Hospital, Subiaco, Rome, Italy, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione Australia IRCSS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia), Italy Introduction: As for many common complex disorders, diagnosticgenomicsapplications for shortstature (SS)face Ciliopathies are a group of hereditary disorders caused by many challenges. In the absence of consensus international abnormal structure/function of primary cilia, which are guidelinesongenetictestingforSS,variousclinicalcriteria ubiquitouslyexpressedorganellescharacterizedbyamother areusedtoinformappropriatetesting.Theextentofgenetic centriole-derivedbasalbody,amicrotubule-basedaxoneme heterogeneity and complexity of SS are still being andaspecializedmembraneharboringproteinsrequiredfor elucidated, challenging diagnostic approaches. signal detection and ampliﬁcation. Causative variants in Materials and Methods: We employed a retrospective KIAA0586,thehuman orthologofchickentalpid3 essential analysis of diagnostic genomics yield for SS patients for primary ciliogenesis and hedgehog signaling, were ﬁrst receiving growth hormone therapy on the Western Aus- associated with Joubert syndrome, a multisystem disorder tralian Paediatric Endocrine Database. In addition, a pro- displaying pathognomonic hindbrain malformation as well spective systematic study using chromosomal microarray as variable skeletal, renal and ocular defects. KIAA0586 is and a clinical exome panel on cases with unknown genetic alsoassociatedwithotherciliopathiessuchastheshortrib- aetiology was initiated in 2018. polydactyly, a lethal bone dysplasia with severely hypo- Results: A major genetic aetiology was identiﬁed in plastic thorax. Here we describe two Roma Gypsy siblings ~31% of cases prior to the systematic application of con- affected by a neonatal lethal short rib-thoracic dysplasia, temporarygenomictechnologies(35outof114participants harboring the KIAA0586 homozygous variant c.1815G>A born since 2005 and receiving growth hormone for >2 (p.Gln605Gln), identiﬁed by targeted resequencing analy- years). Presence of composite genomic ﬁndings in some sis. Clinical features of this family are not limited to the patients challenged interpretation. Referral to a local inter- typical short rib-polydactyly syndrome but also include disciplinary undiagnosed disease program helped in resol- tongue/oral hamartomas, multiple frenulae and cleft palate. ving the diagnostic odyssey for complex patients. The same combination of intraoral ﬁndings have been Conclusions: Diagnostic genomics applications for SS already identiﬁed in patients with the esonic splice site are still evolving and some of the challenges can be over- variant p.Gln605Gln; suggesting continuity between short- come by pre-test clinical selection, detailed phenotyping rib-polydactyly and oral-facial-digital syndromes in the and contribution of an inter-disciplinary team input. The context of KIAA0586 clinical spectrum. current efforts focus on the detection of high penetrance genetic causes, and the remaining challenge is to interpret1298 moderate to low penetrance genetic risk factors for SS. A.Fanelli:None.D.Babu:None.S.Mellone:None.F. Acknowledgements: Merck Serono Australia, grant Prodam: None. S. Bellone: None. G. Genoni: None. S. 201603.4701.POT; DNA is supported by a Raine clinical Vannelli: None. M. Giordano: None. researchfellowship(CRF018,project“Diagnosticgenomics applications for short stature”). P04.66B D.N. Azmanov: None. G.M. Arscott: None. M.B. Report of a novel variant causing a schneckenbecken- Abraham: None. J. Miller: None. C. Connell: None. G. like dysplasia Pathak: None. S. Townshend: None. B. Kamien: None. A.Siafarikas: None. G.Baynam: None. J. Beilby: None. O.W.Quarrell1,C.Rautengarten2,K.Stals3,R.Caswell4, C.S. Choong: None. E. De Franco5, E. Baple6, N. Burgess7, R. Jokhi8, J. L. Hazelwood9, A. C. Ofﬁah10, B. Ebert2, S. Ellard6 P04.64D Identiﬁcations of novel variants affecting SHOX 1Dept Clinical Genetics Shefﬁeld Children's Hospital, expression in Short Stature patients Shefﬁeld S10 2TH, United Kingdom, 2School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, A. Fanelli1, D. Babu1, S. Mellone1, F. Prodam1, Australia, 3Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, S. Bellone1, G. Genoni1, S. Vannelli2, M. Giordano1 Exteter EX2 5DW, United Kingdom, 4College of Medicine and Health, University of Exeter, Exeter EX2 5DW, United 1Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Novara, Italy, Kingdom, 5Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, 2Ospedale Regina Margherita, Divisione di Pediatria, ExeterEX25DW,UnitedKingdom,6RoyalDevon&Exeter Torino, Italy NHS Foundation Trust and College of Medicine and Health, University of Exeter, Exeter EX2 5DW, United Haploinsufﬁciency of the pseudoautosomal SHOX gene Kingdom, 7Dept Histology, Shefﬁeld Children’s Hospital causes70-90%ofLéri-Weilldyschondrosteosis(LWD)and NHS Foundation Trust., Shefﬁeld S10 2TH, United 2-10%ofidiopathicshortstature(ISS).Deletionsremoving Kingdom, 8Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Shefﬁeld the gene or enhancers and nonsense/frameshift mutations teaching Hospitals, Shefﬁeld S10 2SF, United Kingdom, represent a well-established cause of disease. Otherwise, 9School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne,, rearrangements not encompassing any described enhancer Victoria 3010, Australia, 10University of Shefﬁeld, and5’UTRvariationsarealsoidentiﬁedinpatientsbuttheir Academic Unit of Child Health, Shefﬁeld Children's pathogenic role remains unclear. During diagnostic screen- Hospital, Shefﬁeld S10 2SF, United Kingdom ingperformedon934patientsbystandardmethods(MLPA and sequencing) we identiﬁed SHOX alterations in 82 Introduction: A homozygous pathogenic variant in patients (8.8%). Among these, 65 (78%) carried deletions SLC35D1, an endoplasmic reticulum nucleotide sugar while 17 (22%) point mutations. Besides these pathogenic transporter, was identiﬁed as a cause of schneckenbecken mutations we also identiﬁed small deletions not encom- dysplasia in 2007. We report a case of a skeletal dysplasia passing any already described enhancer (n=11) and withinconclusivepathologicalandradiologicalfeaturesand variations within 5’UTR (n=5) in 24 LWD/ISS patients a missense change in SLC35D1. whosepathogenicrolewaslessclearthatwereclassiﬁedas Material and Methods: A consanguineous family had 4 VOUS. The aim of this work was to investigate through pregnancies affected by a skeletal dysplasia. Insufﬁcient functionalstudiesthepathogenicroleofthesevariations.To DNA from the 4 pregnancies meant that exome couple better characterize the deletions not encompassing the analysiswasundertakenontheparentsfollowedbyinsilico enhancers we used a ﬁne-tiling custom aCGH and protein modelling using Phyre2 web and I-TASSER ser- performed in vitro functional assays to assess the potential vers. Functional effects of variants were assessed using a enhanceractivityofconservedsequenceswithinthedeleted proteo-liposome assay (Rautengarten et al., 2014 PNAS areas. The variants within the 5’UTR were tested for their 111: 11563-11568). abilitytointerferewithcorrectgeneexpression.Ourresults Results: Both parents were heterozygous for a missense showed that some of the VOUS might be responsible of change in SLC35D1 c.398C>T p.(Pro133Leu). Reappraisal SHOX deﬁciency either by removing putative regulatory of the radiographs was consistent with schneckenbecken- elements or affecting the proximal promoter activity. In like dysplasia. Testing of one of the fetuses and 2 healthy conclusion, the present study allowed us to reclassify as unaffectedsiblingswasconsistentwithautosomalrecessive likely pathogenic some of the novel variants of uncertain inheritance but not sufﬁcient to conﬁrm pathogenicity. In signiﬁcance, that we detected in the diagnostic screening, silico protein modelling showed that p.Pro133 lies directly thus reducing them of at least 10%. opposite p.Thr65, the site of the only previously reportedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1299 pathogenic missense variant, at the mouth of the solute disease histories with severe growth retardation of prenatal channel, implying pathogenicity. The prote-liposome assay onset, characteristic facial features and respiratory difﬁcul- demonstrated 2-4% in transport activity compared to wild- ties, the latter being most prominent in the index patient; type but also showed SCLD231 is a general UDP-sugar which conﬁrmed the diagnosis of SOFT syndrome. transporter with clear activity towards UDP-Xylose, sug- Conclusion: The ﬁnding i) considerably increases the gesting a mechanism by which the Golgi synthesized sub- number of reported SOFT syndrome patients allowing for strate can be imported into the endoplasmic reticulum for furtherclinicaldelineationofthisraredisorder,andii)adda essential xylosylation reactions. novelPOC1Amissensevariantinexon2,allowingtoreﬁne Conclusion: An agnostic approach to molecular testing the relevance of the functional domain affected by this together with protein modelling and a functional assay change and expand the genotype- phenotype correlation in demonstrated pathogenicity of an SLC35D1 variant and POC1A-related disorders. increased the protein's biochemical characterization. N. Grüning: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- O.W. Quarrell: None. C. Rautengarten: None. K. niﬁcant; Centogene AG. M. Al-Shehhi: None. A. Wes- Stals: None. R. Caswell: None. E. De Franco: None. E. tenberger: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; Baple: None. N. Burgess: None. R. Jokhi: None. J.L. Centogene AG. P. Scott: None. O. Brandau: A. Hazelwood:None.A.C.Ofﬁah:None.B.Ebert:None.S. Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. Ellard: None. L. Abbasi-Moheb: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. Z. Yüksel: A. Employment P04.67C (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG.C.Beetz:A. AnovelPOC1Avariantinexon2causesclassicalSOFT Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. syndrome: Clinical presentations of seven patients P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part- N.Grüning1,M.Al-Shehhi2,A.Westenberger1,3,P.Scott4, time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. E. Ownership Interest O. Brandau1, L. Abbasi-Moheb1, Z. Yüksel1, C. Beetz1, (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); P. Bauer1, A. Rolfs1, A. Al-Kindy4 Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. A. Al-Kindy: None. 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Royal Hospital, P04.69A Muscat, Oman, 3University of Lübeck, Lübneck, Germany, Phenotypic overlap between spondyloepimetaphyseal 4Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman dysplasiawithjointlaxitytype2andMorquiosyndrome type A: case report Introduction: Biallelic pathogenic variants in POC1A (centriolar protein A) cause either SOFT (Short-stature- M. Mijovic1, A. Miletic1, H. Janeski1, B. Dimitrijevic1, Onychodysplasia-Facial-dysmorphism-and-hypoTrichosis) J. Ruml Stojanovic1, M. Lukic1, G. Cuturilo1,2 syndrome or a milder and only partially overlapping phenotype, i.e., variant POC1A-related syndrome – with 1University Children's Hospital, Department of Medical this pleiotropic effect depending on the respective exon Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Medicine, affected by mutation. Pathogenic changes in a total of only University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia 22 patients had been described underlining the disease rareness. Two large consanguineous families of Omani Introduction:Wepresentﬁfteen-year-oldboypatient,with origin presentedto the clinic with7 individuals affected by complexskeletal phenotypehighlysusceptible tomucoply- primordial dwarﬁsm resembling SOFT syndrome, but of saccharidosistypeIVA(Morquiosyndrome).Hehassevere unknown genetic cause and diagnosis. skeletal dysplasia including disproportionate short stature Materials and Methods: Detailed clinical work-up to with short trunk, kyphoscoliosis with gibbus, joint hyper- deﬁne the symptoms and whole-exome sequencing (WES) mobility, bilateral congenital hip dislocations, knock-knee were performed in one of the index patients and two rela- and ulnar deviation of the wrists. The patient is immobile tives, as well as subsequent Sanger sequencing for further since his sixth year. He doesn’t have hepatosplenomegaly, segregation studies. respiratory complications, cardiac valve abnormalities and Result: WES yielded the variant POC1A dental abnormalities. No pathological ophthalmology ﬁnd- (NM_015426.4): c.64G>T p.(Val22Phe) which showed ings, neither hearing loss. segregation within the tested individuals and further family Materials and Methods: We performed enzymes blood members. Thisvariantaffects the alternative exon2, thatis testing for several types of mucopolysaccharidosis in ﬁrst present only in two of three POC1A transcripts. Never- line testing, and exome sequencing which targeted genes theless, all of the investigated patients had comparable1300 related to observed clinical presentation in second line c.268C>T;p.(Arg90*)andc.1739dup;p.(Gly581Trpfs*20). testing. Bi-allelic COL9A1 [MIM 120210] and COL9A2 [MIM Results: Unexpectedly, enzyme level of N-acet- 120260] mutations are already known to cause autosomal- ylgalatosamine-6-sulfate-sulphatease showed normal result recessive inherited Stickler syndrome [MIM 614134; and excluded Morquio syndrome. Subsequently, exome 614284]. However, as far as we know, only one family sequencing showed presence of heterozygous pathogenic with bi-allelic occurrence of a COL9A3 nonsense mutation missense variant in KIF22 gene (c.443C>T, p.Pro148Leu). and Stickler syndrome is published until now. As in our Pathogenic variants in KIF22 gene represent an established patient, in this family the affected individuals showed a causeofspondyloepimetaphysealdysplasiawithjointlaxity comparatively mild phenotype with no vitreoretinal invol- type2(OMIM:603546).TheclinicalpresentationofKIF22- vement or cataracts so far and no cleft palate/Pierre-Robin associated conditions includes skeletal abnormalities, joint sequence.Thus,theﬁndings inourcasefurthersupportthe laxity, joint dislocations, spinal deformities and short sta- assumption that bi-allelic COL9A3 mutations are very ture, which is compatible with the clinical presentation in likely sufﬁcient to cause Stickler syndrome as well. our patient. A. Bohring: None. J. Horvath: None. P. Conclusion: Between Morquio syndrome and spondy- Wieacker: None. loepimetaphyseal dysplasia may exist completely over- lapping skeletal phenotype, which is conﬁrmed literature P04.71C data (ref. Biswas SN et al., 2017). The distinction between Stüve-Wiedemann syndrome: a rare clinical entity these diseases is very important because of available enzymereplacementtherapyforMorquiosyndrometypeA O. Akgün Dogan1, Y. Kendir Demirkol1, M. Say2, and completely different pattern of inheritance and recur- T. Kizilboga Akgün3,4, L. Doğanay4 rencerisk.Exomesequencingshouldbeﬁrstgenetictestin patient with severe skeletal dysplasia with overlapping 1Department of Pediatric Genetics, Health Sciences phenotype. University, Umraniye Education and Research Hospital, M.Mijovic:None.A.Miletic:None.H.Janeski:None. İstanbul, Turkey, 2Bioinformatic Team, Gen-Era B. Dimitrijevic: None. J. Ruml Stojanovic: None. M. Diagnostic, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Molecular Lukic: None. G. Cuturilo: None. Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University, İstanbul, Turkey, 4GLAB (Genomic Laboratory), Health P04.70B Sciences University, Umraniye Education and Research Further evidence for COL9A3 associated autosomal Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey recessive Stickler syndrome Introduction:Stüve-Wiedemannsyndrome(SWS)(MIM601559) A. Bohring, J. Horvath, P. Wieacker is an autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia characterized by bowing of extremities, severe osteoporosis, joint contractures, Institut für Humangenetik, Münster, Germany dysautonomia, frequent respiratory infections, and feeding difﬁculty. Mutations in LIFR are responsible for the syndrome. Heterozygous COL9A3 [MIM 120270] mutations were Althoughthemajorityofpatientsarelostduetocomplicationsin reported to cause multiple epiphyseal dysplasia-3 [MIM infancy,patientswhoreachadolescentperiodarereportedrarely. 600969] which is mainly characterized by stiffness and/or Here, we present a 9 years-old male with SWS with severe pain in the knees, due to ﬂattened, irregular epiphyses, and skeletalﬁndingsduetoanovelhomozygousmutationinLIFR. varus or valgus deformity, waddling gait, and mild short Materials and Methods: The patient was the third child stature insomepatients.Herewereport onthesecond case of healthy, consanguineous parents, born at term with a with bi-allelic COL9A3 nonsense mutations. The boy was birth weight of 3600g(50-75th centile). Bowing in lower born with club feet and moderate hearing loss to healthy extremities was remarkable at birth, and progressed gradu- parents. Radiographs revealed ﬂat lumbar vertebrae, coxa ally with age. He was hospitalized many times for respira- retrotorta,andbroadfemoralmetaphyses.Atexaminationat torydistress,feedingdifﬁculties,andrecurrentfever.Motor age 2,5 years we saw a triangular face, bilaterally mild developmental milestones were delayed however, mental epicanthus, a high arched palate, and short ﬁngers. In development was normal. Physical examination revealed addition, myopia was diagnosed recently. Height was 92 facial dysmorphic features, bending of the extremities, cm, weight 15 kg (50. and 75. centile, respectively). laxity of the metacarpophalangeal joints, scoliosis, promi- Because of the phenotype, the provisional diagnosis of nent heels, and pes planus. X-ray of extremities showed Stickler syndrome was made and molecular analyses bowing of the limbs, bilateral valgus deformity, and revealed compound-heterozygosity for COL9A3 mutations widening of the femoral and tibial metaphysis.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1301 Results: Next-generation sequencing was performed on contributes to genotype-phenotype associations of this rare Illumina MiSeq(v1.9) platform using the virtual panel for disorder. skeletal dysplasia consisting of 130 genes. The novel S. Alter: None. A. Hotz: None. A. Jahn: None. N. Di homozygous variant in LIFR(c.274C>T) was detected. Donato: None. E. Schröck: None. M. Smitka: None. M. Segregation within the family showed that parents were von der Hagen: None. J. Schallner: None. M. Menschi- heterozygous carriers. kowski: None. C. Gillitzer: None. M.W. Laass: None. J. Conclusions: Although SWS is a rare genetic disease, it Fischer: None. A. Tzschach: None. should be kept in mind in patients with congenital bowing in extremities. Targeted exome analysis has great impor- P04.74B tance in the fast and accurate setting in the diagnosis of Analysis of a French cohort of patients with Werner heterogeneous groups of syndromes such as bent bone syndrome; clinical and molecular features dysplasias. O. Akgün Dogan: None. Y. Kendir Demirkol: None. B. Dauriat1, N. Uhrhammer2,3, H. Adamski4, C. Colson5, M. Say: None. T. Kizilboga Akgün: None. L. P. D’Anella6, F. Demurger7, H. Dollfus8, V. Drouin- Doğanay: None. Garraud9, C. Francannet10, M. Gerard5, F. Giuliano11, B. Isidor12, H. Journel7, P. Lacroix13, H. Levesque14, P04.73A L. Mary8, C. Moraine1, X. Piguel15, M. Pistorius16, Novel VPS33B mutation in a patient with autosomal G. Plessis5, I. Reingeard17, M. Rio18, M. Ruivard19, recessive keratoderma-ichthyosis-deafness (ARKID) G. Vera9, C. Vigouroux20, M. Vincent12, J. Bignon2,3, syndrome C. Yardin1,21 S.Alter1,A.Hotz1,A.Jahn2,N.DiDonato2,E.Schröck2, 1Department of Cytogenetics and Medical Genetics, M. Smitka3, M. von der Hagen3, J. Schallner3, Dupuytren University Hospital, Limoges, France, M. Menschikowski4, C. Gillitzer3, M. W. Laass3, 2Department of Oncogenetics, Centre Jean Perrin, J. Fischer1, A. Tzschach1,2 Clermont-Ferrand University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 3INSERM U1240, Imagerie Moléculaire et 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,Freiburg,Germany,2Institute Stratégies Théranostiques, Clermont-Ferrand, France, of Clinical Genetics, Technische Universität Dresden, 4Department of Dermatology, Rennes University Hospital, Dresden, Germany, 3Children´s hospital, Medical Faculty Rennes, France, 5Department of Genetics, Caen University Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Hospital, Caen, France, 6Department of Endocrinology, Dresden, Germany, 4Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Avignon Hospital, Avignon, France, 7Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical Faculty CarlGustav Carus, Clinical Genetics, Rennes University Hospital, Rennes, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany France, 8Department of Genetics, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France, 9Department of Genetics, Autosomal recessive keratoderma-ichthyosis-deafness Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 10Department (ARKID) syndrome is a rare multisystem disorder caused of Genetics, Estaing University Hospital, Clermont- by biallelic mutations in VPS33B; only three patients have Ferrand, France, 11Department of Genetics, Nice been reported to date. ARKID syndrome is allelic to University Hospital, Nice, France, 12Department of arthrogryposis-renal dysfunction-cholestasis (ARC) syn- Genetics, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France, drome (MIM #208085), a severe disorder with early 13Department of Thoracic and Vascular Surgery-Vascular lethality whose phenotypic characteristics also include Medicine,DupuytrenUniversityHospital,Limoges,France, ichthyosis, hearing loss, severe failure to thrive, platelet 14Department of Internal Medicine, University of Rouen, dysfunction and osteopenia. We report on an 11-year-old Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine, male patient with ARKID syndrome and compound Rouen, France, 15Department of Endocrinology, Poitiers heterozygous VPS33B mutations, one of which University Hospital, Poitiers, France, 16Department of [c.1440delG; p.(Arg481Glyfs*11)] was novel. Clinical Internal Medicine, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, features of this patient included ichthyosis, palmoplantar France, 17Department of Endocrinology, Montpellier keratosis, hearing loss, intellectual disability, unilateral hip University Hospital, Montpellier, France, 18Department of dislocation, microcephaly and short stature. He also had Pediatrics, Neurology and Genetics, Hôpital Necker- copper hepatopathy and exocrine pancreatic insufﬁciency, Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 19Department of Internal features that have not been associated with neither ARKID Medicine, Estaing University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, norARCsyndromesofar.Thepatientbroadenstheclinical France, 20AP-HP Saint-Antoine Hospital, Molecular and molecular spectrum of ARKID syndrome and Biology and Genetics Laboratory, Endocrinology1302 Department, National Reference Center for Insulin 1de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, 2Cliniques Secretion and Insulin Sensitivity Rare Diseases, Paris, Universitaires St. Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 3Cliniques France, 21Limoges University, CNRS, XLIM, UMR 7252, Universitaires St Luc & Institute of Experimental and Limoges, France Clinical Research, UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium, 4Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium Introduction: Werner syndrome (WS) belongs to adult onset progeroid diseases, leading to a premature ageing of Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multi-system disease of mesenchymal and epithelial tissues, affecting one person unknown cause, characterized by vascular and immune per a million in the world. Its cardinal signs are short dysregulation that results in progressive ﬁbrosis of the skin stature, lipodystrophy and atrophic skin, premature cataract and other organs. While rare, it can be lethal, and there are and greying of hair; age-associated complications may currently no treatments. SSc is typically sporadic; familial occur in WS such as osteoporosis, chronic skin ulcers or forms are extremely rare. By applying genome-wide Next diabetes mellitus, and patients usually die around 53 years Generation Sequencing (NGS) to such families, we aim to of age from cardiovascular or neoplastic causes. This identify genetic “drivers”, i.e., disease-causative or recessive genetic affection is linked to loss-of-function strongly-predisposing alleles. We hypothesize that these mutations of WRN gene, coding for a helicase involved in genes may also contribute to sporadic disease, when they multiple DNA pathways. No recent clinical nor molecular carry strong de novo mutations, weak inherited variants description were available for French WS patients. (that cause disease only in combination with other genetic Methods: Data from French laboratories found 36 andenvironmentalfactors),orsomaticmutationsinaffected genetically conﬁrmed WS cases, whose 34 for which tissues. We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) on molecular and clinical data were collected. blood-DNA from two affected ﬁrst-degree relatives each Results:31mutationsincluding14newlydescribedones from ﬁve families, and ﬁltered for genes with missense or wereidentiﬁed,withsomeassociatedwithaspeciﬁcFrench nonsense variants that (i) co-segregate with disease, (ii) are region. The mean age for diagnosis was 40.5 years, the rare in public sequence databases and an in-house WES cardinal signs were found in all the patients, and under- database, and (iii) predicted to affect protein function in estimated features (deafness, hepatic, thyroid, valvular, silico. Between 18 and 40 such genes were identiﬁed per hypertensive or capillary impairments) were commonly family. Candidate gene prioritization was performed using diagnosed.Deathoccurredat53.6yearsofage,mostlyfrom literature and database-mining, as well as intersection with cancerous etiologies. Despite the homogeneity of the main RNASeqdata from sporadicSSc cutaneoustissue biopsies. signs, it seems that phenotypes with less severe evolution Variants in the two highest-ranked candidates (one a pro- may exist, without associated predictive or causal factors. ﬁbrotic growth factor, the other a cytokine receptor with Conclusion: This cohort gives an exhaustive description pro-ﬁbrotic, pro-inﬂammatory effects) are currently being of French patients presenting genetically conﬁrmed WS testedfortheireffectsonproteinfunction.Proofofaneffect since the beginning of WRN testing. It deﬁnes accurate onproteinfunctionwillbefollowedbytestingforaroleina frequencies for all the numerous symptoms and gives the bleomycin-induced mouse model of SSc. opportunity for prospective investigations. N. Limaye: None. M. Vanthuyne: None. F. Houssiau: B.Dauriat:None.N.Uhrhammer:None.H.Adamski: None. V. Smith: None. B. Lauwerys: None. None.C.Colson:None.P.D’Anella:None.F.Demurger: None. H. Dollfus: None. V. Drouin-Garraud: None. C. P04.76D Francannet:None.M.Gerard:None.F.Giuliano:None. WNT10A mutations: reﬁning genotype, phenotype, B. Isidor: None. H. Journel: None. P. Lacroix: None. H. penetrance, clinical variability and inheritance manner Levesque: None. L. Mary: None. C. Moraine: None. X. Piguel: None. M. Pistorius: None. G. Plessis: None. I. O. Patat1, I. Bailleul-Forestier2, J. Plaisancie1, Reingeard: None. M. Rio: None. M. Ruivard: None. G. D. Bonneau3, E. Colin3, C. Colson4, M. Cordier5, Vera: None. C. Vigouroux: None. M. Vincent: None. J. C. Coubes6, F. Demurger7, A. Dieux-Coeslier8, Bignon: None. C. Yardin: None. M. Fradin7, M. Gerard4, A. Goldenberg9, B. Isidor10, H. Journel10, D. Lacombe11, M. Lebrun12, D. Martin- P04.75C Coignard13, M. Nizon10, S. Odent7, F. Petit8, N. Philip14, Genetic predisposition to systemic sclerosis J. Piard15, J. Piard15, G. Plessis4, A. Putoux5, C. Quelin7, J. Thevenon16, A. Toutain17, C. Vanleberghe8, N. Limaye1, M. Vanthuyne2, F. Houssiau3, V. Smith4, A.Verloes18,C.Vincent-Delorme8,Y.Capri18,F.Vaysse2, B. Lauwerys3 P. Calvas1, N. Chassaing1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1303 1CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 2Faculté de Chirurgie delorme: None. Y. Capri: None. F. Vaysse: None. P. Dentaire, Toulouse, France, 3CHU Angers, Angers, Calvas: None. N. Chassaing: None. France, 4CHU Caen, Caen, France, 5CHU Lyon HCL, Lyon, France, 6CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 7CHURennes,Rennes,France,8CHRULille,Lille,France, P05 9CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 10CHU Nantes-Hôtel dieu, Cardiovascular disorders Nantes, France, 11CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 12CHU Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France, 13CHU Le P05.01A Mans, Le Mans, France, 14CHU Marseille, Marseille, European Reference Network For RareVascular France, 15CHRU Besançon, Besançon, France, 16CHU Diseases (VASCERN) consensus statement for the Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 17CHRU Tours, Tours, screening and management of patients with pathogenic France, 18CHUParisHôpital Robert Debré,Paris, France ACTA2 variants Introduction: The agenesis of several teeth is a prevalent I. van de Laar1, E. Arbustini2, B. Loeys3,4, E. Björck5, malformation in human. Hypodontia is deﬁned by the M. Groenink6, M. Kempers4, J. Timmermans4, J. Roos- agenesis of six teeth or less, whereas oligodontia refers to Hesselink1,K.Benke7,G.Pepe8,B.Mulder6,Z.Szabolcs7, the agenesis of more than six teeth, excluding the third G. Teixidó-Turà9, L. Robert10, Y. Emmanuel10, molars. Hypodontia and oligodontia can be associated with A. Evangelista11, A. Pini12, Y. von Kodolitsch13, defects in the development of other ectodermal structures G. Jondeau14, J. De Backer15 suchashairs,sweatglandsandnails,deﬁningthespectrum ofectodermaldysplasias.MutationsinWNT10Aareknown 1Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, as a major cause of oligodontia with or without associated Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2IRCCS foundatoin Policlinico ectodermal dysplasia signs. San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3University Hospital of Antwerp Patients and Methods: Based on the analysis of a large University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Radboud seriesof413probandswithhypooroligodontiaand190of University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, theirrelatives,wereport395subjectswithmutationsinthe 5Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, gene WNT10A. 6Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Results: We found a mutation in WNT10A in 227 of the 7Semmelweis University, Heart and Vascular Center, 413 probands, among which two recurrent mutations the Budapest, Hungary, 8Careggi Hospital, University of c.682T>A (p.Phe228Ile) and c.321C>A (p.Cys107Ter) are Florence, Florence, Italy, 9hospital universitari Vall respectivelyinvolvedin178and33unrelatedprobandsand D'Hebron, CIBER-CV, Barcelona, Spain, 10South East families. We show a pattern of tooth agenesis in patients Thames Regional Genetic Service, London, United withWNT10Amutationsandabroadphenotypicvariability Kingdom, 11hospital universitari Vall D'Hebron, despite a correlation between the number of mutations, the Barcelona, Spain, 12Centro Malattie Rare Cardilogiche, number of tooth agenesis and the presence of ectodermal Milan, Italy, 13University Heart Center Hamburg, signs. We conﬁrm the incomplete penetrance of WNT10A UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg, mutation with an estimate of the penetrance and report Germany,14HopitalBichat-ClaudeBernard,Paris,France, several asymptomatic cases with biallelic mutations. 15Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium Discussion: Despite some degree of genotype-phenotype correlation, we highlight the incomplete penetrance and The ACTA2 gene encodes for smooth muscle speciﬁc α- broad clinical variability associated with WNT10A actin,acriticalcomponentofthecontractileapparatusofthe mutations. vascular smooth muscle cell. Pathogenic variants in the O. Patat: None. I. Bailleul-forestier: None. J. Plai- ACTA2 gene are the most frequently encountered genetic sancie: None. D. Bonneau: None. E. Colin: None. C. cause of familial thoracic aortic aneurysm/dissection Colson: None. M. Cordier: None. C. Coubes: None. F. (FTAAD). Although TAAD is the main clinical manifesta- Demurger: None. A. Dieux-coeslier: None. M. Fradin: tion, a variety of occlusive vascular disease and extra- None.M.Gerard:None.A.Goldenberg:None.B.Isidor: vascular manifestations occur in ACTA2 related None.H.Journel:None.D.Lacombe:None.M.Lebrun: vasculopathy. Current data suggest possible mutation- None. D. Martin-coignard: None. M. Nizon: None. S. speciﬁc manifestations of vascular and extra-aortic traits. Odent: None. F. Petit: None. N. Philip: None. J. Piard: Despite its relatively high prevalence, comprehensive None.J.Piard:None.G.Plessis:None.A.Putoux:None. recommendations on the care of patients and families with C. Quelin: None. J. Thevenon: None. A. Toutain: None. pathogenic variants in ACTA2 have not yet been estab- C. Vanleberghe: None. A. Verloes: None. C. Vincent- lished. We aimed to develop a consensus document to1304 provide medical guidance for all health care professionals vEDS. We evaluated the impact of celiprolol and losartan involved in the recognition, diagnosis and treatment of on the biomechanical integrity of the vEDS thoracic aorta. patients and relatives with pathogenic variants in ACTA2. Methods:We(re-)characterisedamurinevEDSmodelat The hereditary thoracic aortic disease (HTAD) Working molecular level using WGS and developed an objective Group of the European Reference Network for Rare approach to measure the maximum tensile force at rupture VascularDiseases(VASCERN)convenedtoreviewcurrent of uniaxially-stretched murine thoracic aortic rings. To literature and discuss expert opinions on clinical manage- assesstreatmenteffect,heterozygousmiceat4weeksofage ment of ACTA2 related vasculopathy. This consensus underwenta4-weektreatmentwithceliprolol,losartan,and, statement summarizes our recommendations on diagnosis, asaproof-of-conceptdrug,theMMP-inhibitordoxycycline. monitoring, treatment, genetic counselling and testing in Results: Heterozygous mice showed a signiﬁcant reduc- patients with ACTA2 related vasculopathy. However, there tion in the rupture force compared to wild-type mice. isaclearneedforadditionalprospectivemulticenterstudies Compared to age- and sex-matched untreated heterozygous to further deﬁne proper guidelines. mice, treatment with doxycycline or celiprolol resulted in a I. van de Laar: None. E. Arbustini: None. B. Loeys: signiﬁcant increase of rupture force, whereas no signiﬁcant None. E. Björck: None. M. Groenink: None. M. Kem- change was detected upon losartan treatment. pers: None. J. Timmermans: None. J. Roos-Hesselink: Conclusions: Our novel read-out system is suitable for None.K.Benke:None.G.Pepe:None.B.Mulder:None. the assessment of the biomechanical effect of candidate Z. Szabolcs: None. G. Teixidó-Turà: None. L. Robert: drugs. In a vEDS model, celiprolol or doxycycline, but not None. Y. Emmanuel: None. A. Evangelista: None. A. losartan, can improve the biomechanical integrity of the Pini:None.Y.vonKodolitsch:None.G.Jondeau:None. aortic wall. As doxycycline is a broad-spectrum antibiotic J. De Backer: None. with considerable side effects, celiprolol may be more sui- table for a long-term therapy and thus rather indicated for P05.02B themedicationofpatientswithvEDS.Thisistheﬁrststudy Novel approach reveals celiprolol but not losartan as demonstrating that celiprolol improves the rupture force of medical therapy for vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome the thoracic aorta. N. Dubacher: None. J. Münger: None. M.C. Gor- N. Dubacher1, J. Münger1, M. C. Gorosabel1, J. Crabb2, osabel:None.J.Crabb:None.A.A.Ksiazek:None.S.M. A. A. Ksiazek3,4, S. M. Caspar1, E. N. T. P. Bakker5, Caspar: None. E.N.T.P. Bakker: None. E. van Bavel: E. van Bavel5, U. Ziegler6, T. Carrel7, B. Steinmann8, None. U. Ziegler: None. T. Carrel: None. B. Steinmann: S. Zeisberger3, J. Meienberg1, G. Matyas1 None. S. Zeisberger: None. J. Meienberg: None. G. Matyas: None. 1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Foundation for People with Rare Diseases, P05.03C Schlieren-Zurich, Switzerland, 2Institute of Mechanical Next Generation Sequencing identiﬁes novel variants in Systems, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich, TJP1, TP63 and PPP1R13L genes in Arrhythmogenic Zurich, Switzerland, 3Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Cardiomyopathy patients UniversityofZurich,Zurich,Switzerland,4ClinicforSmall Animal Internal Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, M. Calore1,2, G. Poloni2, A. V. Postma3, A. Lorenzon2, Switzerland, 5Department of Biomedical Engineering and G. Minervini4, G. Vazza2, I. E. A. Li Mura5, A. Telatin5, Physics, Academic Medical Center, University of I. Zara5, B. Simionati5, J. Ponti2, G. Occhi2, L. Vitiello2, Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Center for B. Bauce6, S. C. E. Tosatto4, P. J. van Tintelen3, Microscopy and Image Analysis, University of Zurich, A. Rampazzo2, M. De Bortoli2,7 Zurich, Switzerland, 7Department of Cardiovascular Surgery,UniversityHospital,Berne,Switzerland,8Division 1Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Health, Medicine of Metabolism, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, andLifeSciences,Maastricht,Netherlands,2Departmentof Switzerland Biology, Padova University, Padova, Italy, 3Department of Medical Biology and Department of Clinical Genetics, Aims: Antihypertensive drugs are included in the medical Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, therapy of vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS). The 4Department of Biomedical Sciences, Padova University, β-blocker celiprolol has been suggested to prevent arterial Padova,Italy,5BMRGenomics,Padova,Italy,6Department damage in vEDS, but the underlying mechanism remains of Biology Cardiac, Thoracic, and Vascular Sciences, unclear. It is also unknown whether the widely-used Padova University, Padova, Italy, 7Institute for AGTR1-antagonist losartan has a therapeutic effect inAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1305 Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy, Afﬁliated L. Zahavich1,2, A. Ali3, R. Mendoza-Londono4, Institute of the University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany N. Tehrani3, L. Grosse-Wortmann1, R. K. Jobling4,5 Among the most common inherited cardiomyopathies, 1Division of Cardiology Labatt Family Heart Centre and arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is characterized DepartmentofPaediatrics,TheHospitalforSickChildren, by progressive myocardial ﬁbro-fatty replacement, arrhyth- University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department miasandriskofsuddendeath.Mutationsingenesencoding of Genetic Counseling, The Hospital for Sick Children, proteinsofcardiacintercalateddiscsaccountforabout60% University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Department of ACM cases, but the remaining 40% is still genetically of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, The Hospital for elusive. Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Aim: We aim at identifying novel ACM genes by next Canada,4DivisionofClinicalandMetabolicGenetics,The generation sequencing. HospitalforSick Children,UniversityofToronto,Toronto, Methods and Results: The DNA of 40 ACM patients ON, Canada, 5Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research, was analyzed using a targeted gene panel consisting of 15 Cardiac Genome Clinic, The Hospital for Sick Children, known Toronto, ON, Canada ACM genes and 53 candidate genes. We found two novel variants in TP63 (c.796C>T, p.R266*) and PPP1R13L Traboulsi syndrome (OMIM 601552) is a rare autosomal (c.1858G>C, p.A620P) candidate genes, encoding for the recessive disorder caused by mutations in ASPH (OMIM proteins p63 and iASPP, respectively. The TP63 variant is 600582). It is characterized by ectopia lentis, spontaneous scoredaslikelypathogenicandthePPP1R13Lvariantasof ﬁltering blebs, other anterior segment anomalies and uncertain signiﬁcance and involves a conserved functional craniofacial dysmorphism. Thirteen patients have been domain. reported, and aortic dilatation has not been noted, though Importantly, the mutant TP63 allele leads to nonsense- details regarding aortic measurements have not been mediated-mRNA decay, causing consistently provided. We report three paediatric patients haploinsufﬁciency. from two families affected with Traboulsi syndrome Also,novelvariantsinTJP1geneweredetectedbywhole presenting with mild-moderate aortic dilatation in addition exome sequencing in additional 4 ACM Italian and Dutch/ to the ocular phenotype. The two affected individuals in German probands. Out of the 4 variants, p.Y669C in the Family 1 have dilation of the aortic root (Patient 1-I aortic encoded protein ZO-1 promotes structural rearrangements sinus30.2Boston z-score 2.2,Patient 1-IIaortic sinus 28.2 of the GUK domain, whereas the p.R265W, p.S329L, and mm,Bostonz-score4.1,andsinotubularjunction23.7mm, p.D360V are predicted to impair the function of the Boston z-score 4.7). In addition Patient 1-I has a involved the disordered region between PDZ2 and PDZ3 myxomatous mitral valve with regurgitation, and Patient domains. Furthermore, rare variants in TJP1 are sig- 1-II has a bicuspid aortic valve. Both patients harbor a niﬁcantly enriched in patients with ACM relative to homozygous variant in ASPH (NM_004318.3 c.2204 G>A controls. (ep.Arg735Gln)). The substitution of tryptophan for Conclusions:WeprovidetheﬁrstevidencelinkingTP63 arginine at this residue has been reported previously in and TJP1 variants to ACM, while the functional involve- Traboulsi syndrome. The ocular ﬁndings in Family 1 ment of PPP1R13L remains to be determined. included both microspherophakia and ectopia lentis. The Grants: TRANSAC CPDA133979/13; Target Projects affectedpatientinFamily2(Patient2-I)hasadilatedaortic 331/12, RP 2014-00000394; (PRAT) CPDA133979; root (aortic sinus 27.4 mm, Boston z-score of 4.1 and CVON2012-10 PREDICT;CVON2015-12 eDETECT sinotubular junction at 20.9 mm, Boston z-score 3.2). M.Calore:None.G.Poloni:None.A.V.Postma:None. Patient 2-I has a homozygous nonsense variant A. Lorenzon: None. G. Minervini: None. G. Vazza: c.2181_2183dupATG (p.W728X) in ASPH discovered on None. I.E.A. Li Mura: None. A. Telatin: None. I. Zara: whole exome sequencing. Comprehensive testing of FBN1 None. B. Simionati: None. J. Ponti: None. G. Occhi: was negative in both families. The phenotype of this None.L.Vitiello:None.B.Bauce:None.S.C.E.Tosatto: extremely rare disorder is continues to evolve and affected None. P.J. van Tintelen: None. A. Rampazzo: None. M. patients require a thorough cardiac assessment. De Bortoli: None. L. Zahavich: None. A. Ali: None. R. Mendoza-Lon- dono: None. N. Tehrani: None. L. Grosse-Wortmann: P05.04D None. R.K. Jobling: None. Aortic dilatation in patients with Traboulsi syndrome1306 P05.06B Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel Metagenomic search for the protozoa in atherosclerotic plaques Introduction: Three generations of a kindred presented with autosomal dominant early-onset paroxysmal atrial A. Zarubin1, A. Markov1, D. Sharysh2, V. Puzyrev1,2, ﬁbrillation (pAF), with recurrent nocturnal self-terminating M. Nazarenko1 palpitations. Methods: Whole exome sequencing, linkage analysis, 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National electrophysiological assays in Xenopus oocytes. Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation, Results:Through geneticstudies weidentiﬁedadisease- 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian causing p.S447R mutation in KCND2, encoding the pore- Federation forming (α) subunit of the Kv4.2 cardiac potassium chan- nel. Kv4.2, with Kv4.3, contributes to the cardiac fast Background: Several reports have shown the relevance of transient outward K+ current, I . I underlies the early to to infection in development of atherosclerosis. However, the repolarization phase in the cardiac action potential, setting bacterial DNA of atherosclerotic plaques mainly was the initial potential of the plateau phase and governing its investigated by metagenomic approaches. Objective: To duration and amplitude. In Xenopus oocytes, the p.S447R search for the protozoa by using genome-wide sequencing mutationincreasedinactivationtimeconstantofthechannel data of human atherosclerotic plaques (AP). andaffecteditsregulation:themutationresidesinaprotein- Material and Methods: We used the results of whole kinase C (PKC) phosphorylation site, which normally genome sequencing of DNA isolated from 12 athero- attenuates Kv4.2 membrane expression. Mutant Kv4.2 sclerotic plaques (SRA149235) and 2 blood samples from exhibitedimpairedresponsetoPKC,resultinginaugmented 1000 Genomes Project (HG00096, HG00099). Sequence Kv4.2 membrane expression and enhanced potassium cur- reads were aligned to the human reference genome (hg19) rents. Moreover, in a hybrid channel composed of Kv4.3 using Bowtie2. The taxonomic classiﬁcation of the reads and Kv4.2, simulating the mature endogenous hetero- was performed with Kraken2 using a curated microbial tetrameric channel underlying I , the Kv4.2 mutation to genome database containing archaea, bacteria, fungi, pro- exerted gain-of-function effect on Kv4.3. Thus, the muta- tozoa, viruses reference genome sequence. Results and tion exerts gain-of-function effect on both Kv4.2 homo- discussion:Pre-alignmentonthehumangenome,evenwith tetramers and Kv4.2-Kv4.3 hetero-tetramers. “very-sensitive” option of Bowtie2, cannot completely Conclusions: Gain-of-function mutation in Kv4.2 causes clean up human gene sequences. Kraken2 determined 13% nocturnal pAF. Interestingly, Kv4.2 expression was pre- to92%ofthehumangenesequencesinunmatchedreadsof viouslyshowntodemonstratecircadianvariation,withpeak different AP samples. We found sequences of Toxoplasma expression at daytime in murine hearts (human nighttime), gondiigenomein8samples(about1678readspersample). with possible relevance to the nocturnal onset of parox- These sequences were shown to be mapped to contigs ysmal AF symptoms in our patients. The atrial-speciﬁc (NW_017384310.1, NW_017384809.1). These contigs phenotype suggests that targeting Kv4.2 might be effective were also found in samples from 1000 Genomes Project. in the treatment of nocturnal paroxysmal AF, avoiding Conclusions: There were no protozoa in genome-wide adverse ventricular effects. sequencing data of human atherosclerotic plaques. The M.Drabkin:None.N.Zilberberg:None.S.Menahem: reads that mapped to the Toxoplasma genome are false None. W. Mulla: None. D. Halperin: None. Y. Yogev: positive. Some microbial reference genomes probably to None. O. Wormser: None. Y. Perez: None. R. Kadir: containhumanDNAsequencesnotpresentedinthehuman None. Y. Etzion: None. A. Katz: None. O. Birk: None. reference genome assembly. A. Zarubin: None. A. Markov: None. D. Sharysh: P05.08D None. V. Puzyrev: None. M. Nazarenko: None. Novel ABCC9 missense mutation in a Chinese infant with Cantu syndrome without skeletal manifestations P05.07C Gain of function mutation in the cardiac Kv4.2 R. Guo1,2,3,4, C. Hao1,2,3,4, S. Qian1, W. Li1,2,3,4 potassium channel underlies paroxysmal atrial ﬁbrillation 1Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 2Beijing Key Laboratory for Genetics of M. Drabkin, N. Zilberberg, S. Menahem, W. Mulla, Birth Defects, Beijing Pediatric Research Institute,Beijing, D. Halperin, Y. Yogev, O. Wormser, Y. Perez, R. Kadir, China, 3Genetics and Birth Defects Control Center, Y. Etzion, A. Katz, O. Birk National Center for Children's Health, Beijing, China,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1307 4MOE Key Laboratory of Major Diseases in Children, Liverpool, Australia, 5Service de Génétique, Centre Beijing, China hospitalier universitaire de Caen – Hôpital Clémenceau,, Caen, France, 6Paediatric dermatology, Our Lady’s Background: Cantu syndrome (CS) is a congenital rare Children’sHospitalCrumlin,NationalChildren’sResearch disorder characterized by congenital hypertrichosis, neona- Centre and Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland, 7Centre for tal macrosomia, a distinct osteochondrodysplasia, and VascularAnomalies,DivisionofPlasticSurgery,Cliniques cardiomegaly. It is a dominant condition caused by universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, heterozygous variants in ABCC9 or KCNJ8. Here, we Brussels, Belgium report a baby boy patient who was referred to Cantu syndrome without skeletal manifestations. Background: Capillary malformation-arteriovenous mal- Methods:Bloodsamplesandclinicaldatawerecollected formation is an autosomal dominant disorder, characterised after informed consent. Trio whole exome sequencing was by capillary malformations and increased risk of fast-ﬂow performed inthispatientandhis parents.Public population vascular malformations, caused by loss-of-function muta- SNP databases (dbSNP147, gnomAD, ExAC and 1000 tions in the RASA1 or EPHB4 genes. Around 25% of the Genomes project) and in silico predictive algorithms were patients do not seem to carry germline mutation in either used to identify the pathogenic variants. one of these two genes. While some of those 25% of Results: We detected a novel de novo heterozygous patients may have mutations in as-yet-unidentiﬁed genes, missense,likelypathogenicvariant(c.3203T>C)inABCC9 mutationsinRASA1orEPHB4thatescapedetectionbyless gene. This mutation was located in transmembrane cyto- sensitivetechniques,suchaspost-zygoticmosaicmutations, plasmic domain 2 (TMD2) which may be gain-of-function are also possible explanations. and increase K channel activity. Methods: DNA was extracted from peripheral blood ATP Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of a Chinese baby lymphocytes,salivaorvascularmalformationtissuesfrom4 patient with pathogenic mutation in ABCC9. Our descrip- patients. RASA1 and EPHB4 coding regions and exon/ tion of the patient’s phenotype would be a part of a spec- intron boundaries were analysed by targeted custom gene trum of features associated with Cantu syndrome. The panel sequencing. A second panel and/or Sanger sequen- unreported mutation extends the genetic spectra of ABCC9 cing were used to conﬁrm the mutations identiﬁed. and emphasizes the usefulness of WES for genetic diag- Results: Four distinct mosaic RASA1 mutations, with an nosis in clinical context. Keywords: Cantu syndrome, allelefrequencyrangingfrom3%to25%,wereidentiﬁedin ABCC9 gene, whole exome sequencing, cardiovascular the 4 index patients with classical capillary malformation - abnormalities. arteriovenous malformation phenotype. Three mutations Grant references: This work was partially supported by were known, one was novel. In one patient, a somatic the Ministry of Science and Technology of China second-hit was also identiﬁed. One index case had three (2016YFC1000306), and the Beijing Municipal Commis- affected children, illustrating germline mosaicism. sion of Health and Family Planning Foundation Conclusion: This study shows that RASA1 mosaic (PXM2017_026274_000001). mutations can cause capillary malformation - arteriovenous R. Guo: None. C. Hao: None. S. Qian: None. W. malformation.Thus,highlysensitivesequencingtechniques Li: None. should be considered as diagnostic tools, especially for patients with no family history. Even low-level mosaicism P05.09A can cause the classical phenotype and increased risk for RASA1 mosaic mutations in patients with capillary offspring. In addition, our study further supports the malformation - arteriovenous malformation second-hit pathophysiological mechanism to explain the multifocality of vascular lesions in this disorder. N. Revencu1, E. Fastre1, M. Ravoet1, R. Helaers2, N. Revencu: None. E. Fastre: None. M. Ravoet: None. P. Brouillard2, A. Bisdorff-Breson3, C. W. Chung4, R. Helaers: None. P. Brouillard: None. A. Bisdorff-bre- M. Gerard5, V. Dvoravoka6, A. D. Irvine6, L. Boon7, son: None. C.W. Chung: None. M. Gerard: None. V. M. Vikkula2 Dvoravoka:None.A.D.Irvine:None.L.Boon:None.M. Vikkula: None. 1CenterforHumanGenetics,CliniquesuniversitairesSaint- Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, P05.10B 2Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université Unique cardiogenetic clinic- our experience from 300 catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Service de patients from Israeli diverse ethnic population Neuroradiologie, Hopital Lariboisière, Paris, France, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Hospital,1308 N. Ruhrman Shahar1, A. Oz1, D. Monakier2, I. Maya1, M. J. Gamundi, B. Mañé, A. I. Jaber, D. López, L. Salzer Sheelo1, L. Basel - Salmon1,3, Y. Goldberg1, M. D. Martínez, J. Martínez, C. Moure, A. Sánchez, L. Bazak1 A. Vancells, J. M. Viguer, I. Hernan, E. Borràs, M. Carballo 1Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Cardiology Dept. Beilinson Hospital, Rabin Hospital de Terrassa (CST), Terrassa, Spain Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv Universit, Tel Aviv, Israel Introduction: Inherited cardiomyopathies (CMs) are a major cause of heart disease. They can be classiﬁed in Introduction: Genetic heart diseases are a major public hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), dilated cardiomyo- healthproblemworldwide.Cardio-geneticsisemergingasa pathy (DCM), arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyo- main discipline for deciphering multiple cardiac patholo- pathy (ARVC), restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) and left gies, with immediate clinical effects on diagnosis, treat- ventricular non-compaction (LVNC). Due to their clinical ment,preventionandprognosisforpatientsandtheirfamily and genetic heterogeneity, targeted-gene Next-Generation- members. Sequencing (NGS) can be a helpful tool in their diagnosis Methods: We have established the ﬁrst designated and to early detect them in pre-symptomatic carriers. cardio-genetics clinic in Israel as part of a tertiary hospital Materials and Methods: 39 DNA samples of patients twoyearsago.Weretrospectivelyreviewedallourpatient's affectedwithdifferentCMswereanalyzedbytargeted-NGS ﬁles from the last 2 years. using Cardio-GeneSGKit® (n=238 genes) or Cardio-Gen- Results:Threehundredpatientsfrom200familiesvisited eSGKit® MCP (n=90 genes). Results were ﬁltered and our clinic and they represent variant population from all analyzed with GeneSystems® platform and informed to over Israel both from Jewish and non Jewish origins. The patients.Co-segregationanalysisand/orcarriertestingwere patients were referred from both pediatric and adults car- performed when possible. diologists, cardiovascular surgeons and primary care Results: 7 pathogenic/probably pathogenic variants were physicians. detected in 5 HCM patients and 2 DCM patients. In HCM Most visits (90%) in our clinic were as outpatients and patients, mutations were found in MYBPC3 (p.Arg495Gln, only 10% were acutely hospitalized. p.Gly532Alafs*23andp.Arg597Gln),CAV3(p.Thr78Met), The patients were referred due to: congenital heart dis- TNNC1 (p.Ala8Val) and TNNI3 (p.Arg145Gln). In DCM easesin10%,hypertrophiccardiomyopathyin52%,dilated patients, mutations were detected in DSP (p.Leu1773- cardiomyopathy in 14%, arrhythmogenic right ventricle Tyrfs*8) and TTN (p.Pro28946Leufs*6). Also, 17 variants dysplasia in 8%, left ventricular non- compaction in 4%, of unknown signiﬁcance (VOUS) were detected in 14 channelopathies in 10% and 2% due to aborted patients affected with HCM (n=10), DCM (n=3) and sudden death. ARVC (n=1). These VOUS were mainly detected in Thepatientsunderwentageneticinvestigationindifferent MYBPC3 (n=7) but also in other genes as DSC2 (n=1), methods according to the clinical presentation: Sanger FHL1 (n=1), FLNC (n=1), LDB3 (n=1), LMNA (n=1), sequencing for known familial/founder mutation, single MYH7 (n=2), PKP4 (n=1), SCN5A (n=1) and gene sequencing, NGS based gene panel sequencing, TNNT2 (n=2). Whole Exome Sequencing and chromosomal microarray. Conclusions: 19 of the 39 analyzed patients (48.7%) We have identiﬁed the underlying genetic cause in presentedaclinicallysigniﬁcantvariantinoneortwogenes approximately 40% of the families - the percentage varies associated with CMs. Detection of pathogenic/probably between the different cardiac pathologies. pathogenic variants in probands can help to improve the Summary:Cardio-geneticsclinicisausefultoolbothfor diagnostic, prognostic and treatment in them and in pre- the patient, families and the primary care physician in symptomatic carriers. various Genetic heart disease. M.J. Gamundi: None. B. Mañé: None. A.I. Jaber: N. Ruhrman Shahar: None. A. Oz: None. D. Mon- None. D. López: None. M.D. Martínez: None. J. Martí- akier: None. I. Maya: None. L. Salzer Sheelo: None. L. nez: None. C. Moure: None. A. Sánchez: None. A. Basel - Salmon: None. Y. Goldberg: None. L. Vancells: None. J.M. Viguer: None. I. Hernan: None. E. Bazak: None. Borràs: None. M. Carballo: None. P05.11C P05.12D Molecular diagnostic testing of inherited Something old, something new: two syndromes cardiomyopathies by targeted Next-Generation associated with pediatric-onset cardiomyopathy Sequencing in a public hospitalAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1309 J. C. Herkert, A. J. van Essen, I. M. van Langen Cardiomyopathyisadiseaseoftheheartmuscleassociated with a disorder of its function. This is a heterogeneous University of Groningen, University Medical Center group of diseases with various clinical signs that can Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands ultimately lead to heart failure. A signiﬁcant proportion of cardiomyopathies is genetically determined. In this group Introduction: Hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies can be found congenital heart defects, muscular dystrophy (HCM/DCM)areinheritedheartmuscledisorders.Theyare and congenital myopathy, hereditary disorders of metabo- isolated in the majority of patients, but are often lism and genetic syndromes, (rasopathies). The use of the accompanied by extracardiac features in children. Distin- whole exome sequencing is currently one of the most guishing children with one syndromic disorder from those effective tools for elucidating the genotype of individual withtwoinheritedconditionsisimportantbecausethismay patients. We have successfully used this method for affectmanagementoptions,cardiacsurveillanceinrelatives studying of genetic architecture of dilated cardiomyopathy and reproductive decision-making. cohortwhereinabout80%ofthe460examinedpatientswe Methods and Results: We present two patients with have found probably causal variant. Most frequently intellectual disability (ID) and cardiomyopathy. Patient 1 affected genes were TTN (18%), FLNC (4%), MYBPC3 presented with paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia at age (4%), MYH7 (4%), DSP (4%), RBM20 (3%), TNNT2(3%), 3 months. At age 5 she showed severe HCM, prolonged DES (2%), LMNA (1%). We have also found CNV QTc, severe ID, epilepsy and cerebral vision impairment. variations in DMD, LAMP2, FLNC, LMNA and MYH7 Exome sequencing(ES)revealedadamagingc.247C>T,p. genes, which were predicted to cause major structural and (Arg83Cys) variant in NAA10, which encodes a ribosomal functional abnormalities of the affected genes. We are also proteininvolvedinN-terminalacetylation.SeveralX-linked focusing on paediatric forms of cardiomyopathy which are NAA10 variants have been associated with genetic dis- more complex and the clariﬁcation is below 50%. orders,butcardiomyopathyhadnotdescribeduntilrecently. Successful molecular biology diagnostic helps to identify Patient2wasdiagnosedwithsevereDCMatage4months, the risk of occurrence of the disease in the family and to mild ID, microcephaly (-6.2SDS), failure to thrive and provideprenataldiagnosis.Inselectedcases,thephenotype clinodactyly. ES revealed compound heterozygous variants can also be studied in cell models, which contribute to the in CEP135. Biallelic variants in CEP135 have also been understanding of the molecular mechanism of the disease reported in two families with microcephaly. Interestingly, andallowamoreaccurateinterpretationofextremeclinical most of Patient 2’s clinical features overlap with those of or laboratory ﬁndings. LM201509 NCLG, AZV 15- ﬁve previously reported unrelated patients with autosomal 27682A, AZV 15-28208A, SVV-260367 recessive inherited microcephaly-cardiomyopathy syn- L. Piherova: None. K. Hodanova: None. H. Hart- drome with unknown genetic etiology. Genematcher iden- mannova: None. D. Musalkova: None. M. Kubanek: tiﬁedanother patient withneonatalcardiomyopathy, failure None. A. Krebsova: None. S. Kmoch: None. to thrive, microcephaly and biallelic variants in CEP135. CEP135 may thus have a role in cardiomyopathy. P05.14B Conclusions: These two cases illustrate that ES is a 11 years of the Queensland Cardiac Genetics Service valuablediagnostictoolforpediatric-onsetcardiomyopathy thatcanidentifynovelfeaturesinwell-knownsyndromesor R. Jonathan1, J. McGaughran1, J. Atherton2,3 novel genes associated with pediatric cardiomyopathy. J.C. Herkert: None. A.J. van Essen: None. I.M. van 1Genetic Health Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 2Royal Langen: None. Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 3University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia P05.13A Cardiomyopathy: genomic-diagnostic approach Introduction: A dedicated conjoint cardiac genetics clinic (CGC)wasestablishedthroughGeneticHealthQueensland L. Piherova1, K. Hodanova1, H. Hartmannova1, and the Cardiology Department at the Royal Brisbane and D. Musalkova1, M. Kubanek2, A. Krebsova2, S. Kmoch1 Women’s Hospital in 2007. The aim of this study was to characterizethepatientcohortseenandassesstheuptakeof 1RURD, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute for Clinical genetic testing and diagnostic rates achieved. and Experimental Medicine (IKEM), Department of Methods: We explored the local databases and patient Cardiology, Prague, Czech Republic charts to characterise the age, sex, referral phenotype and incidence of genetic testing for all patients who had atten- dedtheCGC.Theoutcomesofgenetictesting,andnumber1310 of at risk relatives screened were also calculated. Unsolved cardiomyocytes and a human myoblast cell line and cases who would beneﬁt from further testing with Whole observed dramatic changes in cell size and morphology. Genome Sequencing were identiﬁed. Patient-derived iPSC-cardiomyocytes were hypertrophic, Preliminary Results: Over 1400 individuals were seen displayed sarcomeric structural disarray and had slower for the ﬁrst time during the 11-year period and over 900 contractile velocity compared to control iPSC- have been characterized to date. 488 were probands, the cardiomyocytes. Using Co-Immunoprecipitation for majority (265) of whom were referred for a cardiomyo- ACTN2, followed by mass-spectrometry, we identiﬁed pathy. 141 were referred for an arrhythmia syndrome, and missing protein-protein interactions in the patient with the 72 had had a cardiac arrest or were the relative of an indi- truncated ACTN2. vidual with a sudden cardiac death. 385 probands were Conclusions: Here, we provide evidence that two struc- tested, with a genetic diagnosis being achieved in 164 turalgeneticvariantsinACTN2areassociatedtocontractile (43%).Thehighestdiagnosticratewasachievedinpatients dysfunction and lead to cardiac abnormalities, including with cardiomyopathies (47%). Predictive testing was per- hypertrophy and arrhythmia. formed in a further 415 patients. No speciﬁc grant funded this study. Conclusions: We have reviewed the characteristics of a M.E.Lindholm:None.H.Zhu:None.Y.Huang:None. large cohort of cardiac genetics patients and compared our E.A. Ashley: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, diagnosticratestothoseintheliterature.Wehaveidentiﬁed patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Persona- unsolvedfamilieswhowillbeneﬁtfromfurthertestingwith lis, DeepCell. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; contemporary technologies. SequenceBio, Genome Medical. M. Wheeler: None. R. Jonathan: None. J. McGaughran: None. J. Atherton: None. P05.16D Genetic cardiomyopathies revisited: reevaluating P05.15C current gene panel testing Structural variants in Alpha-actinin 2 are associated with cardiomyopathy and hypertrophy in human D.Dooijes,M.A.Siemelink,J.J.vanderSmagt,R.L.E. cardiac tissue and iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes van Loon, J. G. Post, J. F. van der Heijden, F. W. Asselbergs, A. F. Baas, J. P. van Tintelen M. E. Lindholm, H. Zhu, Y. Huang, E. A. Ashley, M. Wheeler UMC Utrecht, The Netherlands, Utrecht, Netherlands Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, Introduction:Thereisanongoingdebateonthegenesthat Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States shouldbeexaminedduringgenetic evaluationofidiopathic cardiomyopathy patients. Although several genes have Background:Instriatedmuscle,alpha-actinin2isacritical sufﬁcient evidence to be cardiomyopathy-related, for other cytoskeletal protein that anchors actin ﬁlaments within the genesthisremainsunclear.Thesegenesmayhowevercause sarcomere. Rare mutations in ACTN2 have been associated asigniﬁcantburdenonvariantevaluation.Inordertomake with cardiac abnormalities, including arrhythmias and an evidence-based estimation of the value of genes cardiomyopathy. However, the mechanisms behind how examined, we assessed results of cardiomyopathy gene dysfunctional ACTN2 causes cardiac malfunction is not panels after reevaluation and reclassiﬁcation of variants known. The aim of the present study was to investigate the according to current criteria. effects of two novel ACTN2 variants on human cardiac Materials and Methods: All results of a 64-gene NGS- tissue and patient-speciﬁc iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. cardiomyopathypanelperformedbetween2014and2018in Methods and Results: We identiﬁed patients in the the UMC Utrecht, the Netherlands were retrieved. The Stanford Center for Inherited Cardiovascular Disease data- pathogenicityofallgenevariantswasreevaluatedaccording base with novel ACTN2 variants using a custom mutation to current criteria by an experienced clinical laboratory pipeline optimizedfor rare variantdiscovery. We identiﬁed specialistincardiogenetics.Benignorlikelybenignvariants one patient homozygous for a stop-gain mutation (p. were excluded from analysis. Summary results were deter- Q860X)inACTN2andafamilywithanexon8-10deletion. mined for all individual genes. In heart transplant tissue of the homozygous patient, we Results:1264cardiomyopathy panelsperformedshowed observed mild hypertrophy and interstitial ﬁbrosis. There 848 variants (657 unique) in 638 patients (overall yield wasnoevidenceofvariationinACTN2proteinexpression, 50.5%). Of the 848 variants, 124 variants were reclassiﬁed indicating absence of nonsense mediated decay. We used (15%), of which 117 were downgraded (94%). Reclassiﬁ- siRNA to knock down ACTN2 in neonatal rat ventricular cation was mostly due to a high frequency in controlAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1311 populations or based on in-house clinical data (e.g. non- myocardialinfarctionandT2DMincomparisontocontrols, segregation). 28 genes were determined to be of limited with a p-value of 1.42x10-4 and odds ratio equal to 7.37 value in regular pan-cardiomyopathy gene panel testing (95% CI: 4.15 to 13.08). Other SNPs in ARNTL, CLOCK, because of the absence of relevant variants, published lit- and PER2 genes were notsigniﬁcant additional risk factors erature (including ClinGen gene adjudication). for myocardial infarction in T2DM patients. We provide Conclusions: Cardiomyopathy NGS-gene panels per- evidencethatgeneticvariationinARNTLgenemightbean formed on 1264 patients, identiﬁed 28 genes of limited additional risk factor for myocardial infarction in T2DM value in regular genetic testing for cardiomyopathy. In patients. addition, state-of-art reevaluation of variants resulted in a I. Škrlec: None. J. Milić: None. I. Cilenšek: None. D. notable downgrading of previously identiﬁed variants. Petrovič: None. B. Peterlin: None. D. Dooijes: None. M.A. Siemelink: None. J.J. van der Smagt: None. R.L.E. van Loon: None. J.G. Post: None. P05.18B J.F.vanderHeijden:None.F.W.Asselbergs:None.A.F. Clinical Utility of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Baas: None. J.P. van Tintelen: None. Panel Testing in Patients with a Clinical Suspicion of Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular P05.17A Tachycardia (CPVT) Circadian clock genes and myocardial infarction in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus E. H. Seppälä, I. Saarinen, J. Tallila, J. Hathaway, S.Tuupanen,H.Turpeinen,T.Kangas-Kontio,J.Schleit, I.Škrlec1,J.Milić2,I.Cilenšek3,D.Petrovič3,B.Peterlin4 J. Tommiska, E. Salminen, P. Salmenperä, J. Sistonen, M. Gentile, S. Myllykangas, J. Paananen, T. Alastalo, 1Department of Biology and Chemistry, Faculty of Dental J. Koskenvuo Medicine and Health, J. J. Strossmayer University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland J. J. Strossmayer University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia, 3Institute of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia Medicine, University Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, (CPVT) is a rare, but potentially fatal channelopathy. 4Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Genetic testing may be used to conﬁrm a diagnosis in Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia unclearcasesandtherefore,isincreasinglybeingperformed in a heterogeneous patient population. This is a retro- Disruption of circadian clock may trigger the onset of spective review of 134 patients with clinical suspicion of diabetesmellitusandmyocardialinfarction.Type2diabetes CPVTreferredforgenetictestingatBlueprintGeneticsover mellitus (T2DM) is well-known risk factors for cardiovas- a 5-year period (2013-2018). Genetic test results were cular diseases and myocardial infarction. Several physiolo- compiled. A sub-analysis of diagnostic RYR2 variants gical factors can stimulate the emergence of T2DM and (location, segregation) was performed. A pathogenic (P) myocardialinfarction,andsomeofthesefactorsareknown or likely pathogenic (LP) variant was identiﬁed in 27 to oscillate with circadian rhythms. This study aimed to patients(20.1%).Twentypatients(14.9%)hadadiagnostic explore a possible association of the genetic variability in ﬁnding in a CPVT-associated gene: 62.9% in RYR2, 7.4 % thecircadian clock genes ARNTL,CLOCK,andPER2with in CALM1, and 3.7% in CASQ2 (biallelic). Four patients myocardial infarction in patients with type 2 diabetes (14.8%) had a P or LP variant in KCNQ1, KCNJ2 or mellitus as an additional risk factor for myocardial SCN5A and three (11.1%) had a P or LP variant in a infarction. The study group consisted of 231 patients with cardiomyopathy-associated gene (DSG2, DSP or PLN). All myocardialinfarctionandT2DMandacontrolgroupof426 P/LP RYR2 variants were missense, except a deletion T2DM patients. Altogether, 8 SNPs were tested, three in encompassingexon3.Parentaltestingwasperformedin11/ ARNTL gene (rs3789327, rs4757144 and rs12363415), 17 cases where P/LP RYR2 variants were found; 8 (72.7%) threeinCLOCK(rs11932595,rs6811520andrs13124436), variantsweredenovo.EnrichmentofP/LPRYR2variantsin and two in PER2 (rs35333999 and rs934945). The the four described hotspots (OR 50, 95% CI 29-85, signiﬁcance of association for individual SNP was calcu- P<0.0001) was observed. In conclusion, 37% of patients lated to compare the allelic frequency and genotype with a diagnostic test result had a clinically signiﬁcant distribution in patients and control participants using the variant in a gene other than RYR2. Interestingly, 26% of Chi-Square test. After using Bonferroni correction signiﬁ- thesepatientshadgeneticdiagnosisofacardiomyopathyor cant difference in the distribution of ARNTL rs12363415 a channelopathy other than CPVT. This study supports the polymorphism genotypes were found in patients with1312 utilization of broad NGS panels for patients with a clinical geneisresponsibleforthevariousclinicalsyndromes.Upon suspicion of CPVT. sequencing45suchpatients,weidentiﬁedsevenpathogenic E.H. Seppälä: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- variantsinﬁvegenesencodingcomponentsofRAS/MAPK niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employment signaling (BRAF, KRAS, SOS1, RASA1, and PTPN11) in (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Tal- seven unrelated patients. Additionally, we identiﬁed a lila: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blue- recurrent somatic missense mutation in a candidate gene, print Genetics.J. Hathaway: A.Employment (full or part- ARAF (c.640T>C:p.S214P), as the basis for CCLA in two time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S. Tuupanen: A. unrelated patients. ARAF encodes for serine/threonine- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint protein kinase A-Raf. Little is known about ARAF apart Genetics. H. Turpeinen: A. Employment (full or part- fromtheenzymebeinginvolvedinMAPKpathwaywithno time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Kangas-Kontio: previous involvement in lymphatic disease report. Primary A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint endothelial cell studies showed the mutation altered actin Genetics. J. Schleit: A. Employment (full or part-time); skeleton and VE-cadherin organization, which were fully Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Tommiska: A. reversed by inhibition of MEK signaling. Functional Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint relevance of the mutation was also validated by recreating Genetics. E. Salminen: A. Employment (full or part-time); a lymphatic phenotype in a zebraﬁshmodel, with rescue of Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P. Salmenperä: A. the anomalous phenotype using a MEK inhibitor. Sub- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint sequent therapy of the lead proband with a MEK inhibitor Genetics.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent led to dramatic clinical improvement, with remodeling of or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint the patient’s lymphatic system with resolution of the Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); lymphatic edema, marked improvement in his pulmonary Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gentile: A. Employ- function tests, cessation of supplemental oxygen require- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. ments, and near normalization of daily activities. Taken Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other together,ourworkdemonstratestherealizationofprecision intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S. medicine approach enabled through a novel genetic Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- discovery in a patient with lymphatic anomaly of a niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, previously unknown etiology. stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig- D. Li: None. niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Paananen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. P05.21A Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Copy number variants detection by microarray and Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation in options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; congenital heart diseases BlueprintGenetics.J.Koskenvuo:A.Employment(fullor part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership O. Nagy1, K. Szakszon2, D. Nagy3, G. Mogyorósy2, Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual B. Biro4, B. Nagy5, I. Balogh1, A. Ujfalusi1 property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. 1Division of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory P05.19C Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Mutations in genes involved in MAPK pathway cause Debrecen, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of lymphatic anomalies Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, D. Li University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 4First Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Center for Applied Genomics, Philadelphia, PA, United Budapest, Hungary, 5Department of Human Genetics, States Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary Complex lymphatic anomalies include a variety of diag- noses: lymphangiectasia, central conducting lymphatic Congenital heart diseases (CHDs) are the most common anomaly (CCLA), generalized lymphatic anomaly, kaposi- birthdefectsamonglifebirths,whichcouldbepresentedas form lymphangiomatosis, and Gorham Stout disease. The isolated or syndromic with other congenital malformations. overlapping of diagnostic criteria for these disorders The etiology of CHD largely unknown, genetic and suggests that a common pathway rather than a common environmental factors contribute to the disease. RecurrentAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1313 copy number variants (CNVs) have been reported in the disease. Gene expression signature was determined by RT- pathogenesisofCHD.Theaimofthisstudywastoevaluate qPCR with hydrolysis probes. the clinical utility of multiplex ligation-dependent probe Results: We found that DPP4 and APLN mRNA ampliﬁcation (MLPA) and microarray analyses on isolated expression was signiﬁcantly (P<0.05) increased only in and syndromic CHD cases and to explore the relationship adipocytesisolatedfromepicardialadiposetissuecompared between identiﬁed CNVs and CHD. tothesubcutaneousfat.TheITLN1genewasoverexpressed Materials and Methods: Cytoscan 750K array (Affy- in epicardial adipose tissue compared to both subcutaneous metrix) and MLPA SALSA P250 and P311 kits (MRC- and perivascular tissues and expression of ADIPOQ gene Holland)wereusedinthestudy.TheidentiﬁedCNVswere was reduced both in EAT and PVAT compared to SCAT. conﬁrmed by ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization. Results. Moreover, APLN mRNA expression was positively corre- Eighteen prenatal samples, 16 isolated and 33 syndromic lated with total and LDL cholesterol plasma level, and patients with mild to severe CHD phenotype were studied. DPP4 mRNA expression - with VLDL cholesterol con- Prenatal and isolated CHD cases did not show pathogenic centration. We found no signiﬁcant changes in LCN2 and CNVs. Clinically signiﬁcant CNVs were detected in 7/33 NAMPT mRNA level between studied adipose depots. (21%)syndromicCHDpatients:del22q11.2(n=2),8p23.1 Conclusions: Adipocytes isolated from different adipose duplication (n=2), deletion 5p (n=1), deletion 6q21-q22 depots are characterized by differential gene expression of (n=1), unbalanced translocation causing partial deletion of adipokines.EATisofparticularinterestinthecontextofits 4q34.3 and duplication of 6q25.1 (n=1). function, molecular and genetic mechanisms of regulation Conclusion: The identiﬁed genomic imbalances contain of the cardiovascular system and as a therapeutic target for genes that has been associated with human CHD before. correction of adipose tissue-induced effects on health. This The present study demonstrates that using microarray and work was supported by RSF grant No. 17-75-20026. MLPAanalysisincreasesthedetectionrateofcausalCNVs M. Sinitsky: None. Y. Dyleva: None. E. Uchasova: in individuals with syndromic CHD. This study was sup- None. E. Belik: None. O. Gruzdeva: None. A. ported by the Ministry of National Economy, Hungary Ponasenko: None. (GINOP-2.3.2-15-2016-00039). O.Nagy:None.K.Szakszon:None.D.Nagy:None.G. P05.26B Mogyorósy: None. B. Biro: None. B. Nagy: None. I. Cardiac arrhythmias at baseline predict a clinically Balogh: None. A. Ujfalusi: None. relevant genetic yield in idiopathic non familial DCM affecting long term outcome P05.24D Adipokine proﬁle of adipocytes isolated from different J. Verdonschot1, M. T. H. M. Henkens1, A. G. Raafs1, fat depots of coronary artery disease patients P.Wang1,J.J.Merken1,G.R.F.Claes1,I.P.C.Krapels1, E. K. Vanhoutte1, A. van den Wijngaard1, M. Sinitsky1,2, Y. Dyleva1, E. Uchasova1, E. Belik1, H. G. Brunner1,2, M. R. Hazebroek1, S. R. B. Heymans1 O. Gruzdeva1,3, A. Ponasenko1 1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, 1Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Netherlands, 2Radboud University Medical Center, Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation, 2Federal Nijmegen, Netherlands Research Center of Coal and Coal Chemistry of SB RAS, Kemerovo, Russian Federation, 3Kemerovo State Medical Background: Current guidelines recommend genetic Academy, Kemerovo, Russian Federation analysis only in familial dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients without acquired disease. The genetic yield in so- Introduction:Adiposetissueisinterestinginthecontextof called acquired and/or non-familial DCM remains largely its role in pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. Human unknown. adipokinome consists of hundreds of molecules many of Methods:Thisstudyincluded689DCMpatientswhoall which have not yet been well characterized and have underwent genetic evaluation using a 47 cardiomyopathy- variable expression in different adipose depots. associated gene panel and had complete cardiac diagnostic Materials and Methods: We compared DPP4, LCN2, work-up including echocardiography, cardiac MRI, endo- NAMPT, ITLN1, APLN and ADIPOQ mRNA levels in myocardial biopsies and holter monitoring. Environmental adipocytes isolated from the biopsies of subcutaneous triggers were predeﬁned as viral, inﬂammatory, toxic, (SCAT),epicardial(EAT)andperivascular(PVAT)adipose electrical and systemic auto-immune disease. tissue obtained from 25 patients with coronary artery Results: At least one etiology (genetic and/or environ- mental) was found in 530 patients (77%) after complete1314 diagnostic workup, of which 159 (23%) had a genetic mutations in dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) regarding mutation.OneinﬁveoftheDCMpatients(n=90;20%)had (endo)phenotype, penetrance, and management. a combination of a genetic and acquired (environmental) Materials and Methods: A family with DCM and SCD trigger. All of the acquired triggers had a genetic yield was referred to our cardiogenetics outpatient clinic. Accu- around 20%. Although familial DCM had a signiﬁcant rate genetic and cardiologic assessments were performed. higher yield of genetic mutations compared to non-familial DNA sequencing was initiated in the proband using NGS DCM (43% versus 16%, p<0.001), pathogenic mutations (cardiopanel). were still present in 1 of 6. In non-familial DCM patients Results: A novel variant in DSP c.4639dupC was iden- with arrhythmias atbaselinewithout environmental trigger, tiﬁed, absent in gnomAD, locus-speciﬁc databases and thegeneticyieldwas even 39%,comparable totheyieldin predicted as deleterious by dedicated software, affecting familial DCM (43%; p=0,17). Also, genetic DCM has a cardiac-speciﬁc isoform and leading to frameshift p. worse prognosis compared to non-genetic DCM (Log- (Gln1547ProfsTer80). The 60-year-old proband and her Rank=0.008), irrespective of familial history (Log- three nieces (aged 32-45) were diagnosed with DCM and Rank=0.29). ICD implanted. Five siblings (aged 25-61) had SCD. Seg- Conclusions:OneinﬁveDCMpatientswithanacquired regation analysis in asymptomatic relatives identiﬁed two trigger and/orabsence offamilialhistory hasan underlying mutated siblings (31 and 47 years): one presented an epi- genetic mutation. Non-familial DCM patients with sode of acute myocarditis. Despite detailed cardiologic arrhythmias and no clear etiology have a comparable evaluation, they did not meet current diagnostic guidelines genetic yield compared to familial DCM. for AC/DCM. J.Verdonschot:None.M.T.H.M.Henkens:None.A.G. Conclusions: Loss-of-function DSP mutations cause Raafs:None.P.Wang:None.J.J.Merken:None.G.R.F. different phenotypesincludingACandDCM. Adiagnostic Claes: None. I.P.C. Krapels: None. E.K. Vanhoutte: grey zone between left-dominant AC and arrhythmogenic None. A. van den Wijngaard: None. H.G. Brunner: DCM exists, indicating the need for updating current clas- None. M.R. Hazebroek: None. S.R.B. Heymans: None. siﬁcation.Moreover,genotype-baseddeﬁnitioniswarranted to develop personalized management in patients/asympto- P05.27C matic-mutated subjects. Intrafamilial phenotypic variability A novel truncating mutation in DSP (Desmoplakin) and lack of penetrance demand modiﬁer variants in addi- causes autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy tional, yet unknown, genes or epigenetic factors. with variable penetrance Funding: Fondi Ricerca Premiale from University of L’Aquila, Italy L. Camerota1, V. Ferradini2, R. Petroni3,4, R. Monetta4,1, L. Camerota: None. V. Ferradini: None. R. Petroni: S. Romano3, G. Ussia5, F. Sangiuolo6, F. Brancati1,4 None. R. Monetta: None. S. Romano: None. G. Ussia: None. F. Sangiuolo: None. F. Brancati: None. 1MedicalGeneticsDivision,DepartmentofLife,Healthand Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, P05.28D Italy, 2Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Double heterozygosity in a group of patients with rare University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 3Department cardiovascular diseases of Cardiology, University of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy, 4Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto S. Josifovska1,2, R. Vazharova3, L. Balabanski2, Dermopatico dell'Immacolata IDI-IRCCS, Rome, Italy, M. Malinov2, A. Kaneva4, S. Panov1, M. Ganev5, 5Facoltà Dipartimentale di Medicina e Chirurgia, D. Toncheva5 University Campus Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of Rome Tor 1Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Vergata, L'Aquila, Italy Sciences and Mathematics, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Background: Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy (AC) is Republic of, 2Genome Centre, GARH Malinov, Soﬁa, mainly determined by mutations in desmosomal genes. Bulgaria, 3Department of Biology, Medical Genetics and Approximately 75% of AC patients show bi-ventricular Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Soﬁa University St. involvement and left-dominant forms are not uncommon. KlimentOhridski,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,4DepartmentofPediatric Loss-of-function mutations in Desmoplakin (DSP) cause a Cardiology, National Heart Hospital, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, form of AC often manifesting with severe arrhythmias and 5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of sudden cardiac death (SCD). Less is known about DSP Soﬁa, Soﬁa, BulgariaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1315 Introduction: Rare cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are Background: Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is ranked as heterogeneous and this complicates their diagnosis. The thesecondleadingcausesofdeathinTaiwan.Dyslipidemia more complex forms of rare CVD tend to result from the is one of the risk factors for CVD. The LPL and APOE integrated effect of multiple genetic variants that create a geneswerefoundtobeinvolvedinlipidmetabolism.Many backgroundofsusceptibilityrequiringsometimesadditional studiesuncoveredtheassociationbetweendyslipidemiaand factors for the disease to manifest. Whole exome, whole CVD, however, conventional epidemiological studies may genome and target sequencing offer new possibilities to sufferfromun-measuredconfoundersandreversecausality. discoverthecomplex etiologyofsuchdiseases. Theaimof We aimed to elucidate the causal relationship between this study was to identify genetic variants associated with dyslipidemia and CVD using Mendelian randomization the rare CVD using next generation sequencing (NGS). design. Materials and Methods: NGS with TruSight panels Methods: A total of 1951 Chinese adults were recruited (Illumina) was used to analyze DNA samples from 24 from the Matsu community-based integrated health patients with rare CVD: Long QT Syndrome, Tetralogy of screeningprojectduring2015-2017.TwoSNPs(LPLrs328 Fallot, Familial Hypercholesterolemia, suspected Marfan and APOE rs157580) were selected as the instrumental Syndrome, Pathology of great vessels, Cardiomyopathies variables. Both logistic regression and two-stage least- and other. squareinstrumentalvariable(IV)regressionwereappliedto Results: In 14 (58%) of the 24 patients, at least one estimate the relationship between the lipid proﬁles pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant was found. Of and CVD. those, in 8 patients we detected only one variant, in 3 Results: We found rs328 was signiﬁcantly associated patients there was a combination of two or more only withdecreasedtriglyceridelevels(β=-9.105,p=0.012)and pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants, and in 3 patients the increased HDL-C levels (β=1.317, p=0.037), but not with combinationwasofpathogenic/likelypathogenicandVUS. LDL-C levels. The rs157580 was marginally associated Oftheremaining10patients,in5(21%)patients,onlyVUS with increased LDL-C levels. We further found a sig- weredetected(3withtwoVUSand2withoneVUS)andin niﬁcantly protective effect of LDL-C levels on cardiovas- 5 (21%) patients, we did not detect signiﬁcant mutations. cular disease (OR=0.987, 95% CI=0.980-0.994), but not Overall, in 9 (47%) of the patients with detected variants, with triglycerides, HDL-C and CVD. The IV analysis more than one variant was found indicating multiple het- revealed an increasing risk of LDL-C levels on cardiovas- erozygosity. In conclusion, NGS has a potential to detect cular disease by using rs157580 and allele score as the IVs multiple heterozygosity in complex rare cardiovascular (rs157580: OR=1.028, 95% CI=1.018-1.038; allele score: diseases. OR=1.028, 95% CI=1.019-1.038). Triglyceride and HDL- S. Josifovska: None. R. Vazharova: None. L. Bala- C were also associated with cardiovascular disease. banski: None. M. Malinov: None. A. Kaneva: None. S. Conclusion: We identiﬁed the causal relationships Panov: None. M. Ganev: None. D. Toncheva: None. between dyslipidemia and cardiovascular disease by using APOE rs157580 and allele score as the instrumental vari- P05.29A ables. Grant No: MOST 106-2314-B-010-020-MY3 The causal relationship between dyslipidemia and E. Wan: None. T. Wu: None. W. Wu: None. S. Chen: cardiovascular disease using Mendelian randomization None.A.Yen:None.Y.Lee:None.C.Tse:None.T.Liu: None. H. Chen: None. M. Lin: None. E. Wan1, T. Wu2, W. Wu1, S. Chen3, A. Yen3, Y. Lee4, C. Tse5, T. Liu6, H. Chen7, M. Lin1 P05.30B Common atrium,atrioventricularcanal defect/postaxial 1InstituteofPublicHealth,NationalYang-MingUniversity, polydactyly:amildclinicalsubtypeofEllis-vanCreveld Taipei,Taiwan,2DepartmentofPublicHealth,Chung-Shan syndrome caused by compound heterozygosity for loss Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 3School of Oral of function and hypomorphic EVC mutations Hygiene, College of Oral Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Internal F. Piceci Sparascio1, M. C. Digilio2, A. Palencia- Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Campos3,4,I.Torrente1,V.Guida1,J.Rosati5,A.D'Anzi5, Taiwan, 5Bureau of Health and Welfare, Lienchiang S. Briuglia6, P. Versacci7, B. Dallapiccola8, V. Ruiz- County Government, Matsu, Taiwan, 6Lienchiang County Perez3,4, B. Marino7, A. De Luca1 Government, Matsu, Taiwan, 7Institute of Epidemiology and Preventative Medicine, College of Public Health, 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Ospedale Casa Sollievo della National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan Sofferenza, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Ospedale Pediatrico1316 Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 3CIBER de P05.31C enfermedadesRaras(CIBERER),InsititutodeSaludCarlos Heritability and family-based GWAS analyses of the III,Madrid,Spain,4InstitutodeInvestigacionesBiomédicas circulating ceramide, endocannabinoid, and N-acyl de Madrid, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones ethanolamide lipidome Cientíﬁcas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 5Cellular Reprogramming Unit, Ospedale Casa K. McGurk, A. Nicolaou, B. Keavney Sollievo della Sofferenza, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 6Department of Human Pathology of Adult and University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom Childhood "Gaetano Barresi", Unit of Emergency Pediatrics, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, Introduction: Lipids of the endocannabinoid (EC), N-acyl 7Department of Pediatrics, Università Sapienza, Rome, ethanolamine (NAEA), and ceramide (CER) classes are Italy, 8Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, potential novel biomarkers of coronary artery disease and Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma, Italy type-2 diabetes. Major-gene effects have been discovered for certain lipid species, notably lipoprotein(a). We sought ClinicalexpressionofEllisvanCreveldsyndrome(EvCS) toestablishtheheritabilityofEC,NAEA,andCERspecies, is variable with a classic form associated with homo- and identify DNA variants inﬂuencing their concentrations zygous/compound heterozygous mutations in EVC and in plasma. EVC2genes,andthemilderWeyersacrodentaldysostosis Materials and Methods: We undertook heritability linked to speciﬁc heterozygous mutations in the last (QTDT, GCTA) and GWAS analyses (FaST-LMM) of 11 coding exon of EVC2. Additional transitional phenotypes ECs and NAEAs, and 37 CERs in 1,016 plasma samples have been described, including patients with prevalently from 196 British Caucasian families ascertained through a cardiac and limb involvement, presenting with atrioven- hypertensive proband, using targeted mass spectrometry tricular canal defect with common atrium (AVCD-CA) and Illumina 660W-Quad genotyping. and postaxial polydactyly. We report on the results of Results:NAEAsaremoreheritablethanwell-studiedEC molecular analysis of a family with vertical transmission anandamide(AEA) (h2AEA =32-35%;P<5.80x10-11).24- in father and daughter of AVCD-CA and postaxial 46% of the variation in potential biomarker CER is due to polydactyly. The father was compound heterozygous for genetic factors (P<1.00x10-7). GWAS identiﬁed associa- the known recessive p.Arg622* nonsense variant and the tions with eQTLs of proteins in their metabolism (e.g. novelp.Arg663PromissensechangeintheEVCgene.His FAAH; P DHEA <6.33x10-12, SPTLC3; P N(24)S NAEA CER affected daughter was compound heterozygous for the (18) <8.99x10-19) and novel loci implicated in cancer risk same nonsense variant and the novel splice-site c.1316- and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (e.g. FBXO28; P N CER 7A>Gvariant.Twoadditionalunaffectedsisterswerealso (24)S(19)ratio <1.95x10-8, SULT1C4; P N(24)S(19) CER examined.Onewasheterozygouscarrierofthep.Arg622* <8.99x10-19). Two-sample Mendelian randomisation sug- variant, while the other was compound heterozygous for gests that a variant in FAAH (rs324420) inﬂuencing the both the p.Arg663Pro change and the c.1316-7A>G level of plasma NAEAs (beta DHEA = 0.39; NAEA variant. mRNA sequencing in the affected daughter’s P<6.33x10-12) is causally associated with both obesity and ﬁbroblast showed that c.1316-7A>G resulted in the in- drug addiction. frameinsertion of6nucleotidesbetweenEVC exon9 and Conclusions:Wedemonstrate fortheﬁrsttimeestimates 10, and that the expression of the p.Arg622* correspond- of heritability for this extended array of bioactive lipids, ing allele was greatly decreased. Consistently, western identify GWAS-signiﬁcant SNPs associating with their blotanalysisshowedaresidualamountofEVCproteinin levels in circulation, and implicate the lipid species studied the father's and daughter's ﬁbroblasts. Present results here in cardiovascular disease, cancer, and drug addition. suggest that p.Arg663Pro and c.1316-7A>G are hypo- K.M. is supported by a MRC Doctoral Award (MR/ morphicEVCallelesthatactasgeneticmodiﬁerstogether K501311/1) and Travel Grant from The Company of with a loss of function mutation to cause a milder clinical Biologists. subtype of EvCS characterized by AVCD-CA and K. McGurk: None. A. Nicolaou: None. B. postaxial polydactyly. Keavney: None. F. Piceci Sparascio: None. M.C. Digilio: None. A. Palencia-Campos: None. I. Torrente: None. V. Guida: P05.32D None. J. Rosati: None. A. D'Anzi: None. S. Briuglia: A new zebraﬁsh model for in vivo optical mapping of None.P.Versacci:None.B.Dallapiccola:None.V.Ruiz- cardiac action potentials Perez: None. B. Marino: None. A. De Luca: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1317 D. Schepers1, E. Sieliwonczyk1, A. Schlaeppi2, Objective:Diagnostic yieldinaheterogeneous cohortof B. Vandendriessche1, E. Simons1, M. Alaerts1, patients with a suspicion of HCM D. Knapen3, J. Huisken2, B. Loeys1 Methods: A retrospective review of patients with a sus- pected clinical diagnosis of HCM referred for genetic test- 1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and ing at Blueprint Genetics between 2013 and 2018 was Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, undertaken. Variants classiﬁed as pathogenic (P) or likely 2Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI, United pathogenic (LP) at the time of reporting were considered States, 3Zebraﬁshlab, Veterinary Physiology and diagnostic. Biochemistry, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium Results: Diagnostic yield was 26.2% (361/1,376). In total, 373 P/LP variants were identiﬁed including 363 var- Genetically encoded voltage indicators (GEVI) allow iants diagnostic for HCM whereas only 10 were diagnostic opticalmappingofvoltagechangesandofferanalternative for another type of cardiomyopathy based on clinical and method for measuring alterations in cell membrane genetic interpretation (DES, DSP, LMNA, TTN). Approxi- potentials. Initially driven by the neuroscience ﬁeld, the mately 86% (n=320) of diagnostic variants (23.3% of all development of GEVIs has now found applications in the tests) involved genes encoding the sarcomere. Seventeen P cardiovascular sciences as well. Thanks to these GEVIs, it orLPvariants(4.6%ofvariantsand1.2%ofalltests)were has become possible to image cardiac voltage dynamics at inRASopathygenesandthirteenPorLPvariants(3.5%of the cellular level in vivo in translucent organisms such as 0.9% of all tests) were in metabolic/inﬁltrative disease zebraﬁsh. Unfortunately, up to now, the ﬂuorescent signal genes. In addition, three patients with non-diagnostic ﬁnd- of the cardiac voltage sensors used in zebraﬁsh has been ings for cardiomyopathy had P or LP variants in genes very dim. For this reason, we developed a new stable linked to a channelopathy (RYR2, SCN5A) or neuroﬁ- transgenic zebraﬁsh model, expressing Ace2N-mNeon, a bromatosis (NF1). next generation voltage sensor with brighter ﬂuorescence, Conclusions: The diagnostic yield of genetic testing in a underthecontrolofthemyocardialspeciﬁcpromotermyl7. heterogeneouscohortofpatientswithasuspecteddiagnosis UsingSelectivePlanellluminationMicroscopy(SPIM),the of HCM analyzed is lower than what has been reported in conduction of individual action potentials in the heart of 3 well characterized patient cohorts. Importantly, 8% of all dpf zebraﬁsh larvae can be visualized in vivo, allowing the diagnosticﬁndingswereinmetabolicandRASopathygenes measurements of action potential duration and conduction which have signiﬁcant systemic medical management speed. Next, we will apply this new transgenic zebraﬁsh implications. model to evaluate the pathogenicity of genetic variants of J. Koskenvuo: None. J. Hathaway: None. I. Saarinen: unknown signiﬁcance identiﬁed in arrhythmia genes of None. J. Tallila: None. E.H. Seppälä: None. S. Tuupa- patients with inherited primary electrical diseases. nen: None. H. Turpeinen: None. T. Kangas-Kontio: D. Schepers: None. E. Sieliwonczyk: None. A. None.J.Schleit:None.J.Tommiska:None.E.Salminen: Schlaeppi: None. B. Vandendriessche: None. E. Simons: None. P. Salmenperä: None. J. Sistonen: None. M. None. M. Alaerts: None. D. Knapen: None. J. Huisken: Muona: None. M. Gentile: None. V. Kytölä: None. S. None. B. Loeys: None. Myllykangas: None. J. Paananen: None. T. Alastalo: None. P05.33A Diagnostic Yield of Genetic Testing in an Unselected P05.34B Cohort of 1,376 HCM Patients Psycho-social impact of predictive genetic testing in hereditary heart diseases (PREDICT Study) J. Koskenvuo, J. Hathaway, I. Saarinen, J. Tallila, E. H. Seppälä, S. Tuupanen, H. Turpeinen, T. Kangas- C. Bordet1, S. Brice2, C. Maupain1, E. Gandjbakhch1,3, Kontio, J. Schleit, J. Tommiska, E. Salminen, B. Isidor4, A. Palmyre5, A. Moerman6, A. Toutain7, P. Salmenperä, J. Sistonen, M. Muona, M. Gentile, S. Odent8, A. Brehin9, L. Olivier Faivre10, C. Rooryck V. Kytölä, S. Myllykangas, J. Paananen, T. Alastalo Thambo11, E. Schaefer12, K. Nguyen13, D. Dupin Deguine14, C. Rouzier15, P. Jouk16, M. Port Lys17, Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland I. Denjoy18, S. Staraci1, R. Mansouri1, M. Hebert1, A. Bekhechi1, I. Raji1, V. Fressart19, F. Ader19, Introduction: Genetic testing in Hypertrophic Cardiomyo- P.Richard19,S.TezenasduMontcel20,21,M.Gargiulo22,23, pathy (HCM) is recommended by published guidelines. P. Charron1,24 Genetic testing by NGS panels offers practical differential diagnostic solution.1318 1Referral Center for hereditary heart disease, Department psychological and socio-professional impact of predictive of Genetics, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital,, Paris, genetic testing in hereditary heart diseases. France, 2INSERM, Sorbonne Université, Institut Pierre Patients and Methods: This multicentric French study Louis d’Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, F75013, involved 20 expert centers in hereditary heart diseases. We Paris, France, 3Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université included 517 adult relatives (42.3±16.7 years, 60.6% Paris 6, AssistancePublique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital females) who performed predictive genetic testing (pro- Pitié-Salpêtrière, ICAN, Département de Cardiologie,, spective study: N=264, retrospective study: N=253). The Parsi, France, 4Department of Genetics, Nantes University opinion and experience were collected via auto-ques- Hospital,, Nantes, France, 5Department of Genetics, tionnaires, at various moments in the prospective study, Ambroise Paré University Hospital,, Paris, France, with different items and validated scales (STAI and IES). 6Department of Genetics, Lille University Hospital, Jeanne Results: In the prospective study, the main motivations de Flandre Hospital,, Lille, France, 7Department of for performing the test were: “to remove doubt” (65.3%), Medical Genetics, Tours University Hospital, Tours, “for children” (64.0%), “to beneﬁt from medical super- France, 8Department of Medical Genetics, Rennes vision” (34.9%). A mutation was present in 39.4% of University Hospital, Rennes, France, 9Department of relatives. No regret was expressed after testing (only 2.3% Genetics, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized regrets). The result did not lead to a socio-professional Medicine, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, change or family relationship change in 60.7%. Among 10Medical Genetics Unit, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, thosewhohadachange,itwasperceivedasunfavorablefor France, 11Department of Medical Genetics, Bordeaux only3%.Thelevelofanxiety(STAIscale)increasesbefore University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 12Department of the test result and decreased to return to baseline. Subjects Genetics, Strasbourg University Hospital, Hautepierre withdepressionhistoryweremorelikelytodevelopanxiety Hospital, Strasbourg, France, 13Department of Medical at long term (p=0.004). Genetics, APHM, GMGF, Timone Hospital, Aix Marseille Conclusions: Our results show no or marginal adverse University,, Marseille, France, 14Department of Medical psychological and socio-professional impact of genetic Genetics, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France, testing when performed by a team expert in predictive 15Department of Medical Genetics, Université Côte d'Azur, testing. CHU, Inserm, CNRS, IRCAN, Nice, France, 16Department C.Bordet:None.S.Brice:None.C.Maupain:None.E. of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Gandjbakhch:None.B.Isidor:None.A.Palmyre:None. Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France, 17Clinical Genetics A. Moerman: None. A. Toutain: None. S. Odent: None. Unit, University Hospital, Pointe-à-Pitre University A. Brehin: None. L. Olivier Faivre: None. C. Rooryck Hospital, Guadalupe Island,, Pointe à Pitre Guadeloupe, Thambo:None.E.Schaefer:None.K.Nguyen:None.D. France, 18Department of cardiology, Referral Center for DupinDeguine:None.C.Rouzier:None.P.Jouk:None. hereditary heart disease, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France, M.PortLys:None.I.Denjoy:None.S.Staraci:None.R. 19UF cardiogenetics, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital, Mansouri:None.M.Hebert:None.A.Bekhechi:None.I. Paris, France, 20Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Raji: None. V. Fressart: None. F. Ader: None. P. PierreLouisd’EpidémiologieetdeSantéPublique,AP-HP, Richard: None. S. Tezenas du Montcel: None. M. Gar- Hôpitaux Universitaires Pitié Salpêtrière - Charles Foix, giulo: None. P. Charron: None. Département de Santé Publique, F75013,, Paris, France, 21INSERM UMR-1136, Paris, France, 22Institut of P05.35C Myologie, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital,, Paris, Development of a fast and cost effective genetic France, 23Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Pierre diagnostic method for familial hypercholesterolemia in Louis de Santé Publique, Medical Information Unit, Pitié Sweden SalpêtrièreUniversityHospital,,Paris,France,24Sorbonne Université, INSERM, UMR_S 1166 and ICAN Institute for K. Duvefelt1, E. Hagström2, E. Bachus3, V. Hamrefors3, Cardiometabolism and Nutrition,, Paris, France M. Rehnberg4, S. Romeo5, M. Linde1, P. Kiviluoma1, B. Angelin1, P. Benedek1, J. Kere1, M. Eriksson1 Introduction: Hereditary heart diseases are most often characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance and 1Karolinska University hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, delayed cardiac expression. Predictive genetic testing is 2Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Skånes University offeredtoasymptomaticrelatives to allow targetedmedical hospital, Malmö, Sweden, 4Linköping University, care with early therapeutics in order to reduce the risk of Linköping, Sweden, 5Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, complications. The aim of this study was to evaluate the SwedenAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1319 Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal cardiomyopathy (MIM616117). No TNNI3K mutations dominant disease causing elevated levels of low-density have been found to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in lipoprotein cholesterol, carrying a high risk of premature (HCM: MIM192600). We performed a 178 gene-panel coronary heart disease such as myocardial infarction. The enrichedand next-generationsequencingin8 Thaifamilies prevalence of FH is approximately 1/250. There is an withHCM.8pathogenic(P)/likelypathogenic(LP)variants obviousneedforimprovingearlydetectionandtreatmentof were found in 7 families (MHY7(4), TPM1(2),TNNI2(1), FH, which is currently an underdiagnosed condition. TTR(1)). One family harbored two variants in MYH7 and We aimed to characterize the disease-causing mutation TPM1. The remaining family without identiﬁed P/LP spectrum in Sweden, and to develop a cost-effective diag- variants was sent for whole-exome sequencing. We nostics.Thiswasdonethroughiterativeimprovementofthe identiﬁed a rare spliced TNNI3K (c.1178-2A>G) variant analytical strategy, consisting of (i) targeted mutation ana- in the 41-year-old male with severe eccentric HCM who lysis using a panel based on Agena mass spectrometry- presented with syncope from ventricular arrhythmia. His based genotyping; (ii) sequencing of samples failing to asymptomatic 60-year-old father with apical HCM also show mutations; and (iii) redesign of the panel to include harboredthisvariant.The variantwas observedonceinthe new, recurrently found mutations. ExAC database and once in our in-house Thai-exome To date, we have included 1,143 patients from 14 hos- database (>2,000 cases). RNA analysis revealed an altered pitals across Sweden in a nationwide collaboration using a splicing mRNA predicted to create a protein with only N- panel of 113 pathogenic/likely pathogenic mutations in the terminal Ankyrin repeats without the kinase and the C- LDLR, PCSK9 and APOB genes. terminal serine-rich domain. Since the C-terminal serine Dutch Lipid Clinical Network (DLCN) score was avail- richdomainisaninhibitorydomain,theidentiﬁedmutation able for 482 patients in whom mutations were detected in may represent a gain-of-function variant by diminishing 27%. If restricted to patients with probable or deﬁnite FH inhibitory signal of the kinase domain. A previous study (score ≥6; n=309) pathogenic mutations were detected in expressing wild-type human TNNI3K in transgenic-mice 35%. The two most prevalent mutations were found that the mice had cardiac hypertrophy. TNNI3K NM_000384.2(APOB):c.10580G>A(p.Arg3527Gln) and inhibitor which has undergone preclinical testing can serve NM_000527.4(LDLR):c.259T>G(p.Trp87Gly). In total, 38 as a potential therapy for patients with HCM. In summary, different mutations were detected by the panel. 142 panel we report a family with a probably gain-of-function negativesamplesweresequencedwiththeSEQPPRO-LIPO mutation in TNNI3K, suggesting that TNNI3K is a new method, yielding 15 additional mutations in 16 patients. disease gene for HCM. In conclusion, our FH-panel detected mutations in P. Phowthongkum: None. S. Tongkobpetch: None. K. approximately one fourth of Swedish patients with sus- Suphapeetiporn: None. V. Shotelersuk: None. pected FH. The number was increased if analyses were restricted to patients with high DLCN score. P05.37A Vinnova 2016-02972 Circulating miRNAs proﬁling in diabetic patients with K. Duvefelt: None. E. Hagström: None. E. Bachus: ischemic heart disease None. V. Hamrefors: None. M. Rehnberg: None. S. Romeo: None. M. Linde: None. P. Kiviluoma: None. B. A. Bielska1, M. Niemira1, A. Szalkowska1, Angelin: None. P. Benedek: None. J. Kere: None. M. J. Raczkowska1, D. Ostrowski1, W. Bauer1, Eriksson: None. P. Prokopczuk2, S. Dobrzycki2, A. Kretowski1,3 P05.36D 1ClinicalResearchCentre,MedicalUniversityofBialystok, A novel candidate gene of familial hypertrophic Białystok, Poland, 2Department of Invasive Cardiology, cardiomyopathy with therapeutic potential Medical University of Bialystok, Białystok, Poland, 3Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal P. Phowthongkum, S. Tongkobpetch, K. Suphapeetiporn, Medicine, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, V. Shotelersuk Poland Faculty of Medicine, Bangkok, Thailand Introduction: Due to a global increase of morbidity and mortality with ischemic heart disease (IHD) in type 2 TNNI3K encodes cardiac troponin I-interacting kinase diabeticpatients,thereisanurgentneedtoidentifyofearly (TNNI3K), forming homo-dimers or homo-oligomers and biomarkers, which would help to predict an individual risk involving in the cardiac contractility regulation. Loss-of- of development of IHD. MiRNAs are small noncoding function mutations in TNNI3K can lead to dilated RNAs which regulate gene expression and the last few1320 years appear as a key tool for understanding the Patients and Methods: The study included 81 patients pathophysiologyofIHD.Here,wepostulatethatcirculating with chroniccerebralischemia(withoutahistoryofstroke) serum-derived miRNA may serve as potential biomarkers and 69 patients with ischemic stroke (IS). Genotyping was for early IHD diagnosis and help to identify diabetic performed using microarray to determine 21 SNPs in the individuals with a predisposition to develop ischemic heart АСЕ, SERPINE1, FGB, F5, F7, F12, GP1BA, GPIIIa, disease. MTHFR,CYP11B2,PON1,PON2,NOS2,NOS3,PDE4D, Materials and Methods: We obtained serum samples HIFla, LTA, ALOX5AP genes. Stroke subtypes were from 39 T2DM patients (22 with IHD and 17 free of deﬁned according to TOAST criteria. complications). The levels of 798 miRNAs were analysed Results: In patients with chronic cerebral ischemia, the using NanoString nCounter Technology Platform. The TT genotype of the PDE4D (rs966221, SNP83C>T) was miRNA regulatory network analysis was performed using associated with rapidly progressive arterial hypertension the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. (OR=6.22; 95%CI=1.9-20.8; p=0.0036). In patients with Results: Our data showed that 28 miRNAs (including IS the D allele of the ACE gene (rs1799752, I>D) and the miR-615-3p, miR-1303, miRR-122-5p, miR-217) were DD genotype were associated with cardioembolic subtype signiﬁcantly upregulated and 1 miRNA (miR-451a) was of stroke (OR=2.67, 95%CI=1.23-5.8, p=0.02 and downregulated in T2DM IHD patients compared to T2DM OR=7.14,95%CI=1.7-29.7,p=0.0057).InpatientswithIS patientswithoutIHD(adjp<0.05).Basedontheaboveall the C allele of the GP1BA gene (rs2243093, -5T>C) and miRNAs were classiﬁed into four interactive signalling TC genotype were associated with large-artery athero- networks. Targeted genes by the identiﬁed miRNAs were sclerosis subtype of stroke (brachiocephalic artery stenosis enriched in pathways associated with metabolic and cardi- >75% and large-artery occlusion) (OR=3.39, 95%CI=1.1- ovascular diseases, cardiac dysfunction and cardiovascular 10.2, p=0.03 and OR=4.44, 95% CI=1.3-15.5, p=0.023). system development. Conclusions: Detailed genetic analysis in the context of Conclusions: Taken together, our ﬁndings suggest that clinical features of cerebrovascular disease will allow the circulating miRNAs might have a crucial role in the identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant associations. developmentofIHDindiabeticpatientsandmaybeusedas A.Ikonnikova:None.A.Gunchenko:None.S.Galkin: a potential for early diagnosis. None. A. Anisimova: None. T. Nasedkina: None. A. Bielska: None. M. Niemira: None. A. Szalkowska: None. J. Raczkowska: None. D. Ostrowski: None. W. P05.39C Bauer:None.P.Prokopczuk:None.S.Dobrzycki:None. ApolipoproteinEe4associatestoageofischemic stroke A. Kretowski: None. onset but not to stroke outcome P05.38B C. Lagging1,2, E. Lorentzen3, A. Pedersen1,2, Association of polymorphisms in PDE4D, ACE and T. M. Stanne1, M. Söderholm4,5, J. M. Maguire6,7, GP1BA genes with clinical characteristics in patients A. Lindgren4,5, C. Jern1,2 with ischemic stroke and chronic cerebral ischemia 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of A. Ikonnikova1, A. Gunchenko2, S. Galkin2, Biomedicine, the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of A. Anisimova2, T. Nasedkina1 Gothenburg,Gothenburg,Sweden,2DepartmentofClinical Genetics and Genomics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Bioinformatics Core Facility, Russian Federation, 2N.I. Pirogov Russian National University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, Research Medical University, Ministry of Health of the 4Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Neurology, Lund Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation University, Lund, Sweden, 5Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Introduction:Alargedatahasbeenaccumulatedaboutthe Sweden, 6Faculty of Health, University of Technology role of genetic factors in the development of cerebrovas- Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 7Hunter Medical Research cular diseases, but the identiﬁed associations are often not Centre, Newcastle, Australia reproducible in replication studies and meta-analyses. This may be due to the multifactorial nature of this group of Introduction: APOE genotype is a candidate predictor for diseases, the heterogeneity of pathogenic mechanisms, and stroke outcomes. We evaluated whether common APOE theethnicityofpatients.Theworkwasaimedtoinvestigate allelesassociatewithischemicstrokeoutcome,severityand the association of genetic polymorphisms with patient’s age at onset, within the large multicenter Genetics of characteristics in well-deﬁned clinical groups. Ischaemic Stroke Functional Outcome (GISCOME) study.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1321 Methods: This study comprises 6,165 ischemic stroke Enfermedades Raras (CIBERE, Madrid, Spain, cases with genotype data from SNP arrays. Baseline stroke 3Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Clínico San severity was scored according to the NIH Stroke Scale Carlos, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital (NIHSS). Functional outcome at 3 months was scored UniversitarioFundacionAlcorcon,Madrid,Spain,Madrid, accordingtothemodiﬁedRankinScale(mRS).Wederived Spain, 5Unidad de Genética del Hospital Universitario de common APOE allele status (ε2,ε3,ε4) by combining Getafe, (Madrid), Spain, Madrid, Spain, 6Department of information from SNPs rs7412 and rs429358. Effects of Internal Medicine, Hospital Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, minor allele count (ε4,ε2) on age at stroke, stroke severity Madrid, Spain, 7Department of Genetics, Hospital de La andoutcomewereestimatedseparatelyincomparisontothe Princesa, Madrid, Spain, Madrid, Spain, 8Lipid and most common ε3/ε3 genotype. VascularUnit,HospitalCarlosIII,Madrid,Spain,Madrid, Results:Wefoundnoevidenceofadirecteffectofε4on Spain outcome. There was, however, an inverse association between ε4 allele count and age at stroke (β-1.8, Introduction: About 70% of human plasma cholesterol P=0.00017).Thisassociationwassigniﬁcantinbothsexes. circulates as a component of low-density-lipoproteins The ε2 allele was independently associated with poor (LDL). Most LDL is cleared from the circulation through functional outcome (mRS>2) in men (odds ratio[OR]1.47, the hepatic LDL-receptor(1). Reduction in activity or P=0.008), but not in women (OR 0.87, P=0.44). number of LDLR gives rise to Familial hypercholester- Conclusion: This is the largest meta-analysis on APOE olemia(FH;MIM#143890).Earlydetectionofpatientswith genotype and ischemic stroke outcome to our knowledge. FH allows initiation of treatment, thus reducing the risk of We found a lower age at stroke onset in ε4 carriers and a coronary heart disease. In this study we performed in vitro worse functional outcome in male ε2 carriers. Even larger characterization of new LDLR variants found in FH studies are warranted to further investigate the effects of patients. APOE alleles on ischemic stroke outcome in different age MaterialsandMethods:DNAsamplesfromFHpatients and sex strata. wereanalyzedbyNextGenerationSequencing(NGS)using Studyfunding:TheSwedishResearchCouncil,Swedish a customized panel of 198 genes. The LDLR missense Heart and Lung Foundation, Swedish State; ALF- variants were generate into the expression vector agreement. LDLR_NM_000527-Human-cDNA-GFPSpark®-tagbysite- C. Lagging: None. E. Lorentzen: None. A. Pedersen: directed-mutagenesisandtransfectedinLDLR-deﬁcientcell None. T.M. Stanne: None. M. Söderholm: None. J.M. line CHO-ldlA7(2,3). Activity and expression of cell surface Maguire: None. A. Lindgren: D. Speakers Bureau/Hon- LDLRweremeasuredbyﬂowcytometry.LDLRexpression oraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); was detected by Western Blot and immunoﬂuorescence. In Modest;Bayer,BMSPﬁzer.F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard; order to characterize the LDLR intronic variant, the RNA Modest; Bayer, Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS extractedfrompatient´speripheral-blood-mononuclear-cells Pﬁzer, Reneuron. C. Jern: None. was analyzed by RT-PCR followed by Long-Range-PCR. All transcripts were validated by Sanger sequencing. P05.40D Results: Seven new variants at LDLR were character- Functional characterization of new missense and ized. The missense variants c.776A>G;p.(Tyr259Cys), intronic variants in LDLR c.851G>A;p.(Cys284Tyr), c.1072T>G;p.(Cys358Gly) showed signiﬁcant differences in activity and expression C. Rodríguez-Jiménez1, N. Agra2, L. Reinares-garcía3, of LDLR regarding to the wildtype(WT). The variants C. Guijarro4, A. Carazo-Álvarez1, B. Gil Fournier5, c.2279C>T;p.(Thr760Ile) and c.2579C>A;p.(Ala860Glu) F. García-Iglesias6, C. Alonso-Cerezo7, J. Mostaza8, did not showed any differences. The intronic variant S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa1 c.2389+4A>G revealed impact on splicing of LDLR resulting as pathogenic. 1DepartmentofGeneticsofmetabolicsdiseases.Instituteof Conclusions: The functional in vitro characterization of Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital rare variants at the LDLR allow us to conﬁrm the genetic Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, diagnosis of FH, avoiding the classiﬁcation as “uncertain IdiPAZ,Madrid,Spain;CentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédica signiﬁcant variants”, and therefore, to allow for cascade en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERE, Madrid, Spain, family screening. 2Vascular Malformations Section. Institute of Medical & C. Rodríguez-Jiménez: None. N. Agra: None. L. Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Reinares-garcía: None. C. Guijarro: None. A. Carazo- Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Álvarez: None. B. Gil Fournier: None. F. García- Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de1322 Iglesias: None. C. Alonso-Cerezo: None. J. Mostaza: M. Polyak1, A. A. Bukaeva1, A. G. Shestak1, None. S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None. O. V. Blagova2, L. B. Mitrofanova3, E. A. Mershina4, Y. V. Frolova1, S. L. Dzemeshkevich1, P05.41A E. V. Zaklyazminskaya1,5 Divergent degradation pathways for corresponding LDLR and VLDLR disease-causing mutants 1Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow, RussianFederation,2SechenovFirstMoscowStateMedical P. Kizhakkedath, A. John, L. Al-Gazali, B. R. Ali University,Moscow,RussianFederation,3FederalAlmazov North-West Medical Research Centre, Saint Petersburg, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Russian Federation, 4Medical Scientiﬁc and Educational Emirates Center of Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Pirogov Russian National Research Introduction: Misfolded proteins in the early secretory Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation pathway are mainly degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome systems known as ER associated degradation (ERAD) Introduction:Leftventricularnoncompaction(LVNC)isa whichhasbeenimplicatedinthepathogenesisofnumerous cardiomyopathywithcausativegeneticvariantsidentiﬁedin congenital disorders. Therefore, ERAD has been a promis- more than 20 genes. It's often accompanied by other types ing target for therapy of such diseases. In this study we of myocardium remodeling. Several guidelines recommend compare and contrast the degradation behavior of equiva- DNA-diagnostics for LVNC patients but strategy remains lent disease-causing mutations in LDLR and VLDLR, two unclear. The aim of our study is to evaluate efﬁciency of LDLR family receptors. DNA-diagnostic in LVNC patients using gene panel (13 Materials and Methods: HRD1-SEL1L knockout (KO) candidate genes). HEK293 cell lines have been generated using CRISPR/ Materials and Methods: We observed 67 probands Cas9. The missense mutants were generated by Quik- diagnosed with LVNC. Deep phenotyping was performed Change site-directed mutagenesis. The expressed proteins including evaluation of cardiac remodeling (dilatation, were analyzed biochemically and by microscopy. hypertrophy or isolated noncompaction). Genetic screening Results: We found that the disequilibrium syndrome- by NGS (Ion Torrent) sequencing of 13 genes was per- causingVLDLRmissensemutants(p.D487Y,p.D521Hand formed for all patients. Sanger sequencing of additional p.C706F)areretainedintheERwhereasonlyp.D482Hand genesandwholeexomesequencing(WES)wereperformed p.C667F of the LDLR corresponding mutants are retained. if needed. Pathogenecity of genetic variants was analyzed Two of the ER-retained VLDLR mutants were found to be according to ACMG Recommendations (2015). Results. aggregation-prone leading to ER stress as measured by Overall 33 genetic variants in 30 probands (45% of cases) spliced-XBP mRNA levels. However, there was no differ- were ascribed to III-V classes of pathogenicity: 12 variants ences betweenLDLR wild type andmutants with regard to were classiﬁedas likely pathogenic/pathogenic, and 21-as their aggregation status or ER stress. Treatment with inhi- variants of unknown signiﬁcance. Efﬁciency of DNA bitors of autophagy seemed to stabilize the degradation of diagnostic was 22.4% in whole cohort but it varied sig- wild type receptors. In addition, p.C706F VLDLR mutant niﬁcantly depending on cardiac remodeling. The highest stabilized during early phase of both proteasomal and rate of V-IV class variants was found in “LVNC+cardiac autophagy inhibition. Cycloheximide chase analysis in hypertrophy” subgroup (53%). In subgroup “LVNC+car- SEL1L-KO cells revealed that the HRD1-SEL1L complex diac dilation” variants of V-IV class were detected in 14% could be involved in the clearance of ER-retained VLDLR of probands. We detected no mutations in isolated mutants. LVNC cases. Conclusions:ThedownstreamdegradationandERstress Conclusion: Phenotype-driven strategy might be useful induction behavior of ER-retained corresponding LDLR for decision-making in LVNC patients. Screening of 13 and VLDLR mutants are divergent suggesting different genes might be cost-effective in “LVNC+cardiac hyper- clearance mechanisms despite their structural similarities. trophy” subgroup. In patients with isolated LVNC/LVNC P. Kizhakkedath: None. A. John: None. L. Al-Gazali: and dilatation WES might be preferred. This work was None. B.R. Ali: None. supported by RSF grant № 16-15-10421 M. Polyak: None. A.A. Bukaeva: None. A.G. Shestak: P05.42B None. O.V. Blagova: None. L.B. Mitrofanova: None. E. Phenotype-driven strategy of DNA diagnostics in A. Mershina: None. Y.V. Frolova: None. S.L. Dze- patients with LVNC and different types of myocardium meshkevich: None. E.V. Zaklyazminskaya: None. remodelingAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1323 P05.43C Andršová: None. A. Floriánová: None. P. Vít: None. R. Molecular analysis conﬁrmed common ancestor of 10 Navrátil: None. CzechfamilieswithlongQTsyndromecarryingC926T- KCNQ1 variant P05.44D Novel LOX mutations in ﬁve probands with thoracic I. Synková1,2, I. Valášková1,2, R. Gaillyová1,2, aortic/arterial aneurysm and dissection with variable T. Novotný3,2, M. Bébarová4, I. Andršová3,2, connective tissue ﬁndings A. Floriánová3, P. Vít5,2, R. Navrátil6 M. Perik1, I. Van Gucht1, A. Krebsova2, B. Diness3, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, R. Zhurayev4, D. Adlam5, M. Kempers6, I. Luyckx7, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk N. Peeters1, L. Van Laer1, A. Verstraeten1, B. Loeys1,6 University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Internal MedicineandCardiology,UniversityHospital,Brno,Czech 1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Republic, 4Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, HealthSciences,UniversityofAntwerp,AntwerpUniversity MasarykUniversity,Brno,CzechRepublic,5Departmentof Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Cardiology, Pediatrics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, IKEM, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Clinical 6Repromeda, Biology Park, Brno, Czech Republic Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Department of Clinical Pathology, Lviv Introduction: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a hereditary National Medical University after Danylo Halytsky, Lviv, arrhythmic syndrome characterized by abnormal prolonga- Ukraine, 5Acute and interventional Cardiology, University tion of QT interval, increased risk of ventricular arrhyth- of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 6Department of mias, and sudden death. It is the most often diagnosed Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, hereditaryarrhythmicdisorderwithprevalence1:2000.The Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Center of Medical Genetics, KCNQ1geneisoneofthe3majorgenes(KCNQ1,KCNH2 Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of and SCN5A) which account for 75 % of the genetically Antwerp, Anwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium identiﬁed LQTS cases. The same KCNQ1 mutation c.926C>T (p.T309I) was identiﬁed in 10 putatively Loss-of-function variants in LOX, encoding lysyl oxidase, unrelated families. werereportedtocausefamilialthoracicaorticaneurysmand Materials and Methods: 11 highly polymorphic short dissection (TAAD). Using gene panel and exome sequen- tandem repeats (STR) markers were chosen for haplotype cing, we identiﬁed ﬁve additional probands carrying likely analysis in 10 families. Multiplex PCR and fragment ana- pathogenicLOXvariants,includingthreemissensevariants, lysis were performed to identify variant linked to the affecting highly conserved amino acids and absent from mutation across families. Single nucleotide polymorphism gnomAD. The two stopcodons, (c.(351delC)) and p. (SNP) analysis was performed with HumanKaryomap-12 (Gly149*), were identiﬁed in males with type A dissection DNA Analysis Kit (Illumina) in one member of each at19and51yearswithoutfamilyhistory.Theﬁrstproband family. 6219 SNPs on p arm of chromosome 11 were also suffered from splenic rupture, pneumothorax and analysed. varicose veins whereas the second presented with ﬂat feet Results:Thesamehaplotypewasidentiﬁedinthenearest and inguinal hernia surgery. A p.(Thr99Ala) missense regionofthemutationspotineveryfamilybySTRanalysis variant was found in a Marfan syndrome-like male with and then conﬁrmed by SNP analysis, which also identiﬁed TAA. The second missense variant, p.(Met298Arg), was possible crossing-overs. The maximum size of the area discoveredin46yearoldfemalepresentingwithleftcarotid shared by all families is 658407 bp and contains the whole and prior coronary artery dissection. Interestingly, the sequence of KCNQ1 gene. The maximum size of the area identicalLOXvariantpreviouslysegregatedinﬁveaffected shared by two families is 12633501 bp. members of a TAAD family. The woman presented skin Conclusion: Allelic frequencies of identiﬁed alleles in hyperelasticity with recurrent shoulder dislocations. Her STRmarkersincontrolpopulationsuggestthatthereisonly motherisknownwithberryaneurysm,butnotavailablefor onecommonancestorwithmutationc.926C>Tinthegroup genetic testing. The last missense variant, p.(Leu306Pro), of families investigated in this study. was found in a tall male with dilatation of the aorta sinus SupportedbygrantoftheMinistryofhealthoftheCzech and ascendens with elective surgery at age 15. Family Republic: NV16-30571A. history issigniﬁcant for aorticdissectionatpaternalside of I. Synková: None. I. Valášková: None. R. Gaillyová: the family. Segregation studies revealed the absence of p. None. T. Novotný: None. M. Bébarová: None. I. (Leu306Pro) in unaffected mother. The latter two missense variants are both located within the LOX catalytic domain.1324 Our data demonstrate that loss-of-function LOX variants anomaly with autosomal dominant inheritance and variable cause a wide spectrum of aortic and arterial aneurysmal penetrance. disease (including coronary artery dissection), combined NGS target resequencing represents a valuable tool in with connective tissue ﬁndings. cardiomyopathy genetic testing. M. Perik: None. I. Van Gucht: None. A. Krebsova: I. Loddo: None. F. Barbera: None. G. Di Gesaro: None. B. Diness: None. R. Zhurayev: None. D. Adlam: None. D. Bellavia: None. E. La Franca: None. G. None. M. Kempers: None. I. Luyckx: None. N. Peeters: Mamone: None. G. Gentile: None. F. Clemenza: None. None. L. Van Laer: None. A. Verstraeten: None. B. D. Di Carlo: None. Loeys: None. P05.47C P05.46B Genetic screening of cardiovascular genes in a heart Left ventricular non-compaction and Ebstein anomaly transplantation cohort inapatientwithavariantinthesarcomeregeneMYH7 E. Cuesta-Llavona1, J. Gómez1, B. Díaz-Molina1, I. Loddo, F. Barbera, G. Di Gesaro, D. Bellavia, E. La J.Lambert1,B.Alonso1,R. Lorca2,J.Reguero1,E.Coto1 Franca, G. Mamone, G. Gentile, F. Clemenza, D. Di Carlo 1HospitalUniversitarioCentraldeAsturias,Oviedo,Spain, 2Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, IRCCS Mediterranean Institute for Transplantation and Madrid, Spain Advanced Specialized Therapies (ISMETT), Palermo, Italy Heart failure is considered one of the main causes of death Introduction: Left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is in developed countries. Moreover, it is a disease that is a rare hereditary cardiomyopathy, resulting from abnormal inﬂuenced by multiple genetic risk factors and the only embryonic myocardial development. effective treatment when there are no medical or surgical ThemostprevalentCongenitalHeartDiseaseinLVNCis alternativeswouldbehearttransplant.Theaimofthisstudy Ebsteinanomaly(EA),characterizedbyapicaldisplacement istogeneticallycharacterizedpatientswhoseundergoheart and partial fusion of the septal and posterior leaﬂet of the transplantation.Wesequenced65transplantedpatientsfora tricuspid valve with the ventricular septum. comprehensive cardiovascular gene panel of 209 genes, MaterialsandMethods:Wepresentthecaseof46years using Ion semiconductor chips technology in a Ion old male affected by EA and LVNC. GeneStudio S5 Sequencer. We identiﬁed 29 patients with MR imaging shows an Ebstein anomaly, in which the rare variants (either not described or gnomAD frequency ≤ origin of the septal leaﬂet is displaced downward into the 0.0001). Twenty-two of them were single carriers (75.9%), right ventricle, dividing it into a proximal atrialized and six harbor two variants (20.6%), and in one case we distal ventricularized (true or functional ventricle) cham- identiﬁed three variants (3.5%). Regarding to its patho- bers.Thesefeatures,inadditiontoannulardilatation,result genicity, eight patients were carriers of at least a variant in valve regurgitation and right chambers dilatation. MR classiﬁedaspathogenicbyClinVardatabase,sixasvariants imaging shows the coexistence of left ventricle hyper- of unknown signiﬁcance, and the others have no classiﬁca- trabeculation with spongy appearance of the myocardium tion.Thereasonfortransplantationofthesecarrierswasdue consistent with left ventricular non-compaction. to ischemic heart disease in 48% of cases, 29% to dilated Genetic counselling was offered. He reported that his cardiomyopathy,4%valvular,4%hypertrophicand15%to nephewwasaffectedbyEAandshediedatthreemonthsof another type of heart disease. In conclusion, we have age.MolecularanalysisbyNGStargetpanelwasperformed identiﬁed a signiﬁcant percentage of new or rare genetic to our patient. variants in genes that would be associated with heart Results: We identiﬁed a heterozygous missense variant diseasesinahearttransplantedcohort.Therefore,detection (c.728G>A) p.Arg243His in MYH7 gene, classiﬁed as of these variants might be helpful to achieve an early pathogenic according to ACMG Guidelines. diagnosis of these diseases. Further co-segregation and Thisvariantwasoriginallyreportedinanindividualwith functional studies have to be performed in order to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, has subsequently been accomplish an accurate variant classiﬁcation. reported in multiple individuals with LVNC and in an E. Cuesta-Llavona: None. J. Gómez: None. B. Díaz- individual with isolated EA. Molina: None. J. Lambert: None. B. Alonso: None. R. Conclusions: The association between EA, LVNC and Lorca: None. J. Reguero: None. E. Coto: None. mutationsinMYH7,seemstorepresentasubtypeofEbsteinAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1325 P05.48D Biomédica en Red de enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Analysis of endothelin-1 (EDN-1) UTR regions Madrid, Spain, 6Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 7Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 8Centro de C.Solarat1,M.Lago-Docampo1,A.Baloira2,D.Valverde1 Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain, 9Centro de 1University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Servicio de Neumología, Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Pontevedra, Vigo, Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain, Madrid, Spain Spain, 10Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a disease characterized by an increase of secretion and deregulation Introduction:PulmonaryArterialHypertension(PAH)isa of Endothelin-1 (ET-1). This peptide is secreted by the rare and fatal disease consisting in the obliteration of the endothelium of blood vessels and promotes vasoconstric- pulmonary precapillary arteries, leading to right heart tion.WecarriedoutthecharacterizationoftheUTRregions failure and death. of endothelin-1gene (EDN-1), in order to determine Methods: We used targeted panel sequencing with a common variations that may modulate disease outcome. custom panel (HAP v1.2) including 21 genes in 318 PAH The analysis was carried out in 60 patients with different patientsfromtheSpanishregistry(REHAP).Afterdetecting classes of PAH, testing a fragment of 2 kb for both UTR several changes in ABCC8 we carried out a functional region. An in silico analysis was performed to evaluate analysis by minigene assay to evaluate possible splicing binding transcription factors. Luciferase assay was done to variants (8/10). Lastly, we used protein modeling by evaluateinvitrotheSNPinﬂuenceingeneexpression.Data homology (Phyre2) to evaluate the pathogenicity of the revealed the presence of a deletion in the promoter region changes at protein level assessing its stability with (rs397751713), while a transversion in the 3’ UTR region MODELLER. was found (rs2859338). The distribution of the genotype Results:Aftervalidation,weidentiﬁedtenvariantsinthe frequenciesinourPAHpatientswere:forrs397751713: A/ ABCC8 gene that had never been related to PAH: A:0.08;A/-:0.27;-/-:0.66;forrs2859338:A/A:0.15;A/G: c.298G>A:p.(Glu100Lys), c.2176G>A p.(Ala726Thr) and 0.60; G/G: 0.25. Variations are located in a KLF4 binding c.3238G>A:p.(Val1080Ile) were classiﬁed as neutral. sequence and a vitamin D receptor binding sequence c.2422C>A:p.(Gln808Lys) and c.3976G>A:p.(Glu1326- respectively. Both transcription factors are related to PAH Lys) were classiﬁed as likely pathogenic. c.1429G>A:p. development.Inconclusion,theseSNPsintheUTRregions (Val477Met), c.1643C>T:p.(Thr548Met), c.2694+1G>A, of EDN1 are related with gene expression levels, as we c.3288_3289del:p.(His1097ProfsTer16) and c.3394G>A:p. measuredhigherexpressionratesforpatientswithA/Aand (Asp1132Asn) were classiﬁed as pathogenic. Minigenes G/G genotype. Moreover, we hypothesized that this over- conﬁrmed the pathogenicity of c.3394G>A:p. expression is due to the inability of KLF4 and vitamin D (Asp1132Asn) inducing an exon skipping, and the correct receptor to attach the target sequence and to regulate the processing of c.298G>A:p.(Glu100Lys) and c.1643C>T:p. expressionofEDN1,asKLF4isprobetoavoidPAHwhen (Thr548Met). But they were inconclusive for 5 variants, present and vitamin D is an anti-hypertrophic factor. noneoftheencodedexonstranscribedcorrectlyeveninthe C. Solarat: None. M. Lago-Docampo: None. A. wild type. Protein modeling of the possible outcomes Baloira: None. D. Valverde: None. revealed that amino acid changes would not alter protein stability. The skipping of exons 20, 27 and 32 would yield P05.49A unstable proteins, while skipping of exon 22 would barely Rare ABCC8 variants identiﬁed in Spanish pulmonary affect stability. arterial hypertension patients Conclusions: We identiﬁed ten variants in ABCC8, conﬁrmed experimentally the pathogenicity of c.3394G>A: M. Lago Docampo1,2,3, J. Tenorio4,5, C. Pérez Olivares6, p.(Asp1132Asn) and bioinformatically c.3288_3289del:p. I. González Hernández7,8, P. Escribano Subías6,9, (His1097ProfsTer16). Protein stability analysis allowed us G.Pousada2,A.Baloira10,M.Arenas1,2,3,P.Lapunzina4,5, topredictthepossibleoutcomesoftheunconﬁrmedsplicing D. Valverde1,2,3 variants. M. Lago Docampo: None. J. Tenorio: None. C. Pérez 1University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2IIS Galicia Sur, Vigo, Olivares: None. I. González Hernández: None. P. Spain, 3Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas (CINBIO), Escribano Subías: None. G. Pousada: None. A. Baloira: Vigo, Spain, 4Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular None. M. Arenas: None. P. Lapunzina: None. D. (INGEMM), Madrid, Spain, 5Centro de Investigación Valverde: None.1326 P05.51C Conclusions: The functional characterization of variants Familial hypercholesterolemia: functional in PCSK9 has allowed us to classify the variants avoiding characterization of new variants in PCSK9 the“uncertainsigniﬁcance”variantsandthustoconﬁrmthe genetic diagnosis of hypercholesterolemia. The results S.Rodríguez-Nóvoa1,C.Rodríguez-Jiménez1,E.Sánchez- suggest that the variant c.1978G>A;p.(Asp660Asn) could Nieves1, A. Carazo-Álvarez1, F. Arrieta2, L. Reinares- explaintheraisedlevelofLDL-cinthepatientbeinganew García3, P. Martínez-Hernández4, R. Cañas5, J. Mostaza6 case of FH3 due to gain-of-function variant in PCSK9. S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None. C. Rodríguez-Jiménez: 1DepartmentofGeneticsofmetabolicsdiseases.Instituteof None. E. Sánchez-Nieves: None. A. Carazo-Álvarez: Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital None. F. Arrieta: None. L. Reinares-García: None. P. Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Martínez-Hernández: None. R. Cañas: None. J. IdiPAZ,Madrid,Spain;CentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédica Mostaza: None. en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERE, Madrid, Spain, 2DepartmentofEndocrinologyandNutrition.UnitHospital P05.52D Ramón y Cajal. Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Polygenicriskinformationforcoronaryarterydisease- Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria P5.ﬁ FinHealth (IRyCIS), E-28034. CIBER de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain, M. M. Marttila1, T. Paajanen1, H. Marjonen1, N. Kallio1, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Clínico San A. Haukkala2, H. Kääriäinen1, K. Kristiansson1, Carlos, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 4Department of M. Perola1,3 Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitario la Paz, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 5Department of Internal Medicine, 11 National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, Madrid, Spain, Finland, 22 Faculty of Social Sciences, University of 6Lipid and Vascular Unit, Hospital Carlos III, Madrid, Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 33 Research Program Spain, Madrid, Spain for Clinical and Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine,UniversityofHelsinki,Finland,Helsinki,Finland Introduction:Proproteinconvertasesubtilisin/kexintype9 (PCSK9) is a post-transcriptional regulator of the Low- Introduction: We have tested how polygenic risk scores density-lipoprotein receptor(LDLR). “Lost_of_function_- (PRS) for coronary artery disease (CAD), type 2 diabetes variants” at PCSK9 has been related with lower LDL- and venous thromboembolism affect the risk of disease cholesterol while the “gain_of_function_variants” result in within the following ten years in participants from a autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia-3 (FH3, population-based study FINRISK. We will also utilize OMIN#603776) whose prevalence is 0,1-2%(1,2). NMR metabolomic risk information in disease prevention. Materials and Methods: The DNA samples from Materials and Methods: Based on follow-up data from patientsclinicallyclassiﬁedashavingprobableordeﬁnitive national health care registries we modelled PRS in whole familial hypercholesterolemia(FH), were analysed by NGS genomegenotypedpopulationbasedFINRISKcohortswith using a customized panel of 198 genes. The new variants multiple registry follow-up for incident cases (N=21726) found in PCSK9 were generated into the expression vector using Cox regression models. We modelled the impact of PCSK9_NM_174936.3-Human-cDNA-GFPSpark®-tag by genetic and traditional risk factors on a risk of disease site directed mutagenesis. The constructs were transfected within the next 10 years. inHepG2cells.Wemeasurebothactivityandexpressionof Results: We compared the CAD classiﬁcation of Cox LDLR by ﬂow cytometry in order to determine the impact regressionmodelwithtraditionalriskfactorsandpolygenic of PCSK9 variants. additive model with 6,6M variants. From basic model risk Results: In silico study showed six variants in PCSK9: class 10-20% PRS reclassiﬁed 205 participants to highest c.289C>T;p.(Arg97Cys), c.1130C>G;p.(Thr377Ser), >20%riskclass.InFINRISKparticipantsriskforCADwas c.1495C>T;p.(Arg499Cys), c.1633A>G;p.(Ser545Gly), higher for men and smoking adds to risk of disease in all c.1978G>A;p.(Asp660Asn), c.1987A>G;p.(Thr663Ala) PRS classes. Risk for disease increases with BMI being with potential effect in PCSK9. The variant c.1978G>A;p. highest in BMI class 30-35. (Asp660Asn) had a 15% decreased level of internalization Conclusions: The validation showed that adding PRS to of LDL and 20% decreased level of LDLR expression the traditional risk factors signiﬁcantly changed the risk regardingWT-PCSK9.Therestofvariantshadthesameor enabling reclassiﬁcation of as many as 17% of the partici- incremented level ofLDL internalization and expression of pants. PRS and metabolic risk information are returned to LDLR regarding WT-PCSK9. volunteering participants through an internet portal.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1327 Changes in life style are followed up using questionnaires digenic inheritance or genetic synergism, associated with through the portal and the morbidity will be collected changes in RYR2 and KCNH2, has been postulated. through health registers. P5 study is a pilot for P6 which Conclusions: PVT-related channelopathies remain a will recruit 200 000 participants and study 10-20 diseases. diagnosticandtherapeuticchallenge.Phenotypicexpression M.M. Marttila: None. T. Paajanen: None. H. Marjo- and/or variable penetration observed in the disease may nen: None. N. Kallio: None. A. Haukkala: None. H. result from the conﬂuence of defects in different genes Kääriäinen:None.K.Kristiansson:E.OwnershipInterest encoding or modulating ion channels’ function. NGS (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); technology provides foundation to better understanding of Signiﬁcant; Negen oy. M. Perola: None. the genetic proﬁle, phenotype-genotype correlations and etiopathological mechanisms of PVT. Improved detection P05.53A of risk factors will inﬂuence genetic counseling and ther- Aheterogeneous molecularbackground of polymorphic apeutic decision-making, preventing severe consequences, ventricular tachycardia in pediatric patients with like sudden cardiac death. channelopathy and normal heart Partially supported: CMHI-M31/18. M. Pelc: None. P. Kowalski: None. A. Madej-Pilarc- M. Pelc1, P. Kowalski1, A. Madej-Pilarczyk1, zyk: None. D. Jurkiewicz: None. J. Kosińska: None. M. D. Jurkiewicz1, J. Kosińska2, M. Rydzanicz2, Rydzanicz:None.M.Posadowska:None.K.Pręgowska: M. Posadowska3, K. Pręgowska3, P. Stawiński2,4, None. P. Stawiński: None. M. Brzezińska: None. E. M. Brzezińska3, E. Ciara1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, Ciara: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. P. P. Halat-Wolska1, D. Siestrzykowska1, R. Płoski2, Halat-Wolska: None. D. Siestrzykowska: None. R. K. Chrzanowska1, K. Bieganowska3 Płoski: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. K. Bieganowska: None. 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,TheChildren’sMemorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Medical P05.54B Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, RNF213 is a causative gene for pulmonary arterial 3Department of Cardiology, The Children’s Memorial hypertension and is associated with poor clinical HealthInstitute,Warsaw,Poland,4DepartmentofGenetics, outcomes InstituteofPhysiologyandPathologyofHearing,Warsaw, Poland H. Suzuki1, M. Kataoka1, T. Hiraide1, M. Yamada1, T. Uehara1, T. Takenouchi1, N. Hirose1, S. Gamou2, Introduction: Polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (PVT) K. Fukuda1, K. Kosaki1 isalife-threateningarrhythmiaconcomitantwiththegenetic disorders related to myocyte transmembrane ion channel 1KeioUniversity,Tokyo,Japan,2KyorinUniversity,Tokyo, dysfunction called “channelopathies”. They comprise long Japan and short QT syndromes (LQTS/SQTS), Brugada syn- drome, and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular Introduction: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is tachycardia (CPVT). Although nearly 30 genes have been characterizedbyastronggeneticcomponent.About30%of associated with arrhythmogenic channelopathies so far, the patients with idiopathic/heritable PAH have variants in mutation detection rate in syndromes other than LQTS is BMPR2.Thecausativegenes, ifany,intheremaining70% relatively low (~15-65%), therefore their molecular proﬁle of patients have yet to be clariﬁed. Since we reported 2 remains largely unknown. unrelated patients with homozygosity for RNF213 p. Patients and Results: A 62-gene panel comprising Arg4810Lys who had Moyamoya disease and severe knownandcandidategeneswasusedforNGSscreeningof pulmonary hypertension in 2016, we suspected RNF213 12 patients with PVT-associated channelopathy. In 8 would be causative gene for PAH. patients we identiﬁed 4 known and 6 novel, likely patho- Method: We performed whole-exome sequencing for 76 genic variants in KCNH2, RYR2 and SCN5A. Additionally, patients (19 males, 57 females) with idiopathic PAH who rare variants of unknown signiﬁcance in AKAP9, KCNA5, hadbeennegativefor BMPR2 andother knownpathogenic KCNH2, KCNT1, MYH6, SCNN1A, TRDN, TTN were gene mutations. found in 6 cases. Interestingly, in one CPVT patient two Result: We identiﬁed RNF213 p.Arg4810Lys in a het- novel RYR2 variants inherited from healthy parents co- erozygous state in 7 (9.2%) of the 76 PAH patients. Since occured, suggesting recessive pattern ofinheritance.In two the minor allele frequency for the p.Arg4810Lys is 0.77% otherpatientsdiagnosedwithPVTandLQTSpossibilityof in the normal Japanese population, individuals who are heterozygousforthep.Arg4810Lysmightbepredisposedto1328 PAH. From a therapeutic standpoint, patients with the congenital heart disease (CHD). In CTD, we have found RNF213 p.Arg4810Lys were low responders to PAH- one pathogenic mutation and four VUS and, and for CHD speciﬁc vasodilators. The event-free rate of death or lung two pathogenic variants and 6 VUS. In addition, in a small transplantation was signiﬁcantly poorer in RNF213 p. proportion of patients (0,93%) digenic mode of inheritance Arg4810Lys variant carriers than in BMPR2 variants car- was detected. riers (5-year event-free rate since the introduction of pros- Conclusions: These results highlight the importance of taglandin I2 infusion, 0% vs. 93%, P<0.001). thegeneticscreeningofPAHandallowtodetectvariantsin Conclusion: We demonstrated that nearly 10% of PAH-associated forms not described previously. Molecular patients with PAH were heterozygous for the RNF213 p. conﬁrmationoftheclinicalsuspiciousismandatoryincases Arg4810Lys. Documentation of an RNF213 p.Arg4810Lys with clinical overlapping and to perform a properly man- might provide clinically relevant information when select- agement and follow up of the patients. Grants FIS-PI15/ ing pharmacologic interventions. 02012 Actelion unrestricted grant FCHP-grant Grant references: This work was supported by J.A. Tenorio: Other; Signiﬁcant; Actelion. P. Arias: KAKENHI from the MEXT, a grant from the Medical None.I. Hernández:None.N. Ochoa: None. E. Granda: DepartmentCollaborativeProjectofKyorinUniversity,and None. P. Navas: None. G. Gómez-Acebo: None. N. Gal- a grant from AMED (17kk0205002h0002) in Japan. lego: None. P. Lapunzina: None. P. Escribano: C. Other H.Suzuki:None.M.Kataoka:None.T.Hiraide:None. Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or M. Yamada: None. T. Uehara: None. T. Takenouchi: other in-kind support); Signiﬁcant; Actelion. None. N. Hirose: None. S. Gamou: None. K. Fukuda: None. K. Kosaki: None. P05.57A A case report of recessive restrictive cardiomyopathy P05.55C caused by a novel mutation in cardiac troponin I Customized massive paralleled sequencing panel for (TNNI3) diagnosis of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension M. P. Pantou1, P. Gourzi1, A. Gkouziouta2, I. Armenis2, J. A. Tenorio1, P. Arias1, I. Hernández2, N. Ochoa3, C. Zygouri3, P. Constantoulakis3, S. Adamopoulos2, E. Granda1, P. Navas4, G. Gómez-Acebo1, N. Gallego1, D. Degiannis1 PAH Spanish consortium, P. Lapunzina1, P. Escribano3 1Molecular Immunopathology and Histocompatibility Unit, 1INGEMM, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Molecular Genetics Facility, Kallithea-Athens, Greece, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital 2HeartFailure,MCSandTransplantUnit,OnassisCardiac Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital Surgery Center, Kallithea-Athens, Greece, 3Department of Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain Molecular Genetics, BioAnalytica-Genotypes S.A., Athens, Greece Introduction: Diagnosis of Pulmonary Arterial Hyperten- sion (PAH) is challenging due to phenotypic overlapping Introduction: Restrictive cardiomyopathy is a rare cardiac and variable expressivity. Current classiﬁcation based on disease, for which several genes including TNNT2, MYPN, clinical features, does not reﬂect the underlying molecular FLNC and TNNI3 have been associated with its proﬁlingofthesegroups,andpatientsfromdifferentgroups familial form. canshareclinicalfeaturesthatcouldbeassociatedwiththeir Materials and Methods: The index case and her rela- response.Theadvanceinthemassiveparalleledsequencing tives underwent full cardiological assessment. Genetic technologies has allowed describing several new genes analysis of the index case was performed using Illumina's related to PAH, improving diagnosis ratio and a better Trusight Cardio sequencing panel and Sanger sequencing clinicalcharacterizationThus,ouraimedwastoaddressthe was used to screen members of the family for the presence molecular diagnosis of patients with any form PAH of the reported mutation. Material and Methods: 318 patients were included in Results: Here we describe a female proband with a the analysis. 21 gene NGS custom panel was designed the severely manifested restrictive phenotype leading to heart sequencing was performed with a MiSeq. Custom script transplantationattheageof41whowasfoundhomozygous was developed to annotate and ﬁlter the variants. forthenovelTNNI3mutation:NM_000363.4:c.586G>C,p. Results: Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants were (Asp196His). Her parents were third-degree cousins origi- found in 13% of the patients with a 14% of variants of nating from a small village and although they were found unknown signiﬁcance. Interesting, we have found variants heterozygous for the same variant they displayed no in patients with connective tissue disease (CTD) and symptoms of the disease. Her older sister who was alsoAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1329 found heterozygous was asymptomatic. Her twin sister and formation, and for each individual three iPSC clones were her brother who were homozygous for the same variant established. For differentiation to iPSC-CMs we followed displayed a restrictive and a hypertrophic phenotype, two published protocols and evaluated the cells using respectively. immunostaining and patch-clamp experiments. Conclusion: These observations point to a recessive Results: Optimization of the methods resulted in robust mode of inheritance reported for the ﬁrst time for this patient and control iPSC-CM models. The patient cells combination of gene/disease. displayedareducedsodiumcurrentcomparedtothecontrol M.P. Pantou: None. P. Gourzi: None. A. Gkouziouta: iPSC-CMs. None. I. Armenis: None. C. Zygouri: None. P. Con- Conclusion: We established iPSC-CM models for a stantoulakis: None. S. Adamopoulos: None. D. unique Belgian SCN5A founder mutation displaying Degiannis: None. remarkable variable expressivity. Further experiments including transcriptomics, whole-genome sequencing, P05.58B electrophysiological and functional investigations will The ﬁrst Belgian SCN5A founder mutation: enable us to identify genetic modiﬁers and unravel their establishment of an iPSC-cardiomyocyte model to mechanism of action. This will hopefully stimulate the identify genetic modiﬁers development of novel drugs for cardiac arrhythmias. M.Alaerts:None.A.Nijak:None.E.Simons:None.E. M. Alaerts1, A. Nijak1, E. Simons1, E. Sieliwonczyk1, Sieliwonczyk: None. D. Schepers: None. B. Vanden- D. Schepers1, B. Vandendriessche1, E. Van driessche: None. E. Van Craenenbroeck: None. J. Sae- Craenenbroeck2, J. Saenen2, A. Labro3, D. Snyders3, nen: None. A. Labro: None. D. Snyders: None. P. P. Ponsaerts4, B. Loeys1,5 Ponsaerts: None. B. Loeys: None. 1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and P05.59C Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp (Edegem), Belgium, Clinical and genetic data of 151 individuals from 58 2Department of Cardiology, Antwerp University Hospital, unrelated families with SMAD3 mutations Antwerp, Belgium, 3Laboratory for Molecular Biophysics, Physiology and Pharmacology, Department of Biomedical B. Chesneau1,2, T. Edouard2, Y. Dulac2, H. Colineau3,4, Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, N. Hanna5, N. Chassaing1, S. Julia1, G. Jondeau5, 4Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Vaccine and J. Albuisson6, P. Khau Van Kien7, J. Plaisancié1,2 Infectious Disease Institute, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Department of Human Genetics, 1Service de génétique médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU de Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 2Centre de Référence du Netherlands syndrome de Marfan etdes syndromes apparentés, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, Introduction: The SCN5A gene encodes the α-subunit of 3Department of Epidemiology, Health Economics and the voltage-gated cardiac sodium channel Na 1.5. Muta- Public Health, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, v tions are detected in 20% of the patients with Brugada France, 4LEASP UMR1027, INSERM, Université Toulouse syndrome (BrS), an inherited cardiac arrhythmia that III, Toulouse, France, 5Centre de référence pour le predisposes to sudden cardiac death (SCD). We have syndrome de Marfan et apparentés, Assistance Publique- identiﬁed a loss-of-function SCN5A founder mutation Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Bichat, Faculté Paris Diderot, (c.4813+3_4813+6dupGGGT) in 23 different Belgian LVTS INSERM U1148, Paris, France, Paris, France, families.Werecruited89mutationcarriersandtheirclinical 6Service de génétique médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU de spectrum ranges from completely asymptomatic to palpita- ToulouseAP-HP, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, tions, syncopes and SCD. This provides us with a unique DépartementdeGénétique,ServicedeMédecineVasculaire patient cohort to study modiﬁers that play a role in this et Centre de Référence des Maladies Vasculaires Rares, variable expressivity and we decided to create patient- Paris, France, 7Service de génétique médicale, Centre speciﬁc induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Nîmes, Nîmes, cardiomyocytes(CM) asa modelfor furtherinvestigations. France Materials and Methods: Dermal ﬁbroblasts from a skin biopsy of two patients with different phenotypic severity PathogenicvariantsinSMAD3aremainly responsiblefor a and two unrelated control individuals were reprogrammed thoracic aortic disease, characterized by aneurysms and using Sendai viral vectors. The resulting iPSCs were vali- dissections,whichhasamajorimpactintermsofmorbidity datedusingimmunostaining,RT-qPCRandembryoidbody and causing early mortality. These vascular damages are1330 associated with multisystemic signs including premature might also play an important role in cases of unexplained osteoarthritis. SMAD3 encodes one of the canonical TGF-β sudden cardiac death (SCD) in young subjects. pathway members whose defect is involved in connective Materials and Methods: We investigated the cohort of tissue disorders such as Loeys-Dietz syndrome and Czech cardiac arrest (CA) survivors/victims by performing represents a rare cause (2%) of familial thoracic aneurysms massively parallel sequencing using a custom-made panel and dissections. Clinical variability and incomplete pene- comprising 229 cardiac conditions-related genes (Nimble- trance are commonly associated with pathogenic SMAD3 Gen/Illumina). Detected variants were validated by Sanger variants. This prompted us to review all the individuals for sequencing, including their familial segregation and classi- which a SMAD3 mutation was identiﬁed in our Reference ﬁed according to ACMG. Centre and to compare these with published cases, to Results: We have identiﬁed variants in FLNC gene in 3 determine any genotype-phenotype correlation associated cases. In 2/3 cases the rare variant NM_001458.4 (FLNC): with mutations of this gene. Here, we report clinical and c.102G>A p.(Trp34*) was found in non-related Czech genetic data from 20 new cases from 8 families from our subjects (26 years old male CA victim and 16 years old Reference Centre.Afteracompletereviewoftheliterature, femaleCAsurvivor).NM_001458.4(FLNC):c.1732G>Tp. wecollectedatotalof49uniquevariantsofdifferentnature, (Gly578Cys) in CA victim, where this variant was coex- from 151 individuals of 58 unrelated families, including istent with probable causative variant in TTN gene. missense, truncating and splicing variants. This report Conclusion: Both, truncating and missense mutations in conﬁrms the absence of correlation between the mutation the FLNC gene might be associated with SCA and type and the phenotype severity and highlights the demonstrate the clinical utility of genetic testing in at-risk important inter and intra familial clinical variability and family members. The aim of our study is to increase the incomplete penetrance described with SMAD3 mutated usage of genetic analysis in post mortem investigations of patients. Thus, this report brings additional data for the SCD in the young cases in order to improve clinical man- absence of genotype-phenotype correlation of SMAD3 agement of relatives at risk in the Czech Republic. Sup- mutationsandtheneedtoexploreinmoredetailtheeffects ported by IP00064203/6003; LM2015091; CZ.02.1.01/0.0/ of potential modifying factors that could inﬂuence the 0.0/16_013 and AZV - NV18-02-00237. phenotype. P. Votýpka: None. P. Norambuena: None. M. Macek B. Chesneau: None. T. Edouard: None. Y. Dulac: Jr.: None. A. Krebsová: None. None. H. Colineau: None. N. Hanna: None. N. Chassa- ing: None. S. Julia: None. G. Jondeau: None. J. Albuis- P05.61A son:None.P.KhauVanKien:None.J.Plaisancié:None. Determination of disease-associated genes and gene-sets in Tetralogy of Fallot P05.60D Clinical utility of FLNC variants identiﬁed in 3 young R. Manshaei1, M. S. Reuter1,2, B. A. Mojarad3, sudden cardiac arrest victims/survivors for clinical G. Pellecchia2, M. Zarrei2, R. Chaturvedi1,4, management of their at-risk relatives A. S. Bassett5,6,7,8, R. Kim1,9,10, D. Merico2,11 P. Votýpka1, P. Norambuena1, M. Macek Jr.1, 1Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research, Cardiac Genome A. Krebsová2 Clinic, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2The Centre for Applied Genomics, The Hospital 1DepartmentofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,2ndFaculty for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Program in of Medicine, Charles University and Motol, Prague 5, Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Czech Republic, 2Department of Cardiology, Institute for Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Labatt Heart Centre, Clinical and Experimental Medicine (IKEM), Prague, Division of Cardiology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Czech Republic Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Clinical Genetics Research Program, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Introduction: Mutations in FLNC gene were initially Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Division of Cardiology, Toronto related to muscular dystrophy and myoﬁbrillar myopathy Congenital Cardiac Centre for Adults at the Peter Munk butmorerecently,variantsinFLNCwerereportedtocause Cardiac Centre, Department of Medicine, University familialcardiomyopathiesintheabsenceofskeletalmuscle Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada, 7The Dalglish defects. Truncating mutations in FLNC cause an over- Family 22q Clinic for Adults with 22q11.2 Deletion lapping phenotype of dilated cardiomyopathy or arrhyth- Syndrome,DepartmentofPsychiatry,andTorontoGeneral mogenic cardiomyopathy while missense mutations are Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, associated with familiar hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and ON, Canada, 8Department of Psychiatry, University ofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1331 Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9Division of Clinical and 1Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow, Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Toronto, ON, Canada, 10Fred A. Litwin Family Centre in Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, Genetic Medicine, University Health Network, Department 3Bashlyaeva Pediatric City Hospital, Moscow, Russia, of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Centre of Genetics and 11Deep Genomics Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada Reproductive Medicine “Genetico”, Moscow, Russian Federation Introduction:Genesandpathwaysareanalyzedforexcess of ultra-rare truncating and missense variants in Tetralogy Introduction:Idiopathicdilatedcardiomyopathy(DCM)is ofFallotusingabinomialtestcomparingobservedvariation hastheprevalenceof1:250,andatleastone-thirdofallthe rates to background de-novo mutation rates. This method casesareinherited.Accordingtovariousstudiesfocusedon doesn’t require matched controls. the adult patients, mutations in the TTN gene accounts 10- Materials and Methods: Since original background 30%ofDCMcases.ThemutationrateintheTTNgene,the mutation rates were estimated for de-novo variants, we characteristics of manifestations and their prognostic appliedascalingfactortoobtainnewprobabilitiesP'=k*P; signiﬁcance in childhood have not been studied. factor k was computed so that the number of predicted and Aim: To determine TTN mutation rate in children with observed ultra-rare variants match. We applied the same DCM and the relevance of including this gene in the DNA method pooling expected probabilities and observed var- diagnostic protocol for pediatric DCM. iants by pathway, to boost power. We addressed the pro- Materials and Methods: Complete clinical and instru- blemofgene-setcorrelationsbyusingagreedy-step-down- mental examination of 36 DCM aggregation approach; and computed a sampling-based patients was conducted in cardiology centres. Genetic FDR only for aggregated gene-sets. We tested gene-sets study had included sequencing based on the IonTorrent ™ derived from Gene Ontology and pathways, and MPO platform of the TTN isoform N2BA (25 isolated cases) and annotation of human orthologs in mouse. wholeexomesequencingtriosontheIlluminaplatform(11 Results: By applying this method to genes predicted family cases). haploinsufﬁcient, we found signiﬁcant genes: FLT4 (BH- Resultsanddiscussion:Thegroupincluded36probands FDR~0%), NOTCH1 (BH-FDR~0.5%), and etc. For Gene diagnosed with DCM before 18 years (average age: 6.5 Ontology and pathways, we found the VEGF and related years). The sex ratio (M:F) was 23: 8. The only likely pathways (FDR~0%, including FLT4,KDR, ⋯), Cardiac pathogenic truncating variant p.Arg33703*in the TTN gene Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Differentiation, and related was found in a 16-year-old male proband out of 36 (3%). pathways (FDR~0.08%, including NOTCH1 gene, ⋯). For Apparently, TTN-dependent forms of DCMs manifest later MPO terms, we found abnormal vitelline vascular remo- at a young or more mature age. deling and related pathways (FDR~0%, including FLT4, Conclusion: These results do not support the TTN gene KDR,FOXO1, ⋯), delayed heart looping and related as the ﬁrst line of DNA diagnostics for DCM in the pathways (FDR~0.05%, including NOTCH1 gene, ⋯). pediatric group. Further research is needed to compare the Conclusions: FLT4,KDR,FOXO1, and NOTCH1 genes representationofmutationsintheTTNgeneindifferentage were in line with manual gene curation ﬁndings. Also, groups of DCM patients. pathways results conﬁrm manual curation ﬁndings which This study was supported by grant of Russian Research support dysregulated VEGF signaling as a novel mechan- Foundation 16-15-10421 ism contributing to the pathogenesis of TOF. Funded by V. Mikhailov: None. E. Zaklyazminskaya: None. A. Ted-Rogers Centre for Heart Research, and CIHR (MOP- Bukaeva: None. N. Kotlukova: None. I. Povolotskaya: 89066). None. S. Dzemeshkevich: None. R. Manshaei: None. M.S. Reuter: None. B.A. Mojarad: None. G. Pellecchia: None. M. Zarrei: None. P05.63C R.Chaturvedi:None.A.S.Bassett:None.R.Kim:None. Large-scale genetic study provides new insights into D. Merico: None. genetics and etiology of varicose veins P05.62B A.S.Shadrina1,2,3,S.Z.Sharapov1,2,T.I.Shashkova1,4,5, Pediatric patients with DCM have lower than expected Y. A. Tsepilov1,2 mutation rate in the TTN gene 1Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian V. Mikhailov1, E. Zaklyazminskaya1,2, A. Bukaeva1, Federation, 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics, N. Kotlukova2,3, I. Povolotskaya4, S. Dzemeshkevich1 Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Chemical1332 Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Novosibirsk, Russian E.Sundberg1,B.Magnusson1,C.R.Ferreira2,C.Grant2, Federation, 4Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, J. Mitchell3, P. Harmatz4, N. O. Mungan5, F. D. Bulut5, Moscow,RussianFederation,5A.A.KharkevichInstitutefor C. Lampe6, N. Guelbert7, N. Arslan8, B. Makay8, Information Transmission Problems, Moscow, Russian R. D. Puri9, S. Bijarnia-Mahay9, L. Selim10, I. Gamal el Federation Din10,S.Kapoor11,M.DiRocco12,S.Ozen13,E.D.Batu13, G. Gokcay14, M. Torcoletti15, J. Karaﬁlidis16, A. Solyom17 Introduction: Varicose veins are a common pathology of lower extremities. Although heredity is a well-known risk 1Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, factor for varicose veins, genetic architecture of this 2Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC, condition is still poorly understood. United States, 3Montreal Children's Hospital, Montreal, Materials and Methods: This study is a genome-wide QC,Canada,4UCSFBenioffChildren'sHospital,Oakland, association study with deep in-silico functional follow-up CA, United States, 5Cukurova University Hospital, Adana, analysis.Summarystatisticsfor408,455European-ancestry Turkey, 6HSK Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden, Germany, individuals were provided by the Gene ATLAS and the 7Children's Hospital of Cordoba, Cordoba, Argentina, Neale Lab projects. 8Dokuz Eylul University Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, 9Sir Results: Seven loci associated with the risk of varicose GangaRamHospital,NewDelhi,India,10CairoUniversity veins were identiﬁed that explain 10% of the SNP-based Children's Hospital, Cairo, Egypt, 11Lok Nayak Hospital heritability. In six of them, we prioritized the most likely and Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India, causalgenesCASZ1,PIEZO1,PPP3R1,EBF1,STIM2,and 12Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 13Hacettepe HFE.Genesetenrichmentanalysisrevealedgenecategories University, Ankara,Turkey, 14Istanbul University, Istanbul, related to abnormal vasculogenesis. Summary data-based Turkey, 15University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 16Enzyvant, Mendelian Randomization analysis followed by the Het- Cambridge, MA, United States, 17Enzyvant, Basel, erogeneity in Dependent Instruments test showed pleio- Switzerland tropic effects on body mass-, fat-, blood- and blood pressure-related traits. Genetic correlation analysis con- Introduction: Farber disease is a rare lysosomal storage ﬁrmed known epidemiological associations between VVs disorder caused by mutations in both alleles of the ASAH1 and deep venous thrombosis, weight, rough labor, and gene.Theresultingdeﬁciencyofthelysosomalenzymeacid standing job, and found a genetic overlap with multiple ceramidase, and accumulation of the pro-inﬂammatory novel traits, including height, pain, educational attainment, sphingolipid ceramide, causes a broad spectrum of ﬂuidintelligence,walkingpace,smoking,andgonarthrosis. symptoms and disease severity which may delay diagnosis Mendelianrandomizationanalysisrevealedcausaleffectsof or lead to misdiagnosis. The ongoing study described here plasma levels of MICB and CD209 proteins and anthro- is the ﬁrst comprehensive, systematic clinical study of the pometric traits such as height, weight, waist and hip natural history of Farber disease. circumference. Methods:TheObservationalandCross-SectionalCohort Conclusions: Our results provide novel insight into the Study of the Natural History and Phenotypic Spectrum of genetic underpinnings of varicose veins and their etiology. Farber Disease (NCT03233841) is designed to collect ret- Prioritized genes and identiﬁed proteins can be good can- rospective and prospective data including demographics, didates for future functional studies. The study was sup- clinical presentation, phenotype, and diagnostic history of ported by the Russian Science Foundation [Project No 17- patients diagnosed with Farber disease who have or have 75-20223]. not undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplantation A.S. Shadrina: None. S.Z. Sharapov: None. T.I. (HSCT),alongwithspeciﬁcprospectiveclinicalevaluations Shashkova: None. Y.A. Tsepilov: None. in living patients. Results: From November 2017 to December 2018, 42 patients (25 living, 17 deceased) have been enrolled in the P06 study. The average age of the living patients is 9 years Metabolic and mitochondrial disorders (range 1 to 28 years). Average time from onset of ﬁrst symptoms to diagnosis is 2 years (range < 1 to 12 years). P06.03B Patient countries of birth include Afghanistan, Argentina, Farber disease (acid ceramidase deﬁciency): Canada, Egypt, Germany, India, Iraq, Italy, Mexico, Swe- demographic and diagnostic data from the ﬁrst-ever den, Syria, Turkey, and the USA. natural history study Conclusions: Patients representing the breadth of the phenotypic spectrum of Farber disease, from rapidly pro- gressive (severe), to slowly progressive (attenuated) haveAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1333 been enrolled from 15 centers (9 countries). Demographic P06.04C data and numbers of patients enrolled indicate that Farber Lysosomal storage, neurodegeneration, and albinism disease is likely not as rare as previously thought. due to effects of a de novo CLCN7 mutation on E. Sundberg: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, lysosomal acidiﬁcation collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. B. Magnus- E. Nicoli1, M. Weston2, M. Hackbarth1, A. Becerril2, son:B. Research Grant(principal investigator, collaborator A. Larson3, W. M. Zein4, P. R. Baker II3, J. D. Burke5, or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already H. Dorward5, M. Davids1, Y. Huang1, D. R. Adams1,6, received); Modest; Enzyvant. C.R. Ferreira: None. C. P. M. Zerfas7, D. Chen8, T. C. Markello1,6, C. Toro1,6, Grant: None. J. Mitchell: B. Research Grant (principal G. Elliott9, M. Vu10, U. Undiagnosed Disease Network11, investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants W. Zheng10, L. Garrett9, C. J. Tifft1,6, W. A. Gahl1,6,5, as well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. P. D. L. Day-Salvatore12, J. A. Mindell2, M. C. V. Harmatz: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, col- Malicdan1,6,5 laboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. N.O. Mungan: B. 1NationalHumanGenomeResearchInstitute,NIHandNIH Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Ofﬁce of consultant and pending grants as well as grants already the Director, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, received); Modest; Enzyvant. F.D. Bulut: None. C. 2Membrane Transport Biophysics Section, National Lampe: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, already received); Modest; Enzyvant. N. Guelbert: B. Section of Genetics, University of Colorado School of Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States, 4Ophthalmic consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye received);Modest;Enzyvant.N.Arslan:B.ResearchGrant Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Human (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and Biochemical Genetics Section, National Human Genome pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, Enzyvant. B. Makay: B. Research Grant (principal inves- 6Ofﬁce of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome tigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. R.D. 7Diagnostic and Research Services Branch, Ofﬁce of Puri: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- Research Services, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants 8Division of Hemapathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, already received); Modest; Enzyvant. S. Bijarnia-Mahay: United States, 9Embryonic Stem Cell and Transgenic None. L. Selim: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Mouse Core, National Human Genome Research Institute, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 10National Center for grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. I. Gamal el Translational Science, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, Din: None. S. Kapoor: B. Research Grant (principal 11NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 12Department of investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Saint Peter’s as well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. M. University Hospital,, New Brunswick, NJ, United States DiRocco: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants LysosomesrelyonthemaintenanceofanacidicluminalpH alreadyreceived);Modest;Enzyvant.S.Ozen:B.Research for optimal function. The active accumulation of protons is Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand driven primarily by V-ATPase, but luminal acidiﬁcation pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; also requires a neutralizing ion movement. Chloride has Enzyvant. E.D. Batu: None. G. Gokcay: B. Research been proposed to provide this counterion through the Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand transporter ClC-7, encoded by CLCN7. Individuals with pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; loss-of-functionCLCN7mutationsdeveloposteopetrosis;in Enzyvant. M. Torcoletti: B. Research Grant (principal contrast, here we describe two unrelated children with an investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants identical pathogenic de novo variant in CLCN7 without as well as grants already received); Modest; Enzyvant. J. osteopetrosis but instead showing a pleotropic syndrome, Karaﬁlidis:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; including cutaneous albinism, developmental delay, hepa- Enzyvant. A. Solyom: A. Employment (full or part-time); tosplenomegaly, lysosomal storage, cellular accumulation Signiﬁcant; Enzyvant. of large intracellular vacuoles, and no osteopetrosis. The mutation, c.2144A>G; p.Tyr715Cys, increases ClC-7-1334 mediated chloride ﬂux, decreases lysosomal pH and affected at prenatal testing; pregnancy was ended. Inter- increases the size and number of intracellular vacuoles in estingly, neuroimaging in the ﬁrst patient showed pro- thepatients’ﬁbroblasts,withasimilarphenotypicspectrum gressive cerebral atrophy but not the typical white matter in mice carrying an equivalent mutation. The cellular abnormalities seen in previously described complex II hyperacidity and cellular phenotype were rescued in vitro deﬁcient patients. This might point towards a distinct fea- by treatment with the alkalinizing agent, chloroquine, ture of complex II deﬁciency caused by SDHC disruption, emphasizing the role of ClC-7 in regulating lysosomal pH. compared to complex II deﬁciency caused by disruption of E. Nicoli: None. M. Weston: None. M. Hackbarth: the other SDH-genes and SDHAF1. None. A. Becerril: None. A. Larson: None. W.M. Zein: Conclusion:Herewereportfortheﬁrsttimetwocasesof None. P.R. Baker II: None. J.D. Burke: None. H. Dor- complex II deﬁciency caused by biallelic disruption of ward: None. M. Davids: None. Y. Huang: None. D.R. SDHC, emphasizing the importance of screening all SDH- Adams: None. P.M. Zerfas: None. D. Chen: None. T.C. genes in patients with (or suspected of) complex II Markello:None.C.Toro:None.G.Elliott:None.M.Vu: deﬁciency. None. U. Undiagnosed Disease Network: None. W. S.I.M. Alsters: None. S.N. van der Crabben: None. Q. Zheng: None. L. Garrett: None. C.J. Tifft: None. W.A. Waisﬁsz: None. L.P. van der Heuvel: None. R.J. Gahl: None. D.L. Day-Salvatore: None. J.A. Mindell: Rodenburg: None. M.S. van der Knaap: None. None. M.C.V. Malicdan: None. P06.07B P06.06A Screening & Diagnosis of Congenital Metabolic Biallelic disruption of SDHC leads to a novel Disorders using Mass Spectrometry in India: 15 Years’ presentation of mitochondrial complex II deﬁciency Experience with Issues & Challenges S. I. M. Alsters1, S. N. van der Crabben1, Q. Waisﬁsz1, U. P. Dave L. P. van der Heuvel2, R. J. Rodenburg2, M. S. van der Knaap3 MILS International India & Haffkine Institute, Mumbai, India 1Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Introduction: Most congenital metabolic disorders cause 2Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders (NCMD) at severe pathological sequel, such as mental retardation, the Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Medical sudden infantile death or other irreversible mental/motor Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Amsterdam UMC, Vrije disabilities. The dilemma for a clinician is overlapping Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Child Neurology, symptoms in majority of amino, organic & fatty acid Amsterdam, Netherlands disorders like failure to thrive, seizures, vomiting, poor feeding, metabolic acidosis, lethargy, and developmental Introduction: Succinate dehydrogenase complex (i.e. delay. Hence, a need of metabolic test to cover a large complex II) deﬁciency is a rare mitochondrial disorder. So spectrum of disorders in one test. far, in three out of the four nuclear encoded proteins MaterialsandMethods:Theurinarymetabolicproﬁling composing succinate dehydrogenase (SDHA, SDHB, and to cover more than 140 metabolic abnormalities was SDHD),andinoneofitsassemblyfactorgenes(SDHAF1), developed for screening the 5880 patients. The conﬁrmed biallelic disruption has been shown to cause complex II diagnosis was by gas chromatography /mass-spectrometry deﬁciency with a leukoencephalopathy as central clinical or mutational analysis. presentation.ForthefourthSDH-genecomposingsuccinate Results: The 48 % (2856 of 5880 cases) were diagnosed dehydrogenase, SDHC, biallelic disruption has not been to have metabolic abnormality. Amino and organic acido- reported, as of yet. pathiesaccountedhighestasamajorcauseofmortalityand Methods and Results: Here we describe the clinical and morbidity. Overall, low birth weight (34%), convulsions molecular analysis of two siblings with biochemically (33%), premature birth (27%), acidosis, refusal to feed conﬁrmed complex II deﬁciency, caused by compound (13%) and respiratory distress (13%) were recorded, with heterozygous variants in SDHC (c.31C>T; p.(Arg11Cys) consanguinity, history of mental retardation and death of andc.202T>C;p.(Ser68Pro)).Segregationanalysissupports earliersibsasotherhigh-riskgeneticfactors.Thishigh-risk the recessive pattern of inheritance: in none of four healthy screeningindicatedthatwhichmetabolicdisordersaremore siblingstestedbothvariantswerepresent.Onepatienthada frequent in Indian population and a need of strategic plan- severeneurologicalhandicapanddiedofrespiratoryfailure ning for newborn screening at affordable cost. at the age of 11 years. The other sibling was found to beAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1335 Conclusions: The method used for diagnosis covered a P06.09D largespectrumofmetabolicdisordersinashortesttimewith D-Bifunctional protein deﬁciency - diagnosis by whole cost-effective approach & was found signiﬁcant in a exome sequencing and ﬁbroblast analysis despite resource constraint Indian scenario. Our experience & data normal plasma biochemistry will be demonstrated emphasizing genetic counselling & prenatalmutationaldiagnosisinfewillustrativecasesalong M. McClatchey1, M. D'Alessandro2, A. Ross1, withissues&challengeswhileimplementationofthestudy. S. Ferdinandusse3, DDD Study, J. C. S. Dean1 U.P. Dave: None. 1North of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Aberdeen, P06.08C United Kingdom, 2Unviersity of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, cDNA structure analysis revealed a novel CTNS United Kingdom, 3Laboratory of Genetic Metabolic mutation Diseases, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, United Kingdom V. Serzhanova1, A. Filatova1, S. Papizh2, M. Skoblov1,3 D-Bifunctional protein (DBP) deﬁciency is an autosomal 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian recessive disorder of peroxisomal fatty-acid beta-oxidation, Federation, 2Research Institute of Pediatrics and Pediatric caused by mutations in the HSD17B4 gene. It is Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3School of characterisedbyearly-onsetneurologicalsymptomsinclud- Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal University, Vladivostok, ing hypotonia and seizures, developmental delay and Russian Federation eventual neuroregression. Survival beyond 36 months is rare.Diagnosisreliesonthedetectionofaccumulatedlevels Introduction: Cystinosin, encoded by the CTNS gene, is a of VLCFAs in plasma but occasional patients have carrier protein responsible for the export of cystine out of undetectable or near normal plasma levels, sometimes the lysosome. Its deﬁciency leads to cystinosis, an associated with longer survival. autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder. Here, we We report a 9 year old male patient born to non- report a patient with Infantile Nephropathic type of consanguineousnorthernEuropeanparents,presentingwith cystinosis (INC). neonatal seizures and global developmental delay from Materials and Methods: Total RNAs from peripheral early infancy. Developmental progress was made until blood mononuclear cells of participants and primary ﬁbro- around 4 years, after which steady neuro-regression was blasts were extracted by the standard Trizol-based method. seen. Metabolic testing of urine and plasma, including The cDNA structure analysis was performed by electro- VLCFAs, demonstrated normal ﬁndings on multiple phoresis (EP) following Reverse Transcription PCR (RT- occasions. PCR) and Sanger sequencing. Trio based whole exome sequencing undertaken through Results:The cDNA structure analysis of all exons ofthe the DDD study identiﬁed compound heterozyosity for a CTNS revealed homozygous loss of 4th and 5th exons. On missense and a frameshift variant in HSD17B4, consistent theDNAlevelweconﬁrmed9kbdeletion,spanningregion with DBP-deﬁciency. The diagnosis was conﬁrmed by from 3rd to 5th introns. In order to identify the inheritance enzyme analysis in cultured skin ﬁbroblasts which showed pattern we analyzed the pro-band's mother's CTNS gene reduced DBP activity (mildly reduced hydratase activity; both on the cDNA and the DNA levels. Mother was found undetectable dehydrogenase activity) despite a persistent to be heterozygous for the same mutation. normal VLCFA proﬁle, consistent with type III DBP Conclusions:ForINCdiagnosticsweshowedadvantages deﬁciency. of cDNA sequencing versus DNA sequencing. First of all, ThiscasehighlightstheunreliabilityofplasmaVLCFAin in case of some genes, such as CTNS, it is cheaper to thediagnosisofDBP-deﬁciency,particularlywhenresidual sequence cDNA fragments rather than all exons separately. enzymaticactivitymaybepresent.Triobasedwholeexome We ampliﬁed CTNS cDNA, consisting of 12 exons,as sequencing is an alternative, with conﬁrmation by analysis 3 separate fragments. Secondly, long enough deletions or of enzyme activity in cultured ﬁbroblasts. insertions could be detected by electrophoresis with fol- M. McClatchey: None. M. D'Alessandro: None. A. lowing conﬁrmationbyDNA sequencing.Weestimatethis Ross:None.S.Ferdinandusse:None.J.C.S.Dean:None. novel deletion to be classiﬁed as pathogenic according to ACMG criteria because it leads to a truncated CTNS P06.10A protein. A case of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deﬁciency V. Serzhanova: None. A. Filatova: None. S. Papizh: and homozygous mutation DPYD:c.1905+1G>A in None. M. Skoblov: None. Bulgarian patient with severe autistic disorder1336 M. B. Ivanova1,2, V. Jordanova1, T. Todorov3, P06.11B A. Todorova3,4, D. Dimitrov1, I. Dimova5, A. Savov1 Electronic nose for diagnosis of metabolic diseases via breath samples 1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology „Maichin dom“, Medical M. Shinawi1, S. Q. Shen1, R. Jeries2, M. Malik1, L. Bai1, University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Faculty of Chemistry and A.Osula1,R.Wu1,B.Tomic1,E.Toolan1,D.K.Grange1, Pharmacy, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Soﬁa H. Haick2 University "St. Kl. Ohridski", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 1Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, 4Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, MO, United States, 2Technion−Israel Institute of Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 5Department of Technology, Haifa, Israel Medicalgenetics,MedicalUniversitySoﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria Inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are individually rare Background: Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) but often devastating illnesses characterized by the toxic deﬁciency is an autosomal recessive disorder of the accumulation of metabolites. Early diagnosis, frequent pyrimidine metabolism characterised by thymine-uraciluria monitoring, and dietary intervention starting in early with variable expressivity and different phenotypes. It infancy substantially decrease morbidity and mortality. variesfromasymptomatictosevereneurologicalmanifesta- However,currentdiagnosisandmonitoringmethodsrelyon tions and an increased risk of toxicity from 5-ﬂuorouracil repeated blood draws and costly laboratory tests with treatment. prolongedturnaroundtimes.Thus,anon-invasive,efﬁcient, Materials and Methods: A child with severe autistic and rapid approach is needed. Here, we present a novel behavior, intellectual disability (no speech at 6 years old) approach for monitoring patients with IEMs based on and family history - aunt with mental retardation, was analysis of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in breath referred for genetic counseling. Metabolic screening was samples using a nanomaterial-based sensor array, the performed in urine sample by dipstick - glucose, ketone, electronicnose(eNose).Exhaledbreathwascollectedfrom pH, and reducing sugars, followed by LC-MS/MS blood 31patientswithIEMsand34healthycontrolsandanalyzed aminoacids and acylcarnitines and GC/MS urine organic using both eNose and gas chromatography mass spectro- acids analysis. Mutations in DPYD gene are reported in metry (GC-MS). IEM patients comprised 21 patients with DPD deﬁciency patients. The gene was investigated by phenylketonuria (PKU), three patients with ornithine direct Sanger sequencing in proband and his parents. transcarboxylase deﬁciency, and 7 patients with various Results: Elevated levels of thymine and uracil were other IEMs. Machine learning-based pattern recognition detectedbyGC/MSurinetestwhichwassuggestiveofDPD algorithms were used to identify breath proﬁles that deﬁciency. Molecular analysis of DPYD gene showed a distinguished IEM patients from healthy controls with homozygous splice-site mutation c.1905+1G>A in the 78% accuracy, 80-87% sensitivity, and 71-77% speciﬁcity. proband, inherited from heterozygous parents. Subse- When restricting the analysis to patients with PKU, these quently, prenatal testing in the family was performed. The patients could be distinguished from healthy controls with fetus was healthy non-carrier. 78% accuracy, 80% sensitivity, and 76% speciﬁcity. GC- Conclusion: Here we report the ﬁrst Bulgarian patient MSshowedthat dodecane,5-butylnonane,andapropanoic withsevereautisticdisordercausedbyDPDdeﬁciencyand acid-derived compound were signiﬁcantly elevated in subsequentprenataldiagnosticsperformedinthefamily.As breath samples from PKU patients. Each of these patients with this deﬁciency could be easily detected by compounds reliably discriminated PKU patients from determinationofthethymine-uraciluria,screeningforthese controls (c-statistic = 0.786-0.815). Together, these results defects are indicative for all patients with any autistic suggest that breath analysis could become a viable non- behavior and intellectual disability. It also could be useful invasive clinical monitoring and screening tool for IEMs for those patients who are going to be treated with 5- and other disorders that affect pediatric populations. ﬂuorouracil to prevent lethal toxicities and personalise M. Shinawi: None. S.Q. Shen: None. R. Jeries: None. treatments. M. Malik: None. L. Bai: None. A. Osula: None. R. Wu: M.B. Ivanova: None. V. Jordanova: None. T. None. B. Tomic: None. E. Toolan: None. D.K. Grange: Todorov:None. A.Todorova: None.D.Dimitrov: None. None. H. Haick: None. I. Dimova: None. A. Savov: None. P06.13D Measurement of myocardial native T1 value in Fabry patients with treatmentAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1337 O. MIGITA1, K. Kida2, A. Kotoku3, H. Yamamoto1 FLPbasedongeneticbackground.Themostcommonform is FPL type 2 (Dunnigan disease) caused by mutation in 1Department of Pediatrics, St. Marianna University School LMNA gene. Typical clinical features of patients with FLP of Medicine, Miyamae, Kawasaki, Japan, 2Department of are excessive subcutaneous fat accumulation in the neck Pharmacology, St. Marianna University School of andface,reducedsubcutaneousfatinthearmsandlegsand Medicine, Miyamae, Kawasaki, Japan, 3Department of muscular appearance due to muscular hypertrophy. The Radiology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, extentofadiposetissuelossusuallydeterminestheseverity Miyamae, Kawasaki, Japan of the associated metabolic complications such as hyper- glycemia, hyperinsulinemia, insulin-resistant diabetes mel- Fabrydiseaseisknownasmostprevalentlysosomalstorage litus, increased serum triglicerydes, hepatic steatosis, disease, and caused by mutations in the GLA gene. pancreatitis, high blood pressure, and premature athero- Complete or partial defected enzyme activity leads to the sclerosis with an increased risk of coronary heart disease. accumulation of enzyme substrate, sphingolipids in cells MaterialsandMethods:Among64patientstestedusing and multiple organ failure. Several reports have been custom NGS panel due to familiar dyslipidemia, 9 showed published that native T1 value from magnetic resonance lipodystrophic features. Similarity of the phenotypic traits imagingmethodsmayreﬂectsthestorageoforgans.Several and characteristic signiﬁcant hypertriglyceridemia sug- reports also mentioned that native T1 value reduction was gested the diagnosis of FPL type 2. observed in patients with Fabry disease which prior of Results: The study revealed the presence of R482Q cardial structural or functional changes. alteration in LMNA gene in 4 subjects in two families and ECG, echocardiographic and MRI, including calculation R148K in PPARG gene in two subjects in one family. of native T1 value assessment, were performed with two Conclusions: Recognition of FPL type 2 and type 3 patients with Fabry disease prior to enzyme replacement conﬁrm the molecular heterogeneity of familial partial treatment. In those patients LVH was absent, but native T1 lipodystrophy. Identiﬁcation of patients with FPL is chal- valueshowedlowervaluethanmeansvalueinothers.After lenging due to variable and often mild phenotype. Severe startingERTtreatment,nochangesincardiacfunctionwere hypertriglyceridemia was consistent and easy to identify observed. But native T1 values were slightly normalized in feature. Thus we recommend all patient with markedly after 6-12 month ERT treatment. elevated TG to undergo molecular testing for FPL, pre- The native T1 value is one of the candidate quantitative ferably with targeted NGS. Financing: Statutory Research assessment for myocardial storage for lysosomal diseases. No.2016/X/9-SZB, PMM Hospital Research Institute Our results show that it may detect early cardiac involve- L. Rutkowska: None. I. Pinkier: None. K. Salacinska: ment and efﬁcacy the treatment of Fabry disease. The None. D. Salachna: None. L. Jakubowski: None. A. reports which mentioned about T1 values in Fabry patients Gach: None. have been limited. Therefore, it is still unclear whether the native T1 value represents myocardial accumurations of P06.15B substrate in Fabry patients. Further results needed to L-Ferritin: one gene, ﬁve diseases; from hereditary translatethese ﬁnding,butnativeT1valuewouldbeuseful hyperferritinemia to hypoferritinemia - Report of new for clinical evaluation of lysosomal diseases. cases O.Migita: None.K. Kida: None.A.Kotoku: None.H. Yamamoto: None. B. Cadenas1,2,3, J. Fita-Torró4, M. Bermúdez-Cortés5, I. Hernandez-Rodriguez6, J. Fuster5, M. Llinares5, P06.14A A. Galera5, J. Romero7, S. Pérez-Montero4, Molecularheterogeneityinpatientswithfamilialpartial C. Tornador1,4, M. Sanchez4,8,9 lipodystrophy 1Whole Genix SL., Barcelona, Spain, 2Josep Carreras L. Rutkowska, I. Pinkier, K. Salacinska, D. Salachna, Leukemia Research Institute (IJC), Badalona, Spain, L. Jakubowski, A. Gach 3Universitat de Vic-Universitat Central de Catalunya, Vic, Spain, 4BloodGenetics SL, Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain, Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital Research Institute, 5Clinic University Hospital Virgen de laArrixaca,Instituto Lodz, Poland Murciano de Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB), Murcia, Spain, 6University Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol Introduction:Familialpartiallipodystrophy(FPL)isarare (HGTiP), Institut Català d’Oncologia (ICO), Badalona, AD transmitted disorder characterized by abnormal dis- Spain, 7University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, United tribution of adipose tissue. There are six different types of States, 8Program of Predictive and Personalised Medicine1338 ofCancer (PMPPC),Institutd’InvestigacióGermansTrias 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical iPujol(IGTP),Badalona,Spain,9UniversitatInternacional Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Division of de Catalunya (UIC), Barcelona, Spain Pediatric Nutrition and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Introduction: Ferritin is a multimeric protein composed of Istanbul, Turkey light (L-ferritin) and heavy (H-ferritin) subunits that binds and stores iron inside the cell. A variety of mutations have Introduction: Classical galactosemia is a disorder of beenreportedintheL-ferritinsubunitgene(FTLgene)that pathogenic GALT variants leading to galactose-1-phos- cause the following ﬁve diseases: (1) hereditary hyperferri- phate-uridyl-transferase deﬁciency. Majority of the patho- tinemiawithcataractsyndrome(HHCS),(2)neuroferritino- genic variants are small sequence alterations, nevertheless pathy, a subtype of neurodegeneration with brain iron grossalterationshavealsobeenreported(1%).Weaimedto accumulation (NBIA), (3) benign hyperferritinemia, (4) L- investigate the frequency and distribution of GALT muta- ferritindeﬁciencywithautosomaldominantinheritance,and tions in Turkish galactosemia patients with genotype- (5) L-ferritin deﬁciency with autosomal recessive inheri- phenotype correlation. tance. Defects in the FTL gene lead to abnormally high Material and Methods: Clinically and biochemically levels of serum ferritin (hyperferritinemia) in HHCS and diagnosed 91 patients with galactosemia were included in benign hyperferritinemia, while low levels (hypoferritine- this study. Algorithmic genetic testing strategy for GALT mia) are present in neuroferritinopathy and in autosomal was performed initially with Sanger sequencing (n=91) dominant and recessive L-ferritin deﬁciency. followed by MLPA (n=19), only for cases with incompa- Methods:WehavesequencedFTLgeneeitherbySanger tible sequence result. sequencing or by next generation sequencing (NGS) in Results: We identiﬁed 11 known and four novel patho- three families with abnormal levels of ferritin. Moreover, genic variants (p.R67Pfs*19, p.S236Rfs*30, p.S156*, p. we have performed an extensive review of all reported V243I) in 91 patients leading to 95% detection rate. Ret- variants in the FTL gene linked with the previously rospectiveinvestigationofmutationunidentiﬁedcaseswere described ﬁve conditions. tentatively considered galactosemia initially however Results: Here, we identiﬁed two novel FTL variants that deviated in follow ups. causedominantL-ferritindeﬁciencyandHHCS(c.375+2T Conclusions:AsinEuropeancohorts,p.Q188Rinexon6 > A and 36_42delCAACAGT, respectively), and one pre- was the most common (38%) GALT mutations. Second viouslyreportedvariant(Met1Val)thatcausesdominantL- most frequent mutation was p.E340* (14%) in exon 10, ferritin deﬁciency. whichisknowntobespeciﬁcforpopulationinTurkey.The Conclusions: Globally, genetic changes in the FTL gene third most frequent mutation (8%) was a novel single are responsible for multiple phenotypes and an accurate nucleotide deletion leading to frameshift (p. R67Pfs*19) in diagnosisisusefulforappropriatetreatment.Weincludeda exon2,foundtoaggregateinpatientsfromeasternTurkey. diagnosticalgorithmforthedetectionofdiseasescausedby Algorithmic analysis of exons 6 and 10 would delineate defects in FTL gene. molecular genetic diagnosis for 60% of the patients. Funding: This research was partially supported by grant Absenceofgrossmutationsisattributedtooursmallsample SAF2015-70412-R from Spanish Secretary of Research, size. Nevertheless, MLPA should still be recommended for Development and Innovation (MINECO) Spain to M.S. galactosemia patients with unidentiﬁed pathogenic B.Cadenas:None.J.Fita-Torró:None.M.Bermúdez- sequence variants in GALT. Cortés:None.I.Hernandez-Rodriguez:None.J.Fuster: I. Kalay: Other; Modest; Istanbul University Research None. M. Llinares: None. A. Galera: None. J. Romero: Fund (Project No: TTU-2018-31142). M. Balci: None. C. None. S. Pérez-Montero: None. C. Tornador: None. M. gulec: None. G. Gokcay: None. M. Demirkol: None. S. Sanchez: None. Basaran: None. Z.O. Uyguner: None. P06.16C P06.17D The contribution of molecular genetic methods to the GBA1 mutational spectrum in the Republic of diagnosis of classical galactosemia and investigation of Macedonia and a report of a novel de novo mutation genotype-phenotype correlation H. Ajdarche1, M. Vujovic1, M. Jakimovska1, I.Kalay1,M.Balci2,C.gulec1,G.Gokcay2,M.Demirkol2, Z. Stojanovski2, O. Karanﬁlski2, K. Martinova3, S. Basaran1, Z. O. Uyguner1 D. Plaseska-Karanﬁlska1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1339 1RCGEB “Georgi D. Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of M. F. Broekema1, M. Stahl Madsen2, M. Rønn Madsen2, Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former A.Koppen1,M.E.G.Kranendonk1,M.GrootKoerkamp1, Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Clinic for Hematology, N. Hamers1, A. Borgmans1, A. M. J. J. Bonvin3, F. C. P. Medical Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and Methodius”, Holstege1, W. Spiering4, H. Monajemi5, D. Cassiman6, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, S. Mandrup2, E. Kalkhoven1 3University Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, University “SsCyrilandMethodius”,Skopje,Macedonia,TheFormer 1CenterforMolecularMedicine,UniversityMedicalCenter Yugoslav Republic of Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Functional Genomics and Metabolism Research Unit, University of Southern Introduction: Gaucher disease (GD) is caused by the Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 3Bijvoet Center for deﬁcient activity of β-glucocerebrosidase due to homo- Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Utrecht, zygous or double heterozygous GBA1 mutations. In Netherlands,4DepartmentofVascularMedicine,University addition, heterozygous GBA1 mutations represent the most Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Internal common genetic risk factor for Parkinson’s disease. We Medicine,RijnstateHospital,Arnhem,Netherlands,6Center aimed to determine the GBA1 mutational spectrum among for Metabolic Diseases, Leuven University Hospitals, GDpatientsandthefrequencyofcommonGBA1mutations Leuven, Belgium among the general population from R. Macedonia. Material and Methods: Thirty-four individuals belong- Introduction: The nuclear receptor PPARγ, encoded by ing to 10 families with 15 GD Type 1 patients, as well as PPARG, isthe master regulator of adipocyte differentiation 392 individuals from the general population were studied. and function. Mutations in PPARG cause familial partial GD patients were studied using several different methods: lipodystrophysubtype3(FPLD3),characterizedbyadipose directDNAsequencingofGBA1exons,MultiplexLigation tissue redistribution causing type 2 diabetes, and dyslipide- Probe-Dependent Ampliﬁcation (MLPA), and next- mia. In two non-consanguineous patients we identiﬁed generation sequencing on MiSeq using Illumina TruSight PPARγ E379K and R212Q. The mutations are situated in Inherited panel. Allele-speciﬁc ampliﬁcation was designed distinctdomainsofthePPARγ.Whereas,E379Kislocated to screen for ﬁve common GBA1 mutations among the in theligandbinding domain (LBD) and contactstheDNA general population. binding domain (DBD) of its binding partner RXRα in the Results: A total of eight pathogenic variants (c.115 PPARγ-RXRα-DNA crystal structure, R212Q is located in +1G>A, c.392A>G, c.882T>G, c.1226A>G, c.1263- the hinge region and interacts with the DNA. Methods and 1317del, c.1312G>A, c.1342G>C and c.1363A>G) were materials: We have used genome-wide sequencing-based detected. The most common mutation was c.1226A>G strategiesinPPARGknockoutmouseembryonicﬁbroblasts (N370S),representing60%ofGBA1alleles.Thec.882T>G transduced with PPARγ to determine how these PPARG and c.1342G>C were present on one allele (H255Q: mutations-thatdonotinterfereininteractionswithRXRα, D409H). The novel c.392A>G variant was detected in one ligand,andcofactors,butdoimpairtheadipogeniccapacity GD patient as a de novo event. The frequencies of GBA1 - affect the ability of PPARγ to activate PPARG target mutations among the general population were the follow- genes in the context of native chromatin structure. ing: c.1226A>G (3/700, 0.43%), c.882T>G/c.1342G>C (2/ Results: Both PPARG mutations impair the transactiva- 784, 0.26%), c.115+1G>A (1/668, 0.15%), while c.1263- tion potential of PPARγ on an overlapping subset of target 1317del was not detected among the studied individuals. genes. Classical PPARγ target genes such as FABP4, Conclusion: The knowledge of GBA1 mutational spec- ANGPTL4, and LPL are among the genes that are highly truminourcountrywillallowforbettermanagementofGD affected. Genome-wide proﬁling of PPARγ (WT and patients as well as easier carrier screening among GD mutants)andtheenhanceractivitymarkerH3K27Acshows family members and Parkinson’s patients. that these PPARG mutations impair PPARγ binding on H. Ajdarche: None. M. Vujovic: None. M. Jaki- enhancers that require PPARγ for chromatin remodeling. movska: None. Z. Stojanovski: None. O. Karanﬁlski: Conclusion: These ﬁndings indicate that a subset of None. K. Martinova: None. D. Plaseska- PPARγ target genes are sensitive to PPARG mutations. In Karanﬁlska: None. addition, relatively subtle molecular defects in PPARγ are sufﬁcient to cause lipodystrophy. P06.18A M.F. Broekema: None. M. Stahl Madsen: None. M. FPLD3-associated PPARγ mutants deﬁne subclasses of Rønn Madsen: None. A. Koppen: None. M.E.G. Kra- target genes nendonk:None.M.GrootKoerkamp:None.N.Hamers: None. A. Borgmans: None. A.M.J.J. Bonvin: None. F.C. P. Holstege: None. W. Spiering: None. H. Monajemi:1340 None. D. Cassiman: None. S. Mandrup: None. E. A.Rotig:None.N.Boddaert:None.M.Metodiev:None. Kalkhoven: None. B. Ruzzenente: None. P06.19B P06.20C Ten novel mutations in the mitochondrial elongation Mutations in GLDC and AMT genes in Czech and translation factor EFG1 are associated to neurological Slovak patients with nonketotic hyperglycinemia involvement D. Zahorakova, J. Kucerova, M. Buganova, G. Barcia1,2, M. Rio1,2, Z. Assouline1,2, C. Zangarelli2, A. Puchmajerova, J. Zeman, P. Martasek M. Schiff1,2, M. Barth3, A. Munnich1,2, V. Procaccio3, J. Steffann1,2, A. Rotig2, N. Boddaert1,2, M. Metodiev2, Department of Pediatrics, Charles University and General B. Ruzzenente2 University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic 1Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 2Imagine Institute, Paris, Introduction: Nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH, France, 3CHU Angers, Angers, France MIM#605899) is a rare, life threatening disorder caused by a defect in the mitochondrial enzyme complex - glycine Mutationsinnucleargenesencodingco-factorsorstructural cleavage system (GCS). The defect results in an accumula- subunitsofthemitochondrialtranslationmachineryprevent tionofglycineinthebody.ClassicalformofNKHpresents the synthesis of the 13 mitochondrial DNA encoded in the ﬁrst days of life with lethargy, hypotonia, seizures, proteins which causes OXPHOS deﬁciency. Mutations in coma and apnea. Surviving patients have profound devel- the GFM1 gene, encoding the mitochondrial translation opmental delay and severe, usually pharmacoresistant elongation factor EFG1, have been linked to mitochondrial epilepsy. Cerebral spinal ﬂuid (CSF) and plasma glycine diseases with neurologic or hepatic presentations in few levels are elevated as well as CSF:plasma glycine ratio. patients. NKH is an autosomal recessive disorder with causative Here, we further expand the genetic and phenotypic mutations identiﬁed in genes encoding the components of spectrum of GFM1-linked disease mutations by reporting GCS - GLDC, AMT and GCSH. We present the results of clinical, biochemical and neuroimaging ﬁndings from 9 mutation analysis in seven patients with classical form unrelated pediatric patients harboring homozygous or of NKH. compound heterozygous GFM1 mutations, including 10 Materials and Methods: Analysis of the GLDC and novel pathogenic variants. AMT genes was performed by Sanger sequencing All patients were born at term and without fetal distress. and MLPA. In 8/9 children, the ﬁrsts clinical signs were noticed during Results: Mutations in the GLDC gene, including a large the neonatal period. Only 1 child had psychomotor regres- deletion of exons 10 to 25, were detected in four patients. sion and lactic acidosis (8 months) after initial normal Five mutations (c.1420G>A, c.1543A>G, c.1877T>G, development. All patients presented with neurological c.2594del, c.2579G>T) are novel. Mutations in the AMT involvement with axial hypotonia and dystonia being the genewereidentiﬁedinthreepatients.Analysisofmutations major signs. West syndrome was frequently observed (5/9 in parents was performed to conﬁrm compound hetero- patients). One child had liver failure. Western blot analysis zygosity in all patients. on patient ﬁbroblasts revealed that all mutations result in Conclusions: Identiﬁcation of molecular defect enabled decreased abundance of the mutant EFG1 protein. Speciﬁc genetic counseling and prenatal genetic testing in affected decrease of mtDNA-encoded proteins conﬁrmed that families. We report 5 novel GLDC mutations and our mitochondrialtranslationwasimpairedinpatients,whichin ﬁndings expand the spectrum of described variants asso- turn, resulted in an impaired biogenesis of OXPHOS ciated with NKH. complexes I and IV. Supported by grants PROGRES Q26/LF1 and RVO- In conclusion, GFM1 mutations result in OXPHOS VFN 64165. deﬁciency and constant neurological involvement with D. Zahorakova: None. J. Kucerova: None. M. Buga- hypotonia, dystonia, and epilepsy. Some patients had a nova:None.A.Puchmajerova:None.J.Zeman:None.P. neonatal rapidly progressive disease, but a stable course is Martasek: None. more frequent. Liver failure is not a constant feature of GFM1 related diseases. P06.21D G.Barcia:None.M.Rio:None.Z.Assouline:None.C. GeneticanalysisofpatientswithGLUT1DSsuspect:the Zangarelli: None. M. Schiff: None. M. Barth: None. A. importance of diagnostic conﬁrmation Munnich: None. V. Procaccio: None. J. Steffann: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1341 O. Sánchez-Lijarcio1,2, D. Yubero3,2, A. I. Vega1,2, À. None. C. Pérez-Cerdá: None. R. Artuch: None. B. García-Cazorla3,2, M. O'Callaghan3,2, L. G. Gutiérrez- Pérez: None. Solana4,2,M.L.Couce5,2,M.delToro6,2,E.López-Laso7,2, M. Ugarte1,2, C. Pérez-Cerdá1,2, R. Artuch3,2, B. Pérez1,2 P06.22A Targeted next generation sequencing in selected inborn 1Centro de diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, errors of metabolism Centro de Biología Molecular, UAM, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, L. Dvorakova, K. Peskova, M. Reboun, M. Novakova, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, G. Storkanova, P. Chrastina, T. Honzik 5ComplejoHospitalarioUniversitariodeSantiago,Madrid, Spain, 6Hospital Universitario Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Clinic of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Prague 2, Spain,7HospitalUniversitarioReinaSofía,Córdoba,Spain Czech Republic Introduction: Classic patients with GLUT1DS present Introduction: We implemented a targeted NGS for the hypoglycorrhachia, drug-resistant epilepsy, developmental diagnosisofpatientswithasuspicionforselectedgroupsof delay, a complex movement disorder and, in 50% of the inborn errors of metabolism (IEM). cases, an acquired microcephaly. Furthermore, patients Methods: A total of 195 genes were analyzed using a respond to ketogenic diet. custom-designed oligo capture probe set (Roche Nimble- Methods:Inthisstudy,48suspectedcasesofGLUT1DS Gen)andMiSeqsequencer(Illumina).Positiveresultswere were included. Inclusion criteria were: CSF glucose level conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. below 50.5 mg/dL and clinical ﬁndings suitable for Results: In total, we identiﬁed 74 mutations in genes GLUT1DS.Wehaveperformedtheidentiﬁcationofexonic associated with IEM. The found mutations were usually SNV and deletions in SLC2A1 by Sanger combined with SNVs or small deletions/insertions. In two cases we iden- MLPA or its entire sequence were analysed by next gen- tiﬁed gross deletions (PHKA2, NM_000292.2: deletion of eration sequencing (NGS). Patients without pathogenic exon 33, AGL, NM_000642.3: deletion of exons 11-21). ® variants in SLC2A1 were analysed by TruSight One panel Genes associated with glycogen metabolism were analyzed (Illumina®). in 46 probands. The diagnosis of GSD was conﬁrmed by Results: We have detected 27 patients with variations in ﬁnding of causative mutations in 19 of them: GYS2 (1x), SLC2A1. Ten of them were de novo mutations, while ﬁve G6PC (1x), AGL (4x), PYGL (2x) and PHKA2 (11x). We others were associated to maternal or paternal inheritance established the diagnosis in 3 out of 6 patients with rhab- (missense variants). The mutational spectrum in SLC2A1 domyolyses (2x RYR1, 1x PFKM). Four out of 6 patients includes two large deletions, three small deletions, one were diagnosed in the group of peroxisomal disorders (1x small duplication and twenty nucleotide changes (eighteen PEX1, 1x PEX12, 2x HSD17B4). Among 17 patients with likely missense and two splice site mutations). Fifteen hyperhomocysteinemia we identiﬁed 1 patient with CblD variants are novel, ﬁve loss-of-functions and ten likely deﬁciency (MMADHC), 2 patients with FTCD deﬁciency, missense, six with unknown signiﬁcance following the and 3 patients with the MTHFR deﬁciency. In two patients ACMG guidelines. In twenty-one cases no pathogenic with biochemical ﬁndings leading to urea cycle disorders mutations in SLC2A1 were detected and were further ana- wediagnosed1patientwithargininosuccinicaciduria(ASL) lysed by TruSight One® panel, allowing the detection of and1patientwithCPSIdeﬁciency.Thediagnosticyieldfor pathogenic variants in eight different genes related to ion MSUD was 100% (1x BCKDHA, 8x BCKDHB). channels, transcriptional factors or cellular trafﬁcking. Conclusions: The correlation of phenotypic signs, bio- Conclusions: Our results show that a response to keto- chemicalﬁndingsandNGSresultsiscrucialforcompleting genicdiet,drug-resistantepilepsyand/orhypoglycorrhachia thediagnosisofIEM.Support:MZCR-RVOVFN64165, is not a pathognomonic marker for GLUT1DS. Moreover, SVV No.260367 the results highlight the fact that geneticanalysis should be L. Dvorakova: None. K. Peskova: None. M. Reboun: a must-have for GLUT1DS classiﬁcation. None. M. Novakova: None. G. Storkanova: None. P. ACCI-CIBERER project: ER18P2AC746 and Chrastina: None. T. Honzik: None. ERTRLEOI1 O. Sánchez-Lijarcio: None. D. Yubero: None. A.I. P06.23B Vega:None.À.García-Cazorla:None.M.O'Callaghan: Haemochromatosistype4:structure/functionanalysisof None. L.G. Gutiérrez-Solana: None. M.L. Couce: None. the newly identiﬁed p.Ser47Phe missense mutation M. del Toro: None. E. López-Laso: None. M. Ugarte: provides new insights abouttheferroportinbiologyand mechanisms of disease1342 K. Uguen1, M. Le Tertre1, A. Elbahnsi2, C. Ka1, 1Robarts Research Institute, London, ON, Canada, I. Gourlaouen1, C. Ferec1, I. Callebaut2, G. Le Gac1 2Western University, London, ON, Canada 1InsermUMR1078,LaboratoiredeGénétiqueMoléculaire Introduction: Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) are often et Histocompatibilité, CHRU de Brest, Hôpital Morvan, calculated in prospective cohorts representing generally Université Bretagne Loire, Brest, France, 2IMPMC, healthy populations. Given the rarity of phenotypic Sorbonne Universités – UMR CNRS7590, UPMC Univ extremes, characterizing the polygenic underpinnings of a Paris 06, Muséum d’Histoire Naturelle, IRD UMR206, quantitative trait’s full spectrum can be challenging. In Paris, France patients referred to a specialized lipid clinic, we aimed to establish polygenic proﬁles for triglyceride (TG), high- Haemochromatosistype4isthesecondmostfrequentcause density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and low-density of inherited iron overload after HFE-related haemochroma- lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). tosis. The disease is due to heterozygous mutations in the Materials and Methods: We performed PRS analyses SLC40A1 gene, which encodes the sole iron export protein usinga16-SNPTGscore(N=1,406),9-SNPHDL-Cscore reportedinmammals;namelyferroportin1(FPN1).Alarge (N=1,298), and 10-SNP LDL-C score (N=1,226). For phenotypicheterogeneityisobservedinadultpatients.This clinical practicality, we utilized smaller PRSs that incor- is partially explained by the existence of two categories of porate SNPs with the largest phenotypic effects. Extreme geneticvariants:loss-of-functionmutations,whichleadtoa scores reﬂecting an excess of trait-raising SNPs were progressive accumulation of iron in reticuloendothelial deﬁnedasscores≥90thpercentile,ascalculatedinthe1000 cells,andgain-of-functionmutations,whichareresponsible Genomes cohort. forapartialtocompleteresistancetohepcidin(thesystemic Results: As TG levels increased, the prevalence of ironmetabolismregulatoryhormone)andaprogressiveiron extreme TG PRSs greatly increased; patients with the deposition in parenchymal cells. The p.Ser47Phe missense highestTGlevelswere5.30-fold(P<0.0001)morelikelyto mutationwasidentiﬁedin8relatedpatientspresentingwith haveanextremePRScomparedtothosewithnormallevels. anironoverloadphenotypecharacteristicofFPN1dysfunc- As HDL-C levels increased, the prevalence of extreme tion.InvitroevaluationswereperformedinHEK293Tcells. HDL-C PRSs increased slightly; patients with the highest They revealed that the 47Phe mutant was correctly HDL-C levels were 2.37-fold (P=0.003) more likely to expressed at the cell surface, while it signiﬁcantly reduced haveanextremePRScomparedtothosewithnormallevels. abilityofFPN1toexportiron.Theyalsoevidencedthatthe As LDL-C levels increased, the prevalence of extreme 47Phe mutant was strongly resistant to hepcidin. Using a LDL-CPRSsincreasedslightly;however,theprevalenceof 3D model of human FPN1, built by homology to the extreme PRSs was not different between patients with the experimental structure of a bacterial homolog (BbFpn) in highest LDL-C levels and those with normal levels. the outward-facing state, we observed that Ser47 is located Conclusions: The polygenic proﬁles of these lipid traits in the vicinity of residues that play a critical role in the were quite distinct. Evaluation of patients at phenotypic transport of iron across the plasma membrane. The region extremesallowsformoreefﬁcientuseofresourcestodeﬁne might also be involved in the docking of hepcidin and clinically relevant genetic determinants. down-regulation of FPN1. We conclude that p.Ser47Phe J.S. Dron: None. J. Wang: None. H. Cao: None. M.A. missense mutation is responsible for ambivalent functional Iacocca:None.A.D.McIntyre:None.M.R.Ban:None.J. effects, with loss-of-function having a predominant con- F. Robinson: None. R.A. Hegele: None. sequence on phenotype. K. Uguen: None. M. Le Tertre: None. A. Elbahnsi: P06.25D None. C. Ka: None. I. Gourlaouen: None. C. Ferec: Hyperphenylalaninemia: identiﬁcation and None. I. Callebaut: None. G. Le Gac: None. characterization of pathogenic variants in DNAJC12 P06.24C D. Gallego1, F. Leal1, M. Castro1, I. Vitoria2, M. Bueno- Polygenicriskscoreproﬁlingofquantitativelipidtraits: Delgado3, A. Belanger-Quintana4, A. Morais5, lessons from a specialized dyslipidemic cohort C. Pedrón6, I. García7, C. Alcalde8, V. Hamilton9, J. Campistol10, R. Artuch10, M. Ugarte1, A. Gámez1, J. S. Dron1,2, J. Wang1, H. Cao1, M. A. Iacocca1,2, L. R. Desviat1, B. Pérez1 A. D. McIntyre1, M. R. Ban1, J. F. Robinson1, R. A. Hegele1,2 1Centro de diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, CentrodeBiologíaMolecular,UAM,Madrid,Spain,2H.U. La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 3H. U. Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1343 Spain, 4H. U. Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 5H. U. La Ege university Medical Faculty Division of Pediatric Paz, Madrid, Spain, 6H.U.Niño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, 7H. Genetics, Izmir, Turkey U.Miguel Servet,Zaragoza,Spain, 8Hospital RíoHortega, Valladolid, Spain, 9INTA, Santiago de Chile, Chile, 10H. Introduction: Leigh syndrome (LS) associated with Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deﬁciency is an early onset, fatal mitochondrial encephalopathy, leading to multiple Introduction: Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is caused in neurologicalfailureandeventuallydeath,usuallyintheﬁrst 98% of cases by loss-of-function mutations in the gene decade of life. Mutations in SURF1, a nuclear gene coding for the hepatic protein phenylalanine hydroxylase encoding a mitochondrial protein involved in COX (PAH). The remaining 2% accounts for defects in the assembly, are the most common cause of LS. synthesis or regeneration of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), Material-Methods: SURF1 gene was sequenced in 48 cofactor of PAH and tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylases patients with clinical suspicion of mitochondrial disorder (TH,TPH),bothneurologicallyexpressed.Biallelicvariants (mainly complex IV deﬁciency and LS) between January in gene DNAJC12, cochaperone of these hydroxylases, 2016 and January 2019. Demographical, clinical and were recently described in HPA patients with neurological molecular ﬁndings of the patients were obtained from symptoms and early-onset Parkinson. Here, we report the hospital ﬁles. genetic analysis of DNAJC12 in unsolved Spanish HPA Results: We identiﬁed 13 patients with clinical features cases and the functional characterization of variants. of LS who are either homozygous or compound hetero- Patients and Methods: The study included DNAJC12 zygous for SURF1 mutations. Of the 26 mutant alleles, 14 sequencing of 15 Spanish HPA cases (120-442 μM) neu- (54%) had null mutations (8 frameshift and 6 nonsense) 12 rologicallyasymptomatic.BH4treatmentwasonlyrequired (46%)hadmissense.Themostcommontwomutationswere under fever episodes. Functional analysis of variants was C.769G>A (6/26) and c.870dupT (6/26) (%23). Although doneusingpatient-derivedﬁbroblaststransientlytransfected mutations in SURF1 have been mainly associated with with the three hydroxylases. typicalLS,threeofthepatientsinthisreporthadanatypical Results:Fournovelnucleotidechangeswereidentiﬁedin course of LS. There is no deﬁnite genotype-phenotype DNAJC12 in 15 HPA cases: two pathogenic variants correlation.Electrontransportchainstudieswereperformed probably affecting splicing (c.298-2A>C, c.502+1G>C) in six patients in whom either muscle or skin ﬁbroblasts and two likely pathogenic variants c.309G>T (p. specimen available. The COX activity in each of these six Trp103Cys) and c.524G>A (p.Trp175Ter). The change p. patients was signiﬁcantly decreased. Trp175Ter, present in 0.1% of Spanish control population, Conclusions: To date, more than 100 patients of Leigh was detected in 80% of alleles, with 9 homozygous cases. disease with SURF1 mutations have been reported. We DNAJC12 mRNA levels were slightly diminished and reportclinicalandmolecularﬁndingsof13patientsfrom12 immunorreactive protein was undetectable. PAH transfec- families and also the ﬁrst case series of SURF1 gene deﬁ- tion suggest a pathogenic effect on PAH and TH stability ciency from Turkey. while no effect was found for TPH. M. Kose: None. H. Onay: None. F. Ozkınay: None. Conclusions: DNAJC12 sequencing should be incorpo- ratedinroutineHPAgeneticconﬁrmationofcasesdetected P06.27B in newborn screening to apply a tailored therapy. To avoid Progeroid syndrome with focal segmental future neurological complications, our cases should be glomeruloscrelosis due to ZMPSTE24 mutations included in clinical follow-up. Grants: PI16/00573; LCF/PR/PR16/11110018; ERDF M. Matsuo1, N. Iwasaki2,1, T. Kusakabe3, K. Sato4, D. Gallego: None. F. Leal: None. M. Castro: None. I. G. Nishimura5, K. Saito1 Vitoria: None. M. Bueno-Delgado: None. A. Belanger- Quintana: None. A. Morais: None. C. Pedrón: None. I. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tokyo Women's Medical García: None. C. Alcalde: None. V. Hamilton: None. J. University, Tokyo, Japan, 2Institute of Geriatrics, Tokyo Campistol:None.R.Artuch:None.M.Ugarte:None.A. Women'sMedicalUniversity,Tokyo,Japan,3Departmentof Gámez: None. L.R. Desviat: None. B. Pérez: None. Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Hypertension Research, ClinicalResearchInstitute,NationalHospitalOrganization P06.26A Kyoto Medical Center, Kyoto, Japan, 4Department of Mutations in SURF1 Gene Associated with Leigh Cardiology, Tokyo Women’s Medical University, Tokyo, Syndrome İn Turkey Japan, 5Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical University Hospital, Saitama, Japan M. Kose, H. Onay, F. Ozkınay1344 Introduction: Biallelic ZMPSTE24 mutations cause man- Isolated methylmalonic acidaemia (iMMA) is a group of dibuloacral dysplasia with type B lipodystrophy (MADB), autosomal recessive disorders caused by impairment of an autosomal recessive progeroid syndrome characterized propionatemetabolism.Theseverityofclinicalpresentation by mandibular hypoplasia, progressive acroosteolysis, and dependsontheunderlyinggeneandcanrangefrommildto lipodystrophy. Two MADB patients with focal segmental life-threatening condition with failure to thrive, hypotonia, glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) were reported previously. metabolic acidosis, developmental delay, encephalopathy, Herein,wepresentanadditionalMADBpatientwithFSGS pancreatitis, and chronic kidney disease. The common sign due to ZMPSTE24 mutations. is increased methylmalonic acid plasma/urine level and Materials and Methods: The patient is 42-year-old hyperamonaemia. iMMA is genetically heterogeneous and Japanese female. Her older sister had succumbed from can be due to defects in genes involved in propionate diabetic nephropathy at age 41 years. Her clinical course pathway or cobalamin metabolism. The most common are was as follows: subcutaneous fat atrophy since childhood; MUT, MMAA, and MMAB. proteinuria in her twenties; proteinuria with hypertension Patients and Methods: Nine children were reported for after delivering her son at age 31 years; diabetes mellitus genetictesting.Fivepatientswereclinicallydiagnosedafter (DM), hyperlipidemia, and fatty liver at 36 years; loss of manifestationbeforeyear2013and4patientswerefoundin visceral fat and renal dysfunction due to FSGS proven on extendedneonatalscreeningfrombloodspotsthathasbeen kidney biopsy at 39 years, and kidney transplantation at 41 undertakeninSlovakiasince2013.GenesMUTandMMAA years.Atage42years,shewasreferredfordiagnosticwork were sequenced using Sanger sequencing. One patient was up. She showed a progeroid appearance with decreased analyzed using whole exome sequencing. subcutaneous fat. Radiographs revealed open cranial suture Results: The diagnosis of iMMA was genetically con- and thin clavicles. The study protocol was approved by the ﬁrmed in all tested patients. Six patients had bi-allelic Institutional Review Boards of Tokyo Women’s Medical MMAA mutations (three different known pathogenic var- University. Written informed consent was obtained. iants and one novel variant p.A102T), two patients had bi- Results: Two rare heterozygous variants, p.Q41X and p. allelicMUTmutations(twoknownpathogenicvariantsand R412L in ZMPSTE24, were detected. R412L, a novel var- one novel variant p.R93C) and one patient had a homo- iant conserved over species, was not found in ExAC or zygous known pathogenic MMAB variant. 1000G, and was predicted to be pathogenic on PolyPhen2 Conclusions:Theneonatalscreeningfrombloodspotsisan and Mutation T@ster. She has since received Metreleptin effective way for early pick-up of individuals with iMMA. injections, achieving improvements of DM, liver dysfunc- The most prevalent iMMA underlying gene in Slovakia is tion, and renal dysfunction. MMAAfollowedbyMUTandMMAB,unlikereportedinother Conclusion: We reported a progeroid patient associated countries, where the MUT gene is the most prevalent one. with FSGS caused by ZMPSTE24 mutations. Metreleptin Support: APVV-17-0296, VEGA 2/0083/17, APVV-107-12 was estimated to ameliorate renal function. M. Skopkova: None. K. Brennerova: None. J. Sali- M. Matsuo: None. N. Iwasaki: None. T. Kusakabe: gova:None.L.Potocnakova:None.K.Halova:None.V. None. K. Sato: None. G. Nishimura: None. K. Bzduch: None. J. Stanik: None. D. Gasperikova: None. Saito: None. P06.30A P06.28C A novel homozygous missense mutation in TUFM leads Isolated methylmalonic acidaemia in Slovakia to a mitochondrial cardiomyopathy syndrome without progressive encephalopathy M. Skopkova1, K. Brennerova2, J. Saligova3, L. Potocnakova3, K. Halova4, V. Bzduch2, J. Stanik1,2, T. Hershkovitz1, A. Kurolap1,2, T. Paperna1, A. Mory1, D. Gasperikova1 C. Gonzaga-Jauregui3, S. E. Wolf3, J. D. Overton3, A. R. Shuldiner3, H. Mandel4, H. Baris Feldman1,2 1Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Biomedical ResearchCenter,SAS,Bratislava,Slovakia,2Departmentof 1The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Pediatrics, Medical Faculty of Comenius University and Haifa, Israel, 2The Ruth & Bruce Rappaport Faculty of National Institute of Children's Diseases, Bratislava, Medicine, Technion–Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Slovakia, 3Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty of Israel,3RegeneronGeneticsCenter,Tarrytown,NY,United PavolJozefSafarikandChildrenFacultyHospital,Kosice, States, 4Institute of Human Genetics and Metabolic Slovakia, 4Pediatric Clinic, Children Faculty Hospital, Disorders, Western Galilee Medical Center, Nahariya, Banska Bystrica, Slovakia IsraelAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1345 Introduction: Mitochondrial dysfunction typically results Sciences, Firenze, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit Cardarelli in clinically heterogeneous, often devastating, disorders. University Hospital, Napoli, Italy, 4Pediatric Neurology, Accurate molecular diagnosis can be challenging. We Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Unit and Laboratories, describeaproband,thethirdsonofhealthyconsanguineous Children's Hospital A. Meyer-University of Florence, parentsofMuslimArabdescent.Hepresentedatsixmonths Firenze, Italy, 5Metabolic and Muscular Unit, Meyer with fatal, severe cardiogenic shock, dilated cardiomyo- Children's Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 6Molecular Medicine, pathy,lacticacidosisandmultiplemitochondrialrespiratory IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy, 7 Medical complex deﬁciency. GeneticsUnit,DepartmentofBiomedicalExperimentaland Materials and Methods: We performed trio whole- Clinical Sciences, Firenze, Italy exome sequencing (WES) and singelton mitochondrial genome sequencing. Results were ﬁltered for rare, protein- We evaluated a 14-month-old girl with apostural tetrapar- altering variants in genes related to mitochondrial function. esis, growth delay, severe psychomotor retardation, pro- Protein structures were modelled using SWISS-MODEL found sensorineural hearing loss, leopard-like retinopathy, based on the bovine crystal structure of mitochondrial hypogammaglobulinemia, anemia and thrombocytopenia, Elongation Factor Tu/Ts complex (PDB #1XB2), and hepatopathy, esophageal varices and calciﬁcations in the visualized with UCSF Chimera software. hepatic segment VI, startle-type critical manifestations, Results: We identiﬁed a novel homozygous missense brain calciﬁcations, progressive cortico-subcortical atrophy variantinTUFM(NM_003321.4):c.344A>C;p.His115Pro, that result in tetraventricular hydrocephalus. Moreover, encoding the mtDNA translation elongating factor Tu reduction of mitochondrial respiratory complex-I-III was (EFTu). Pathogenic variants were not detected in observed.Theseriousconditionsledthepatienttoexitusat mitochondrial DNA. 24 months of age. Several molecular tests (panel genes for Thismissensevariantislocatedindomain1oftheEFTu brain calciﬁcation, Aicardi-Goutières syndrome, disorders protein, which is required for GTP/GDP-binding and for ofglycosylation,peroxisomaldisease)andCGH-arraywere complex formation with elongation factor Ts (EFTs). This normal. Whole exome sequencing (WES) identiﬁed two highlyconservedHis115(GERP5.42)ispredictedtobean rare variants in KARS gene. KARS gene encodes the exposed and functional residue; therefore, substitution with mitochondrial and cytoplasmic isoform of the t-RNA a physiochemically different residue may disrupt proper synthase of lysine, essential for a correct protein synthesis. protein folding, and may hamper Tu/Ts complex stability To date, mutations in KARS are associated with autosomal and EFTu reactivation. recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth, non-syndromic hearing Conclusions: To date, only four patients with bi-allelic loss, clinical features characterized by microcephaly, TUFM mutations have been reported, all with severe early- epilepsy, leukoencephalopathy, peripheral neuropathy, onset lactic acidosis and progressive infantile encephalo- visual impairment, auditory and hepatic failure and others pathy without cardiomyopathy. We present a novel variant with severe cardiomyopathy, psychomotor and mild delay inapatientwithdilatedcardiomyopathyandlacticacidosis myopathy.Functionalstudyonmusclebiopsyofourpatient but without early encephalopathy, thus expanding the phe- revealed an alteration of protein expression. notype of TUFM-related mitochondrial disease. OurcaseshowsonceagainhowWESanalysisistheﬁrst T. Hershkovitz:None.A.Kurolap:None.T. Paperna: level method in clinical practice in children with multi- None. A. Mory: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. S.E. systemic, neurological and/or neuromuscular problems, Wolf: None. J.D. Overton: None. A.R. Shuldiner: None. mostly in case of mitochondrial disorders whose diagnosis H. Mandel: None. H. Baris Feldman: None. is often problematic because of their large phenotypic and genotypic heterogeneity. Finally, the use of WES allowed P06.31B us to outline a new phenotype associated with a poorly EfﬁcacyofWESinpatientswith"unsolvedphenotype": characterized gene. expansion of the phenotype spectrum associated with V. Palazzo: None. F. Peluso: None. L. Dosa: None. M. mutations in KARS gene Della Monica: None. F. Mari: None. E. Procopio: None. M.Donati:None.F.Santorelli:None.R.Guerrini:None. V. Palazzo1, F. Peluso2, L. Dosa1, M. Della Monica3, S. Giglio: None. D. Vergani: None. F. Mari4, E. Procopio5, M. Donati5, F. Santorelli6, R. Guerrini4, S. Giglio1,2, D. Vergani7 P06.32C Muscle involvement in a large cohort of pediatric 1Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's University patients with genetic diagnosis of mitochondrial disease Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical Experimental and Clinical1346 C. Jou1, J. D. Ortigoza-Escobar1, M. M. O'Callaghan1, Pesini: None. S. Emperador: None. E. Lopez-Gallardo: A. Nascimento1, A. Darling1, L. Pias-Peleteiro1, B. Perez- None. P. Bayona-Bafaluy: None. R. Montero: None. C. Dueñas1, M. Pineda1, A. Codina1, C. Arjona1, Jimenez-Mallebrera: None. A. Garcia-Cazorla: None. J. J. Armstrong1, F. Palau1, A. Ribes2, L. Gort2, F. Tort2, Montoya: None. D. Yubero: None. R. Artuch: None. P. Navas3, E. Ruiz-Pesini4, S. Emperador4, E. Lopez- Gallardo4,P. Bayona-Bafaluy4,R. Montero1, C. Jimenez- P06.33D Mallebrera1, A. Garcia-Cazorla1, J. Montoya4, Multiple mitochondrial DNA deletions due to mtDNA- D. Yubero1, R. Artuch1 maintenance defects are identiﬁed by next generation sequencing of the mitochondrial genome through 1Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de eKLIPse Llobregat, Spain, 2Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, CIBERER- ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Universidad Pablo de Olavide C. Bris1,2, D. Goudenège1,2, S. Bannwarth3, and CIBERER-ISCIII, Sevilla, Spain, 4Instituto de P. Gaignard4,5, B. Rucheton6, C. Jardel6, A. Trimouille7, investigación Sanitaria de Aragón and CIBERER-ISCIII, M. Martin-Négrier7, S. Allouche8, A. Slama4, Zaragoza, Spain V. Desquiret-Dumas1,2, N. Gueguen1,2, D. Bonneau1,2, M.Barth1,G.Lenears2,P.Reynier1,2,P.Amati-Bonneau1, Mitochondrial diseases (MD) are a group of genetic and V. Paquis-Flucklinger3, V. Procaccio1,2 acquired disorders which present signiﬁcant diagnostic challenges. Here we report the disease characteristics of a 1Département de biochimie et génétique, CHU d'Angers, large cohort of pediatric MD patients (n = 95) with a angers, France, 2MITOVASC – Equipe MITOLAB UMR deﬁnitive genetic diagnosis, giving special emphasis on CNRS 6214 - INSERM 1083, Angers, France, 3Université clinical muscle involvement, biochemical and histopatho- Côte d'Azur, CHU de Nice,INSERM, CNRS, IRCAN, Nice, logical features. Of the whole cohort, 51 patients harbored France, 4Biochemistry Laboratory, Bicêtre Hospital, mutations in nuclear DNA (nDNA) genes and 44 patients Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin- had mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genes. The Bicêtre, France, 5U1195 Inserm and University Paris-Sud nDNA patients were more likely to have a reduction in and University Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, muscle ﬁber succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) stains and in 6Biochemistry Department and Genetics Center, APHP, SDH-positive blood vessels, while a higher frequency of GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7CHU Bordeaux, mtDNApatientshadraggedred(RRF)andblueﬁbers.The ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,Bordeaux,France,8Service presence of positive histopathological features was asso- de biochimie, Centre Hospitalier et Universitaire de Caen, ciated with ophthalmoplegia, myopathic facies, weakness Caen, France and exercise intolerance. In 17 patients younger than two yearsofage,RRFandblueﬁberswereobservedonlyinone Purpose: Diseases caused by nuclear genes affecting case, six cases presented cytochrome c oxidase (COX) mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) stability are an important reduction/COX-ﬁbers, SDH reduction was observed in ﬁve group of mitochondrial disorders and characterized by andallexceptonepresentedSDH-positivebloodvessels.In multiple mtDNA deletions. However, mtDNA deletions conclusion, muscle involvement was a frequent ﬁnding in also accumulate during aging, making their interpretation our series of MD patients, especially in those harboring difﬁcult in patients suspected of mitochondrial diseases. mutations in mtDNA genes. The objective of this work was to identify criteria to Grant References: This work was supported by grants distinguish normal aging vs mtDNA maintenance defects. from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI17/00109, PI17/ Methods: MtDNA of patient muscles with known 00021, PI17/01286, PI15/01082, PI16/01048), Fundación pathogenic variants in nuclear genes involved in mtDNA Mutua Madrileña MMA17/01, AEPMI, the FEDER Fund- maintenance (n=34) and muscle from controls without ing Program from the European Union, the Agència de mitochondrial enzyme and assembly defects (n=53) were Gestiód’AjutsUniversitarisideRecerca (AGAUR)(2014: sequenced by next-generation sequencing (NGS). The SGR 393), the CERCA Programme/Generalitat de Catalu- sequencing data were processed through eKLIPse, a nya and CIBERER-ISCIII. bioinformatic tool allowing the detection of mtDNA rear- C. Jou: None. J.D. Ortigoza-Escobar: None. M.M. rangements.Thedeletions’proﬁleswerecomparedbetween O'Callaghan: None. A. Nascimento: None. A. Darling: patients and controls according to age groups. None. L. Pias-Peleteiro: None. B. Perez-Dueñas: None. Results:Intheoverallcohort,selectedparameterssuchas M. Pineda: None. A. Codina: None. C. Arjona: None. J. location or number of deletions and heteroplasmy level Armstrong: None. F. Palau: None. A. Ribes: None. L. were signiﬁcantly different between patients and controls. Gort: None. F. Tort: None. P. Navas: None. E. Ruiz- However, the criteria for identifying mtDNA maintenanceAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1347 defects was depending on patient age: The number of the RD-Connect PhenoTips instance, and variant ﬁltration deletions appearing to be signiﬁcantly relevant only in the and prioritisation was undertaken using the RD-Connect elderly, while in young subjects breakpoint repeat lengths Genome-Phenome Analysis Platform. surrounding the deletions were discriminant. InonepatientWESidentiﬁedararenuclearhomozygous Conclusion: EKLIPse analysis of mtDNA NGS allowed mis-sense variant c.308C>T (rs749249430) in NDUFAF3 to discriminate age-related mtDNA rearrangements from on chromosome 3, three INDELs in NDUFS1, intronic those related to mtDNA maintenance defects. These char- variants in NDUFA10 on chromosome 2 and a hetero- acteristics are promising criteria in order to guide the zygous intronic variant c.408+6468C>T (rs752756523) in molecular diagnosis towards mtDNA maintenance defects NDUFB9 on chromosome 8. In the other patient, a mito- and also to facilitate the prioritization of novel variants chondrialDNA(mtDNA)mis-sensemutationinMT-ATP6 identiﬁed in nuclear-encoded genes involved in mtDNA c.163A>G at m.8689 and a splice donor variant c.207 stability. +2T>G (rs782792601) and two mis-sense splice region C. Bris: None. D. Goudenège: None. S. Bannwarth: variants: c.206A>G (rs781909386) and c.205A>G None.P.Gaignard:None.B.Rucheton:None.C.Jardel: (rs782503581) in NDUFB11 were identiﬁed on the X None.A.Trimouille:None.M.Martin-Négrier:None.S. chromosome. Allouche: None. A. Slama: None. V. Desquiret-Dumas: NDUFAF3isamitochondrialrespiratorychaincomplexI None. N. Gueguen: None. D. Bonneau: None. M. Barth: (C1) assembly factor. mtDNA mutation m.8689 is asso- None. G. Lenears: None. P. Reynier: None. P. Amati- ciated with mitochondrial complex V deﬁciency and Leigh Bonneau: None. V. Paquis-Flucklinger: None. V. syndrome while NDUFB11 is associated with mitochon- Procaccio: None. drial C1 deﬁciency. The pathogenicity of these genes is in the process of being conﬁrmed in patient ﬁbroblasts. P06.34A WES followed by functional validation of disease alleles Molecular diagnosis of mitochondrial respiratory chain could identify disease-causative variants in mitochondrial complex deﬁciencies by whole exome sequencing respiratory chain complexes. J. Vella: None. S. Laurie: None. L. Matalonga: None. J.Vella1,S.Laurie2,L.Matalonga2,J.Borg1,3,D.Soler4, J. Borg: None. D. Soler: None. E. Said: None. A. E. Said5, A. Felice1,5,6 Felice: None. 1The Malta BioBank (BBMRI.mt), Centre of Molecular P06.36C Medicine and Biobanking, University of Malta, Msida, Two long-surviving adults with Myopathy Lactic Malta, 2Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG- Acidosis Sideroblastic Anemia 1 (MLASA1) due to CRG), Center for Genomic Regulation; Barcelona Institute previously undescribed mutations in PUS1 of Science and Technology (BIST); University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Applied M. F. Smeland1, K. Arntzen2,3,4, M. van Ghelue1,3, G. Å. Biomedical Science, Faculty ofHealth Sciences, University M. Hansen1, H. Hjellnes1, M. I. Olsen5 ofMalta,Msida,Malta,4DepartmentofPaediatrics,Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 5Department of Pathology, 1Dpt of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of North Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 6Department of Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2Dpt of Neurology, University Physiology and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 3Department Surgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta of Clinical Medicine, The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 4The National Neuromuscular Centre of Mitochondrial disorders are considered to be rare diseases Norway, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, which are genetically heterogenous. The oxidative phos- Norway, 5Dpt of Haematology, University Hospital of phorylation system consists of ﬁve multiprotein enzyme North Norway, Tromsø, Norway complexes. We report here two cases of patients suspected to have a mitochondrial disorder whose samples were Introduction: Myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic banked at the Malta BioBank (BBMRI.mt). anemia 1 (MLASA 1, MIM#600462) is a rare, autosomal The analysis was part of a collaborative BBMRI-Large recessivemitochondrialdiseasewhichismostoftenfatalby Prospective Cohort (BBMRI-LPC) project focused on adolescence. A few cases of long-surviving patients have mitochondrial disorders. The full mitochondrial genome been reported. Microcephaly, short stature, cognitive sequenicng, whole exome sequencing (WES) and data impairment and cardiomyopathy are variable features. We processing were carried out at Centro Nacional de Análisis present two females aged 26 and 31, further demonstrating Genómico(CNAG-CRG).Phenotypicdatawasrecordedin long survival in MLASA 1.1348 Materials and Methods: Patient 1 presented with myo- of Molecular Medicine, Biotech Research Center, Pasteur pathy,lactacidosisandanemiaatage7,andMLASA1was Institute of Iran,, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of suspected. Patient 2 presented with anemia at age 24. Severe exercise intolerance and myopathy since childhood Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is the primary was revealed. In both patients PUS1 was sequenced by aminoacidopathyaffecting branched-chain amino acid Sanger/Next-Generation Sequencing. Further clinical (BCAA) metabolism. The disease is mainly caused by the investigations and cDNA analysis are ongoing. deﬁciency of an enzyme named branched-chained α-keto Results: In patient 1, compound heterozygosity for acid dehydrogenase (BCKD), which consist of four NM_025215.5(PUS1):c.431G>Ap.(Arg144Gln)andc.441 subunits, and encoded by BCKDHA,BCKDHB, DBT, and +1G>A was detected. Patient 2 was shown to be homo- DLDgenerespectively.Consanguinityincreasesthechance zygous for c.441+1G>A. This mutation is predicted to of the presence of pathogenic mutations in a homoallelic disrupt the donor splice site of intron 3, making aberrant state.Bearingthisonourminds,autozygositymappingwas splicing likely. The missense variant c.431G>T p. performed with two sets of multiplex polymorphic STR (Arg144Gln) is located both at a highly conserved nucleo- (Short Tandem Repeat) markers linked to the above- tide and amino acid. Both patients have high S-lactate and mentioned genes. The aim was to indirectly ﬁnd the chronic acidosis. Ringed sideroblasts were observed only probable mutated gene in the studied families. Then once, in patient 1, but have otherwise not been demon- families who showed a homozygous haplotype for the strable in our patients. STR markers ﬂanking gene/genes were subsequently Conclusions: cDNA analysis might give further insights sequenced. In this study, we also summarized our recent into the consequences of the identiﬁed mutations, possibly molecular genetics ﬁndings to illustrate the mutation explaining the long survival. Classical sideroblastic anemia spectrum of MSUD in our country with high rate of is not obvious in all MLASA patients, and the expressivity consanguineous marriage (38.4%). Eleven novel mutations and age of presentation of symptoms are variable. Darbe- and some recently reported mutations were identiﬁed. We poetin alfa seems effective in controlling the anemia, while foundthatBCKDHBmutationisthemostcommonmutated severe lactacidosis is difﬁcult to treat. gene in our study which is different from other reports in M.F. Smeland: None. K. Arntzen: None. M. van other parts of the world. Additionally, structural modelling Ghelue:None.G.Å.M.Hansen:None.H.Hjellnes:None. of MSUD mutations has been analyzed to predict the M.I. Olsen: None. pathogenicityofthenewlyidentiﬁedvariants.Identiﬁcation of these mutations will further expand the spectrum of P06.37D known gene mutations and contributes to the genotype- Maple syrup urine disease mutation spectrum in a phenotype correlation and is very important in prenatal cohortof40consanguineouspatients;insilicoanalysisof molecular diagnosis of MSUD at- risk families. novel mutations M. Abiri: None. H. Saei Ahan: None. M. Eghbali: None. R. Karamzadeh: None. T. Shirzadeh: None. Z. M.Abiri1,H.SaeiAhan2,1,M.Eghbali3,R.Karamzadeh4, Shariﬁ: None. S. Zeinali: None. T. Shirzadeh5, Z. Shariﬁ6, S. Zeinali7 P06.38A 1Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Identiﬁcation and characterization of new RNASEH1 Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, mutations associated with PEO syndrome and multiple Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Student Research mtDNA deletions committee,FacultyofMedicine,IranUniversityofMedical Sciences,Tehran,Iran,IslamicRepublicof,3Departmentof L. Carreño-Gago1,2, C. Blazquez-Bermejo1,2, J. Díaz- Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University Manera3,2, Y. Camara1,2, E. Gallardo3,2, R. Marti1,2, of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, J. Torres-Torronteras1,2, E. Garcia-Arumi4,1,2 44Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at CellScienceResearchCenter,RoyanInstituteforStemCell 1Departament dePatologíaMitocondrial iNeuromuscular, Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca Republicof,5KawsarHumanGeneticsResearchCenter,41 (VHIR), UAB, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Majlesi St., Vali Asr St, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 6Department of Midwifery, Faculty of Nursing and ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei de Neurologia, Midwifery, Tehran Medical Sciences, Islamic Azad Laboratori de Neurologia Experimental, Hospital de la University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 7Department Santa Creu i Sant Pau i Institut de Recerca de HSCSP, UAB, Barcelona, Spain, 4Àrea de Genètica Clínica iAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1349 Molecular. Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron., subunits (MT-ND genes) of complex I diagnosed in our Barcelona, Spain department. Material: In the cohort of 106 unrelated families with Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion and deletion mtDNA mutations, mutations in MT-ND genes were found syndrome encompasses a group of disorders caused by in 13 patients from 12 families. mutations in genes involved in mtDNA replication and Results: Among 13 patients, 8 different heteroplasmic maintenance. The clinical phenotype ranges from fatal mtDNAmutationsinMT-ND1(2x),MT-ND3(1x)andMT- infantile hepatocerebral forms to mild adult onset progres- ND5(5x)geneswerefound.Inpatientwithchildhood-onset siveexternalophthalmoplegia(PEO).Wereportthecaseof of migraines followed by stroke-like episodes later in a patient with PEO and multiple mtDNA deletions, with adulthood, novel heteroplasmic mutation m.13091T>C in two new homozygous mutations in RNASEH1. The ﬁrst MT-ND5 was found. Six patients with heteroplasmy levels mutation (c.487T>C) is located in the same catalytic >60% developed Leigh syndrome and their prognosis was domain as the four previously reported mutations, and the signiﬁcantly worse compared to ﬁve patients with hetero- second(c.258_260del)islocatedintheconnectiondomain, plasmy levels <60%. MELAS syndrome including stroke- where no mutations have been reported. In silico study of like episodes was observed in these ﬁve patients. In two the mutations predicted only the ﬁrst mutation as patho- children, the diseases started with optic neuropathy genic, but functional studies showed that both mutations mimicking LHON syndrome, later it transitioned to multi- cause loss of ribonuclease H1 activity. mtDNA replication system diseases compatible with MELAS syndrome. CI dysfunction was demonstrated in patient ﬁbroblasts, which activities in muscle mitochondria were decreased in most were unable to recover normal mtDNA copy number after patients and mitochondrial energy-generating capacity was ethidium bromide-induced mtDNA depletion. Our results altered in some patients. demonstrate the pathogenicity of two new RNASEH1 Conclusions: Patients with multisystem MD due to variants found in a patient with PEO syndrome, multiple mutations in mtDNA-encoded subunits of complex I deletions,andmildmitochondrialmyopathy.Thisworkwas usuallydevelopLeighorMELASsyndromesandrepresent supported by the Spanish Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 11%offamilieswithmaternallyinheritedMDdiagnosedin FondodeInvestigacionesSanitarias;EGAistherecipientof our centre. Early onset of the disease and higher mtDNA agrantfromtheFISPI15-01428-FEDER.JTwasfundedby mutation heteroplasmy levels are accompanied with Leigh a fellowship granted by the Generalitat de Catalunya phenotype and worse prognosis. (PERIS program, SLT002/16/00370). Supported by AZV17-30965A, RVO VFN 64165, AZV16- L. Carreño-Gago: None. C. Blazquez-Bermejo: None. 32341A, and AZV16-33018A. J. Díaz-Manera: None. Y. Camara: None. E. Gallardo: T. Daňhelovská: None. H. Kolářová: None. K. None. R. Marti: None. J. Torres-Torronteras: None. E. Beránková: None. A. Vondráčková: None. H. Hansí- Garcia-Arumi: None. ková: None. T. Honzík: None. J. Zeman: None. M. Tesařová: None. P06.39B Novel mutation m.13091T>C in MT-ND5 gene leads to P06.40C MELAS phenotype - retrospective study in Czech The mutation spectrum of NAGLU in patients with mutations in mtDNA-encoded subunits of mucopolysaccharidosis type III B patients complex I F. Ozkinay1, D. A. Emecen1, M. Kose1, E. Isik1, T. Daňhelovská, H. Kolářová, K. Beránková, E. A. Bozaci2, E. Canda2, B. Tuysuz3, T. Atik1, H. Onay4 A. Vondráčková, H. Hansíková, T. Honzík, J. Zeman, M. Tesařová 1Subdivision of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Turkey, 2Subdivision of Pediatric Metabolism, Department Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic Turkey, 3Subdivision of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Cerrahpasa University, Isolated respiratory chain complex I (CI) deﬁciency, the Istanbul,Turkey,4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Faculty mostcommon causeofmitochondrialdisorders(MD),may of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey be caused by mutations in nuclear or mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). We analysed patients with maternally inherited Aim: Mucopolysaccharidosis type III B (MPS IIIB) is an multisystem MD due to mutations in mtDNA-encoded autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease caused by1350 mutations in the NAGLU gene which codes the lysosomal Results: In 83 cases (40%), we identiﬁed likely patho- enzyme alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase. The major symp- genic or pathogenic variants in genes that have been asso- toms of the disease are cognitive and neurological defects. ciated with mitochondrial diseases (42), other In this study molecular spectrum of 13 MPS IIIB patients neurometabolic diseases (21) or other neurodevelopmental were evaluated. disorders (20). In 58 cases (28%) we identiﬁed variants of MateryalandMethods:TwelveMPSIIIBpatientsfrom unknown signiﬁcance where follow up studies for func- 11 families both clinically and molecularly diagnosed were tionalanalysesarepending.Moreoverwenewlyidentiﬁed8 included in this study. NAGLU gene sequencing was per- candidate genes affecting the mitochondrial function or formed using a next generation sequencing platform (Illu- selenoprotein metabolism. However 27% of the cases minaMiSeq).Demographic,clinicalandlaboratoryﬁndings remain unsolved. Further ongoing investigations of the of the patients were obtained from the hospital records. latterinaresearch settingincludetheadditionalanalysisof Results:Tendifferent mutationsin13MPSIIIBpatients parental DNAs (trio analysis) as well as full genome, were identiﬁed. Eight of the all mutations were missense, transcriptome and proteome analysis. one mutation was splice site and one large deletion. Three Conclusions: Although presenting with a wide pheno- mutations (c.509G>T, c.700C>G, and c.1000G>A) were typic spectrum WES facilitated a deﬁnite diagnosis in 40% deﬁned for the ﬁrst time in this study. and a possible diagnosis pending follow up in 28% of Conclucion: Our study expanded the mutation spectrum the cases. of the NAGLU gene, contributing to the improved genetic S.Beck-Woedl:None.L.Laugwitz:None.R.Buchert: counseling of MPSIIIB patients. In accordance with the None. M. Grimmel: None. M. Sturm: None. U. Grassh- literature, missense mutations were also the most common off: None. O. Rieß: None. T. Haack: None. mutations in our study. F. Ozkinay: None. D.A. Emecen: None. M. Kose: P06.42A None.E.Isik:None.E.A.Bozaci:None.E.Canda:None. The study of the full spectrum of variants leading to B. Tuysuz: None. T. Atik: None. H. Onay: None. hyperphenylalaninemia have revealed 10 new variants in the PAH gene P06.41D Diagnostic exome in neurometabolic disorders I. Kuznetcova, P. Gundorova, O. Ryzhkova, A. Polyakov S. Beck-Woedl1,2, L. Laugwitz1,2,3, R. Buchert1, Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for M. Grimmel1, M. Sturm1, U. Grasshoff1,2, O. Rieß1,2, Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation T. Haack1,2 Introduction:Hyperphenylalaninemia(HPA)isagroupof 1Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Tuebingen, disease characterized by elevated concentrations of pheny- Germany, 2ZSE, Rare Disease Center, University of lalanine inblood. HPAincludes phenylketonuriaandBH4- Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3Children’s Hospital, deﬁcient forms of hyperphenylalaninemia. Pediatric Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Materials and Methods: 1265 unrelated probands from University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany Russia were previously searched for 25 frequent mutations inthePAHgene.DNAsamplesof293probandswithoutor Introduction: Molecular diagnosis of neurometabolic with one frequent mutation were analyzed. The next gen- diseases is challenging due to the large number of eration sequencing (NGS) of PAH, PTS, GCH1, PCBD1, established and candidate disease genes associated with an QDPR, SPR and DNAJC12 genes to search for point extreme heterogeneity of clinical presentations at variable mutations and MLPA method to search for gross deletions ages. Especially in infancy-onset of inborn errors of were conducted. metabolism an early diagnosis is crucial to guide down- Results: Among 327 chromosomes without identiﬁed stream clinical management and treatment decisions. mutations, mutations in the PAH gene were found on 259 MaterialsandMethods:Weherereportontheresultsof chromosomes, and mutations in the PTS gene were found exome-based diagnostics of 209 index cases with clinically on 10 chromosomes. On 10 chromosomes gross deletions suspected neurometabolic diseases. Coding genomic by the MLPA method were detected. 104 rare variants of regions were enriched with a SureSelect Human All Exon the РАН gene, including 10 variants not previously Kit V6/7 (Agilent technologies) for subsequent sequencing described (p.Pro69Thr, p.Leu83Trpfs*9, p.Gln232Pro, p. on an Illumina HiSeq2500/NovaSeq6000 system. Clinical Cys237Phe, p.Ala300Asp, p.Gly312Ser, p.Thr328Pro, p. variant prioritization included different ﬁltering steps (e.g. Tyr417*, p.Asp435Val, IVS9-1G>C), and 6 variants of the MAF < 0.1 % in gnomAD, in-house database).Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1351 PTSgenewererevealed.Throughttheuseallthepresented BDNF, LY86, ABCG2 polymorphisms and obesity. The methods,mutationswerefoundon97.3%ofchromosomes. research is part of the EUFP7 ProMarka and ROMCAN Conclusions: According to the study results, a spectrum studies. Replication studies for conﬁrmation of these of mutations leading to hyperphenylalaninemia in Russia markes are ongoing. was established. The data obtained helped to reveal rare O. Andrei: None. P. Iordache: None. G. Ursu: None. mutations of the PAH gene and establish the percentage of V. Radoi: None. L. Bohiltea: None. R. Ursu: None. tetrahydrobiopterin-dependentHPAformsinRussia-0.4%. I. Kuznetcova: None. P. Gundorova: None. O. Ryzh- P06.45D kova: None. A. Polyakov: None. Gene discovery for favourable adiposity using cross- phenotype analysis P06.43B Correlation of BDNF, LY86, ABCG2 polymorphisms L. O. Huang1, U. Schick2, N. Yang2, T. O. Kilpeläinen1, and obesity in an Romanian Caucasian male cohort R. J. F. Loos2 O. Andrei1, P. Iordache2, G. Ursu3, V. Radoi4, 1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic L. Bohiltea4, R. Ursu4 Research, Copenhagen N, Denmark, 2The Charles BronfmanInstituteforPersonalizedMedicine,IcahnSchool 1”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States Bucharest, Romania, 2”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Epidemiology, Obesity has become a global pandemic in the last few Bucharest, Romania, 3”Agrippa Ionescu” Emergency decades. It is often associated with cardiometabolic Military Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 4”Carol Davila” comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease and type 2 University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of diabetes. However, some individuals remain cardiometabo- Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania lically healthy despite being obese, also called the metabolically healthy obese (MHO). The biological Introduction: Obesity is one of the most important public mechanisms that underlie MHO are poorly understood. To health problems worldwide. In Romania, the prevalence of identify novel adiposity-increasing variants with protective obesity is increasing and it is more common in male. The cardiometabolic effects, we performed pairwise analyses of aim of this study is to identify the genes involved in the adiposity and cardiometabolic traits using available sum- predispositionandpathogenesisofobesity.3allelicvariants mary statistics from 11 GWAS. These include three of genes related to this condition were analysed: adiposity traits (body fat percentage, body mass index, rs11030104 of BDNF gene, LY86 gene rs2199936 poly- and waist-to-hip ratio) and eight cardiometabolic traits morphism and rs2199936 of ABCG2 gene. (high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density lipopro- Methods: This study consists of 5281 male patients tein cholesterol, triglycerides, fasting glucose and insulin, hospitalized between 2012 and 2017 in multiple clinics in blood pressure, and incident coronary artery disease and Bucharestforvariousmedicalreasons.Allsubjectswereof type 2 diabetes). We identiﬁed genome-wide signiﬁcant self‐reported European descent. No signiﬁcant difference associations (P<5x10-8) with any of the 24 trait pairs was observed between the average age of the cases (66.9) consisting of one of three adiposity traits and one of the and controls (64.3). DNA was extracted from whole blood eight cardiometabolic traits. This resulted in the discovery at deCODE Genetics (Reykjavik, Iceland) and genotyped, of 62 independent loci residing in gene regions such as using Inﬁnium OmniExpress‐24 bead chips (Illumina). A COBLL1, PPARG, VEGFB and VEGFA. Results of tissue total of 716 503 SNPs were genotyped for each individual and cell enrichment analyses using DEPICT implicate included in the study. strongestenrichmentinadiposetissue,adrenalcortex,liver, Results: The BDNF rs11030104 polymorphism has and arteries. Gene set enrichment analyses using DEPICT shown statistical correlation for obesity alike with the highlighted several pathways (P<5x10-4), such as “abnor- worldwide rates (p=0.0004642). Another statistical corre- mal muscle cell glucose uptake”, “decreased percent body lation between obesity and the rs1294410 LY86 variant, fat”,and“responsetoinsulinstimulus”.Ourresultsprovide responsible for the waist to hip ratio variation, was identi- insights into biological pathways that may underlie MHO ﬁed (p=0.003984). ABCG2 rs2199936, which is involved and could shed light on future drug development targeting intheserumuricacidadjustment,hasalsoshownstatistical improvement in cardiometabolic proﬁle of unhealthy obese correlation for obesity (p= 0.003733; OR= 0.4707). individuals. Conclusions: The results suggest that in the European Danish Council for Independent Research (DFF6110- male population there is a strong correlation between the 00183), Novo Nordisk Foundation (NNF18CC0034900)1352 L.O. Huang: None. U. Schick: None. N. Yang: None. P06.47B T.O. Kilpeläinen: None. R.J.F. Loos: None. Enrichment of variants affecting mitochondrial metabolism in patients with Parkinson disease P06.46A A clinical case of somatic mosaicism in an unaffected G. Bergant, A. Maver, B. Peterlin fatheroffemalepatientwithornithinetranscarbamylase deﬁciency (OTC) Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia N. Semenova1, I. Anisimova1, O. Shchagina1, While age-related accumulation of somatic mitochondrial A. Chuchrova1, O. Ryzhkova1, I. Bychkov1, mutationshasbeendemonstratedinParkinsondisease(PD) N. Pechatnikova2 patients, the role of germline mitochondrial variants has never been systematically studied. In the present study, we 1Reseach Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian aimed to investigate the germline genetic burden in genes Federation, 2Morozov Children’s City Clinical Hospital, affecting mitochondrial function and the role of the Moscow, Russian Federation subsequent genetic variability in PD. For this reason, we compared the genetic variability in 70 patients with early Introduction: Ornithine transcarbamylase deﬁciency onsetorfamilialPDwithoutadiscoveredmonogeniccause (OTC) is an X-linked inborn error of metabolism of the with that of 253 controls. Mitochondrial genome was urea cycle. OTC deﬁciency can occur as a severe neonatal- reconstructed from clinical or whole exome sequencing onset disease in males and as a post-neonatal-onset (partial data,whichallowedustoinvestigatebothmitochondrialas deﬁciency) disease in females. well as nuclear genes, including nuclear genes involved in MaterialsandMethods:Wepresentfamilywith4-years human mitochondrial disorders. For further analysis, old girl who has clinical symptoms of urea cycle disorders. variants were ﬁltered excluding nuclear variants based on Anothermembersoffamilyarehealthy.Proband’sperinatal in-house populational data, those with mean allele period was normal. Since the ﬁrst year she refused to eat frequency over 5% in public databases and synonymous meat product. At age of 3 years she was detected liver mitochondrial variants. We detected signiﬁcant differences transaminase elevated (more than 10 norm) with neurolo- in burden of variants in three mitochondrially encoded gical symptoms. Orotic acid concentration in urine was genes. The greatest increase of variant burden between PD normal. A low-protein diet was effective: a liver transami- and controls was observed in MTND5 (38.6% versus nase normalized, neurological symptoms stopped. 26.9%), MTCO2 (10.5% versus 5.5%) and MTND4L (7% Results: Analysis of whole exome sequencing data versus 0.5%), with the ﬁrst and last being mitochondrial revealed a pathogenic heterozygous variant c.78-1G>A in respiratory complex I components. No signiﬁcant differ- OTC gene in the proband. This variant was conﬁrmed by ences have been observed in the variant burden of nuclear Sanger sequencing in proband, wasn’t detected in her genes. In conclusion, our ﬁndings support the hypothesis motherandherhealthyoldersister,andwasdetectedinher thatgermlinemitochondrialvariantsmightcontributetothe fatherinheterozygousstateinmosaicform.Inherfatherwe pathogenesis of PD. detected only one copy of X -chromosome by different G.Bergant:None.A.Maver: None.B.Peterlin:None. methods, including cytogenetic. We detected mosaicism of variant c.78-1G>A in OTC gene in the different tissues P06.48C (buccal epithelium, blood, seminal ﬂuid, urinary sediment) Rapid mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) sequencing: which are having an origin from every germ layer (ecto- facilitating rapid diagnosis of mitochondrial diseases in derm, mesoderm, endoderm). paediatric acute care Conclusions: Our clinical case shows that affected females may inherit the OTC pathogenic variant from her L. S. Akesson1,2,3, S. Eggers1, C. J. Love1, B. Chong1, father who doesn't have clinical symptoms of disease. It is M. F. Hunter3,4, E. I. Krzesinski3,4, N. J. Brown1,2, important for determination of genetic risk and discussion T. Y. Tan1,2, C. M. Richmond1, D. R. Thorburn1,2,5, of the necessary of prenatal testing. J. Christodoulou1,2,5, Z. Stark1,2,5, S. Lunke1,2,5 N. Semenova: None. I. Anisimova: None. O. Shcha- gina:None.A.Chuchrova:None.O.Ryzhkova:None.I. 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Bychkov: None. N. Pechatnikova: None. Australia, 2University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Monash Genetics, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia, 4Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 5Australian Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, AustraliaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1353 Phenylketonuria(PKU) is an inborn error of metabolism Introduction: Standard rapid genomic testing techniques involving impaired metabolism of phenylalanine that leads analyse nuclear DNA variants using exome and/or genome to severe mental retardation. In Moldova PKU diagnosis is sequencing (ES/GS). Rapid mtDNA analysis is not based on newborn screening(NBS) from 1989. routinely available, particularly in centres performing ES, Materials and Methods: Diagnosis of 123 Moldavian which does not deliver clinical-grade mtDNA sequencing. PKU/HPA patients was based on Phe level >3mg/dL and WedescribeourexperienceusingrapidmtDNAsequencing genetic analysis by PCR/RFLP method of hot-spot muta- in tandem with an ES-based rapid genomic diagnosis tions (R408W, P281L, R158Q, R261Q, R252W, IVS12 program as part of the Australian Genomics Acute Care +1G>A, L48S, R261X, G272X, IVS10-11G>A) carried out ﬂagship. onEppendorfMasterCyclerProfollowedby“Sanger”DNA Methods: Two infants presenting with persistent lactic sequencing on ABI 3130xl Genetic Analyzer(Switzerland), acidosis and bone marrow failure were recruited for rapid ABI 3500dx Genetic Analyzer(Moldova). genomic testing. With clinical suspicion of mitochondrial The results: During 28 years, 107 PKU patients have disease, both infants underwent rapid ES and mtDNA been identiﬁed by NBS and 16 patients - extra screening, sequencing in tandem, the latter using Nextera libraries showing the total PKU incidence of 1:6463 newborns, from a full length mtDNA amplicon. screening rate 92-97% for last 5 years. Most of them(69%) Results: ES was non-diagnostic in both infants. mtDNA have a classical PKU phenotype(Phe levels at diagnosis sequencingidentiﬁedasinglelargemtDNAdeletioninboth 24,3-52mg/dl), followed by moderate PKU(21%), mild infants, diagnostic of Pearson syndrome (MIM 557000). PKU(7%), and HPA(2%). The 105 PKU patients were Diagnostic reports were issued within 73 hours 55 minutes subjected to genetic analysis of PAH gene being identiﬁed and54hours25minutes,respectively.Bothinfantsavoided 32diseasecausingmutations:18missense(56%),8splicing invasive bone marrow biopsies and a range of other (25%), 3 deletion(9%) and 3 nonsense(9%) mutations, that investigations. compound 47 different genotypes in Moldavian PKU Conclusions: Rapid mtDNA sequencing in tandem with patients. The most common mutation was R408W found in ES results in additional diagnoses in seriously ill children 50.5%ofcases.Onenovelmutationc.2T>Cinexon1was withsuspectedmitochondrialpathology,suggestingthatES identiﬁed in a patient with constantly Phe level ~13mg/dL, alone may be insufﬁcient in this setting. When designing slight intellectual disability and no other mutations in PAH rapid genomic diagnosis programs, centres should consider gene was detected, that was suggestive for errors in BH4 incorporating mtDNA ampliﬁcation and analysis in indivi- biosynthesis genes. duals with suspected mitochondrial pathology, by combin- Conclusion: Efﬁciency of PKU diagnosis in Moldova ing ES and mtDNA sequencing in tandem, or analysing has been increased, due to NBS coverage and mutation mtDNA data from GS, which captures the mitochondrial detection over 90% rate, applying a targeted specialized genome. treatment and prenatal diagnosis. L.S.Akesson:None.S.Eggers:None.C.J.Love:None. K.R. Boiciuc: None. C. Gemperle-Britschgi: None. D. B. Chong: None. M.F. Hunter: None. E.I. Krzesinski: Sato: None. N. Rimann: None. T. Croitori: None. D. None. N.J. Brown: None. T.Y. Tan: None. C.M. Rich- Blanita: None. E. Halabudenco: None. V. Sacara: None. mond: None. D.R. Thorburn: None. J. Christodoulou: B. Thöny: None. N. Usurelu: None. None. Z. Stark: None. S. Lunke: None. P06.50A P06.49D Whole genome sequencing characterizes precise break Biochemical and molecular genetic diagnosis of points and extent of heterozygous deletion in PAH in a Moldavian PKU patients: A novel missense mutation in patient identiﬁed by newborn screening PAH gene E. K. Samuelsson, S. Rajaei, J. Asin Cayuela K. R. Boiciuc1, C. Gemperle-Britschgi2, D. Sato2, N. Rimann2, T. Croitori1, D. Blanita1, E. Halabudenco1, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Göteborg, Sweden V. Sacara1, B. Thöny2, N. Usurelu1 Since 1965, newborn babies in Sweden are screened for 1Institute of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Inborn Errors of Metabolism (IEM) by biochemical Republicof,2UniversityChildren'sHospitalZurich,Zürich, analysis. For the past few years, ﬁndings are genetically Switzerland characterized in our laboratory by exon panel sequencing and Sanger. Here we complement exon panel sequencing with whole genome sequencing (WGS), which is superior1354 characterizing copy number variations. Exon panel sequen- Results: Celastrol treatment signiﬁcantly increases cing of a sample positive for phenylketonuria (PKU) on PMM2 proteinlevelsandactivity ofvariousmutants inthe newborn screening detected a heterozygous SNV (single cellular model. Theseresultscorrelate with an increment in nucleotide variant) in a well known CpG hotspot for PKU, the transcriptional and proteomic levels of some HSPs of in PAH. Copy number analysis (CNV) indicated a the proteostasis network. The HSP90 inhibitor, but not the heterozygous deletion spanning exon 3 PAH, but not exon HSP70one,interfereswiththeeffectofcelastrolonPMM2. 2 nor 4. Using whole genome sequencing, we were able to The combination of celastrol and CVIII has a mutation- reveal the exact break points andsize ofthe deletion. Exon dependent synergistic effect on PMM2 activity. 3 of PAH is involved in encoding the regulatory domain Conclusions: These results show the positive effect of (located at the N-terminal) of phenylalanine hydroxylase. celastrol on the PMM2 stability and activity through the This domain determines the speciﬁcity of the enzyme for HSP90-drivenmodulationoftheproteostasisnetwork.This the amino acid phenylalanine. The break points as well as isaproof-of-conceptofthepossibletherapeuticuseofPRs theSNV,weresubsequentlyveriﬁedbySanger sequencing and PCs for PMM2-CDG. and both parents were also analyzed by Sanger sequencing D.Gallego:None.A.Vilas:None.P.Yuste:None.L.R. to conﬁrm their heterozygous genotypes. The proband was Desviat: None. M. Ugarte: None. C. Pérez-Cerdá: None. consequentlyfoundtobecompoundheterozygote,resulting A. Gámez: None. B. Pérez: None. in classical PKU. E.K. Samuelsson: None. S. Rajaei: None. J. Asin P06.52C Cayuela: None. Functional consequences of bi-allelic PNPT1 variants associated with multisystemic disease P06.51B Proteostasis regulators as a possible mutation-speciﬁc R. Rius1,2, L. G. Riley3,4, N. J. Van Bergen1,2, therapeutic approach for PMM2-CDG A. G. Compton1,2, D. J. Amor1,2,5, M. Kava6,7,8, S. Balasubramaniam9,10,11, M. Fanjul-Fernandez5, D. Gallego1, A. Vilas1, P. Yuste2, L. R. Desviat1, M. Cowley12,13,14, M. Fahey15, T. Y. Tan1,2,5, M. Ugarte1, C. Pérez-Cerdá1, A. Gámez1, B. Pérez1 D. R. Thorburn1,2,5, J. Christodoulou1,2,5 1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares 1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, (CEDEM), Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of UniversidadAutónomadeMadrid,CentrodeInvestigación Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Kids Research, The Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, InstitutodeInvestigaciónSanitariaIdiPAZ,Madrid,Spain, 4Discipline of Child & Adolescent Health, Sydney Medical 2Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Munich, Germany School, University of Sydney, Syndey, Australia, 5Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Royal Children’s Hospital, Introduction: PMM2-CDG, the most common glycosyla- Melbourne, Australia, 6Department of Neurology, Perth tiondisorderforwhichthereisnocure,hasbeensuggested Children’s Hospital, Perth, Australia, 7School of to be a conformational disease. The misfolded nature of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Western most of the disease-causing mutations makes the use of Australia, Perth, Australia, 8Department of Metabolic stabilizingmolecules,pharmacologicalchaperones(PCs)or Medicine and Rheumatology, Perth Childrens’ Hospital, proteostasis regulators (PRs), a promising therapeutic Perth,Australia,9DisciplineofChild&AdolescentHealth, strategy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, of PRs on the stability and activity of PMM2 unstable Australia, 10Western Sydney Genetics Program, The mutants and decipher their molecular mechanisms. Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, Materials and Methods: Patient-derived ﬁbroblasts 11Discipline of Genetic Medicine, Sydney Medical School, transduced with their own PMM2 folding or oligomeriza- University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 12Children's tion mutation were treated with different concentrations of CancerInstitute,Randwick,Australia,13SchoolofWomen's PRs (celastrol and MG-132) or combining celastrol and a and Children's Health, UNSW Sydney, Syndey, Australia, PC (CVIII). Their effect was studied by western blot and 14Cancer Division, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, PMM enzymatic assay. The expression levels of several Sydney, Australia, 15Department of Paediatrics, Monash molecular chaperones (HSPs) were assessed by qRT-PCR University, Melbourne, Australia and western blot. The speciﬁcity of the molecular chaper- ones involved was evaluated by using speciﬁc HSP70 or Introduction: PNPT1 encodes the Polyribonucleotide HSP90 inhibitors. nucleotidyltransferase 1 protein which predominantlyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1355 localizes to the mitochondria, and is involved in multiple of Torino, Torino, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer RNAprocessingfunctions.Bi-allelicpathogenicvariantsin Children's University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 4Pediatric PNPT1 have been identiﬁed in patients with a hetero- Clinic, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico "San Matteo", geneous phenotype ranging from non-syndromic deafness University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy to a multisystemic presentation with severe global devel- opmental delay, seizures, dystonia, choreoathetosis, Mitochondrialdiseases(MD)arethemostcommoncauseof ophthalmologicalabnormalitiesanddifferentMRI-ﬁndings. inherited metabolic diseases. Combined respiratory chain Materials and Methods: We investigated 5 unrelated (RC) complexes defects are caused by mutations in the patientswithbi-allelicvariantsinPNPT1identiﬁedthrough mtDNA-encoded RNA products and mutations in nuclear massively parallel sequencing. The patients presented with genes involved in mtDNA translation machinery. PUS1, a clinical features in common with previously reported mul- nuclear gene, encodes for cytoplasmatic and mitochondrial tisystemic cases. Using patient ﬁbroblasts and peripheral tRNA pseudouridine-synthase-1, that converts uridine into blood samples, we performed functional studies to conﬁrm pseudouridine in several tRNA positions increasing the pathogenicity including cDNA studies, complex I (CI) and efﬁciency of protein synthesis on both compartments. IV (CIV) enzyme activity assays, immunoblotting, RT- Mutations in PUS1 cause MLASA syndrome, a rare qPCR analysis for detection of mitochondrial unprocessed autosomal recessive disorder of oxidative phosphorylation transcripts, and expression of targeted interferon and iron metabolism, clinically characterized by Mitochon- signalling genes. drial Myopathy, Lactic Acidosis and Sideroblastic Anemia. Results:Comparedtocontrols,patientﬁbroblastsshowed We report clinical, biochemical and molecular ﬁndings of mildlyreducedCIandCIVproteinactivities,therewasalso unreported patient in which Whole Exome Sequencing a reduction in PNPT1 protein expression and a 2-6 fold (WES) revealed the presence of new biallelic mutations in accumulation of MT-ND5+MT-ND6 and MT-CYTB+MT- PUS1.Reviewofthe16PUS1mutantpatientspublishedto ND6mitochondrialRNAunprocessedtranscripts.Inblood, date demonstrates a huge clinical heterogeneity with therewasanincreasedexpressionof6genesinvolvedinthe intellectual disability, microcephaly and anemia as typical interferon I pathway. clinical elements. Given the paucity of the patients Conclusions: The accumulation of mitochondrial described, it is not possible to delineate a complete unprocessed transcripts and increased interferon pathway phenotypic picture and the associated clinical evolution, expression provides furtherevidencefor therole ofPNPT1 and it is not possible to establish an accurate genotype - in mitochondrial RNA processing, and of the possible phenotype correlation that allows us to indicate a proper contribution of an immune response to disease pathogen- prognosis and follow-up. Moreover, our patient had severe esis. It also demonstrates that in order to conﬁrm patho- osteoporosis with multiple fractures that were never genicity, functional analyses of the primarily affected previously reported in the literature and a more early processes are more sensitive than the modest defects evolution of neuro-muscular symptoms than the other detected downstream on the respiratory chain enzyme patients. WES is increasing the diagnostic yield in MD, in activities. particularenhancingtheabilitytoidentify potential nuclear R. Rius: None. L.G. Riley: None. N.J. Van Bergen: gene mutations in patients with biochemically deﬁned None.A.G.Compton:None.D.J.Amor:None.M.Kava: defects affecting multiple mitochondrial RC and complex None. S. Balasubramaniam: None. M. Fanjul-Fernan- phenotype. dez:None.M.Cowley:None.M.Fahey:None.T.Y.Tan: F. Peluso: None. B. Siri: None. V. Palazzo: None. A. None. D.R. Thorburn: None. J. Christodoulou: None. Provenzano:None.R.Artuso:None.A.Pagliazzi:None. G. Forzano: None. G. Contro': None. F. Di giovanni: P06.53D None. T. Foiardelli: None. F. Bassanese: None. S. Whole exome sequencing (WES) in suspected Savasta: None. S. Giglio: None. mitochodrialdisease:PUS1geneandMLASAspectrum P06.54A F. Peluso1, B. Siri2, V. Palazzo3, A. Provenzano1, Mitochondrial disease caused by a novel homozygous R. Artuso3,A. Pagliazzi1, G.Forzano1, G.Contro'1, F. Di mutation (Gly106del) in the SCO1 gene Giovanni1, T. Foiardelli4, F. Bassanese4, S. Savasta4, S. Giglio1,3 N. Brix1, J. M. Jensen2, I. S. Pedersen3,4, A. Ernst3, S. Frost2, P. Bogaard5, L. Bender1, M. B. Petersen2,4 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Biomedical Experimental and Clinical Sciences, University of Firenze, 1Dept. of Pediatrics, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Dept. of Clinical Firenze,Italy,2DepartmentofPediatrics,OIRM,University Genetics, Aalborg, Denmark, 3Section of Molecular1356 Diagnostic, Aalborg, Denmark, 4Dept. of Clinical France, 2Nice Sophia-Antipolis University, IRCAN, CNRS, Medicine, Aalborg, Denmark, 5Pathological institute, INSERM, UMR 7284 & U1081, 06107 Nice, France Aalborg, Denmark Mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with a variety of Introduction:TheCytochromeCoxidaseassemblyprotein diseases. Each human cell contains several mitochondria SCO1 gene encodes a mitochondrial protein essential for which hold multiple copies of mitochondrial DNA the mammalian energy metabolism. Only three cases of (mtDNA). mtDNA heteroplasmy is the coexisting of wild- SCO1 mutations have thus far been reported. All cases typeandmutantmtDNAmoleculesinacell.Theproportion presented with lactate acidosis and encephalopathy. Two of mutated mtDNA should exceed a threshold to cause hadhepatopathyandhypotonia.Onefurtherpresentedwith biochemical defects. NGS leaded us to identify an intrauterinegrowthretardationandhypertrophiccardiomyo- increasingnumberofpathogenicvariantsbutalsoofvariant pathy leading to cardiac failure. of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS).Only a tiny sub-group of Here we present a case of a girl of Afghan con- VUS was functionally evaluated with certitude, while the sanguineous parents, born premature with a novel homo- pathogenicity of the great majority was only assessed in- zygous mutation in the SCO1 gene and a different silico.Weinvestigatedsevenpatientswithclinicalfeatures, phenotype than previously reported cases. muscle biopsy and biochemical defects suggesting a Within the ﬁrst two hours, the girl developed severe mitochondrial dysfunction, including the presence of lactate acidosis and hypoglycemia. Echocardiography, eye cytochrome c oxidase - deﬁcient ﬁbers (COX (-)). mtDNA examination, ultrasound of the brain, kidneys and urinary sequencing found a VUS for each patient. In order to tract were normal. As was the level of ammonium. At four determinethepathogenicityoftheseVUS,wequantiﬁedthe days old an investigation of suspected metabolic disease level of mtDNA heteroplasmy by semi-quantitative ﬂuor- was initiated including whole exome sequencing. Merely escent PCR in muscle ﬁbres COX (+) and COX (-) single ﬁve days later whole exome sequencing revealed a novel cells. We found a statistically signiﬁcant heteroplasmic homozygous mutation in the SCO1 gene (c.317_319del- difference between individual COX (+) and COX (-) cells GAG)inexon2resultinginanin-framedeletionofGly106. for 6 patients, which supports the pathogenicity of these A muscle biopsy was later performed, showing reduced VUS, allowing us to conﬁrm the diagnosis for these activity of complex IV in accordance with the SCO1 patients. Determining the pathogenicity of the VUS mutation detected by whole exome sequencing. The girl identiﬁed by NGS is becoming a major goal to reduce died 1 month old. diagnostic wandering in patients. The single cell hetero- Conclusion: We identiﬁed a novel homozygous SCO1 plasmy quantiﬁcation is a gold-standard method for the mutation (Gly106del) in a patient with a clinical course of mutation-diseasecausallinkassessmentandshouldbeused mitochondrial disease different from previously reported routinely in diagnosis. In this objective, we designed a SCO1 cases. Mitochondrial disease may manifest in neo- fastest and easiest single cell quantiﬁcation tool. nates, but early diagnosis has so far been difﬁcult. Because E.Zereg:None.S.Bannwarth:None.G.Morel:None. of improved technique as whole exome sequencing early A. Chaussenot: None. S. Ait-El-Mkadem: None. K. diagnosis and consideration of treatment level are now Fragaki: None. B. Chaﬁno: None. M. Berthet: None. V. possible. Paquis-Flucklinger: None. C. Rouzier: None. N.Brix:None.J.M.Jensen:None.I.S.Pedersen:None. A. Ernst: None. S. Frost: None. P. Bogaard: None. L. P06.56C Bender: None. M.B. Petersen: None. TANGO2 associated autosomal recessive disease: A novel case P06.55B Characterization of seven mitochondrial DNA variants R. Ripszám, K. Hadzsiev, J. Zima, Á. Till, B. Melegh of unknown signiﬁcance by quantiﬁcation of single cell heteroplasmy University of Pécs, Medical School, Pécs, Hungary E. Zereg1, S. Bannwarth1,2, G. Morel1, A. Chaussenot1, Introduction: TANGO2-related disorder was ﬁrst pub- S.Ait-El-Mkadem1,K.Fragaki1,B.Chaﬁno1,M.Berthet1, lished in 2016. Homozygous or compound heterozygous V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,2, C. Rouzier1 mutations of TANGO2 gene lead to the disease Metabolic encephalomyopathiccrises,recurrent,withrhabdomyolysis, 1Departement of Medical Genetics, National Center for cardiac arrhythmias, and neurodegeneration. Symptoms Mitochondrial Diseases, Nice Teaching Hospital, Nice, include recurrent metabolic crises associated with encepha- lopathy, rhabdomyolysis, cardiac arrhythmias andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1357 laboratory ﬁndings such as hypoglycaemia, hyperammone- years and 35 years, respectively. The main clinical mia, lactic acidosis and elevated CK levels. With the symptoms were problems with mild dysarthria, rapid progression of the disease epilepsy, developmental delay, speech, proximal weakness of lower extremities, balance cognitive impairment, global brain atrophy and pyramidal disturbances and/or psychiatric disorders. Cerebellar atro- signs appear. phy in brain MRI was a constant feature. Leukocyte Materials and Methods: We report a 4-year-old child hexosaminidaseA activity was decreased to 1.8 - 4.1% of with developmental delay. From 21 months of age he controls.Allpatientscarriedatleastoneallelewiththemild showed episodes of suddenly onset hypotonia, gait variant p.Gly269Ser; a novel variant p.Arg252Cys was instability, ataxia, and distortion of the head and upper detected in one family. Adult form of TSD seems to be an body. During these paroxysm plasma creatinine kinase and underdiagnosedalthoughanenzymeassayinserum/plasma lactate was elevated. He has seizures from 2-years-of-age: isafast,inexpensiveandreliabletooltodetectpatientswith grand mal and spasms also occurred. He has this form of TSD and genetic conﬁrmation is routine. hypothyreoidism. UNCE 204064; PROGRES Q26/LF1; RVO-VFN 64165 Results: A pathogenic apparently homozygous H. Vlaskova: None. H. Jahnova: None. E. Kostalova: TANGO2:c.385C>Tvariantwasidentiﬁedinexon4ofthe None. M. Magner: None. J. Jireckova: None. H. Pou- TANGO2 gene by Whole Exome Sequencing. We exam- petova: None. K. Peskova: None. V. Kozich: None. ined the parents for the above mentioned variant, but we could only detect the variant in the mother. Based on that P06.58A furtherexaminationswereneededtodistinguishinbetween TRMU-relatedtransientliverfailureofinfancypresents homozygosity versus heterozygosity with a deletion. With with microcephaly and neurodevelopmental delay quantitative PCR assay by using 3 gene-speciﬁc amplicons encompassingthecodingexons3,4,5oftheTANGO2gene H. Azaklı1, E. Yücel2, Ç. Arıkan3, A. Armutlu4, a large deletion encompassing exons 3-5 was detected. S. Eraslan2, H. Kayserili1,2 Conclusions: The above mentioned compound hetero- zygous state in our patient conﬁrms the diagnosis of 1Institute of Health Sciences, Koç University School of TANGO2-associated biallelic disorder. The disease might Medicine (KUSoM), İstanbul, Turkey, 2Medical Genetics be very underdiagnosed, whole exome sequencing is still a Department, Koç University School of Medicine (KUSoM), clue to ﬁnd the alterations in TANGO2 gene. İstanbul, Turkey, 3Gastroenterology Department, Koç R.Ripszám:None.K.Hadzsiev:None.J.Zima:None. University School of Medicine (KUSoM), İstanbul, Turkey, Á. Till: None. B. Melegh: None. 4PathologyDepartment,KoçUniversitySchoolofMedicine (KUSoM), İstanbul, Turkey P06.57D Adult form of Tay-Sachs disease: main symptoms, 21 months-old girl presented at genetics outpatient clinics enzyme and genetic diagnostics in Czech patients due to microcephaly, mild neurodevelopmental delay and facial dysmorphism. She was born to healthy non- H. Vlaskova, H. Jahnova, E. Kostalova, M. Magner, consanguineous couple. Prenatal and perinatal history was J. Jireckova, H. Poupetova, K. Peskova, V. Kozich uneventful. She was followed up at metabolism& gastro- enterology clinics for vomiting attacks, elevated liver Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, enzymes/ lactate levels during 3-to-12 month-of-age. GeneralUniversityHospitalandFirstFacultyofMedicine, Mitochondrial work-up had not revealed the underlying Charles University in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic pathology. SNParray showed 16q23.1 deletion encompass- ing two genes, WWOX and LSM3P5, which is associated Tay-Sachs disease (TSD) is a rare neurodegenerative with bilateral cataracts, iris coloboma and autistic beha- disorder caused by lysosomal β-hexosaminidase A deﬁ- viour. Paternal transmission of the microdeletion was ciency due to mutations in the HEXA gene. Phenotypic conclusive for its possibly benign nature. Clinical Exome spectrum of TSD is diverse and differs between infantile Sequencing(CES) revealed homozygous TRMU gene c. andadult form.No effective treatmentfor TSDisavailable G835A(c.V279M) pathogenic change explanatory for the and genetic counselling (DNA analysis) is thus important historyoftransientliverfailureofinfancy.FibroScanat21/2 forprenataldiagnosis.Ourcohortincludes14patientswith yearsrevealedstage2hepatosteatosiswithmildﬁbrosisand adult form of TSD (surprisingly twice more than infantile liver biopsy was performed for histopathological evalua- form) diagnosed in the Czech Republic between 2002 and tion. TRMU (tRNA 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridylate 2018 yielding an estimated birth prevalence of 1:325,000. methyltransferase) gene mutations were identiﬁed as Median age of ﬁrst symptoms and of diagnosis were 21 responsible from transient liver failure of infancy at 2009.1358 Twenty-two patients have been reported uptill now and earlydiagnosisofthedisease.Acknowledgement:Thiswork clinical variability ranges from early death(6/22) to normal was supported by Biomedical Research Program in WCM- development. Although no systematic follow-up is avail- Q, and by Qatar National Research Funds grants numbers: able,microcephalyandmild neurodevelopmentaldelayhas 09-740-3-192 and 09-741-3-793. been reported. The case we reported herein presented with N.A. Yousri: None. K.A. Fakhro: None. K. Suhre: microcephaly and psychomotor retardation and diagnostic None. R.G. Crystal: None. work-up revealed the etiopathogenesis of transient liver failureininfancy.CESastheleadingdiagnostictechnology P06.60C for single gene disorders, enables clinical management, High-throughput metabolomics for early detection of counselling also for TRMU-related hepatic failure which individuals at increased risk for type 2 diabetes has a relatively benign course. TRMU gene sequencing is highly recommended in infants with unexplained liver J. Hällfors, S. Ruosaari, P. Würtz, N. Tertipis failure not only in Yemenite Jewish but in all Middle East populations and Turkey. Nightingale Health Ltd., Helsinki, Finland H. Azaklı: None. E. Yücel: None. Ç. Arıkan: None. A. Armutlu: None. S. Eraslan: None. H. Kayserili: None. Introduction: Advances in metabolomics now allows for proﬁling of large-scale cohorts. We identiﬁed circulating P06.59B blood biomarkers predictive of T2D. Also, metabolic Genetics meets Metabolomics in Type 2 Diabetes in a signaturesweregeneratedforriskstratiﬁcationandtracking Middle Eastern Population the health of the individuals. Materials and Methods: NMR metabolomics was used N. A. Yousri1, K. A. Fakhro2, K. Suhre1, R. G. Crystal3 to quantify 228 metabolic measures in 11,896 individuals fromfourFinnishcohorts(meanage35years,range24-45). 1Weill Cornell Medical College- Qatar, Doha, Qatar, Results: Associations between baseline metabolites and 2Sidra Medical Research, Doha, Qatar, 3Weill Cornell diabetes onset during the 7-15 years of follow-up (392 Medical College- NY, New York, NY, United States incident cases) were assessed by logistic regression. Alto- gether 113 metabolites were associated with incident dia- T2D and its complications are a major concern for its high betes(P<0.0009;rangeofoddsratios(OR)per1-SD:0.59- prevalence in Qataris, and both genetic risk and lifestyle/ 1.50)afteradjustingforsex,baselineage,glucoseandBMI. environmental factors play a role in T2D. We investigate: Amongthestrongestpredictorsofincreasedriskofdiabetes PolygenicRiskScores(PRS)ofT2DinQataris,genetically were higher concentrations of branched-chained and aro- Determined Metabotypes (GDM) of T2D and gene- matic amino acids (OR: 1.33), triglycerides in very-low- metabolic networks. Polygenic risk scores highlight the density lipoproteins (VLDL; OR 1.50), and lower levels of role of genetics in early diagnosis, compared to other risk omega-6 fatty acids (OR 0.75). A biomarker signature factors. Identifying gene-metabolite associations is impor- comprised of phenylalanine, free cholesterol in large HDL, tant for understanding the genetic factors affecting meta- and the ratio of cholesteryl esters to total lipids in large bolic pathways. 1000 Qatari samples (57% T2D), with VLDLwaspredictiveofincidentdiabetesinanindependent whole exome sequence and genotype array data were used. validation cohort after adjusting for baseline glucose and All samples were proﬁled for more than 1000 metabolites. BMI (OR 10.1 comparing 5th vs 1st quintile of the bio- We constructed a PRS using those SNPs that replicated marker score). from81publishedloci,inthearraydata,andcomputedthe Conclusions: Individuals at risk for T2D display a dis- accuracyofPRSinindividualswithwholeexomedata.For tinct metabolic signature even years before the disease determining GDMs in T2D, we ﬁrst identiﬁed metabolites develops. Using the signature, both early risk stratiﬁcation signiﬁcantlyassociatedwithT2D,andthentheassociations and personalised follow-up of the disease progression is ofthosemetaboliteswith1.6millioncommonvariants.We enabled. High-throughput metabolomics therefore provides found229metabolitesassociatedwithT2D,amongwhich6 apowerfultoolforpopulation-widediabetespreventionand metabolitesaresigniﬁcantlyassociatedwithSNPsin5loci. control programs. Metabolomics is already used for health We identiﬁed a gene-metabolic network containing 21 tracking in Finland. uniquelociand33uniquemetabolicpathways.Inthisstudy J. Hällfors: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- weshowgenesthatcontributetothepolygenicriskscoreof niﬁcant; Nightingale Health Ltd. S. Ruosaari: A. T2D, genetically determined metabotypes and gene- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Nightingale metabolic networks in T2D. We believe these results will Health Ltd. P. Würtz: A. Employment (full or part-time); helpimprovetheunderstandingofT2Dmechanismsandin Signiﬁcant; Nightingale Health Ltd. N. Tertipis: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1359 P06.61D pathogens discovered through Multiplex Serology Fromprenatalcystichygromatoraremetabolicdisease- screening in UK Biobank a patient with Zellweger Syndrome A. Y. Chong1, N. Brenner2,3, A. Jimenez Kaufmann4, J. Jovanovic1, A. Maver2, A. Hodzic2, B. Peterlin2, A. Cortes5, R. Almond6, M. Hill7, T. J. Littlejohns8, O. Miljanovic1 J. J. Gilchrist1,9, T. Parks1, C. Watson10, O. Rodriguez10, N. Allen6,8, G. McVean5, T. Waterboer2, A. Moreno 1Centre for MedicalGenetics and Immunology, Podgorica, Estrada4, A. Hill1,11, A. J. Mentzer1,5 Montenegro, 2University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia 1Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Infections and Cancer Introduction: Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is a rare, fatal, Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, autosomal, recessive inheritable disease that occurs as a Heidelberg, Germany, 3Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg consequence of mutations in one of the 14 PEX familial University, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Human Population genes. ZS represents the absence of peroxisomes resulting GenomicsLab,LaboratorioNacionaldeGenómicaparala in damaging metabolic pathways, especially beta oxidation Biodiversidad,Irapuato,Mexico,5BigDataInstitute,LiKa of very long chain fatty acids. ZS is characterized by facial Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery, dysmorphia, neurological disorders and gradual insufﬁ- University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6UK ciency of all vital organs. In the second half of pregnancy Biobank, Stockport, United Kingdom, 7MRC-Population the ventriculomegaly appearance is possible and endocra- HealthResearchUnit,UniversityofOxford,Oxford,United nium MRI could detect characteristical ZS changes: Kingdom, 8Nufﬁeld Department of Population Health, abnormal gyral forms, disturbed myelination and cerebral University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, periventricular pseudocysts. 9Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, The aim istouse thecase report on a ZSpatient to point United Kingdom, 10Department of Biochemistry and out the possibility of recognising a rare inheritable disease Molecular Genetics, University of Louisville School of expected with a frequency of one in 50,000 live births. Medicine, Louisville, KY, United States, 11The Jenner Results: The infant with dysmorphia, hypotonia, hyper- Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom bilirubinaemia, and hepatomegaly is presented. In 13th week of gestation the enlarged nuchal region cystic Introduction: Infectious agents contribute signiﬁcantly to hygroma and the border ventriculomegaly were found by theglobalburdenofdisease,throughbothacutesyndromes ultrasound examination. Pre-natal diagnosis excluded and chronic disease sequelae. Understanding the biological chromosomalaberrationsandpregnancywascontinuedand mechanisms underpinning susceptibility to infection and completed by birth in term. Severe hypotonia and dys- development of chronic disease may inform future pre- morphia were present at birth. In the further course a ventative and therapeutic strategies. jaundice, rise in liver enzymes and lactate dehydrogenase, Materials and Methods: Using a rigorously validated development of hepatic insufﬁciency, and multiorganic Multiplex Serology platform, we sought to identify human failure have occurred with a lethal outcome in the ﬁfth genetic variation associated with differential response to month of life. A clinical exome sequencing (NGS) identi- infectious agents. We undertook genetic association analy- ﬁedthehomozygousmutationinthePEX6gene,described sis of antibody responses measured against 45 antigens as pathogenic-causative to ZS. targeting 20 infectious agents implicated in chronic disease Conclusion: Considering the characteristics of ZS, set- pathogenesis (including human herpes and papilloma- ting up a suspicion and conducting prenatal diagnosing for viruses, and Helicobacter pylori) using baseline serum ZS are crucial in preventing this syndrome among samplesfrom9,611individualsselectedatrandomfromthe liveborns. UK Biobank. J.Jovanovic:None.A.Maver:None.A.Hodzic:None. Results:Weidentiﬁed2853non-HLAregionsassociated B. Peterlin: None. O. Miljanovic: None. with antibody responses to our selected pathogens (p < 1x10-5), 13 of which contained peaks reaching genome- wide signiﬁcance (p < 5x10-8). Some of these association P07 signals validate candidate mechanisms of infection activity Immunology and hematopoietic system whereas others implicate other plausible yet previously unrecognised molecular pathways. Associations were P07.01A observed within the extended MHC region for at least one Shared immunogenetic associations across common antigen from each of the 20 pathogens. Of the non-MHC1360 associations, we identiﬁed three regions associated with distribution between neonates with BPD and without BPD more than one pathogen. These regions span NFKB1 on by dominant model (GG vs. GA/AA) (p=0.001; chromosome 4, the IGH region on chromosome 14, and RR=2.188, 95% CI 1.428-3.348; OR=3.138, 95% CI FUT2 on chromosome 19. 1.539-6.397). After the adjustment for BMW, gestational Conclusions: The ﬁndings and approaches used in this age, and sepsis, logistic regression conﬁrmed statistically work and future ambitions to apply the Multiplex Serology signiﬁcant association between TNF -308G/A genotypes platform to the entire UK Biobank cohort are likely to and development of BPD in premature infants (B=- 0.992, improveourunderstandingofinfection-diseaseassociations p=0.003). TNF -308 A allele is risk factor for BPD and molecular mechanisms facilitating therapeutic dis- (p=0.0007). covery and precision medicine. Conclusions:OurﬁndingssuggestthatTNF-308Aallele A.Y. Chong: None. N. Brenner: None. A. Jimenez is a risk factor for development of BPD in premature neo- Kaufmann: None. A. Cortes: None. R. Almond: None. nates under the 32 weeks. M. Hill: None. T.J. Littlejohns: None. J.J. Gilchrist: T.M.Damnjanovic:None.T.Varljen:None.O.Rakic: None. T. Parks: None. C. Watson: None. O. Rodriguez: None. B. Jekic: None. J. Liston: None. I. None.N.Allen:None.G.McVean:None.T.Waterboer: Novakovic: None. None. A. Moreno Estrada: None. A. Hill: None. A.J. Mentzer: None. P07.04D HereditaryangioedemaduetoC1-inhibitordeﬁciencyin P07.03C south-eastern Europe: SERPING1 mutations and StudyofTNF,IL1B,andIL6genespolymorphismsand genetic factors modifying the clinical phenotype susceptibility to bronchopulmonary dysplasia in premature neonates M. Rijavec1, M. Košnik1,2, M. Zidarn1, S. Andrejević3, L. Karadža-Lapić4, D. Cikojević5, V. Grivčeva-Panovska6, T. M. Damnjanovic1, T. Varljen2, O. Rakic3, B. Jekic1, P. Korošec1 J. Liston4, I. Novakovic1 1University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,Belgrade,Serbia,2Instituteof Golnik, Slovenia, 2Medical Faculty Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Legal Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Slovenia, 3Clinic of Allergology and Immunology, Clinical Neonatology, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Escola de Ciencias Da Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 4General Hospital Saude, Faculdade de Medicina, ItajaI, Santa Catarina, Šibenik, Šibenik, Croatia, 5University Hospital Split, Split, Brazil Croatia,6DermatologyClinic,SchoolofMedicine,Ss.Cyril andMethodiusUniversity,Skopje,Macedonia,TheFormer Introduction: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a Yugoslav Republic of commonchroniclungdiseaseassociatedwithpretermbirth. Our objective was to investigate whether the TNF, IL1B, Introduction: Hereditary angioedema due to C1 inhibitor IL6 genes polymorphisms have inﬂuence on BPD deﬁciency (C1-INH-HAE) is a rare genetic disorder susceptibility. characterized by recurrent oedemas and large heterogeneity Materials and Methods: The study included 351 neo- in clinical presentation. Our aim was to determine the nateswith gestationperiodlessthan32weeks.Genotyping spectrum of SERPING1 mutations in C1-INH-HAE ofIL1B-511G/A,IL6-174G/CandTNF-308G/Avariants patients, including genotype-phenotype relationship and if was performed by Real-time PCR. The statistical differ- functional genetic variants in F12 and KLKB1 affect the ences in genotypes distribution among the groups were disease expression. compared using the chi-square or Fisher exact test. Materials and Methods: Acohort of150 clinicallywell Results: BPD was present in 36 neonates (11.43%). characterised C1-INH-HAE patients from 75 unrelated There were no signiﬁcant differences in the genotypes families from Croatia, Republic of Macedonia, Serbia, and distribution and allele frequencies for the IL1B and IL6 Sloveniawasrecruited for genetic analysis,whichincluded genes variants between neonates with and without BPD. sequencing and MLPA analysis of SERPING1, as well as The frequencies of TNF genotypes were GG 55.6%, GA detection of F12 (rs1801020) and KLKB1 (rs3733402) 38.9%andAA5.6%inneonateswithBPDandGG79.7%, variants. GA 19.7% and AA 0.6% in neonates without BPD. TNF Results: We have identiﬁed 39 different mutations (14 genotypes frequencies between these groups were statisti- missense, 11 nonsense, 7 frameshift, 1 in-frame deletion, cally signiﬁcantly different (p=0.001). Also, statistically 2 splicing defects, 1 substitution affecting the promoter, 3 signiﬁcant difference was observed in TNF genotypes large indels). Thirteen mutations have not been previouslyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1361 described. When addressing the genotype-phenotype rela- incubatedinconditionedmediumfromeditedHCT116cells tionship we found that patients with nonsense and frame- showedloweractivationandslowerproliferationthanthose shiftmutations,largeindels,splicingdefects,andmutations incubated in medium conditioned by wild-type HTC116 affecting the C1-INH active site (at Arg444) exhibited an cells. Unlike, edited HCT116 cells presented a higher increased clinical severity score, compared with those with proliferationratecomparedtowildtypecells.Inconclusion, missense mutations, excluding mutations at Arg444. disruption of the rs6822844 region provokes alterations in Importantly, the F12 variant was associated with disease intestinalcellsthatseemtoaffectmonocytesandinturnthe onset. No association between KLKB1 variant and disease inﬂammatory status, suggesting the presence of genomic expression was identiﬁed. elements within the region that could contribute to the Conclusions: Our study identiﬁed 39 different, among development of celiac disease. Funding: PI16/00258 (JRB) them 13 novel, disease-causing mutations in C1-INH-HAE and EJ-2017111082 and ACM (ACR). patients, highlighting the heterogeneity of mutations in the M. Sebastian de la Cruz: None. A. Olazagoitia-Gar- SERPING1 gene. The mutations with a clear effect on C1- mendia: None. I. Romero-Garmendia: None. I. Iras- INH function predispose patients to a more severe disease torza: None. A. Castellanos-Rubio: None. J.R. phenotype and the CC F12 variant to earlier disease onset. Bilbao: None. M.Rijavec:None.M.Košnik:None.M.Zidarn:None. S. Andrejević: None. L. Karadža-Lapić: None. D. P07.06B Cikojević: None. V. Grivčeva-Panovska: None. P. Immunoregulatoryeffectandtheroleofplasmacell-free Korošec: None. DNA in celiac disease P07.05A A. Zinkova1, I. Brynychova1,2, I. Hoffmanova3, Functional study of the rs6822844 SNP associated with M. Korabecna1, P. Dankova2 risk to celiac disease in intestinal cells 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First M. Sebastian de la Cruz1, A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia1, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General I. Romero-Garmendia1, I. Irastorza2, A. Castellanos- University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Rubio1,3, J. R. Bilbao1 Science, Charles University, Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Third 1University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU), BioCruces Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and University HealthResearchInstitute,Leioa,Spain,2CrucesUniversity Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Second Department of Hospital (UPV/EHU), Barakaldo, Spain, 3IKERBASQUE, Internal Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain Introduction:Immunoregulatoryeffectsofplasmacell-free SNP rs6822844 shows the strongest association with celiac DNA (cfDNA) have been reported but its role in disease (CeD) susceptibility outside the HLA region. The pathogenesis of celiac disease (CD) has not been SNPislocatedbetweenIL2 andIL21 genes, which encode studied yet. for immune IL-2 and IL-21 cytokines, respectively, and Materials and Methods: We determined the total havebeenproposedascandidateetiologicalgenesforCeD, cfDNA concentration and relative content of telomeric although functionally conﬁrmation is still pending. Thus, sequencesinplasmacfDNAinrecentceliacdiseasepatients the main aim of this study was to analyze the effect of (rCD, n = 10) and healthy age-matched controls (HC, n = rs6822844inintestinalcells.Forthatpurpose,thegenomic 10) by qPCR. To document that the observed biological region surrounding rs6822844 was mutated in HCT116 effects are caused by cfDNA molecules, we treated the epithelial intestinal cells using CRISPR-Cas9, and mRNA paired plasma samples with DNase. Using paired samples levelsofIL2,IL21andFGF2wereanalyzed.TheCRISPR- ofplasma(non-treatedandtreated byDNase),weanalyzed Cas9 edition produced a complex reorganization of the the contribution of cfDNA to the activation of TLR9 and genomic region, and provoked a downregulation of FGF2 TNF-α mRNA expression in THP1 monocytic cell line. expression located 240kb downstream of the SNP. On the Results: We found neither signiﬁcant differences in the contrary, FGF2 expression was upregulated in intestinal quantity of cfDNA nor in the relative amount of telomere biopsies from CeD patients. In addition, U937 monocytes sequences in the non-treated rCD and HC plasma. Stimu- were incubated in edited and non-edited HCT116-condi- lation of THP1 cells with non-treated rCD plasma led to tioned media and ILB1 expression was measured to higher mRNA expression level TNF-α (p=0.031) than sti- evaluate their activation. Proliferation assays were also mulation with non-treated HC plasma. The cfDNA in rCD performed in both HCT116 and U937 cells. Monocytes plasmasamplesstimulatedtheproductionofTLR9mRNA.1362 TheTLR9mRNAexpressionwassigniﬁcantly(p=0.014) P. Comella: None. N. Beckmann: None. G. Hoffman: lowered after cfDNA removal from rCD plasmas. None. E. Schadt: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Conclusions: We provide the ﬁrst evidence that cfDNA niﬁcant; Sema4 Genomics. contained in rCD plasma differs in its immunoregulatory capacity from cfDNA in HC plasma. P07.08D SupportedbytheMinistryofEducation,YouthandSport Angiogenesis in CML: miRNAs and angiogenic factors oftheCzechRepublic[grantnumbersProgresQ25,Progres in plasma before and after TKI treatment Q43,SVV260436andSVV260373]andbytheMinistry of Health of the Czech Republic [grant number RVO/VFN Z. Litwinska1, K. Łuczkowska1, A. Sobuś1, D. Rogińska1, 64165]. E. Pius-Sadowska1, A. Pietrzyk2, E. Paczkowska1, A. Zinkova: None. I. Brynychova: None. I. Hoffma- M.Gniot3,G.Helbig4,K.Lewandowski3,B.Machaliński1 nova: None. M. Korabecna: None. P. Dankova: None. 1Department of General Pathology, Pomeranian Medical P07.07C University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Department of Clinical Machine learning classiﬁers implicate B cell activation Genetics and Pathology, University of Zielona Góra, in chronic fatigue syndrome Zielona Góra, Poland, 3Department of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, University of Medical P. Comella, N. Beckmann, G. Hoffman, E. Schadt Sciences,Poznan,Poland,4DepartmentofHematologyand Bone Marrow Transplantation, School of Medicine in Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland United States Introduction: The differences of an angiogenic potential Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) is a disease resulting in between clinical phases of chronic myeloid leukemia extreme fatigue without any known underlying medical (CML), point at the signiﬁcance of neovascularisation in condition. CFS often presents in patients following a viral CML pathogenesis. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), infectionandpatientsmay appear tohaveslightlyimpaired possessing antiangiogenic properties and microRNAs immunesystems.Withnopositivediagnostic,CFSisoften (miRNAs), implicated in governing angiogenesis, both misunderstoodandmisdiagnosed.Apilotclinicalstudywas seem vital in this process. In this study, we aimed to established to give further insight into the immunological investigate how TKI treatment affects angiogenesis-related role of CFS. This pilot study included 15 CFS patients and miRNAsexpressionandangiogenicfactorsconcentrationin 15 age and sex matched controls undergoing cardiopul- plasma of CML patients. monary exercise testing (CPET). Blood was extracted at Materials and Methods: Peripheral blood plasma sam- four time points - immediately before, 1 day after, 2 days ples were obtained from CML patients at the diagnosis after and 3 days after. Five immune cell types were sorted (n=23) and during TKI treatment (n=12). Quantitative fromwholebloodcollectedfromeachparticipant,andRNA assessment of the expression of miRNA-126-3p, miRNA- was extracted and sequenced for each cell type, as well as 150-5p and miRNA-21-3p was performed with qRT-PCR. whole blood, at each time point. Additionally, each Concentrations of selected angiogenic factors in plasma participant underwent extensive clinical surveys and (Angiogenin, bFGF, Endostatin,aFGF, PDGF-AA, PIGF, questionnaires. Thrombospondin-2, VEGF-D, Angiopoietin-1, VEGF) Our team has employed machine learning approaches to were assessed using multiplex ﬂuorescent bead-based construct classiﬁers that can accurately distinguish CFS immunoassays (Luminex Corporation). from non-disease states in immune cells using RNA-Seq Results: MiRNA-150-5p and miRNA-21-3p expression data. This technique has generated non-linear gene asso- was evidently higher in the treatment group (p=0,001 and ciations that can be used to understand distinct gene p=0,03, respectively). PDGF-AA concentration in newly expression differences between disease and non-disease diagnosed patients with CML was higher than in already states. We were able to identify B cell classiﬁers as being treated patients (942,84 pg/ml vs 512,5 pg/ml, p=0,02), the highest performing classiﬁers in the immune cell similarly to VEGF (262,82 pg/ml vs 27 pg/ml, p=0,03). populations, suggesting B cells contain more interesting Conclusions: TKI treatment affects miRNAs expression disease-statebiology.Genesignaturesfromtheseclassiﬁers and angiogenic factors concentration in plasma of CML werefurtherfoundtobeenrichedinco-expressionmodules patients. MiRNAs could serve as biomarkers in monitoring associated with B cell maturation. These classiﬁer algo- CML progression and drug response, however, their exact rithms can also be used to predict unseen observations as a role in CML-related angiogenesis remains to be further future diagnostic tool. elucidated.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1363 Funding: This work was supported by Pomeranian S. Jalil: None. Y. Novik: None. R. Maldonado: None. MedicalUniversityYoungInvestigatorGrantMB-173-218/ D. Balboa: None. T. Otonkoski: None. U. Wartiovaara- 17. Kautto: None. K. Wartiovaara: None. Z. Litwinska: None. K. Łuczkowska: None. A. Sobuś: None. D. Rogińska: None. E. Pius-Sadowska: None. A. P07.10B Pietrzyk: None. E. Paczkowska: None. M. Gniot: None. Genome-wide association study identiﬁes seven novel G. Helbig: None. K. Lewandowski: None. B. loci associating with circulating cytokines and cell Machaliński: None. adhesion molecules in Finns P07.09A E. Sliz1, K. Marita1, A. Ahola-Olli2, O. Raitakari2, Increasing fetal hemoglobin by genetic editing the cells M. Perola3, V. Salomaa3, T. Lehtimäki4, T. Karhu1, of sickle cell disease patients H. Viinamäki5, M. Salmi2, K. Santalahti2, S. Jalkanen2, J. Jokelainen1, S. Keinänen-Kiukaanniemi1, S. Jalil1, Y. Novik1, R. Maldonado1, D. Balboa1, M. Männikkö1, K. Herzig1, M. Järvelin1, S. Sebert1, T. Otonkoski1,U.Wartiovaara-Kautto2,K. Wartiovaara3,1 J. Kettunen1 1StemCellsandMetabolismResearchProgram,University 1University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 2University of Turku, of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Comprehensive Cancer Turku,Finland,3NationalInstituteforHealthandWelfare, Center, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki,Finland, 4Tampere University, Tampere,Finland, 3Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, 5University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland Finland Introduction: Genetic factors modulate the inﬂammatory Beta-hemoglobinopathies, such as Sickle Cell Disease load, but the exact mechanisms are incompletely (SCD) and beta-thalassemia are amongstthemostcommon understood. monogenic diseases with tens of millions of patients Methods: We performed a genome-wide association globally.Theyarisefrommutationsinthebeta-globingene study (GWAS) on 16 circulating inﬂammatory phenotypes HBB and the only curative treatment is an allogenic in Northern Finland Birth Cohort 1966 (NFBC1966, hematopoieticstemcelltransplant,whichiscomplicatedby N=5,284). A subsequent meta-analysis was completed for limited matching donor availability, severe adverse reac- 10phenotypesavailableinapreviousGWAS[1]addingup tions and excessive costs. Hemoglobinopathy symptoms to 13,577 individuals in the study. Complementary asso- can also be ameliorated with the increase of fetal ciationtestswereperformedtostudytheeffectoftheABO hemoglobin (HbF), but pharmacological treatments are blood types on soluble adhesion molecule levels. sub-optimal.However,naturallyoccurringbeneﬁcialaltera- Results: We identiﬁed seven novel and six previously tionscanleadtoelevatedlevelsofHbFinadulthood.When reported genetic associations (p<3.1x10-9). We observed these benign Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin three loci associating with soluble vascular cell adhesion (HPFH) syndrome alterations are coinherited with a beta- molecule-1 (sVCAM-1) level, one of which is the ABO hemoglobinopathy the disease can be much milder or even locus that has been previously associated with soluble E- symptomless. Several HPFH alterations have been identi- selectin (sE-selectin) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 ﬁed.GenetherapyandgeneeditingtoolssuchasZFNs,and (sICAM-1) levels [2-4]. Our ﬁndings further suggest that CRISPR/Cas9 hold much promise for the treatment of thebloodtypeBassociatesprimarilywiththeconcentration genetic diseases and have been studied also for the ofsVCAM-1whiletheA1subtypeshowsarobusteffecton treatment of beta-hemoglobinopathies. The ﬁrst CRISPR/ sE-selectinandsICAM-1levels.ThegenotypesintheABO Cas9 clinical trials are also underway. Here, we have used locus associating with higher soluble adhesion molecule the CRISPR/Cas9 - based genetic engineering as well as levels tend to associate with lower circulating cholesterol singlebaseeditingtoproducebeneﬁcialHPFHmutationsto levels and lower cardiovascular disease risk. hematopoietic cell lines, control and SCD patient hemato- Conclusions: The present results extend the knowledge poietic CD34+ cells in vitro. After genetic editing and aboutgeneticfactorscontributingtotheinﬂammatoryload. differentiation to hemoglobin- producing red blood cells, Our ﬁndings suggest that two distinct mechanisms con- the cells show up to 35% production of fetal Hb. The tribute to the soluble adhesion molecule levels at the ABO differentiation capacity and the genetic proﬁle of the cells locus and that increased soluble adhesion molecule levels shownosigniﬁcantchanges.Funding:AcademyofFinland, by itself may not increase risk for cardiovascular disease. grants 308481, 286773 References: (1) Am J Hum Genet 2017;100:40-50. (2) PLoS Genet 2008;4:e1000118. (3) PLoS One 2012;7:1364 e51441. (4) Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2009;29:1958- for some particular genes, this possibility should not be 67. underestimated. E. Sliz: None. K. Marita: None. A. Ahola-Olli: None. G. Kök: None. A. Aykut: None. A. Durmaz: None. E. O. Raitakari: None. M. Perola: None. V. Salomaa: D. Pariltay: None. N. Gülez: None. F. Genel: None. M.Ö. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, ÇoĞulu: None. andexpertwitness);Modest;NovoNordisk.Other;Modest; Bayer Ltd. T. Lehtimäki: None. T. Karhu: None. H. P07.12D Viinamäki: None. M. Salmi: None. K. Santalahti: None. Geneticvariantrs16944inIL1Bgeneisariskfactorfor S. Jalkanen: None. J. Jokelainen: None. S. Keinänen- early onset sepsis susceptibility and outcome in preterm Kiukaanniemi: None. M. Männikkö: None. K. Herzig: infants None. M. Järvelin: None. S. Sebert: None. J. Kettunen: None. N. Maksimovic1, T. Varljen2, G. Sekulovic3, T. Damnjanovic1, I. Novakovic1 P07.11C DOCK8 deﬁciency; two patients with large deletions 1Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, detected by Next-generation sequencing UniversityofBelgrade,Belgrade,Serbia,2InstituteofLegal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, G. KÖk1, A. Aykut1, A. Durmaz1, E. Pariltay1, N. GÜlez2, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Neonatology, Belgrade, F. Genel2, M. Ö. ÇoĞulu1 Serbia 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Introduction: Neonatal sepsis is progressive immunologi- MedicalGenetics,İzmir, Turkey, 2Dr Behçet Uz Children’s cal process caused by invasion of microbial pathogens on Hospital,Clinic of Pediatrics, İzmir, Turkey thenormallysteriletissueofinfants.Despitethesigniﬁcant improvement of intensive neonatal care it is the most Dedicator ofcytokinesis 8 (DOCK8)gene mutationslead a frequent cause of morbidity and mortality among preterm combined primary immunodeﬁciency which is ﬁrst infants. Interleukin-1-beta (IL1B), is a proinﬂammatory described as a new entity in the autosomal recessive Hyper mediator that appears very early in response to infection. IgE syndrome (HIES). Just like the HIES, these mutations The polymorphism -511 G/A in IL1B gene is located cause elevated serum IgE, eosinophilia, frequent staphylo- upstream of the transcriptional start site and inﬂuences its coccalinfections.Patientshaveincreasedriskforinfections transcriptional activity. The aim of this study was to as well as autoimmunity and malignancy. DOCK8 gene evaluate the relationships between rs16944 polymorphism spans 48exonsanddeletionsare themostcommontype of inIL1B(-511G/A)andsusceptibilityandoutcomeofearly mutations. Here, we present 2 primary immune deﬁciency onset sepsis (EOS) in preterm infants. patientswhoareclinicallydiagnosedasDOCK8deﬁciency. MaterialandMethods:Ourstudyincluded 471preterm Both of the patients have consanguineous parents and infants, 285 with EOS and 186 healthy premature infants. laboratory results indicating DOCK8 deﬁciency. Ion For all patients data about gender, gestational age, weight AmpliSeq™ Primary Immune Deﬁciency Research Panel onbirth(BMW),Apgarscoredeterminedinthe5thminute designed for sequencing 264 primary immune deﬁciency (AS5’), type of delivery and multiple pregnancies are col- genes were used for mutation detection. After initial lected.IL1B-511G/Agenotypesweredetectedwithcustom analysis of 264 genes ﬁltering through minor allele real time genotyping assay. frequency, variant location and variant effect no causative Results: Frequency of AA IL1B -511G/A genotype is mutation was detected. Immune gene panel rechecked in statistically signiﬁcantly higher in EOS group (p=0.028). both cases due to the strong clinical ﬁndings and large Genotype frequencies between EOS and control groups by deletions were detected in both patients. First patient was recessive (GG+GA/AA) model also show signiﬁcant dif- foundtohaveahomozygousdeletion(c.(53+1_54-1)_(827 ferences (p=0.012). Logistic regression with weight on +1_828-1)del) extending from 2nd to 7th exons and second birthandgestationalageascovariatesconﬁrmedsigniﬁcant patient have homozygous c.(53+1_54-1)_(3234+1_3235- association between IL1B -511 G/A genotypes and devel- 1) deletion extending from 2nd to 26th exons. opment of sepsis (B=-0.427, p=0.000). Also, in the EOS We want to underline that large deletions may escape group AA genotype was signiﬁcant predictor of lethal from routine ﬁltering analysis and the suspected genes outcome (p=0.033). should be checked individually by an integrative genomic Conclusion: IL1B -511 G/A polymorphism could be viewer. If deletions are the majority types of the mutation associated with early onset sepsis susceptibility and out- come in preterm infants.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1365 N.Maksimovic:None.T.Varljen:None.G.Sekulovic: S. Rüeger: None. C. Hammer: A. Employment (full or None. T. Damnjanovic: None. I. Novakovic: None. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genentech. A. Loetscher: None. E. Zdobnov: None. J. Fellay: None. P07.13A Genome-to-genome analysis of Epstein-Barr virus P07.14B infection Implementationofanewdiagnosticstrategyforfamilial erythrocytosis in Slovenia S. Rüeger1,2, C. Hammer3,4, A. Loetscher5,2, E. Zdobnov5,2, J. Fellay1,2,6 A. Kristan1, J. Gašperšič1, P. Hudler1, D. Germ1, T. Režen2, D. Rozman2, T. Kunej3, T. Pajič4, M. Fink4, 1Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, EPFL, S. Anžej Doma4, Š. Žula4, I. Preložnik Zupan4, R. Količ5, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, T. Marčac Grahek5, M. Moškon6, N. Debeljak1 Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Cancer Immunology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, United 1Medical Centre for Molecular Biology, Institute of States, 4Department of Human Genetics, Genentech, South Biochemistry,FacultyofMedicine,UniversityofLjubljana, San Francisco, CA, United States, 5Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Centre for Functional Genomics and University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 6Precision Bio-Chips, Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department Switzerland of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Clinical department of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is one of the most common Haematology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, viruses latently infecting humans. It is the cause of Ljubljana, Slovenia, 5Kemomed Research and infectious mononucleosis and has oncogenic potential. Development, Kemomed Ltd., Kranj, Slovenia, 6Faculty of Littleisknownaboutthepotentialimpactofhumangenetic Computer and Information Science, University of variation on inter-individual differences in response to Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia EBV. The challenge of genetic determinant discovery explaining host susceptibility and response to EBV Introduction: Familial erythrocytosis is a rare congenital infection is compounded by pathogen genetic variation. disorder deﬁned by increased red blood cell number, Wehereuseagenome-to-genome(G2G)strategytosearch haemoglobin and haematocrit. Variants in genes involved for genetic associations between paired human and EBV in oxygen sensing pathway (including EGLN1) or genes samples, which could highlight sites of host-pathogen affecting haemoglobin oxygen afﬁnity results in seven genomic conﬂicts and shed light on pathogenesis. different types of familial erythrocytosis. We obtained and curated human genome-wide genotyp- Materials and Methods: National diagnostic algorithm ingdataandconsensusEBVgenomesequencingdatafrom was developed to identify patients with familial ery- 266 HIV-infected individuals with elevated EBV plasma throcytosis, among patients undergoing polycythemia vera viral load (>2000 copies/ml). We performed a separate testing over ﬁve-year period in Slovenia. Libraries were genome-wide association study (GWAS) for each viral prepared according to the protocol for Illumina Nextera variant using generalized linear mixed models, while con- DNAExome,enrichedbasedontheprotocolforIntegrated trolling for human and EBV population structure. DNA Technologies xGen Hybridization Capture of DNA We performed a total of 850 GWASs. No host-pathogen Libraries and sequenced on MiniSeq sequencer. Identiﬁed association survived the Bonferroni corrected G2G sig- variants were validated by Sanger sequencing. niﬁcance threshold of 10-11. We observed four signals with Results: National diagnostic algorithm revealed that P<10-8, including an association between variants in the among 1054 polycythemia vera negative patients, only 81 EBV gene BFRF1 and in the human gene RSRC1, which had increased haemoglobin and haematocrit at least twice functions in spliceosome assembly and participates in over a 2 month period. Further examinations pointed out multiplestepsofmRNAsplicing.BecauseEBVdependson seven families indicative for familial erythrocytosis. Tar- host proteins for viral gene expression, changes in alter- geted exome-sequencing identiﬁed heterozygous substitu- nativesplicingduetoRSRC1variationcouldinﬂuenceEBV tion rs61750991 in EGLN1 gene in two affected but not in pathogenesisbyselectingspeciﬁcBFRF1escapemutations. unaffected members of one family. The described diag- The joint analysis of host and pathogen genetic variation nostic algorithm was also established within the in-house can help uncover novel genetic inﬂuences on infectious developed ViDis platform, enabling visualisation and diseases. sharing of medical algorithms (http://vidis.fri.uni-lj.si).1366 Conclusions: We successfully established diagnostic E148Q (P=0.004), M694V/E148Q (P<0.001) and V726A/ algorithm for familial erythrocytosis in Slovenia and V726A (P=0.001). Of note, 12/354 (3.39%) patients were facilitated its broad accessibility within medical society via found to be homozygous for the M694V mutation. ViDis platform. Implementation into clinical practice iden- Conclusions: Our data suggest that late-onset FMF is tiﬁed an EGLN1 variant rs61750991 in one studied family, moreprevalentinwomenandisofgreatergeneticdiversity indicative for familial erythrocytosis type 3. than previously reported. Further studies including late- Supported by Slovenian Research Agency grant no. L3- onset FMF patients homozygous for MEFV mutation 9279 and Young Researcher founding. All rights reserved. M694V are ongoing and may lead to the identiﬁcation of A. Kristan: None. J. Gašperšič: None. P. Hudler: novel disease-modifying mechanisms. None. D. Germ: None. T. Režen: None. D. Rozman: G. Kriegshäuser: None. H. Hayrapetyan: None. S. None.T.Kunej:None.T.Pajič:None.M.Fink:None.S. Atoyan: None. S. Nemeth: None. C. Oberkanins: None. Anžej Doma: None. Š. Žula: None. I. Preložnik Zupan: T. Sarkisian: None. None. R. Količ: None. T. Marčac Grahek: None. M. Moškon: None. N. Debeljak: None. P07.16D Rare frameshift mutation in SERPINA3 contributes to P07.15C generalized pustular psoriasis Genotypic diversity observed within a large cohort of Armenian patients with late-onset familial U. D. Hüffmeier1, H. Sticht2, J. Wenzel3, D. Wilsmann- Mediterranean fever Theis3, K. Wolff4, S. Löhr1, B. Frey5, M. Hahn6, A. B. Ekici1, S. Uebe1, C. Thiel1, A. Reis1, J. Prinz7, G. Kriegshäuser1,2, H. Hayrapetyan3,4, S. Atoyan3,4, V. Oji8, P. Schulz9, K. Kingo10, S. Kõks11, R. Mössner12, S. Nemeth5, C. Oberkanins5, T. Sarkisian3,4 L. Munoz6, A. E. Kremer4, S. Frey6 1Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, General Hospital, Steyr, Austria, 2Clinical Institute of Germany, 2Bioinformatics, Biochemistry, University of Medical and Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University, Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Graz, Austria, 3Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Dermatology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 4Department of Medical 4Department of Medicine 1, University of Erlangen, Genetics, Yerevan State Medical University, Yerevan, Erlangen, Germany, 5Department of Radiation Oncology; Armenia, 5ViennaLab Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 6Department of Internal Medicine 3 - Rheumatology and Introduction: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) as an Immunology; Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen- autoinﬂammatory disease, results from mutations in the Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, MEFV gene mainly with an autosomal recessive mode of Germany, 7Department of Dermatology, University of inheritance. The age of onset of FMF varies, with about Munich, Munich, Germany, 8Department of Dermatology, 60% and 90% of patients experiencing their ﬁrst attack University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 9Department of beforetheageof10and20years,respectively.Hence,FMF Dermatology, Fachklinik Bad Bentheim, Bad Bentheim, with the ﬁrst attack occurring at the age of ≥ 40 years (i.e. Germany, 10Department of Dermatology, Dermatology late-onset FMF) is rare and only a few small studies have Clinic,UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,11Departmentof addressed this disease subset. Pathophysiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Objectives: This work aimed at investigating the mole- 12Department of Dermatology, Georg-August-University culargeneticcharacteristicsofArmenianpatientsdiagnosed Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany with late-onset FMF. Methods: Genomic DNA isolated from 354 Armenian Recent research in psoriasis has identiﬁed pustular mani- late-onset FMF patients were analysed for the 12 most festationsaseitherMendelianoroligogenictraitsincontrast commonMEFVmutationsplusSAA1isoforms1.1,1.3and to the numerous associated SNPs in common plaque 1.5 using multiplex PCR and reverse-hybridisation. Muta- psoriasis. Autosomal-recessive mutations in IL36RN have tional spectra and resulting genotypes were then matched been identiﬁed in 16-30% of patients with generalized against the clinico-demographic proﬁles collected for these pustular psoriasis (GPP), a rare, severe pustular psoriasis patients. accompanied by multi-systemic inﬂammation. These muta- Results:Ofall354patients,194(54.80%)werefemaleand tions increase pro-inﬂammatory signaling in the IL-36 160 (45.20%) were male. The following genotypes were pathway. In exome sequences of 25 independent patients signiﬁcantly associated with the late-onset variant: M680I/ negative for IL36RN, we identiﬁed 2 patients with theAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1367 identicalheterozygousframeshiftvariantinSERPINA3.We toidentifyhowIFN-λandTypeIInterferonpathwaygenes nextsequencedthecodingexonsinfurther54GPPand319 are expressed during treatment. palmoplantar PP patients by Sanger without identifying MaterialsandMethods:Weevaluatedtheexpressionof further truncating variants. SERPINA3 is an excellent genes of the type I IFN signaling pathway in 24 CHC functional candidate as it encodes serine protease inhibitor patientstreated with pegylated interferon plus ribavirin and A3 which inhibits cathepsin G, a neutrophil-speciﬁc further stratiﬁed according to rs12979860 polymorphism. protease known to increase IL-36ß activity >500fold. Samples were evaluated at different time points (time 0, SERPINA3 expression in liver cell lines, ﬁbroblasts and week 1 and week 12 during treatment and week 3 after the epidermal cell line HaCaT could be stimulated by pro- treatment). Allelic discrimination was performed using inﬂammatory cytokines and dexamethasone. Protein Taqman Genotyping SNP assay (AHBKCW9, Thermo- amounts in sera of the two mutation carriers were in the Fisher). Expression levels for 30 Type I IFN genes was lower normal range. By transfecting HaCaT cells with evaluated using Biomark HD System (Fluidigm). Kruskal- vectors containing the mutant or wildtype cDNA, we Wallis and Dunn´s post tests were used for comparisons. observed evidence for an unstable mRNA and lack of Results:Mostofthegeneshadelevatedexpressionlevels protein in the mutant. Immunohistochemical analyses before treatment, except for IFNA1, IFNAR and IFHI. revealed an increased staining of serpin A3 within upper Overall, they had a decline in week 1 and a signiﬁcant epidermal layers in GPP, accentuated at the edge of higher expression levels in later time points. In week 1 psoriatic pustules. This close proximity to neutrophils during treatment, CC homozygote patients for rs12979860 suggests an interaction between serpine A3 and the hadlowergeneexpressionlevels,comparedtopatientsthat neutrophilic enzyme cathepsin G. This interaction might carried the risk allele T, this was observed for IFI6, IFI16, be compromised by SERPINA3 variants leading to more IRF9 and RIGI. In contrast, relative mRNA expression for activation of pro-inﬂammatory IL-36ß. IFH1 and RNASEL were subtle higher in patients with CC Funding: CRC1181-project A05, BMBF-Metarthros genotype. 01EC1407A Conclusions: Gene expression levels in Type I IFN sig- U.D. Hüffmeier: None. H. Sticht: None. J. Wenzel: nature genes was different according to time points eval- None. D. Wilsmann-Theis: None. K. Wolff: None. S. uated and also when patients were stratiﬁed according to Löhr:None.B.Frey:None.M.Hahn: None.A.B.Ekici: rs12989860 polymorphism. None. S. Uebe: None. C. Thiel: None. A. Reis: None. J. A. Marques Vieira da Silva: None. L.E. Alvarado- Prinz: None. V. Oji: None. P. Schulz: None. K. Kingo: Arnez:None.T.Azamor:None.L.RibeiroBatista-Silva: None. S. Kõks: None. R. Mössner: None. L. Munoz: None. F.S.G. Kehdy: None. T. Leal Calvo: None. M. None. A.E. Kremer: None. S. Frey: None. Ribeiro-Alves: None.C.Bayma:None.A.C.Magalhães: None. M.D.L. Sousa Maia: None. R. Páez Meireles: P07.17A None.H.NodarseCuni:None.P.DornellesPicon:None. DifferentialexpressionofTypeIIFNsignalingpathway D.C. de Souza Matos: None. M. Ozório Moraes: None. genes in Hepatitis C patients treated with Pegylated Interferon plus ribavirin P07.18B Analysis of the CD40 and CD40LG in Turkish Hyper A. Marques Vieira da Silva1, L. E. Alvarado-Arnez2, IgM Syndrome: Mutation proﬁle and description of six T. Azamor1, L. Ribeiro Batista-Silva1, F. S. G. Kehdy1, novel mutations T. Leal Calvo1, M. Ribeiro-Alves1, C. Bayma1, A. C. Magalhães1, M. D. L. Sousa Maia1, R. Páez E. uzay1, A. Aykut1, A. Durmaz1, N. Karaca2, N. Gülez3, Meireles3, H. Nodarse Cuni3, P. Dornelles Picon4, N. Kütükçüler2, Ö. Çoğulu1 D. C. de Souza Matos1, M. Ozório Moraes1 1Ege university faculty of medicine. department of medical 1FundaçãoOswaldoCruz(Fiocruz),RiodeJaneiro,Brazil, genetics,İzmir,Turkey,2Egeuniversityfacultyofmedicine. 2Universidad Privada Franz Tamayo - UNIFRANZ, department of pediatric immunology, İzmir, Turkey, 3Dr Cochabamba, Bolivia, Plurinational State of, 3Centro de Behçet uz children's hospital. clinicof pediatrics, İzmir, Ingeniería Genética y Biotecnología, Havana, Cuba, Turkey 4HospitaldeClínicasdePortoAlegre,PortoAlegre,Brazil Hyper IgM syndromes (HIGM) is a group of primary Introduction: InChronic Hepatitis C, 20% of patients will immune deﬁciency disorders characterized by defective develop cirrhosis and may progress to hepatocellular CD40 signaling. Five types of Hyper IgM syndrome have carcinoma. Over the past years, many studies have tried beencharacterized:HyperIgMsyndrometype3(autosomal1368 recessive) (MIM: 606843) is characterized by mutations of The highly-multiplexed targeted re-sequencing technol- theCD40geneandHyper-IgMsyndrometype1(X-linked) ogy Molecular Inversion Probes (MIPs) enabled a genetic (MIM308230),characterizedbymutationsoftheCD40LG screenforthecompletecodingsequenceof48genesofthe gene. Patients with HIGM syndrome are susceptible to IL1-pathway. Rare Variant Burden Analysis (RVBA) was recurrentandsevereinfectionsandinsometypesofHIGM performed on 520 healthy individuals for whom extensive syndrome opportunistic infections and an increased risk of immunophenotyping measurements are available. cancer as well. The disease is characterized by decreased We identiﬁed 221 variants, out of which 166 rare (gno- levels of immunoglobulin G(IgG) in the blood and normal mAD-Exome AF< 1%), in 41 genes. When considering or elevated levels of IgM. The aim of this study was to individuals with 1% most extreme cytokine production, evaluate the spectrum of CD40 and CD40LG gene RVBA showed association with identical genes over dif- mutations in Turkish HIGM patients. We present a ferentstimulations;e.g.inindividualswiththehighestIL6- molecularanalysisof9TurkishHIGMpatients.Allmutant producing macrophages, IL1R2 is associated with LPS-, alleleswereidentiﬁed,including7CD40LGmutations4of Candida- and MTB-stimulations. When using the con- which were novel and 2 novel CD40 mutations. CD40LG tinuous measurements, associated genes are unique per mutations were c.31C>T (p.Arg11Ter), c.755G>A (p. stimulation. More than 50% of the continuous associations Gly252Asp), were previously reported whereas c.89 T>A become stronger in extreme phenotypes; e.g. IL6- (p.Val30Asp),c.446G>A(p.Ser149Asn),c.578T>GL193R production in whole blood stimulated with PHA is asso- (p.Leu193Arg) c.616_619delCTCA (L206EfsX35) muta- ciated to NCF4 continuously, in the corresponding 1% of tions were novel. Novel CD40 mutations were individuals with lowest IL6-production this signal is mag- c.170_172delTAA and one stoploss mutation niﬁed and even extended by associations with NCF2 and c.830_833delAGTG. Herein, we describe on 8 HIGM CYBA (other ROS-production genes). patientsofTurkishoriginandreportﬁvenovelmutationsin Weshowthatdistinctiverare genetic variation,identiﬁed CD40 and CD40LG genes. byMIPs, inﬂuencecytokineresponsestovariousstimuliin E. Uzay: None. A. Aykut: None. A. Durmaz: None. N. different cell-types in healthy individuals. We now plan to Karaca:None.N.Gülez:None.N.Kütükçüler:None.Ö. validateinitialassociationsbyfunctionalfollow-upandaim Çoğulu: None. to expand this method to various IL1-mediated diseases. R.C.vanDeuren:None.P.Arts:None.L.A.B.Joosten: P07.19C None. M. Jaeger: None. M. Steehouwer: None. M. van The role of rare genetic variation in the Interleukin-1 der Vorst: None. C. Gilissen: None. C.A. Dinarello: pathway None. M.G. Netea: None. F.L. van de Veerdonk: None. A. Hoischen: None. R. C. van Deuren1,2, P. Arts1,2, L. A. B. Joosten1, M. Jaeger1, M. Steehouwer2, M. van der Vorst2, P07.20D C.Gilissen2,C.A.Dinarello1,3,M.G.Netea1,F.L.vande Identiﬁcation of novel Non-MHC association loci/region Veerdonk1, A. Hoischen1,2 in IgAD patients through MHC risk allele stratiﬁcation and polygenic risk score analysis 1Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical C. LIM1,2, J. Varadé3, Y. Goh1, T. Behrens4, Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human L. Hammarström2,5 Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 1Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, Netherlands, 3Department of Medicine, University of 2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States Vigo, Immunology- Biomedical Research Center CINBIO Singular Research Center, Vigo, Spain, 4Genentech, Inc, The interleukin-1 (IL1)-pathway has a fundamental role in South San Francisco, CA, United States, 5BGI-Shenzhen, infection and inﬂammation. It comprises both IL1-agonists Shenzhen, China and -antagonists that together are responsible for maintain- ing a balance in innate immunological response. Common Introduction: Immunoglobulin A deﬁciency(IgAD) is the variants in underlying genes have previously been asso- most common human primary immunodeﬁciency disease ciated with infection, inﬂammation, cardiovascular disease andhasstrongassociationwiththemajorhistocompatibility and cancer, whereas the role of rare variants remains to be complex(MHC),however,itsetiologyremainsunclear.We elucidated. aimedtoidentifynon-MHCregionmarkersassociatedwithAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1369 IgAD by deﬁned genotypic subgroups of IgAD based on hematological assays. In addition, these disorders exhibit MHC susceptibility alleles. a genetic heterogeneity with over 50 genes involved. This Materials and Methods: Total of 10993 individuals study reports the results of an upfront diagnostic strategy were analyzed. Previously published MHC risk haplotypes using whole-exome sequencing (WES) with a targeted were evaluated and the subjects were then stratiﬁed based analysisofapanelof145genesinvolvedinthrombosisand on the MHC susceptibility alleles (HLA*B0801- hemostasis(besidesplateletgenesalsoothergenesinvolved DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201/HLA-DRB1*0701-DQB1*0202/ in coagulation and venous thrombosis embolism are HLA-DRB1*01-DQB1*0501). Gene-based association ana- analysed). Sixty-Six patients suspicious for an IPD were lysiswasperformedtoinvestigatethenon-MHCassociation subjected to this WES approach. Fourteen patients (21%) using approximately 540000 SNPs and 24000 genes. harbored (likely) pathogenic variants that explained the Additionally, polygenic risk score (PRS) pathway/gene set clinical spectrum in these patients. Genes affected were analysis was performed using 4760 pathway/genes set to GP9, MYH9 (2 cases), NBEAL2, P2RY12, RUNX1 (3 infer the pathway involved in the respective subgroup. cases), SLFN14 and VWF (2 cases); all involved in Results: The presence of HLA-DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201 thrombocytopenia or thromobocytopathy. Additionally, 2 (P=0.07) or HLA-DRB1*0701(P=0.72) alone was not patients with a mutation in the THPO gene and 1 patient sufﬁcient to confer susceptibility to IgAD. In the cohort with a mutation in SEPRINC1 were observed, both genes carrying at least one MHC risk allele, a protective allele, areknowntobeinvolvedinvenousvenousthromboembolic rs4097492,atSTXBP6(P=7.63x10−9)wasobserved.CD40 disease thromboembolic diseasethromboembolic diseaseve- (P=6.89x10−5) was observed potentially associated with nousthromboembolicdisease.In4(6%)otherpatientsonly patients homozygous for the HLA-B*0801-DRB1*0301- one heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variant of an auto- DQB1*0201 haplotype whereas DHX38(P=8.60x10−5), a somal recessive gene was observed. In 12 patients (18%) a novel inhibitor of protein phosphatase 4, shows a weak variant of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS/class 3) was association with patients homozygous for HLA-DRB1*01- observed. Further segregation studies within the family en DQB1*0501. For patients lacking any risk alleles, seven functional studies are requiredtofullysolve these cases. In generegionswereidentiﬁed,includingTNFRSF13B(TACI) conclusion, we found that WES is a powerful tool in (P=1.12x10−4), with suggestive evidence of association genetically diagnosing patients with IPD. with IgAD. Pathway PRS analysis shows that cohort car- A. Simons: None. M. Stevens-Kroef: None. W. van rying at least one HLA-B*0801-DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201 Heerde: None. S. Schols: None. P. Brons: None. S. de haplotype have strong association with autoimmune and Munnik: None. immunepathwaywhileHLA-DRB1*01-DQB1*0501cohort having association with asthma pathway and IgA P07.22B production. Uncovering the pathogen induced host-response on Conclusions: Our ﬁndings suggest that the pathogenesis RNA level to aid genetic diagnosis of primary of IgAD may be different depending on the presence of immunodeﬁciencies (PIDs) selected MHC susceptibility haplotypes. C. Lim: None. J. Varadé: None. Y. Goh: None. T. S. Kersten1,2, C. Kaffa3, M. G. Netea2, A. Hoischen1,2 Behrens: None. L. Hammarström: None. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for P07.21A Molecular Life Science, Radboud University Medical Applicationofwholeexomesequencingforpatientswith Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of inherited platelet disorders Experimental Internal Medicine, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Science, Radboud University Medical A. Simons, M. Stevens-Kroef, W. van Heerde, S. Schols, Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Centre for Molecular and P. Brons, S. de Munnik Biomolecular Informatics (CMBI), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands Radboud University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands Primary immunodeﬁciencies (PIDs) constitute a group of diseasescharacterizedbyimmunesystemdysfunction,that, Inherited platelet disorders (IPDs) are disorders consisting duetoitsphenotypicalandclinicallyheterogeneousnature, of thrombocytopenia (reduction in number of platelets), remains complex to diagnose. Consequently, leading to thromobocytopathy (defect in function of platelets) or a misdiagnosis and misclassiﬁcation of patients in a clinical combination of these. Diagnosis is often hampered by the setting. Although whole exome sequencing (WES) has lack of speciﬁcity and correct validation of current proven its signiﬁcance as a diagnostic assay in PIDs, two-1370 thirds of all patients remains diagnosis-negative. As 3 patients we detected a homozygous (likely) pathogenic accurate identiﬁcation of the underlying genetic defect is variant inthe genes MKL1, DHFRand PRF1, respectively. paramount to the clinical management of the disease, The exome-wide analysis did not result in additional exploring alternative approaches to improve PID diagnosis diagnoses. For the 3 solved cases the genetic diagnosis is crucial. Given the relative ease of access to the affected had direct impact on the clinical decision making. tissue and ex vivo stimulations, we hypothesize RNA- Medication was adjusted, speciﬁc dietary suggestions were sequencingholdsthepotentialtoreducethisdiagnosticgap provided for the DHFR case and the genetic diagnosis was signiﬁcantly. instrumental in ﬁnding potential matching transplantation To gain functional insight into the host-response, donors for the PRF1 and MKL1 cases. Also the diagnosis 3’mRNA-seq was performed on peripheral blood mono- helped the parents in future family planning. We conclude nuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from ﬁve healthy donors. thatrapidexomesequencingcanbeofgreataddedvaluefor Mimicking bacterial, viral, fungal and a more general thediagnosisandtreatmentchoiceofpatientswithasevere immune response, PBMCs were exposed to speciﬁc inborn error of immunity. immune stimulants, i.e. S.Auris, PolyI:C, C.Albicans and W. Koole: None. K. Neveling: None. S. Castelein: LPS, respectively, in vitro for 4 and 24 hours (n=50). None. S.S.V. Henriet: None. J. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers: Differentiallyexpressedgeneswereidentiﬁedbycorrecting None.T.Rinne:None.M.Nelen:None.A.Simons:None. for baseline expression in non-stimulated PBMCs. In turn, comparison of differential expression between conditions P07.24D enabled us to unravel the core host-response, as well as The impact of rare and low-frequency genetic variants pathogen speciﬁc responses in both the early and late con- in common variable immunodeﬁciency (CVID) text. Collectively, these insights not only aid our quest to identify novel PID candidate genes, i.e. genes of unknown A. Bisgin1,2, O. Sonmezler1, I. Boga1, M. Yilmaz3 function or undescribed immune function, it also assists WES-based variant ﬁltering and prioritization. Ultimately, 1CukurovaUniversityAGENTEM(AdanaGeneticDiseases paving way to expand the current host-response series for Diagnosis and Treatment Center), Adana, Turkey, unsolved PID patients. 2CukurovaUniversityFacultyofMedicine,BalcaliHospital S. Kersten: None. C. Kaffa: None. M.G. Netea: None. and Clinics, Department of Medical Genetics, Adana, A. Hoischen: None. Turkey, 3Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Balcali Hospital and Clinics, Division of Pediatric Allergy and P07.23C Immunology, Adana, Turkey Clinical importance of rapid exome sequencing in patients with inborn errors of immunity Introduction: NGS (Next Generation Sequencing) have uncovered hundreds of common and rare genetic variants W. Koole, K. Neveling, S. Castelein, S. S. V. Henriet, involved in complex and rare diseases such as immune J. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers, T. Rinne, M. Nelen, A. Simons deﬁciencies. However, these rare variants cannot be classiﬁed clinically vice versa those common variants only Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, marginally contributes to disease susceptibility. In this Netherlands study, we evaluated the multi-gene panel results of CVID patients and argued that if rare variants located in different Incaseofasevereinbornerrorofimmunityafastdiagnosis genes could in fact play a more important role in disease is of vital importance and can change clinical decision susceptibility and/or etiology. making. In order to get a diagnosis in critically ill patients Material and Methods: We performed NGS from 103 with a differential diagnosis for an inborn immunity patients’ peripheral blood via a CVID-related 19 genes disorder we make use of our in-house rapid whole-exome panel (CARD11, CD19, CD81, ICOS, CTLA4, CXCR4, sequence workﬂow with a turnaround time of 1-3 weeks. GATA2,ICOS,IRF2BP2,MOGS,MS4A1,NFKB1,NFKB2, Using this workﬂow we, so far, have analyzed the exomes PLCG2,TNFRSF13B,TNFRSF13C,TNFSF12,TRNT1and of 14 patients using a primary immunodeﬁciency gene- TTC37). Detected variants were evaluated and classiﬁed panel (currently 386 genes). Depending on the clinical based on their impact, pathogenicity classiﬁcation and phenotype, another gene panel analysis and/or an analysis population frequency as well as the frequency within our of the entire exome was additionally performed in 8 out of study group. 14 cases. For 10 of the 14 cases trio-sequencing was Results: Next generation sequencing revealed 112 dif- performed to enable de novo analysis. The panel analyses ferent (total of 227) variants with under 10% population resulted in agenetic diagnosis in3 patients (21%). Inthese frequency in 103 patients which 22 (19.6%) were benign,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1371 28 (25%) were likely benign, 5 (4.5%) were likely patho- + EVs may be an inducing factor for Treg cell differ- genicand2(1,8%)werepathogenic.Moreover,55(49.1%) entiation and memory Treg expansion. variants were classiﬁed as variant ofuncertainsigniﬁcance. GrantsandFellowships:ÚNKP-18-3-IV-SE-14.Árpád- We also observed different variant frequencies when com- FerencKovácsisaKerpel-FroniusÖdönFellow. pared to population frequency databases. Á.F. Kovács: None. N. Fekete: None. L. Kőhidai: Conclusion:Case-controldataisnotsufﬁcientenoughto None. E.I. Buzás: None. É. Pállinger: None. unravel the genetic etiology of immune deﬁciencies. Thus, it is important to understand the incidence of two or more P07.26B rare variants’ coexistence for the possible key role in the Reduced Severity of Collagen-induced Arthritis in pathogenesis of immune deﬁciencies. Peptidylarginine deiminase knockout mice A. Bisgin: None. O. Sonmezler: None. I. Boga: None. M. Yilmaz: None. A. Suzuki, Y. Kochi, T. Shibuya, K. Yamamoto P07.25A RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan Unravelling the role of HSPE1 in regulatory T cell heterogeneity identiﬁed by a single-cell transcriptomic Previously,peptidylargininedeiminasetype4(PADI4)was approach identiﬁed as a susceptibility gene for Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by genome-wide association studies. Peptidyl citrul- Á. F. Kovács, N. Fekete, L. Kőhidai, E. I. Buzás, É. line is a target antigen of anti-citrullinated peptide Pállinger antibodies (ACPAs), and only PADs (translated protein from PADI genes) can provide peptidyl citrulline via Dept. of Genetics, Cell- and Immunobiology, Budapest, modiﬁcation of protein substrates. Also the distribution of Hungary PADI4andPADI2hasoverlapinimmunecells.Theaimof this study was to investigate the relationship between Introduction: Regulatory T cell (Treg) signature is PADI4geneandPADI2geneintheprogressionofRA.To composed of cell clusters of discrete states dispersed in a clarify the physiological function of PADI4 and PADI2 in continuum gravitating around four different well-deﬁnable RA, we used collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), known as a functional poles. The cell number and function of memory RA model mouse. We examined that localization of PAD4 Treg cells is of key question, as these cells promote and PAD2 protein was indicated by immunohistochemistry reproductiveﬁtnessduringhumanpregnancybyreinforcing in CIA mice. We also measured expression of Padi genes immune tolerance against fetal antigens. The aim of our and various inﬂammatory cytokines in immune cells by study was to examine the role of HSPE1 in Treg real-time TaqMan assay and ELISA, respectively. We differentiation and its inﬂuence on the functional states. generated PADI4−/− and PADI2−/− mice and performed Methods: Single-cell Treg and naïve T cell sequencing experimental arthritis. We demonstrated that the clinical data were obtained from 10x Genomics repository. Python disease score was signiﬁcantly decreased in PADI4−/− basedScanpytoolkitwasusedfortheanalysisofsingle-cell miceandPADI4expressionwasinducedbyCIIimmuniza- data. Furthermore, qPCR-based gene expression of HSPE1 tion. In PADI4−/− mice sera, serum anti-type II collagen in circulating PBMCs was evaluated. (CII)IgM,IgG,andinﬂammatorycytokinelevelswerealso Results:Weidentiﬁed7differentcellclustersintheTreg signiﬁcantly decreased compared with those in wild-type cell population. We deﬁned 4 in-house panels for the Treg mice sera. Interestingly, PADI2 expression was compensa- cell subtype identiﬁcation. Two clusters of memory Treg tionally induced in CD11b+ cells of PADI4-/- mice. wereidentiﬁed.AmongTregcells,HSPE1showsacluster- Furthermore, we examined that the clinical disease score dependent expression pattern; the memory subtype expres- and expression levels of Padi genes in PADI2−/− CIA sing the highest levels. Furthermore, mass spectrometry mice. It appears that PADI4 and PADI2 enhance collagen- showedthepresenceofHSPE1inBeWotrophoblasticcell- initiated inﬂammatory responses. This study was supported derived extracellular vesicles (EVs). BeWo-derived EVs by Grants-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (C). bound to CD4+ T cells and induced downregulation of A. Suzuki: None. Y. Kochi: None. T. Shibuya: None. IL6RA together with an increased IL-10 production. K. Yamamoto: None. Conclusion:Byourinsilicoapproach,wedeﬁned4gene panels which provide a good identiﬁcation tool for the P07.27C different Treg cells subtypes. Single-cell analysis shows a A systems genetics approach to study Candida Treg cell subtype-speciﬁc signature of HSPE1 expression. susceptibility using single-cell RNA-seq Our results raise the possibility that BeWo-derived HSPE11372 D. H. de Vries, V. Matzaraki, M. G. P. van der Wijst, E. Svenungsson6, S. Rantapää-Dahlqvist4, O. B. Bakker, V. Kumar, L. Franke A. A. Bengtsson5, A. C. Syvänen8, K. Lindblad-Toh9, L. Rönnblom1, The DISSECT Consortium UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands 1Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala Candida albicans infection of the blood stream, candidae- University,Uppsala,Sweden,2ScienceforLifeLaboratory, mia, has mortality rates over 30% and is the most common Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, invasive fungal infection in immunocompromised patients. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Dept. of Medicine Candidaemia is poorly understood and has poor treatment (Solna), Karolinska Institutet, and Dept. of Endocrinology, available. To better understand candidaemia response, we Metabolism and Diabetes Karolinska University Hospital, usedsingle-cellRNA-seq(scRNA-seq)in24hourCandida Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Public Health and stimulated and unstimulated peripheral blood mononuclear Clinical Medicine/Rheumatology, Umeå University, Umeå, cellsofsixdonorstoidentifycell-type-speciﬁcresponsesto Sweden, 5Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Candida stimulation. Rheumatology,LundUniversity,SkåneUniversityHospital, Differential expression (DE) analysis with MAST bulk- Lund, Sweden, 6Department of Medicine, Rheumatology like scRNA-seq, shows high (97.3%) concordance with an unit, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, independent bulk RNA-seq candida cohort. In addition, 7Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, MAST was also run on 7 cell types to identify cell-type- Rheumatology/Neuro and Inﬂammation Sciences, speciﬁc DE effects. While the CD4+ T cells and natural Linköping, Sweden, 8Department of Medical Sciences, killer (NK) cells have most DE genes (1459 and 1313, Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory, respectively), classical monocytes have the most distinct Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 9Broad Institute of response. We are now able to show that the previously MIT and Harvard, Boston, USA, and Science for Life identiﬁedinterferonpathwayupregulationincandidaemiais Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and consistently present throughout all immune cell types after Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden stimulation with Candida albicans. Subsequently,wedideQTLanalysison72stimulatedand Introduction: Childhood onset systemic lupus erythema- 75 unstimulated individuals with bulk RNA-seq data tosus (SLE) is associated with a more aggressive disease available, to identify response-speciﬁc eQTLs. However, course and higher mortality risk than adult onset SLE. To we were unable to link speciﬁc cell types to these eQTLs identify genetic risk loci in juvenile onset SLE (jSLE) we when we overlapped the eQTL genes with the DE genes, performed DNA sequencing in a Swedish SLE cohort. likely due to small sample sizes in both datasets. In con- Materials and Methods: Coding and regulatory regions clusion, we found no enrichment of stimulation-speciﬁc of1853genesweresequencedin958patientswithSLEand eQTLs in cell-type-speciﬁc DE genes, but were able iden- in 1030 healthy individuals. 117 of the patients had jSLE tify cell-type-speciﬁc responses to Candida albicans expo- (disease onset at age <18 years). Target capturing was sure, revealing NK cells to have a stronger response than performed with a Roche NimbleGen custom liquid capture expected from previous studies. library followed by Illumina HiSeq2500 sequencing. Funding: L.F.: ZonMW-VIDI 917.14.374, ERC Starting Results: Single variant case-control association analysis Grant 637640 revealed that 40 SNVs were associated with jSLE D.H.deVries:None.V.Matzaraki:None.M.G.P.van (FDR<5%). These 40 SNVs were enriched for missense der Wijst: None. O.B. Bakker: None. V. Kumar: None. variants (8% vs 1.8% for all SNVs). Two coding SNVs in L. Franke: None. the NCF2 gene showed the strongest evidence of associa- tion to jSLE (rs17849502 and rs17849501, best P= 1E-10, P07.28D OR=3.9, 95% CI[2.6-5.9]). This association exceeded the Targetednext-generationsequencingsuggestsnovelrisk signal from the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region in loci in juvenile onset systemic lupus erythematosus statistical signiﬁcance (best HLA SNV was TNXB rs369580, P=6E-08, OR=2.5[1.8-3.5]). In order to further J. K. Sandling1, L. Hultin Rosenberg2, F. H. G. Farias2, isolate the genetic contribution to jSLE, a case-case asso- A. Alexsson1, D. Leonard1, S. Kozyrev2, E. Murén2, Å. ciation analysis comparing juvenile and adult onset SLE Karlsson2, A. Mathioudaki2, P. Pucholt1, D. Eriksson3, cases was also performed. The two top loci from this ana- G. Pielberg2, J. Meadows2, J. Nordin2, J. Dahlqvist2, lysis were IL27 and LIFR (P<1E-05). Currently replication M. Bianchi2, The ImmunoArray Development ofthesetwolociisongoinginanadditional100jSLEcases. Consortium, C. Bengtsson4, A. Jönsen5, L. Padyukov6, Conclusion: Using targeted sequencing we have identi- M. L. Eloranta1, C. Sjöwall7, I. Gunnarsson6, ﬁed coding SNVs in novel candidate risk loci in jSLE,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1373 highlighting differences in the genetic risk factors for Results: We identiﬁed a novel homozygous missense var- childhood and adult onset SLE. iant NM_001024858.3(SPTB):c.6119C>T (p.Thr2040Ile), J.K.Sandling:None.L.HultinRosenberg:None.F.H. located in the spectrin repeat region. Parents were both het- G. Farias: None. A. Alexsson: None. D. Leonard: None. erozygous for this variant. The time from sample receipt to S. Kozyrev: None. E. Murén: None. Å. Karlsson: None. result was 68hrs. Pretransfusion eosin-5-maleimide (E5M) A. Mathioudaki: None. P. Pucholt: None. D. Eriksson: stainingintheprobandwasmarkedlyreduced(ratio<0.6)and None. G. Pielberg: None. J. Meadows: None. J. Nordin: blood ﬁlm showed marked spherocytosis including micro- None. J. Dahlqvist: None. M. Bianchi: None. C. spherocytes and nucleated erythrocytes. Both parents Bengtsson: None. A. Jönsen: None. L. Padyukov: None. demonstrated mildly reduced E5M staining, with occasional M.L. Eloranta: None. C. Sjöwall: None. I. Gunnarsson: spherocytesandelliptocytesseeninthematernalandpaternal None. E. Svenungsson: None. S. Rantapää-Dahlqvist: blood ﬁlms respectively. The proband has life-threatening None. A.A. Bengtsson: None. A.C. Syvänen: None. K. haemolytic anaemia with progressive liver failure, and early Lindblad-Toh: None. L. Rönnblom: B. Research Grant genetic diagnosis has facilitated hypertransfusion to suppress (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and ineffective erythropoiesis and reverse hepatic dysfunction. pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig- Conclusions: This case of severe prenatal haemolytic niﬁcant; AstraZeneca. anaemiaduetoahomozygousSPTBmutationbroadensthe genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of spectrin deﬁciency P07.29A and highlights the value of rapid early genomic diagnosis. Rapid identiﬁcation of a bi-allelic SPTB mutation in a C.M.Richmond:None.S.Campbell:None.H.W.Foo: neonate with severe haemolytic anaemia and liver None. S. Lunke: None. Z. Stark: None. E. Bannister: failure None. A. Greenway: None. N.J. Brown: None. C.M.Richmond1,S.Campbell2,H.W.Foo3,S.Lunke1,4, P07.30B Z.Stark1,5,6,E.Bannister3,5,A.Greenway2,N.J.Brown1,5 A genome-wide association study of CM-SJS/TEN with SOC in Japanese population based on whole genome 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's sequencing Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of Haematology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Y. Kawai1, Y. Hitomi1, M. Ueta2, S. Khor1, K. Nakatani1, Australia, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Royal C. Sotozono3, S. Kinoshita2, M. Nagasaki4, K. Tokunaga1 Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 4Department of Clinical Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 1Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Australia, Melbourne, Australia, 5Department of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 2Department of Frontier Medical Science and Technology Australia, 6Australian Genomics Health Alliance, for Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Melbourne, Australia Medicine, Kyoto, Japan, 3Department of Ophthalmology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan, Introduction: Erythrocyte membrane defects, caused by 4Department of Integrative Genomics, Tohoku Medical deﬁcienciesinmembraneproteinsankyrinandspectrin,are MegabankOrganization,TohokuUniversity,Sendai,Japan an important cause of neonatal non-immune haemolytic anaemia. Heterozygous mutations in SPTB, encoding Introduction: Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epi- β-spectrin, cause autosomal dominant hereditary spherocy- dermalnecrolysis(SJS/TEN)areimmunologicallymediated tosis. Few cases of bi-allelic mutations have been reported, severe reactions of the skin and mucous membranes. with severe consequences, including hydrops fetalis and Although previous genome-wide association studies identi- fatalornear-fatalanaemia.Rapidgenomictestingfacilitates ﬁed the common SNPs as genetic risk factors of cold early diagnosis and informs management in critically ill medicinerelatedSJS/TENwithsevereocularcomplications patients. We describe rapid genomic diagnosis of a novel (CM-SJS/TEN with SOC), little is known about the homozygous SPTB mutation in a case of severe prenatal- contribution of rare variants and structural variants (SVs) onsethaemolyticanaemiawithtransfusion-dependence,and to development of CM-SJS/TEN with SOC. conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia with hepatosplenomegaly. Materials and Methods: In order to investigate impact Methods: Clinical rapid trio exome testing was per- ofthesevariantsaswellascommonvariants,weconducted formed on DNA extracted from peripheral blood using thewholegenomesequencing(WGS)of133CM-SJS/TEN Agilent Sureselect QXT CREv2 kit, followed by sequen- with SOC patients and 418 healthy control. cing on Illumina NextSeq500.1374 Results:WGSidentiﬁedmorethan21millionvariants,of Results: A missense variant in Toll-Like receptor 1 which 2.3 million were SVs. Genome-wide association test (TLR1) rs5743618 was a cytokine QTL for IFN-gamma of these variants reproduced the associations of previously responsetotheTLR1/2stimulusPAM3CSK4atage11(p- reported common variants on HLA-A and chromosome value =1x10-4)andage16(p-value =3.42x10-9) FDRcorr FDRcorr 16q12.1 loci. In addition, the novel associations of micro- years. The same variant was a cytokine QTL for IL-13 satellite polymorphism near CDH12 gene and the aggre- response to PAM3CSK4 at age 11 (p-value =1x10-4) FDRcorr gationofrarecodingvariantsonTRPM8andPARD3genes andage16(p-value =3.53x10-3)andIL-2responseto FDRcorr were identiﬁed. in silico gene expression analysis revealed LPS at age 11 (p-value =0.031) and age 16 (p- FDRcorr that the disease susceptibility alleles of HLA-A and BRD7 value =3.34x10-2) years. FDRcorr affect gene expression levels at whole blood in GTEx Conclusions: The missense variant rs5743618 in TLR1 database. was identiﬁed as the main cytokine QTL for IFN-gamma Conclusion: Majority of variants with signiﬁcant asso- and IL-13 to TLR1/2 ligand PAM3CSK4 as well as IL-2 ciation with CM-SJS/TEN with SOC were found among responsestoLPS.Thisvarianthasrecentlybeenassociated non-coding region illuminating the regulatory role of with asthma and allergic rhinitis inlarge-scale GWAS.The genetic variations on the development of CM-SJS/TEN mechanisms linking immune responses to allergic disease with SOC. needs to be established. Grants: This study was partially supported by grants in M. Tutino: None. L. Lin: None. J. Hankinson: None. aidfromtheMinistryofEducation,Culture,Sports,Science E. Bakhsoliani: None. J. Curtin: None. M. Edwards: and Technology of the Japanese government (BioBank None. A. Custovic: None. M. Rattray: None. S. John- Japan Project) and the Japan Agency for Medical Research ston: None. A. Simpson: None. and Development (JP17km0405001). Y. Kawai: None. Y. Hitomi: None. M. Ueta: None. S. P07.32D Khor: None. K. Nakatani: None. C. Sotozono: None. S. Rare variants in antiviral response genes drive severe Kinoshita: None. M. Nagasaki: None. K. viral respiratory infections in children Tokunaga: None. D. Lawless1, S. Asgari2, L. Schlapbach3, J. Fellay1 P07.31C Genetic predictors of immune response to bacterial and 1Global Health Institute, École Polytechnique Fédérale de viral stimuli in children Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United M. Tutino1, L. Lin1, J. Hankinson1, E. Bakhsoliani2, States, 3Mater Research Institute, University of J. Curtin1, M. Edwards2, A. Custovic2, M. Rattray1, Queensland, Brisbane, Australia S. Johnston2, A. Simpson1 A robust and self-limiting immune response is required for 1The University of Manchester, Manchester, United clearance of viral respiratory infections. In rare cases, life- Kingdom, 2Imperial College, London, United Kingdom threatening infections may occur in previously healthy children.Touncoverthissusceptibilitytoseverediseasewe Background: Little is known about variability of immune searched for rare genetic variants in 120 children requiring responses to microbial ligands between individuals, and intensivecaresupportuponinfectionbyarespiratoryvirus. over time. Within the setting of a population based birth We used exome sequencing followed by protein network cohort, we investigated genetic predictors of immune analysistocatalograrecoding variantsandcluster themby responses to bacterial and viral stimuli in children. known physical and functional associations. We identiﬁed Materials and Methods: We measured cytokine potentially causal variants in 14 genes involved in responses (n=27) to stimuli including live viruses and proinﬂammatory response and viral nucleic acid detection, bacteria (n=14) in peripheral blood mononuclear cell from including DDX58 and IFIH1, encoding RIG-I and MDA5, children at ages 11 (n=306) and 16 (n=335) years. We respectively. Both proteins share a common mechanism of sequenced exons, promoters and 3’- and 5’-UTRs of 364 RNA recognition and signal repression. In the absence of immune response genes. After QC, 1705 SNPs (LD R2 < viral infection, each is maintained in an autoinhibited state, 0.8 and MAF > 8%) and 328 differentially expressed where the CARD effector domain and the ATP-binding cytokine-stimulus pairs at age 11, and 364 cytokine- helicase domain are masked by the C-terminal repressor stimulus pairs at age 16 were available for cytokine domain(CTD).BindingofviraldsRNAattheCTDrelieves Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL) analysis using linear repression and results in a proinﬂammatory cascade. Three regression. loss-of-function variants inIFIH1werepreviouslyreportedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1375 for this cohort. A further four patients had helicase / ATP- by site directed mutagenesis, and tested for its ability to binding domain variants in IFIH1 and one patient with a complement DNA repair defects of a FANCA-KO human rare CTD variant. Rare variants were found in DDX58 cell line generated by TALEN technologies. affecting the RNA binding motif; one patient harboured a Results:usingWESdata,weidentiﬁed93.3%ofmutated variant predicted to disrupt the ATP-binding helicase. In alleles including large deletions later conﬁrmed by MLPA total, we identiﬁed 10 rare variants in 15 patients. We or SNPs arrays. We demonstrated pathogenicity of 3 present a primary immunodeﬁciency resulting in extreme FANCAmissensevariantsanddemonstratedthat2FANCA susceptibility to common respiratory RNA viruses, due to variants reported in mutations databases as “affecting geneticvariantsinacommonpathwaythatseverelyimpairs functions” are non pathogenic SNPs. Deep analysis of viral recognition. SNSF Grant PP00P3157529 sequencing data revealed the actual mutations, highlighting D. Lawless: None. S. Asgari: None. L. Schlapbach: the importance of functional analysis. None. J. Fellay: None. Conclusion:WESandproperbioinformaticsanalysisare sufﬁcient to effectively characterize FA patients regardless P07.33A complementation group, type of mutations, mosaic condi- Whole exome sequencing and functional studies for tion, and DNA source. Fanconi anemia diagnostics M.Bogliolo:None.M.Aza-Carmona:None.N.Muñoz Subirana: None. R. Pujol: None. J. Casado: None. F. M. Bogliolo1, M. Aza-Carmona2, N. Muñoz Subirana1, Garcia: None. T. Paprotka: None. C. Bauser: None. J. R. Pujol1, J. Casado3, F. Garcia4, T. Paprotka5, Dopazo: None. J. Bueren: None. J. Surrallés: None. C. Bauser6, J. Dopazo7, J. Bueren3, J. Surrallés1 1Hospital de Sant Pau and UAB, Barcelona, Spain, P08 Intellectual disability 2Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Universidad P08.01B Autónoma de Madrid, Spain; Skeletal Dysplasia CNOT2 as the critical gene for phenotypes of 12q15 Multidisciplinary Unit, Hospital Universitario La Paz, microdeletion syndrome Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras CIBERER U710: T. Uehara1, H. Suzuki1, M. Yamada1, T. Takenouchi1,2, Hematopoietic Innovative Therapies Division, (CIEMAT). K. Kosaki1 Advanced Therapies Mixed Unit. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz (UAM, IIS-FJD). 1Center for Medical Genetics, Keio University Hospital, Madrid. Spain., Madrid, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Keio University Biomédica en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) U715: School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan Departamento de Genómica Computacional, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, [Background]Chromosome 12q15 microdeletion is charac- Valencia, Spain, 5GATC Biotech AG, Jakob-Stadler-Platz terized by intellectual disability and dysmorphic facial 7,D-78467Konstanz,Germany,Kostanz,Germany,6GATC features. Recently, the smallest region of overlap (SRO) in Biotech AG, Jakob-Stadler-Platz 7,D-78467 Konstanz, 16 previously reported patients was used to deﬁne three Germany, Konstanz, Germany, 7Clinical Bioinformatics candidate genes for the 12q15 microdeletion syndrome: Area, Director Fundacion Progreso y Salud CDCA, CNOT2, KCNMB4, and PTPRB. The relative contributions Hospital Virgen del Rocío c/Manuel Siurot s/n, 41013, of these three genes have not yet been delineated. Herein, Sevilla, Spain, Sevilla, Spain we document a patient with a microdeletion of the chromosomal12q15regionandre-deﬁnetheSRO.[Clinical Introduction: Fanconi anemia (FA) patients exhibit Report]The patient was a 12-year-old female with intellec- chromosome fragility, bone marrow failure, malformations tual disability and multiple structural abnormalities includ- and cancer susceptibility. FA is caused by point mutations ing cleft lip and palate and 2-3 toe syndactyly. She and large deletions in 22 genes following 3 heritability exhibited dysmorphic facial features such as upslanting patterns, making it diagnostics challenging. andshortpalpebralﬁssures,micrognathia,low-setears,and Material and Methods: 68 FA patients with a positive hypoplastic antihelix. [Molecular Analysis] A microarray chromosome fragility test were analyzed by WES. Copy analysis showed a de novo 1.32-Mb deletion within 12q15 number variations were evaluated by sequencing data ana- that included CNOT2, a member of the CCR4-NOT lysis with Rstudio. To test FANCA missense variants, complex that regulates gene expression by regulating wtFANCAcDNAwasclonedandvariantswereintroduced transcription and mRNA degradation, and 14 other genes.1376 Results and Discussion: Remapping of the 12q15 dele- 11UMR-Inserm 1231 GAD Team, Génétique des Anomalies tion region in the 16 previously reported patients together du Développement, Université de Bourgogne Franche- with that in the newly identiﬁed patient indicated that Comté, Dijon, France, 12Department of Pediatric CNOT2 is the only gene that is commonly deleted. In Neurology and Developmental Medicine, University of conclusion,theseﬁndingssuggestthatCNOT2istheprime Basel Children's Hospital (UKBB), Basel, Switzerland, candidate for the neurological phenotypes of the 12q15 13CH Auray-Vannes, Hôpital Bretagne Atlantique, Service microdeletion syndrome.[Funding] This study was sup- de Pédiatrie, Vannes, France, 14Ecole Pratique des Hautes ported by Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (Grant Etudes, PSL Research University, Paris, France, Number: Research on Rare and Intractable Diseases) and 15PediatricNeurologyUnit,CliniquesUniversitairesSaint- Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development Luc, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, (Grant Number: JP18ek0109301). 16Center of Autism and Departmentof Genetics, University T.Uehara:None.H.Suzuki:None.M.Yamada:None. Hospital Liège, Liège, Belgium, 17GeneDx, Gaithersburg, T. Takenouchi: None. K. Kosaki: None. MD,UnitedStates,18CentredeGénétique,HôpitalCouple- Enfant, CHU de Grenoble-Alpes, La Tronche, France, P08.02C 19Centre de génétique humaine, Université de Franche- Bi-allelic pathogenic variants in the lanosterol synthase Comté, Besançon, France, 20Integrative and Cognitive gene LSS involved in the cholesterol biosynthesis cause Neurosciences Research Unit EA481, University of alopecia with intellectual disability, a rare recessive Franche-Comté, Besançon, France, 21Department Medical neuroectodermal syndrome GeneticandPathology,UniversityHospitalofBasel(USB), Basel, Switzerland, 22Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, T. Besnard1,2, N. Sloboda3, A. Goldenberg4, S. Küry1,2, INSERM ERL 1157, CNRS UMR 7203 LBM, Sorbonne B. Cogné1,2, F. Breheret1, E. Trochu1, S. Conrad1, Universités-UPMC, CHU Saint-Antoine, Paris, France M. Vincent1,2, W. Deb1,2, X. Balguerie5, S. Barbarot6, G. Baujat7, T. Ben-Omran8, A. Bursztejn9, Purpose: Lanosterol synthase (LSS) gene was initially V. Carmignac10,11, A. N. Datta12, A. Délignières13, described in families with extensive congenital cataracts. L. Faivre10,11, B. Gardie2,14, J. Guéant3, P. Kuentz10,11, Recently, a study has highlighted LSS associated to M. Lenglet2,14, M. Nassogne15, V. Ramaekers16, hypotrichosis simplex. We expanded the phenotypic R. E. Schnur17, Y. Si17, E. Torti17, J. Thevenon18, spectrum of LSS to a recessive neuroectodermal syndrome P. Vabres10,11, L. Maldergem19,20, D. Wand21, formerly named Alopecia with mental retardation (APMR) A. Wiedemann3, B. Cariou2, R. Redon2, A. Lamazière22, syndrome. It is a rare autosomal recessive condition S. Bézieau1,2, F. Feillet3, B. Isidor1,2 characterized by hypotrichosis and intellectual disability (ID) or developmental delay (DD), frequently associated 1CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, withearlyonsetepilepsyandotherdermatologicalfeatures. France, 2L'institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Methods: Through a multi-center international colla- Nantes, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 3INSERM, UMR borative study, we identiﬁed LSS pathogenic variants in 1256 Nutrition-Genetics-Environmental Risk Exposure and APMR individuals either by exome sequencing or LSS Reference Centre of Inborn Metabolism Diseases, Sanger sequencing. Splicing defects were assessed by University of Lorraine and University Hospital Centre of transcripts analysis and minigenes assays. Nancy (CHRU Nancy), Nancy, France, 4Department of Results: We reported 10 APMR individuals from 6 Genetics,RouenUniversityHospital,NormandyCentrefor unrelated families with bi-allelic variants in LSS. We Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, additionally identiﬁed one affected individual with a single 5DepartmentofDermatology,UniversityHospitalCenterof rare variant in LSS and an allelic imbalance suggesting a Rouen, Rouen, France, 6CHU de Nantes, Department of second event. Among the identiﬁed variants, two were Dermatology, Nantes, France, 7Department of Medical truncating, seven were missense and two were splicing Genetics, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne variants.Quantiﬁcationofcholesterolanditsprecursorsdid Paris Cité University, IMAGINE Institute, Necker Enfants not reveal noticeable imbalance. Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 8Section of Clinical and Conclusion: In the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, the Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hamad lanosterol synthase leads to the cyclization of (S)-2,3-oxi- Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 9Dermatology dosqualeneintolanosterol.OurdatasuggestLSSasamajor department, hôpital Brabois, Vandœuvre-Lès-Nancy, gene causing a rare recessive neuroectodermal syndrome. France, 10Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence T. Besnard: None. N. Sloboda: None. A. Goldenberg: Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs None. S. Küry: None. B. Cogné: None. F. Breheret: de l'Est, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, None. E. Trochu: None. S. Conrad: None. M. Vincent:Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1377 None. W. Deb: None. X. Balguerie: None. S. Barbarot: hand,patientscarryingvariantsinSATB2,ASXL3,SPTAN1 None. G. Baujat: None. T. Ben-Omran: None. A. and LAS1L genes present some but not all the consistent Bursztejn: None. V. Carmignac: None. A.N. Datta: features attributed to these genes. None. A. Délignières: None. L. Faivre: None. B. Gardie: Conclusion:MolecularheterogeneityinAS-likepatients, None. J. Guéant: None. P. Kuentz: None. M. Lenglet: together with the presence of distinctive clinical features in None. M. Nassogne: None. V. Ramaekers: None. R.E. someofthem,indicatesthatAS-likeismadeupbydifferent Schnur: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; clinical entities overlapping phenotypically with AS, mak- GeneDx. Y. Si: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- ing them difﬁcult to distinguish. niﬁcant; GeneDx. E. Torti: A. Employment (full or part- We thank ISCIII (PI16/01411), Asociación Síndrome time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. J. Thevenon: None. P. Angelman and Fundació Parc Taulí-I3PT (CIR2016/025) Vabres:None.L.Maldergem:None.D.Wand:None.A. for their ﬁnancial support. Wiedemann:None.B.Cariou:None.R.Redon:None.A. C.Aguilera:None.A.Ruiz:None.E.Gabau:None.N. Lamazière: None. S. Bézieau: None. F. Feillet: None. B. Baena: None. N. Spataro: None. L. Capel: None. N. Isidor: None. Capdevila: None. A. Ramírez: None. V. Delgadillo: None. S. Ourani: None. C. Brun: None. M. P08.03D Guitart: None. Genotype-phenotype correlation in 11 Angelman-like syndrome patients with new molecular diagnosis P08.04A When high incidence and high genetic heterogeneity C. Aguilera1, A. Ruiz1, E. Gabau2, N. Baena1, lead to different genetic aetiologies within one family: a N. Spataro1, L. Capel1, N. Capdevila2, A. Ramírez2, caseoftwo sibswithneurodevelopmentaldisordersand V. Delgadillo1, S. Ourani2, C. Brun2, M. Guitart1 de novo variants in one known and one candidate gene 1Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic. Parc D. Prchalová1, M. Havlovicová1, M. Hančárová1, Š. Taulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d’Investigació i Bendová1, V. Stránecký2, Z. Sedláček1 Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain, 2Paediatric Unit. 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d’Investigació i University2ndFacultyofMedicineandUniversityHospital Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics Barcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain and Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Charles University 1st Faculty of Introduction: Approximately 10% of patients with a Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech clinical diagnosis of Angelman syndrome (AS) remain Republic without a molecular diagnosis (AS-like). Whole-exome sequencing in a cohort of 17 AS-like patients led to the Wereportonafamilywithtwoaffectedpatients,a13-year- identiﬁcation of 11 pathogenic/likely pathogenic de novo oldgirl(P1) with severe intellectualdisability (ID), autism, variants in 10 genes involved in neurodevelopment agenesis of corpus callosum, abnormal EEG ﬁndings, disorders, not previously associated with AS. Clinical re- hearing loss, eye defect and short stature, and her brother evaluation was performed in order to establish the (P2) with congenital chylothorax and hydrops who died genotype-phenotype correlation in the molecularly diag- 36 hours after birth. nosed patients. Exome sequencing identiﬁed in P2 a de novo PTPN11 Materials and Methods: The clinical characteristics of variant NM_002834.4:c.417G>C p.(E139D) listed as the 11 patients were reviewed for the presence of the con- pathogenic in ClinVar and causing Noonan syndrome, sistent and frequent AS clinical features. Additional dis- which was consistent with theclinical ﬁndings. There were tinctive clinical features were collected and compared with noclear-cutﬁndingsinP1,withapossibleexceptionofade the clinical phenotypes reported in the literature in patients novo frameshift ARGLU1 variant NM_018011.4: carrying pathogenic variants in the identiﬁed genes. c.695delAAGAp.(K232Ffs*6).ARGLU1encodesarginine- Results: Clinical re-evaluation showed that the 11 and glutamate-rich protein 1 which may have a transcrip- patients meet the consistent and almost all of the frequent tional regulatory role. ARGLU1 has not been associated features of AS. The additional clinical ﬁndings in patients with ID yet but is among possible candidate genes. The carrying variants in SMARCE1, KIF1A, SYNGAP1 and gene is intolerant to loss-of-function variation (3/20 SLC6A1 genes ﬁt with the phenotypes reported in patients observed/expected variants in gnomAD). Several de novo with pathogenic variants in the same genes. On the other ARGLU1 variants (gene deletions and a frameshift) have1378 been identiﬁed in a large candidate gene screen, and the epilepticseizuresat5monthsanddiedat6months.Patient samevariantasthatofP1wasdenovoinonepatientofthe #2 had a similar disease course, except that he had no DDD cohort. The variant is located in the last exon but epilepsy. He died at 4 months of cardio-respiratory failure. truncates the glutamate-rich domain, which may alter pro- Both patients had null auditory evoked potentials. teinfunction.Phenotypeinformationonpreviouspatientsis Whole-exome sequencing (WES) in patient #2 revealed limited but suggests overlap with P1. the previously reported c.1070_1071del p. Our study supports the notion that due to the high inci- (His357Argfs*15) ATAD1 homozygous variant. We rein- dence of neurodevelopmental disorders and their huge terpreted WES data obtained ﬁve years ago for patient #1, genetic heterogeneity affected siblings often have different previously interpreted as normal, which highlighted the genetic aetiologies. Additional patients and analyses are novel c.383G>T p.(Gly128Val) homozygous variant in needed to conﬁrm or exclude ARGLU1 as a new ID gene. ATAD1. Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203. The phenotype of these two patients was close to that of D. Prchalová: None. M. Havlovicová: None. M. published patients, associating neonatal stiffness with Hančárová: None. Š. Bendová: None. V. Stránecký: immobility. We conﬁrm the auditory involvement reported None. Z. Sedláček: None. once. The retrospective diagnosis of our patient #1 illus- trates that ATAD1 mutation is associated with a recogniz- P08.05B able clinical presentation, which is critical for genetic Lethal neonatal stiffness and immobility caused by counseling and potential targeted therapy. biallelic variations in ATAD1 M.Villy:None.R.Bunod: None. S.Whalen: None.K. Maincent:None.D.Doummar:None.N.Dorison:None. M. Villy1, R. Bunod2, S. Whalen2, K. Maincent3, M. Mayer: None. A. Isapof: None. T. Billette: None. A. D. Doummar3, N. Dorison3, M. Mayer3, A. Isapof3, Afenjar: None. P. Léger: None. I. Martin: None. B. T. Billette3, A. Afenjar2, P. Léger4, I. Martin5, B. Keren6, Keren: None. D. Héron: None. C. Mignot: None. D. Héron1,2, C. Mignot1,2,6,7 P08.06C 1APHP, Département de génétique, Groupe Hospitalier New candidate genes in autism spectrum disorder PitiéSalpêtrière,Paris,France,2APHP,Unitédegénétique clinique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, F. Mari1, C. Fallerini1, A. Curró1, D. Lopergolo1, 3APHP, Unité de neuropédiatrie et pathologie du E. Benetti2, A. Giliberti1, M. Cannone1, F. Valentino1, développement,Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, F. Ariani1, A. Pinto3, S. Furini2, R. Canitano4, 4APHP, Réanimation néonatale et pédiatrique, Hôpital J. D. Buxbaum5, S. De Rubeis5, A. Renieri1 Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 5APHP, Soins intensifs de néonatalogie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, France, 6Centre deRéférence DéﬁciencesIntellectuellesde 2Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Causes Rares, Paris, France, 7INSERM, U 1127, CNRS Siena,Siena,Italy,3GeneticaMedica,AziendaOspedaliera UMR 7225, Sorbonne Université, UPMC Université Paris Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 4Child Neuropsychiatry, 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, épinière, ICM, Paris, France 5Department of Psychiatry, Ichan School of Medicine, at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States ATAD1 encodes for thorase, a protein which regulates the surface-expressionofAMPAreceptors.Thus,thoraseplays Introduction: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a well- an essential role in neurotransmission. Biallelic loss-of- known highly genetic heterogeneous entity. functionoractivatingATAD1mutationshavebeenrecently Materials and Methods: In the context of an Interna- describedinsixpatientsfromthreedifferentfamilies. They tional project aiming at identifying the genetic causes of presented with severe encephalopathy characterized by ASD (Autism Sequencing Consortium, Mount Sinai), we neonatal stiffness, limited or absent mobility, poor eye performed a whole exome sequencing (WES) analysis in a contact, feeding difﬁculties and respiratory distress. cohortof100ASDpatients,notharboringCNVs,attending Here,wereportontwonovelinfantswiththiscongenital the Medical Genetics Unit of Siena. immobility and hypertonia syndrome. Patient #1 needed Results: Mutations in already known ASD-related genes intensive cares from birth because of secondary neonatal were detected in 11% of cases, while either de novo or respiratory distress. He had extreme stiffness of limbs and inheritedmutationsinnovelgeneswereidentiﬁedin21%of axialhypotonia,immobility,absenceofeyecontact,limited cases. The novel identiﬁed genes can be pooled in three responsiveness to stimuli and weak sucking. He had categories: i-genes for which causative mutations have notAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1379 beenpreviouslyreported(eightgenes),ii-genesforwhicha Center, Durham, NC, United States, 14Division of likelyassociationwithASDhasbeenpreviouslyreportedin BiochemicalDiseases,DepartmentofPediatrics,University a single case (eg DRP2 etc) and iii-genes whose mutations of British Columbia, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, have been previously associated with intellectual disability BC, Canada, 15Department of Pediatrics, Duke University (ID) in only one (eg BCORL1 etc) or a few families (eg Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, 16Center for BRD4 recently associated with a Cornelia De Lange-like Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children’s Research phenotype etc). Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 17Department of Conclusions: Overall, our extensive approach goes Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United beyond safely conﬁrming the pathogenic role of ASD/ID States candidate-genes and allows establishing the novel role of ID-related genes in ASD. It delineates the impact of new The evolutionarily conserved Notch signaling pathway genes across neurodevelopmental dimensions, providing operates in many different developmental, homeostatic and importantnewinsightsintofunctionalpathwaysinvolvedin disease processes. In vivo and in vitro studies have shown heterogeneous ASD phenotypes. an important role of the Notch ligand DLL1 in the F.Mari: None.C.Fallerini: None.A.Curró:None.D. development of the nervous system and somites, among Lopergolo: None. E. Benetti: None. A. Giliberti: None. others. M.Cannone:None.F.Valentino:None.F.Ariani:None. We identiﬁed 14 individuals from ten unrelated families A.Pinto:None.S.Furini:None.R.Canitano:None.J.D. with heterozygous DLL1 variants by exome sequencing. Buxbaum: None. S. De Rubeis: None. A. Renieri: None. The most common features in our cohort were intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, seizures and variable P08.07D brain malformations. Four patients had scoliosis including Mutations in DLL1 cause variable neurodevelopmental one with a vertebral segmentation defect. We identiﬁed six disorders nonsense variants, two splice site variants, one missense variant affecting a highly conserved cysteine in the DSL B. Fischer-Zirnsak1, L. Segebrecht1,2, P. Charles3, domain, and one 122 kb deletion containing DLL1. Ana- C. F. Boerkoel4, K. Brown5, T. Cartwright6, Y. Chen7, lysis of the splice site variant NM_005618.4:c.54+1G>A C. Costin8, S. Fehr9, K. Foss10, T. Ha11, G. Hildebrand1, showed an in-frame insertion of 12 bp near the sequence D. Horn1, S. Liu7, E. J. Marco12, M. McDonald13, coding for the signal peptide, possibly affecting proper K. McWalter7, S. Race14, M. Schubach1,2, Y. C. Si7, localizationofthemutantDLL1protein.Thefeaturesinour A. Slavotinek11, S. Stockler14, A. Telegraﬁ7, E. Torti7, cohortresemblethoseofpatientswithoverlappingterminal A.C.Tsai5,X.Wang7,M.Zafar15,B.Keren3,U.Kornak1, deletions of 6q27 encompassing DLL1, supporting the G. Mirzaa16,17, N. Ehmke1 previous hypothesis that haploinsufﬁciency of DLL1 is causative of the phenotype in this deletion. 1Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, In conclusion, we identiﬁed heterozygous mutations in 2Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany, DLL1 in a cohort with a variable neurodevelopmental 3Department of Genetics, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux phenotypeandothermulti-systemfeatures.Ourclinicaland de Paris, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, molecular data support haploinsufﬁciency as a mechanism 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of British forthepathogenesisofDLL1-relateddisordersandillustrate Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 5Department of the importance of DLL1 in human brain development. Pediatrics,TheChildren'sHospital,UniversityofColorado Grants: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States, Stroke (NINDS), award number K08NS092898; Jordan’s 6Neuroscape Center, Departments of Neurology, Guardian Angels. Pediatrics, Physiology, Radiology, and Psychiatry, B. Fischer-Zirnsak: None. L. Segebrecht: None. P. UniversityofCalifornia,SanFrancisco,CA,UnitedStates, Charles:None.C.F.Boerkoel:None.K.Brown:None.T. 7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 8Akron Cartwright:None.Y.Chen:A.Employment(fullorpart- Children’s Hospital, Akron, OH, United States, 9Praxis für time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. C. Costin: None. S. Fehr: HumangenetikTübingen,Tübingen,Germany,10Divisionof None.K.Foss:None.T.Ha:None.G.Hildebrand:None. GeneticMedicine, Seattle Children's Hospital,Seattle, WA, D.Horn:None.S.Liu:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); United States, 11Division of Genetics, Dept. Pediatrics, Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. E.J. Marco: None. M. McDonald: UniversityofCalifornia,SanFrancisco,CA,UnitedStates, None. K. McWalter: A. Employment (full or part-time); 12DepartmentofChildNeurology,CorticaHealthcare,San Signiﬁcant;GeneDx.S.Race:None.M.Schubach:None. Rafael, CA, United States, 13Department of Pediatrics, Y.C. Si: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Division of Medical Genetics, Duke University Medical GeneDx. A. Slavotinek: None. S. Stockler: None. A.1380 Telegraﬁ: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; like phenotype and propose a loss-of-function effect of GeneDx. E. Torti: A. Employment (full or part-time); BRD4 mutations. The variability of the phenotype might in Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. A.C. Tsai: None. X. Wang: A. part be explained be different effects on target Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. M. effector genes. Zafar: None. B. Keren: None. U. Kornak: None. G. N.N. Hauer: None. C. Vogl: None. B. Popp: None. C. Mirzaa: None. N. Ehmke: None. Büttner: None. S. Uebe: None. H. Sticht: None. A.B. Ekici: None. P. Klinger: None. C. Kraus: None. M. P08.08A Krumbiegel: None. A. Wiesener: None. H. Dörr: None. Exploring the phenotypical spectrum of BRD4 defects A. Reis: None. C.T. Thiel: None. N. N. Hauer1, C. Vogl1, B. Popp1, C. Büttner1, S. Uebe1, P08.09B H. Sticht2, A. B. Ekici1, P. Klinger3, C. Kraus1, Truncating CHD8 variants cause a Sotos-like syndrome M. Krumbiegel1, A. Wiesener1, H. Dörr4, A. Reis1, with autism C. T. Thiel1 S. Douzgou1, H. Liang2, K. Metcalfe1, S. Somarathi1, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander- M. Tischkowitz3, W. Mohamed4, U. Kini4, S. McKee5, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Germany, L. Yates6,7, M. Bertoli6, S. Lynch8, S. Holder9, -. the 2Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Deciphering Developmental Disorders study10, S. Banka1 Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Orthopaedic Rheumatology, Friedrich- 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Hospital, Manchester University Hospitals NHS Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Medicine, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen- Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Division of Nürnberg FAU, Erlangen, Germany Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Bromodomain Protein 4 (BRD4) is a member of the Kingdom, 3Academic Department of Medical Genetics, bromodomain protein family involved in binding to University of Cambridge, Cambridge University Hospitals hyperacetylated genomic regions of promotors and enhan- NHS foundation Trust, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, cers. BRD4 mediates CDK9 activity to inﬂuence transcrip- Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Oxford Centre for Genomic tion elongation by RNA polymerase II and thus regulates Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation gene expression, cell differentiation and cell cycle. Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 55Northern Ireland Recently, frameshift and missense variants were reported Regional Genetics Centre, Belfast Health and Social Care with a Cornelia de Lange-like phenotype. In three Trust, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, independent families we identiﬁed 2 missense and 1 6West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, NHS Greater frameshift heterozygous de novo variants in BRD4 Glasgow and Clyde, Institute of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill (c.1856G>T; c.2513A>T; c.2728delC). The individuals Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 7KwaZulu-Natal with the c.1856G>T and the c.2728delC variants presented Research and Innovation Sequencing Platform (KRISP), withintellectualdisabilityandCorneliadeLange-likefacial University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa, gestalt. Short stature was present in all but the individual 8TempleStreetChildren’sHospital,Dublin,Ireland,9North with the frameshift variant. Protein structure modelling West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Harrow, London, indicates that variant c.1856G>T (p.Ser619Iso) likely United Kingdom, 10Department of Medical Genetics, affects binding of BRD4 to its ligands. Expression analysis Cambridge University Hospitals Foundation Trust, showed that both missense variants, but not the frameshift Cambridge, United Kingdom variant, lead to a reduced expression indicating a loss-of- function effect of all three identiﬁed variants. Immuno- Variants in the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding ﬂuorescence analysis from cells with the missense variants protein 8 (CHD8) have been associated with intellectual conﬁrmed a reduced cellular growth and smaller cell size disability (ID), autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and comparedtocontrols.Transcriptionalproﬁlingtoassessthe overgrowth and CHD8 is one of the causative genes for effect of BRD4 on known effector proteins highlighted a OGID (overgrowth and ID). However, the phenotypic complex dysregulation in patient and CRISPR/Cas9 spectrum of individuals heterozygous for CHD8 truncating meditated BRD4 defect cell lines. We expand the clinical variants has not been clearly deﬁned. We investigated 26 spectrum of mutations in BRD4 from idiopathic short individuals with CHD8 protein truncating variants (PTVs), staturewithoutdistinctfacialgestalttoaCorneliadeLange- including 10 previously unreported patients, and found aAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1381 pattern of common features: macrocephaly (76%), tall University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ, United States, stature (65%), developmental delay and/or intellectual 13Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's disability (DD/ID, 81%), autism spectrum disorders (ASD, Hospital & The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 81%), sleep difﬁculties (48%), gastrointestinal problems Australia, 14Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden (42%),anddistinctfacialfeatures.Thegestaltisreminiscent University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, ofSotosandWeaversyndromes.Mostoftheindividualsin 15DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusMC,University our cohort had moderate-to-severe intellectual disability, Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands and some had regression of speech (37%), seizures (27%) and hypotonia (27%), and two individuals were also non- Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the CLTC gene have ambulant. Most individuals had ASD (81%), similarly to beenreported in14patientswithintellectualdisability(ID) previous studies, but we found a higher incidence of with or without epilepsy. comorbidneurodevelopmentaldelay/impairment.Ourstudy Methods: We describe 13 novel patients with a likely showsthathaploinsufﬁciencyofCHD8isassociatedwitha pathogenic de novo CLTC variant, identiﬁed by using Sotos-like syndrome with pronounced autistic traits. diagnostic exome sequencing or an ID gene panel. S.Douzgou:None.H.Liang:None.K.Metcalfe:None. Results: All individuals presented with intellectual dis- S. Somarathi: None. M. Tischkowitz: None. W. ability (ID), ranging from mild to moderate/severe, with or Mohamed: None. U. Kini: None. S. McKee: None. L. without additional neurologic, behavioral, craniofacial, Yates: None. M. Bertoli: None. S. Lynch: None. S. ophthalmologic and gastrointestinal features. The severe Holder: None. -. the Deciphering Developmental Dis- end of the clinical spectrum, including severe ID, epilepsy, orders study: None. S. Banka: None. microcephaly and hypoplasia of corpus callosum was more frequently observed in the group of individuals with mis- P08.10C senseandin-framevariantsthaninthosewithnonsenseand Delineation of the clinical phenotype caused by de novo frameshift variants, although this difference was not sig- CLTC variants niﬁcant(Fisher’sExactTest;p-value>0.0125).A3Dmodel of the CHC1 protein showed that the de novo missense M.J.NabaisSá1,H.Venselaar2,L.Wiel3,A.Trimouille4, CLTC variants do not cluster in 3D dimensionalproximity. E. Lasseaux4, S. Naudion4, D. Lacombe4, A. Piton5, However, these variants may affect the interaction with C.Vincent-Delorme6,C.Zweier7,A.Reis7,R.Trollmann8, otherclathrinheavyandlightchainsasCHC1interactswith A. Ruiz9, E. Gabau10, A. Vetro11, R. Guerrini11, three light chains to form clathrin. The nonsense and fra- S. Bakhtiari12, M. Kruer12, K. Crompton12, D. J. Amor13, meshift variants are all predicted to result in nonsense- E. K. Bijlsma14, T. S. Barakat15, M. F. van Dooren15, mediated mRNA decay. R. Pfundt1, C. Gilissen1, B. B. de Vries1, A. P. de Conclusion: Taken together, these results suggest that Brouwer1, D. A. Koolen1 missense and in frame variants exert a dominant negative effect (antimorph), whereas the nonsense and frameshift 1Radboudumc/Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and variants would result in haploinsufﬁciency (hypomorph). Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Center for Molecular Consequently, the wide phenotypic variability observed in and Biomolecular Informatics, RIMLS, Radboudumc, CLTC-related ID seems to be associated with allelic Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, heterogeneity. RILMS, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU M.J. Nabais Sá: None. H. Venselaar: None. L. Wiel: Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 5Institut de Genetique et de None. A. Trimouille: None. E. Lasseaux: None. S. Nau- BiologieMoleculaireetCellulaire,INSERMU964&CNRS dion: None. D. Lacombe: None. A. Piton: None. C. UMR 7104, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, 6Hôpital Vincent-Delorme:None.C.Zweier:None.A.Reis:None. Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 7Institute of Human R.Trollmann:None.A.Ruiz:None.E.Gabau:None.A. Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen- Vetro: None. R. Guerrini: None. S. Bakhtiari: None. M. Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 8Department of Pediatrics, Kruer: None. K. Crompton: None. D.J. Amor: None. E. Division of Neuropediatrics, Friedrich-Alexander K.Bijlsma:None.T.S.Barakat:None.M.F.vanDooren: UniversityErlangen-Nürnberg(FAU),Erlangen,Germany, None.R.Pfundt:None.C.Gilissen:None.B.B.deVries: 9Laboratori de Genètica, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic, None. A.P. de Brouwer: None. D.A. Koolen: None. CorporacióSanitàriaParcTaulí,InstitutUniversitariParc Tauli-UAB, Sabadell, Spain, 10Corporació Sanitària Parc P08.11D Taulí, Institut Universitari Parc Tauli-UAB, Sabadell, Four further patients with bi-allelic CNTNAP2 Spain, 11A. Meyer Children's Hospital, University of aberrations Florence, Florence, Italy, 12Phoenix Children's Hospital/1382 M. Rio1, C. Gitiaux2, M. Hully2, A. Munnich1, 2q14.3deletioninvolvingmultipleexonsofCNTNAP5ina N. Boddaert3, K. Poirier4, C. Besmond4, G. Barcia1 child with developmental delay and microcephaly. Materials and Methods: A 9-year-old girl with an 1Department of genetics, Necker Hospital, paris, France, intellectual disability and microcephaly (OFC < 0.4th per- 2Department of neuropediatrics, Necker Hospital, paris, centile) was seen in the genetics clinic. The girl had parti- France, 3Department of radiology, Necker Hospital, paris, cular difﬁculties with visual-spatial tasks and she had very France, 4Imagine Institut, paris, France low working memory and processing speed. An 850 kb SNP array (Illumina Human CytoSNP-12 Beadchip) was Biallelic defects in CNTNAP2 gene were previously done which identiﬁed the deletion. No other copy number described in an autosomal recessive disorder with severe variations were identiﬁed and detailed investigations for an intellectual disability (ID), epilepsy and cortical dysplasia. alternative cause were all normal. Parents were of normal Todate,25affectedindividualshavebeenreported.Mostof intelligence. patients have severe ID with absent or limited expressive Results: An 838kb de novo 2q14.3 deletion was identi- speech and limited verbal comprehension. Only two ﬁed (chr2: 125,204,264-126,042,867; hg19). There are few patients with moderate ID and able to use sentences were reports of deletions involving CNTNAP5 but all have reported. We described four children from three families involvedmultipleothergenesorcopynumbervariants.This with novel homozygous or compound heterozygous is the ﬁrst reported case of a de novo deletion disrupting deleteriousCNVsandmutationsinCNTNAP2gene.Motor CNTNAP5 in an individual with intellectual disability and milestones were mildly delayed in all patients, with a microcephalyandnootherCNVsidentiﬁed.CNTNAP5isa walking age between 22 and 30 months. All patients had member of the neurexin family of multidomain transmem- ID. Two patients had severe ID with complete lack of brane proteins involved in cell adhesion and intercellular speech. Two unrelated patients had mild ID with preserved communication,leadingtoourhypothesisthatmutationsin speech and good verbal comprehension. One of them was CNTNAP5 result in abnormalities of neurodevelopment. able to write and read, while his brother had severe Conclusion: We hypothesise that CNTNAP5 is an intellectual disability with no language. Epilepsy occurred important gene in neurodevelopment and disruption of in all patients, with an age at onset between 3 and CNTNAP5 causes neurodevelopmental disability. 2q14.3 24 months. One patient was seizure free for 4 years. All deletions involving CNTNAP5 may constitute a new dele- patients, except one, had cortical dysplasia. No speciﬁc tion syndrome. facial dysmorphism was noted. Birth parameters and post- E.G. Ludington: None. H. Bae: None. S. Yu: None. C. natal growth were in the normal range. In conclusion, we P. Barnett: None. reported four individuals from three families with biallelic aberrationsinCNTNAP2causingIDandadditionalfeatures P08.13B such as epilepsy and cortical dysplasia. In contrast to Linked homozygous CRADD and USP44 variants in previous reports, we observed moderate ID with preserved intellectual disability speech and verbal comprehension in two children suggest- ing clinical variability even in a same family. M. Koprulu1, G. Nalbant1, Q. Zaman2, R. Muhamamad M. Rio: None. C. Gitiaux: None. M. Hully: None. A. Kamran Shabbir2, S. Malik2, A. Tolun1 Munnich:None.N.Boddaert:None.K.Poirier:None.C. Besmond: None. G. Barcia: None. 1Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan P08.12A Noveldenovo2q14.3deletiondisruptingCNTNAP5ina Background: The global prevalence of intellectual dis- girl with intellectual impairment and microcephaly ability is estimated to be around 1%; however, the molecular basis remains unknown in most cases. We E. G. Ludington1, H. Bae1, S. Yu2, C. P. Barnett1 studied a consanguineous Pakistani kinship with severe intellectualdisability,mildlissencephaly,brainatrophyand 1Women's and Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, progressivedeclineincognitiveskillstoidentifythegenetic Australia, 2SA Pathology at Women's and Children's basis of the disease. Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia Materials and Methods: Homozygosity mapping was performed and exome sequence ﬁle of one affected indivi- Introduction: Reports of small 2q14.3 deletions including dual was investigated for candidate variants. CNTNAP5 are rare and the clinical effect is currently Results: In a 3.9-Mb region of shared homozygosity,we unknown. Here we present a case of an 838kb de novo detected CRADD c.2T>G variant and novel USP44Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1383 c.873_884del and c.886delA variants. CRADD variant Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Division of Evolution & alters the initiation codon (AUG◊AGG; p.(M1?) or p. Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty (M1A)), anditisextremelyrare(highestMAF=3.28E-05). ofBiology,MedicineandHealth,UniversityofManchester, CRADD variant leads to premature translational Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Department of Pediatrics, termination. Klinikum Nuremberg, Nuremberg, Germany, 8Department Discussion:BiallelicdamagingvariantsinCRADDcause of Neuropediatrics, Klinikum Weiden, Kliniken recessive mental retardation 34 (MRT34) with mild to Nordoberpfalz AG, Weiden, Germany, 9Le Bonheur moderate intellectual disability (ID) and in some cases Children’s Hospital, Memphis, TN, United States, additional lissencephaly and megalencephaly. Only one ID 10Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, familyhasbeenreportedwithanUSP44variant,whichisa University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, deletion similar to ours. Phenotype of our patients, severe TN, United States, 11Department of Neuropediatrics, Lyon intellectual disability and mild lissencephaly but no sei- University Hospital, Lyon, France, 12University of zures,isdifferentfromphenotypesofpatientswithCRADD Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, orUSP44mutationsaloneandisnotassevereaswouldbe United States, 13HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, expected of an additive effect. Huntsville, AL, United States, 14Northern Genetics Service, Conclusion: Familial linked homozygous variants are Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, very rare, and we found such variants in CRADD and Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 15Institute of USP44intwocousinswithsevereintellectualdisabilityand Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität mild lissencephaly. This study also highlights that whole Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany, exome sequencingratherthancandidategeneapproachcan 16Department of Medical Genetics, Lyon University uncover a novel molecular basis for a disorder. Hospital, Lyon, France, 17CNRS UMR 5292, INSERM M. Koprulu: None. G. Nalbant: None. Q. Zaman: U1028, Claude Bernard Lyon 1 University, Lyon, France, None. R. Muhamamad Kamran Shabbir: None. S. 18Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Malik: None. A. Tolun: None. Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 19Children’s National Health System, Washington, DC, P08.14C United States, 20Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute Spatially clustering de novo variants in CYFIP2, of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, encoding the cytoplasmic FMRP interacting protein 2, 21Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, cause intellectual disability and seizures Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 22Division of General Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics and M. Zweier1, A. Begemann1,2, K. McWalter3, M. T. Cho3, Adolescent Medicine, Medical University Graz, Graz, L. Abela4,2, S. Banka5,6, B. Behring7, A. Berger8, Austria, 23Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, C. W. Brown9,10, M. Carneiro11, J. Chen12, 24Department of Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedicine and G. M. Cooper13, Deciphering Developmental Disorders TranslationalMedicine,UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia, (DDD) Study, C. R. Finnila13, M. J. Guillen Sacoto3, 25Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, A. Henderson14, U. Hüffmeier15, P. Joset1, B. Kerr5,6, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, G. Lesca16,17, G. S. Leszinski18, J. H. McDermott5, 26Department of Pediatrics, Neurology and M. R. Meltzer19, K. G. Monaghan3, R. Mostafavi9, Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas Southwestern K. Õunap20,21, B. Plecko4,2,22, Z. Powis23, G. Purcarin12, MedicalCenter,Dallas,TX,UnitedStates,27Departmentof T. Reimand20,21,24, K. M. Riedhammer18,25, Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL, J. M. Schreiber19, D. Sirsi26, K. J. Wierenga12,27, United States, 28Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, M. H. Wojcik28, S. M. Papuc1,29, K. Steindl1, H. Sticht30, Cambridge, MA, United States, 29Victor Babes National A. Rauch1,2 Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 30Institute of Biochemistry, Emil-Fischer Center, Friedrich-Alexander- 1InstituteofMedicalGenetics,UniversityofZurich,Zurich- UniversitätErlangen-Nürnberg(FAU),Erlangen,Germany Schlieren, Switzerland, 2Radiz–Rare Disease Initiative Zurich, Clinical Research Priority Program for Rare CYFIP2, encoding the evolutionary highly conserved Diseases, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, cytoplasmic FMRP interacting protein 2, has previously 3GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 4Division of beenproposedasacandidategeneforintellectualdisability Child Neurology, University Children’s Hospital Zurich, and autism because of its important role linking FMRP- Zurich, Switzerland, 5Manchester Centre for Genomic dependenttranscriptionregulationandactinpolymerization Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS via the WAVE regulatory complex (WRC). Recently, de Foundation Trust, Health Innovation Manchester, novo variants affecting the amino acid p.Arg87 of CYFIP21384 were reported in four individuals with epileptic encephalo- A. Rieß1, K. Schäferhoff1, S. Spranger7, M. Sturm1, pathy. We here report 12 independent patients harboring a A. Weichselbaum2, O. Rieß1, T. B. Haack1 variety of de novo variants in CYFIP2 broadening the molecular and clinical spectrum of a novel CYFIP2-related 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, neurodevelopmental disorder. Using trio whole-exome or University Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 2Department of -genome sequencing, we identiﬁed 12 independent patients Neuropediatrics and Neurometabolic Laboratory, carryingatotalofeightdistinctdenovovariantsinCYFIP2 Children's Hospital of the University of Tübingen, with a shared phenotype of intellectual disability, seizures, Tübingen, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, and muscular hypotonia. We detected seven different University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 4Dept. of missense variants, of which two occurred recurrently (p. Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Philadelphia (Arg87Cys) and p.(Ile664Met)), and a splice donor variant University, Amman, Jordan, 5Institute of Human Genetics, inthelastintronforwhichweshowedexonskippinginthe Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, transcript. The latter is expected to escape nonsense- 6Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik Homburg/Saar, mediated mRNA decay resulting in a truncated protein. Homburg, Germany, 7Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, Despite the large spacing in the primary structure, the Germany variants spatially cluster in the tertiary structure and are all predicted to weaken the interaction with WAVE1 or WeperformeddiagnosticWholeExomeSequencing(WES) NCKAP1 of the actin polymerization regulating WRC- in1037caseswithintellectualdisability(ID)andﬁlteredfor complex.Preliminarygenotype–phenotypecorrelationindi- pathogenic variants as well as pathogenic CNVs in genes cates a profound phenotype in p.Arg87 substitutions and a previouslyreportedinID.In234casesweranTrioanalysis; more variable phenotype in other alterations. This study in another 79 cases we sequenced more than one affected evidenced a variety of de novo variants in CYFIP2 as a individualperfamily.Withthisapproachwecouldidentify novel cause of mostly severe intellectual disability with pathogenic variants or CNVs in 31% of the cases and seizures and muscular hypotonia. prioritize candidate variants of unclear signiﬁcance in M. Zweier: None. A. Begemann: None. K. McWalter: another 17.6% of the cases. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx, About 66% of the pathogenic variants occurred de novo Inc. M.T. Cho: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- or were transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner, niﬁcant; GeneDx, Inc.. L. Abela: None. S. Banka: None. while21%ofthevariantswereautosomalrecessive.Onlya B.Behring:None.A.Berger: None.C.W.Brown:None. minority of 11% was X-chromosomal and less than 1% M.Carneiro:None.J.Chen:None.G.M.Cooper:None. occurred in mitochondrial DNA. C.R.Finnila:None.M.J.GuillenSacoto:A.Employment Among these we identiﬁed severalcases with pathogenic (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx, Inc.. A. Hender- variants in HNRNPH2, NBEA, PUS3, RHOBTB2, TBCK son:None.U.Hüffmeier:None.P.Joset:None.B.Kerr: and TBC1D23, genes that have been associated with ID None. G. Lesca: None. G.S. Leszinski: None. J.H. very recently. Besides identifying pathogenic variants in McDermott: None. M.R. Meltzer: None. K.G. Mon- genes previously associated with ID, we were also able to aghan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; identify22newcandidategenessuchasBCL11B,FBXO11 GeneDx, Inc.. R. Mostafavi: None. K. Õunap: None. B. and KMT2E. Plecko: None. Z. Powis: None. G. Purcarin: None. T. Taken these results together we could reveal causative Reimand: None. K.M. Riedhammer: None. J.M. variants in about 31% of cases and identify potentially Schreiber: None. D. Sirsi: None. K.J. Wierenga: None. causative variants in another 17% of cases in a study M.H. Wojcik: None. S.M. Papuc: None. K. Steindl: comprising more than 1000 individuals with intellectual None. H. Sticht: None. A. Rauch: None. disability. R. Buchert: None. M. Grimmel: None. S. Beck-Wödl: P08.15D None. A. Bevot: None. A. Dufke: None. M. Elgizouli: Diagnostic whole exome sequencing identiﬁes new None. T. Froukh: None. D. Gauck: None. U. Grasshoff: causative variants in 1000 cases with intellectual None. N. Kaiser: None. M. Kehrer: None. I. Krägeloh- disability Mann: None. H. Küpper: None. A. Kuechler: None. L. Laugwitz: None. J. Magg: None. U. Moog: None. A. R. Buchert1, M. Grimmel1, S. Beck-Wödl1, A. Bevot2, Müller: None. B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz: None. A. Rieß: A. Dufke1, M. Elgizouli3, T. Froukh4, D. Gauck1, None. K. Schäferhoff: None. S. Spranger: None. M. U. Grasshoff1, N. Kaiser2, M. Kehrer1, I. Krägeloh- Sturm:None.A.Weichselbaum:None.O.Rieß:None.T. Mann2, H. Küpper2, A. Kuechler3, L. Laugwitz1,2, B. Haack: None. J. Magg2, U. Moog5, A. Müller1, B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz6,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1385 P08.16A A.A.Qaisar12,E.Falconnet2,V.Zoete8,13,E.Ranza2,14,15, Language impairment with a partial duplication of P. Makrythanasis2,16, F. A. Santoni2,17, J. Ahmed4, DOCK8 N. Katsanis1, C. Walsh6, S. E. Antonarakis2,14,18 A.Benítez-Burraco1,M.Fernández-Urquiza2,S.Jiménez- 1CenterforHumanDiseaseModeling,Durham,NC,United Romero3 States,2DepartmentofGeneticMedicineandDevelopment, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Human 1Faculty of Philology, Seville, Spain, 2Faculty of Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotechnology Humanities, Oviedo, Spain, 3Faculty of Psychology, Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Córdoba, Spain Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan, 4Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University, In this talk we will report on a boy with a microdeletion in Peshawar, Pakistan, 5Atlantic Health System, Goryeb 8p23.1 (arr[hg19] 8p23.1 (7169490-7752586) and a micro- Children's Hospital, Morristown, NJ, United States, duplication in 9p24.3 (arr[hg19] 9p24.3 (266045-459076). 6HowardHughesMedicalInstituteandDivisionofGenetics Our proband exhibits a moderate language delay, mostly and Genomics, Children's Hospital Boston, and Neurology affecting the expressive domain, as well as cognitive delay and Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School Center for Life andbehaviouraldeﬁcits,includingattentionalproblemsand Sciences, Boston, MA, United States, 7Medical and aggressiveness. Whereas the microdeletion in chromosome Population Genetics Program and Center for Mendelian 8 is reported as benign, the microduplication in chromo- Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, some9ishypothesizedaspathogenic,affectingthebodyof Cambridge, MA, United States, 8Swiss Institute of the gene DOCK8. We will discuss the role of this gene in Bioinformatics, Molecular Modeling Group, Batiment brain developmentand function, focusingonthefunctional Genopode, Unil Sorge, Lausanne, Switzerland, 9GeneDx, linksoftheDOCK8proteinwithCDC42,inturnassociated Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 10Department of to nearly 30 candidates for language disorders and/or Biosciences, COMSATS University, Islamabad, Pakistan, language evolution, including SLIT1, SLIT2, and ROBO1, 11Department of Medicine, KMU Institute of Medical which play a key role in the externalization of language Sciences, Kohat, Pakistan, 12Radiology Department, Lady (speech). We will also present results of a targeted whole Reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan, 13Department of transcriptome sequencing analysis (RNA-seq) aimed to Fundamental Oncology, Lausanne University, Ludwig determine changes in the expression levels in the blood of Institute for Cancer Research, Epalinges, Switzerland, DOCK8, its functional partners with a known role in 14Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of language development, impairment, and/or evolution Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 15Medigenome, The Swiss (ABL1, DCDC2, DOCK4, MAPK1, MET, ROBO1, and Institute of Genomic Medicine (current address), Geneva, SLIT2), and several other robust candidate genes for Switzerland, 16Biomedical Research Foundation of the language disorders and/or language evolution (AUTS2, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 17Department of BAZ1B, BMP2, CMIP, CNTNAP2, DLX1, ELP4, FLNA, Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University FOXP1, FOXP2, GRIN2A, POU3F2, RUNX2, and SOX9). Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 18iGE3 We will conclude that the phenotype exhibited by our Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, proband might result from a severe deﬁcit in working Switzerland memory (mostly impacting on language structure and use), seemingly resulting from a reduced dosage of DOCK8 and Cargotransportalongthecytoplasmicmicrotubularnetwork the subsequent alteration of a CDC42-regulated network isessentialforneuronalfunction,andcytoplasmic dynein-1 important for language development. is an established molecular motor critical for neurogenesis A. Benítez-Burraco: None. M. Fernández-Urquiza: and homeostasis. We performed whole exome sequencing, None. S. Jiménez-Romero: None. homozygosity mapping, and chromosomal microarray studies in ﬁve individualsfrom three independent pedigrees P08.17B and identiﬁed likely pathogenic variants in DYNC1I2 Biallelic variants in DYNC1I2 cause syndromic (Dynein Cytoplasmic 1 Intermediate Chain 2), encoding a microcephaly with intellectual disability, global component of the cytoplasmic dynein 1 complex. In a developmental delay and dysmorphic facial features consanguineous Pakistani family with three affected indivi- duals presenting with microcephaly, severe intellectual E. E. Davis1, M. Ansar2, F. Ullah1,3, S. A. Paracha4, disability, cerebral malformations and dysmorphic facial D. J. Adams5, A. Lai6, L. Pais7, J. Iwaszkiewicz8, features, we identiﬁed a homozygous splice donor site F. Millan9, M. T. Sarwar4, Z. Agha10, S. F. Shah11, variant (NM_001378.2:c.607+1G>A). We report two1386 additional cases with similar neurodevelopmental deﬁcits Both copy number losses and gains occur within andcraniofacialfeatureswhoharbordeleteriousvariants:an subtelomeric 9q34 region without common breakpoints. individual bearing a p.(Tyr247Cys) change in trans with a The microdeletions cause Kleefstra syndrome (KS), 374 kb deletion encompassing DYNC1I2; and an unrelated whose responsible gene is EHMT1 (euchromatin histone case harboring compound heterozygous variants p. methyltransferase 1). A 9q34 duplication syndrome (Gln290*) and p.(Tyr247Cys). F0 zebraﬁsh larvae with (9q34DS) had been reported in literature, but it has never CRISPR/Cas9 gene disruption or transient suppression of been characterized by a molecular point of view. At the dync1i2adisplayedsigniﬁcantlyalteredcraniofacialpattern- best of our knowledge, we report on the two patients ing with concomitant reduction in head size. We monitored carrying the smallest 9q34.3 duplications containing cell death and cell cycle progression in dync1i2a zebraﬁsh EHMT1 as the only relevant gene. We compared them models and observed signiﬁcantly increased apoptosis, to 21 described patients carrying 9q34.3 duplications likelyduetoprolonged mitosiscausedby abnormalspindle encompassing the entire gene and extending within 3 morphology,offeringinitialinsightsintothecellularbasisof Mb~. By surveying the available clinical and molecular microcephaly. Additionally, complementation studies in cytogenetic data, we could ﬁnd out that similar neurode- zebraﬁsh demonstrate that the p.(Tyr247Cys) attenuates velopmental disorders (NDDs) were shared by patients gene function, consistent with protein structural analysis. carriers of even very different sized duplications. More- Our genetic and functional data indicate that the DYNC1I2 over, some facial features of the 9q34DS were more dysfunction likely causes an autosomal recessive micro- represented than those of KS. However, an accurate in cephaly syndrome, and highlightfurther thecritical roles of silico analysisofthe genesmapped in all the duplications the dynein-1 complex in neurodevelopment. allowedustosupportEHMT1asbeingsufﬁcientto cause E.E. Davis: None. M. Ansar: None. F. Ullah: None. S. a NDD phenotype. Wider patient cohorts are needed to A. Paracha: None. D.J. Adams: None. A. Lai: None. L. disentangle whether the rearrangements have full causa- Pais: None. J. Iwaszkiewicz: None. F. Millan: None. M. tive role or simply confer the susceptibility to NDDs and T. Sarwar:None.Z. Agha: None. S.F.Shah:None.A.A. possibly to identify the cognitive and behavioral proﬁle Qaisar: None. E. Falconnet: None. V. Zoete: None. E. associated to the EHMT1 increased dosage. Ranza: None. P. Makrythanasis: None. F.A. Santoni: A. Sironi: None. M.T. Bonati: None. C. Castronovo: None. J. Ahmed: None. N. Katsanis: E. Ownership None.D.Zimbalatti:None.M.Crippa:None.I.Bestetti: Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual None. J.A. Rosenfeld: None. D.A. Scott: None. P. Stan- property); Signiﬁcant; Rescindo Therapeutics. C. Walsh: kiewicz: None. A. Novelli: None. S. Loddo: None. J. None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. Taylor: None. F. Devillard: None. L. Larizza: None. P. Finelli: None. P08.18C 9q34.3 microduplications lead to Neurodevelopmental P08.19D Disorders through EHMT1 overexpression Epha7 haploinsufﬁciency is associated with neurodevelopmental delay A.Sironi1,2,M.T.Bonati3,C.Castronovo2,D.Zimbalatti2, M. Crippa1,2, I. Bestetti1,2, J. A. Rosenfeld4, D. A. Scott4, J. Levy, C. Dupont, H. Nasser, E. Yvon-Chaou, P. Stankiewicz4, A. Novelli5, S. Loddo5, J. Taylor6, M. Rachid, M. Lopez, B. Benzacken, E. Pipiras, F. Devillard7, L. Larizza2, P. Finelli1,2 A. Verloes, A. Tabet 1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational AP-HP, Paris, France Medicine, Milan, Italy, 2Lab. of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Interstitial6q15-q16.1deletionsarerareandfewcaseshave CusanoMilanino,Milan,Italy,3ClinicofMedicalGenetics, beenreportedintheliterature.Genotype-phenotypecorrela- San Luca Hospital, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, tion is complex because of incomplete penetrance and Milan, Italy, 4Dep. of Molecular and Human Genetics, variableexpressivity,varioussizeandbreakpointsofthe6q Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, deletions.Wereport6additionalpatientsfromtwofamilies 5Lab. of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children's with 6q16.1 deletion encompassing or disrupting EPHA7 Hospital, Rome, Italy, 6Genetic Health Service New gene. All patients presented a neurodeveloppemental Zealand, Auckland, New Zealand, 7Département de disorder. SNP array analysis of family 1 (patient 1 to 5) GénétiqueetProcréation,CHUGrenoble-Alpes,Grenoble, showeda4,5Mbdeletionat6q16.1disruptingexons10-17 France of EPHA7 (OMIM *602190) in all affected children and alsoinheritedfromtheaffectedfather.Forfamily2(patientAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1387 6), SNP array analysis revealed a 3,1 Mb deletion at Case presentation: Here we report on a boy with pro- 6q15q16.1 encompassing only one OMIM gene: EPHA7. found developmental and motor delay, drug-resistant epi- TheephrinreceptorA7(EPHA7,mappedin6q16.1)encode lepsy starting at 7 months and recurrent episodes of status a member of ephrin receptor subfamily of the protein- epilepticus.Trio-exomesequencingrevealedthecompound tyrosinekinasefamily.EPHandEPH-relatedreceptorshave heterozygous variants in SCL25A12; c.225del; p.(Glu76- been implicated in mediating developmental events, Serfs*17)andc.1747C>A;p.(=),whichareabsentinpublic particularly in the nervous system. EphA7 play a role in databases. As the phenotype was overlapping and the corticaldomainsformation,determinebrainsizeandshape, synonymous variant was predicted to alter the splicing, we and is involved in development of the central nervous performed mRNA analysis on blood of the patient that system. We provide further evidence for EPHA7 haploin- revealed a loss of full-length cDNA. Western blot on sufﬁciency role in neurodevelopmental disorder and muscle biopsy of the patient conﬁrmed these results. Brain delineate clinical phenotype. Interestingly, one patient MRI including MR-spectroscopy further supported the (patient 3) had a 6q16.1 deletion encompassing geneticﬁndingssincecholine/myoinositolwerefoundtobe EPHA7 and a 1,4 Mb 7q11.23 microdeletion associated elevatedinthemedullarylayer,whereasNAAwasreduced. with more severe symptoms than those observed in Conclusion: The clinical presentation as well as char- Williams-Beuren syndrome. EPHA7 deletion could also acteristic MR-spectroscopy pattern combined with the loss contribute to the most severe neurodevelopmental pheno- of mRNA/protein expression in patient´s tissues conﬁrmed type as a second hit. the pathogenicity of both variants. Thus, we could set the J. Levy: None. C. Dupont: None. H. Nasser: None. E. diagnosis of EIEE39. However, at our lab and as far as we Yvon-Chaou: None. M. Rachid: None. M. Lopez: None. know at other laboratories, synonymous (and many spli- B.Benzacken:None.E.Pipiras:None.A.Verloes:None. cing) variants are not well characterized. Bioinformatics A. Tabet: None. toolsforsplicingareoftennotwellintegratedandfollowing mRNA analyses is hampered by technical and economical P08.20A obstacles. Hence, improvements are urgently needed to A deleterious synonymous SLC25A12 variant in a boy identify causative synonymous and splicing variants. with severe epileptic encephalopathy J. Hentschel: None. F. Distelmaier: None. D. Klee: None.H.Zöllner: None. M.Nastainczyk-Wulf: None. T. J. Hentschel1, F. Distelmaier2, D. Klee3, H. Zöllner3, Bartolomaeus: None. E. Jäger: None. D. Wieczorek: M. Nastainczyk-Wulf1, T. Bartolomaeus1, E. Jäger4, None. S. Redler: None. R. Jamra: None. D. Wieczorek5, S. Redler6, R. Jamra1 P08.21B 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofLeipzigMedical Somaticinstability ofCGG repeatsintheFMR1geneis Center, Leipzig, Germany, 2Department of General a factor in symptom severity in Fragile X syndrome Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, patients University Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Department of Diagnostic and D. V. Yudkin1, I. V. Grishchenko1, A. A. Tulupov2,3, Interventional Radiology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine Y. M. Rymareva2,3, Y. V. Maksimova4,5, A. R. Shorina5 University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 4Rheumatology Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Leipzig, 1FBRI SRC VB “Vector”, Rospotrebnadzor, Koltsovo, Leipzig,Germany,5InstituteofHumanGenetics,University Novosibirsk region, Russian Federation, 2International Clinic Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 6Heinrich‐Heine‐ Tomography Center Siberian Branch of Russian Academy University, Medical Faculty, Institute of Human Genetics, of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Novosibirsk Düsseldorf, Germany State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 4Novosibirsk State Medical University, Novosibirsk, Background: SLC25A12 encodes a mitochondrial mem- Russian Federation, 5Novosibirsk Clinical City Hospital brane protein ARALAR/AGC1 that contributes to the No. 1, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation exchange of aspartate/glutamate. Biallelic pathogenic var- iants lead to decreased availability of N-acetyl aspartate in Introduction: Fragile X syndrome is a main cause of thebrain,leadingtoearlyinfantileepilepticencephalopathy inherited intellectual disability in humans. The molecular (OMIM #612949) with global cerebral hypomyelination, basis of the disorder is a CGG-repeat expansion in the developmental regression, apnea, seizures, and muscular FMR1 gene. Normal repeat lengths are fewer than 50 hypotonia. triplets; the full mutation repeat size is more than 200 triplets. It has been shown that carriers of a large allele1388 exhibit repeat size somatic instability. This instability was information about the protein is not a prerequisite to assess suggested to be linked to symptom severity. Here, we the pathogenicity of the variant. This allows us to assess present a study of the relationship between somatic whether variants in protein domains for which the precise instability in patients with changes in their brains and the function is unknown or cannot be assessed biochemically, severity of their psychiatric symptoms. are pathogenic. Moreover, we can test variants in proteins Materials and Methods: Measurements of the repeat for which no biological information is available at all. size were carried out by fragment analysis on an ABI During the presentation an overview will be given on the 3130XL Genetic Analyzer, and the MRIs were performed number of mutations tested until now using the PRiSM onanAchievascannerwithamagneticﬁeldstrengthof1.5 screeningandtheiroutcomes,discussingamongstothersthe T. Patients were diagnosed by genetic and psychiatric sensitivity and speciﬁcity as well as the strengths and the assessments at NCCH No. 1. weaknesses of this screen. Taken together, we have now Results: The efﬁciency of PCR in repeat sizing does not setup a functional genomics screen which has already allow the calculation of the instability index by the quan- proven its value at the diagnostic as well as the titationofeachallele,ashasbeendonepreviouslyinmouse scientiﬁc level. studies. We developed a novel approach for evaluating G.M. van Woerden: None. Y. Elgersma: None. somatic instability in humans based on repeat sizes and the number of alleles. A strong correlation between somatic P08.23D instability and changes in brain-region connectivity was GATAD2B-Associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder found in Fragile X syndrome patients and in some brain (GAND),furtherdelineationofthephenotypeinaseries regions of the patients’ healthy mothers. Additionally, of 10 patients somatic instability signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced the psychiatric and behavioral symptoms of Fragile X syndrome patients. G. Vera1, A. Sorlin2, G. Delplancq2, F. Lecoquierre1, The study is supported by Russian Science Foundation F.Petit3,T.Smol3,A.Ziegler4,D.Bonneau4,S.Mercier5, Grant 18-15-00099. P. Edery6, G. Lesca7, N. Chatron7, B. Duban-Bedu8, D.V. Yudkin: None. I.V. Grishchenko: None. A.A. C. Colson9, B. Gerard10, B. Durand10, Y. Capri11, Tulupov: None. Y.M. Rymareva: None. Y.V. Maksi- T. Frebourg1, A. Lebre12, G. Nicolas1, P. Saugier-Veber1, mova: None. A.R. Shorina: None. A. Guerrot1 P08.22C 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen PRiSM, a functional genomics screen to assess the University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F 76000, pathogenicity of candidate variants of NormandyCenterforGenomicandPersonalizedMedicine, neurodevelopmental disorders Reference Center for Developmental Disorders, Rouen, France, 2Centre de Génétique, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, G. M. van Woerden, Y. Elgersma Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, INSERM 1231, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 3CHU Lille, Nextgenerationsequencing(NGS)hasbecomethemethod Clinique de Génétique, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, F- of choice to identify the presence of pathogenic mutations 59000andEA7364RADEME,UniversitédeLille,F-59000, in children with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Recent Lille, France, 4Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, studies suggested that a possible pathogenic genetic University Hospital, 49933 Angers Cedex 9 ; UMR CNRS mutation can be identiﬁed in the majority of individuals 60154-INSERM 1083 and Mitovasc Institute, University of withintellectualdisability.However,manyoftheidentiﬁed Angers, 49933, Angers, France, 5Service de génétique variants are genetic variants of unknown signiﬁcance médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 6Service de (VUS). To establish whether these variants are pathogenic, génétique clinique, Centre de Référence Anomalies du independent conﬁrmation is needed. The PRiSM (Pipeline Développement etSyndromes Malformatifs Sud Est- HCL ; for Rapid in silico/in vitro/in vivo Screening of Mutations) CentredeRechercheenNeurosciencesdeLyon,GENDEV, is developed as a functional genomics screen to test the Inserm U1028, UMR CNRS 5292, UCBL1, Lyon, France, pathogenicity of such variants. (see: www.functiona 7Hospices Civils de Lyon, Genetic Department and lgenomics.nl).Althoughwe can make useofmany speciﬁc Molecular Biology Laboratory, Centre de Biologie Est, biochemical read-outs to establish the pathogenicity of a Bron,F-69677,France;UniversitéClaudeBernardLyon1, variant (eg, kinase assays, ubiquitin assays) the core assays F-69100, Villeurbanne, Lyon, France, 8Cytogenetics of the PRiSM screen are hypothesis-free: biological Service, Saint Vincent de Paul Catholic HospitalsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1389 Association of Lille, Free Faculty of Medicine, Lille, P08.24A France, 9Service de Génétique, CHU de Caen - Hôpital Mutations in PIGU, impairing the function of the GPI Clémenceau, Caen, France, 10Laboratoire de Diagnostic transamidase complex cause severe intellectual Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, disability, epilepsy, and brain anomalies Strasbourg, France, 11Department of Genetics, APHP- Robert DEBRE University Hospital, Denis Diderot School A. Knaus1, F. Kortüm2, T. Kleefstra3, A. Stray-Pedersen4, ofMedicine,ParisUniversity,Paris,France,12Department D. Đukić1, T. Gerstner5, D. Horn6, M. Hempel2, of Genetics, Reims University Hospital, Reims, France P. M. Krawitz1 Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the GATAD2B gene 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, have recently been associated with a syndromic neurode- University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of velopmental disorder (GAND) characterized by severe Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg- intellectual disability (ID), impaired speech, childhood Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 3Department of Human hypotonia, and dysmorphic features. The majority of Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, reported patients harbored de novo loss of function (LoF) Netherlands, 4Norwegian National Unit for Newborn variants. To date, the phenotype of only four patients has Screening, Division of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, been precisely described in the literature, contrasting with Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Department of the relative frequency of detection of such LoF GATAD2B Pediatrics, Sørlandet Hospital, Arendal, Norway, 6Institute variants.Here,we describe 10patientswith conﬁrmedLoF of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité- GATAD2B variants and further delineate the clinical Universitätsmedizin Berlin,, Berlin, Germany phenotype. Methods: Patients were included by contacting referent The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor links over clinicians from several French genetics departments. 150 proteins to the cell surface and is present on every cell Results: Developmental delay was severe with a median type. Many of these proteins play crucial roles in neuronal age of 2.4 years (range [2-5]) for independent walking and developmentandfunction.Mutationsin18ofthe29genes, of 2.75 years (range [1-4]) for ﬁrst spoken words. They implicatedinthebiosynthesisoftheGPIanchor,havebeen showed very little subsequent progress, one patient identiﬁed as the cause of GPI biosynthesis deﬁciencies remaining non-verbal at age 30 years. ID was mostly (GPIBDs) in humans associated with intellectual disability moderate, with only one severe and one mild case, which and seizures as the cardinal features. PIGU is an essential differs from the original description of severe ID. Most component of the GPI transamidase complex along with common dysmorphic features included broad forehead, PIGK, PIGS, PIGT, and GPAA1 that links GPI anchored deeply set eyes, hypertelorism, downturned mouth and, proteins(GPI-APs)ontotheGPIanchorintheER.Here,we anomalies of the extremities. Conversely, prenatal compli- report two homozygous missense mutations cations, non-cerebral organ malformations, epilepsy and (NM_080476.4:c.209T>A and c.1149C>A) in ﬁve indivi- autistic behaviour were very rare. One patient presented duals from three unrelated families. All individuals asthma and recurrent respiratory infections, another one presented with global developmental delay, severe to presented severe feeding difﬁculties and developed acute profound intellectual disability, muscular hypotonia, sei- lymphoblastic leukemia and IgG deﬁciency. zures,brainanomalies,scoliosis,andmildfacialdysmorph- Conclusions:NGS-basedapproachesforsequencingwill ism. Using ﬂow cytometry, a characteristic proﬁle for GPI improve the detection of GATAD2B variations. Better transamidase deﬁciency consisting of reduced cell surface knowledge of the clinical phenotype is essential for a cor- expressionofFLAER,CD16,andCD24,butnotCD55and rect interpretation of the molecular results and for an CD59 on granulocytes and free GPI anchor detected by T5 accurate management of these patients. antibody on B-cells, was determined. Moreover, computer- G. Vera: None. A. Sorlin: None. G. Delplancq: None. assisted facial analysis of different GPIBDs revealed a F. Lecoquierre: None. F. Petit: None. T. Smol: None. A. shared characteristic facial gestalt between individuals with Ziegler: None. D. Bonneau: None. S. Mercier: None. P. mutationsinPIGUandGPAA1.Ourﬁndingsstrengthenthe Edery: None. G. Lesca: None. N. Chatron: None. B. roleoftheGPItransamidasecomplexinthedevelopmentof Duban-Bedu: None. C. Colson: None. B. Gerard: None. nervous and skeletal systems and expand the clinical B. Durand: None. Y. Capri: None. T. Frebourg: None. spectrum of disorders belonging to the group of inherited A. Lebre: None. G. Nicolas: None. P. Saugier-Veber: GPI anchor deﬁciencies. None. A. Guerrot: None. A.Knaus:None.F.Kortüm:None.T.Kleefstra:None. A. Stray-Pedersen: None. D. Đukić: None. T. Gerstner:1390 None. D. Horn: None. M. Hempel: None. P.M. Krawitz: P08.26C F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc.. Exome sequencing of 100 patients with intellectual disability P08.25B Cryptic unbalanced translocations causing intellectual O. Levchenko1, E. Dadali1,2, L. Bessonova1, N. Demina1, disability or congenital malformations can be G. Rudenskaya1, G. Matyushchenko1, T. Markova1, surprisingly large I. Anisimova1, N. Semenova1, O. Schagina1, O.Ryzhkova1, R. Zinchenko1,2, V. Galkina1,V. Voinova3, K. Cremer1, M. Kreiß1, R. C. Betz1, J. Buchholz2, A. Lavrov1,2 E. Mangold1, H. Lüdicke2, J. Maric-Biresev1, E. Engels1, H. Hundertmark1, J. Becker1, H. Engels1 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Department of Molecular and Cellular 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Genetics, Biomedical Faculty, Pirogov Russian National Germany, 2Heinrich-Meng-Institut gGmbH, ResearchMedicalUniversity,Moscow,RussianFederation, Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum Rhein-Erft-Kreis, Kerpen, 3The Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics named Germany after Academician Yuri Veltischev of the Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Unbalancedreciprocaltranslocationsareafrequentcauseof Federation intellectual disability (ID) and are usually diagnosed by conventional cytogenetic diagnostics. However, some of Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) is a widespread them are only detectable by e.g. FISH, MLPA or group of diseases with a frequency of 1% to 3%. Next chromosomal microarrays (CMA) and are thus cryptic. generation sequencing (NGS) technologies signiﬁcantly Here,wepresentthreeunbalancedtranslocationsdetected reduced the time of diagnostics compared to single-gene after cytogenetic analyses with normal results at our insti- sequencing. Optimal method of NGS is a whole (WES) or tuteinthelastyear.InPatient1,a10-yearoldgirlwithi.a. clinical (CES) exome sequencing. ID and dysmorphisms, CMA detected a 5.0Mb terminal MaterialsandMethods:Thestudyincluded100patients gain of 2q and a 3.6Mb terminal loss of 21q. Surprisingly, with various forms of ID. All cases were submitted from theterminalimbalancesinpatients2and3werequitelarge: geneticists. Martin-Bell, Rett syndromes and chromosomal CMAdetectedan11.4Mblossof10pandan8.9Mbgainof pathologywereexcluded,thepatientshadnotraumaticand 13q in Patient 2, a 10-month old boy with i.a. growth infectious brain damage. WES was performed for 69 retardation, VSDs and choanal atresia. In Patient 3, a 15- patients.CES(panelof6500HGMDgenes)wasperformed year old boy with i.a. ID, short stature, microcephaly, sei- for 31 patients. Founded gene variants were conﬁrmed by zures and renal agenesis, CMA detected a 10.4Mb loss of Sanger sequencing in trios. 9p and an 11.4Mb gain of 12p. FISH demonstrated unba- Results: We diagnosed syndromes (Kabuki, Cohen, lanced translocations in all patients and balanced maternal Cowden, Nicolaides-baraitser, ZTTK, Smith-Magenis, translocations for patients 1 and 2. For Patient 3, parental Helsmoortel van der Aa, Cornelia de Lange-like, multiple material was unavailable. congenital anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndrome 1), Especially patients 2 and 3 are instructive examples with metabolic diseases (MPS III type), early epilepsy ence- imbalancesgreaterthan10Mbwhichtheoreticallyshouldbe phalopathy (type 4 and 7), mental retardation autosomal detectable by GTG-banding. However, the affected regions dominant (7, 8, 35, 36, 49 types, ID with a mutation in the were very similar in size and banding patterns and thus GRIA1), mental retardation X-linked (98 and 102 types), escaped detection by banding methods. Our observations mesomelic dysplasia with a mutation in the AFF3. Several emphasizetheimportanceofCMAnotonlyinthedetection new candidate genes were identiﬁed. As a result, 21 of microdeletions and -duplications, but also of large pathogenic variants, 3 probably pathogenic and 12 variants chromosomal imbalances in patients with ID or congenital of unknown signiﬁcance were found. malformations. Conclusions: The total diagnostic value of the exome K.Cremer:None.M.Kreiß:None.R.C.Betz:None.J. sequencing is 24% (20% for WES; 29% for CES). Many Buchholz: None. E. Mangold: None. H. Lüdicke: None. nonspeciﬁcclinicalsignsinIDmakeitdifﬁculttoestablish J. Maric-Biresev: None. E. Engels: None. H. Hundert- precisediagnosiswithoutmoleculargenetictesting.Inthese mark: None. J. Becker: None. H. Engels: None. cases, exome sequencing is a method of ﬁrst choice. O. Levchenko: None. E. Dadali: None. L. Bessonova: None. N. Demina: None. G. Rudenskaya: None. G. Matyushchenko: None. T. Markova: None. I.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1391 Anisimova: None. N. Semenova: None. O. Schagina: Nava: None. M. Spentchian: None. D. Heron: None. B. None. O. Ryzhkova: None. R. Zinchenko: None. V. Keren: None. P. Charles: None. Galkina: None. V. Voinova: None. A. Lavrov: None. P08.28A P08.27D Involvement of FMN2 in nonsyndromic autosomal- Whole exome sequencing in a cohort of adults patients dominant intellectual disability with intellectual disability D. T. Babikyan, S. Midyan, A. Hovhannisyan, I. Marey1,2, S. Heide1,2, C. Mignot1,2, S. Whalen1,2, T. Sargsyan A. Afenjar1,2, J. Buratti3, V. Olin3, E. Lejeune3, S. Karagic3, C. Nava3, M. Spentchian1,2, D. Heron1,2, Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, B. Keren3, P. Charles1,2 Yerevan, Armenia 1APHP, Genetic Department, Medical Genetic UF, We report genetic analysis of a non-consanguineous Armand-Trousseau and Pitié Salpêtrière Hospitals, Paris, Armenian family exhibiting extended history of non- France,2ReferenceCenterforIntellectualdisabilityofRare syndromic intellectual disability (NSID) in four-generation Causes, Paris, France, 3Developmental Genomic UF, pedigree,includingaffectedsixmales(threesibs,fatherand Genetic Department, AP-HP, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, two paternal uncles) and three females (daughter, paternal Paris, France grand-mother and grand-grand-mother) with mild to moderate ID and with normal karyotype. Molecular Intellectual disability (ID) is frequent (about 2% of the karyotypinganalysisofall affected relatives usingIllumina population, i.e. 1.3 million of persons). Etiologies are HumanOmniExpress BeadChip identiﬁed only benign numerousandheterogeneous.Wedevelopedsince2005,as CNVsandnoextendedregionofLOH.Assumingapparent part of the Reference Center for ID of Rare Causes, a autosomal dominant inheritance pattern of the clinic speciﬁc multidisciplinary consultation (neurologist, geneti- through four generations, all living affected six male and cist and social worker) for adults with ID which main one female relatives were analysed by Whole Exome objectives are diagnosis, genetic counseling, management, Sequencing analysis using Illumina´s SureSelect 62Mb follow-up,phenotypiccharacterization,evolutionaryproﬁle Enrichment Kit and HiSeq2000 platform. Further variant and natural evolution of different genetic syndromes in calling and annotation by ANNOVAR revealed only one adults.ManyadultswithIDhavenodiagnosisbecausethey heterozygous genetic variation in all affected relatives: a could not beneﬁt from the latest high-throughput sequen- putative exonic 33 bp non-frameshift deletion in FMN2 cing techniques. We focused on adults patients (older than gene (NM_020066:c.2802_2834del) predicting a deletion 15 years) with isolated or syndromic ID without diagnosis. of amino acids 934-945. The heterozygous variant was These patients were from pediatric departments (40%), conﬁrmedbySangersequencinginallaffectedrelativesand adults’ medical departments (30%) (whose neurological wasnotdetectedinanyofthehealthyrelatives(motherand departments20%)orreferredfromtheirgeneralpractitioner sibs).FMN2encodesaproteinoftheforminfamilyofactin or practitioner of their institution (30%). 222 of these cytoskeletonnucleationfactorswhichishighlyexpressedin patients underwent high throughput sequencing in trios the maturing brain. FMN2 as a candidate gene for ID had (patient and 2 parents) consisting in TruSight One gene been speculated in reports of two sporadic cases with panel(TS1,51trios,Illumina*)orwholeexomesequencing interstitial deletions involving FMN2 and suggesting the (171 trios). We established a diagnosis in 21.6% of them mechanismofhaploinsufﬁciencywhichwascontradictedto with TS1 and 43% with WES. Whole exome sequencing the further report of homozygous truncating mutations in diagnosis yield is comparable with series published in FMN2 as cause of autosomal-recessive NSID in two literature.Inmostofcaseswefounddenovomutations.We consanguineous families. This is the ﬁrst report of FMN2 alsofoundcandidategenesneedingvalidationwithongoing intragenic mutation causing autosomal-dominant form gene matching procedures. Identifying genetic causes is of NSID. crucial for relatives’ genetic counseling and to describe D.T. Babikyan: None. S. Midyan: None. A. Hovhan- natural evolution of known syndromes with valuable nisyan: None. T. Sargsyan: None. information on evolutionary proﬁle in adults. I. Marey: None. S. Heide: None. C. Mignot: None. S. P08.30C Whalen: None. A. Afenjar: None. J. Buratti: None. V. Tellingtheuntoldstory:Theeconomicandpsychosocial Olin: None. E. Lejeune: None. S. Karagic: None. C. impacts on families affected by intellectual disability1392 D. Schoﬁeld1, O. Tan1, R. Shrestha1, R. Rajkumar1, L.Christie:None.M.Lefﬂer:None.L.Murray:None.T. N. Kasparian2,3, M. Rice1, L. Rynehart1, S. West1, Roscioli: None. M. Field: None. J. Boyle4, L. Christie4, M. Lefﬂer4, L. Murray4, T. Roscioli5,6, M. Field4,7 P08.31D The beneﬁts of whole exome sequencing data reanalysis 1GenIMPACT: Centre for Economic Impacts of Genomic in Intellectual disability Medicine, Macquarie Park, Australia, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Randwick, Z. Fattahi, M. Babanejad, F. Peymani, M. Beheshtian, Australia, 3Heart Centre for Children, the Children's F. Larti, K. Kahrizi, H. Najmabadi Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia, 4Genetics of Learning Disability (GoLD) Service, Newcastle, Australia, GeneticsResearchCentre,UniversityofSocialWelfareand 5NeuroscienceResearchAustralia,UniversityofNewSouth Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Wales, Randwick, Australia, 6Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Nowadays, whole exome sequencing has become a wide- Royal North Shore Hospital, St Leonards, Australia spreadtoolinstudyingMendeliandisorders.Thediagnostic yieldisassumedaround25-40%andthenegativecasesare Introduction: Data on the ﬁnancial and psychosocial costs duetoWESlimitations.Besidesthetechnicalissuessuchas incurred by families affected by intellectual disability (ID) low coverage in speciﬁc regions or random failure in is scarce, thus limiting the capacity to value the beneﬁts of hybridization reaction, inaccuracies in different data diagnosing and preventing ID through the application of analysisstepsplayasigniﬁcantrole.Thesecanberesolved genomictesting.Wereportontheﬁrstlarge,in-depthstudy by updates in bioinformatics tools, algorithms, databases exploring the economic, psychosocial and potential repro- andliterature,improvingthediagnosticyieldofatleast10- ductive impacts of whole genome sequencing (WGS) 20% in different studies. Recently, we have published the for ID. results of a large cohort of patients presenting intellectual Materials and Methods: A survey instrument was disability in which the diagnostic yield of 54% was developed to assess quality of life, psychosocial impacts, achieved. In present study, 172 negative cases from education, employment, income, wealth, welfare depen- previouscohortwereselectedaimingtoimprovediagnostic dency, living arrangements and family out-of-pocket costs. yield by re-sequencing and/or re-analysis. So far, the Eligible families had WGS. Data on 175 individuals with analysis of 68 patients is accomplished of which, the ID (100 households) has been collected. possible causative variant is detected in 12%. These results Results: Preliminary data showed combined costs to the are ascertained through three main strategies. First, Australian and State Governments, and private households extensive clinical follow up, re-sampling and re- totalled $13.1million per household up to the age of 69. interpretation of previous WES data led to identiﬁcation Familiesboreasigniﬁcantﬁnancialburden($4.8millionper of one known and two novel candidate genes; ASPM, TTI1 household) mainly due to lost income and out-of-pocket and GPR126. Second; WES-reanalysis applying improved expenses. Families were under enormous psychosocial algorithms and ﬁltering strategies in addition to updates of strainandmostcarersreportedhavingapoorqualityoflife. disease-causing genes revealed two possible candidates; Costs to Governments were $10.7million per household, AKTIP, MAZ, and two known genes; CDK10, FSCN1. with the main costs being for special education, residential Third; re-sequencing revealed another candidate gene; care and welfare. Among the families who have had WGS CCDC58 possibly by expanding the coverage. In conclu- results returned, 44% have had a diagnosis with a further sion, this project has shown 12% improve in diagnostic 12% having a potential diagnosis. Most families would yield so far, also introduced ﬁve possible novel candidate consider using assistive technologies such as prenatal genes and provided a second report for the recently diagnosisandIVFwithpreimplantationgeneticdiagnosisin identiﬁed genes; CDK10 and FSCN1. future pregnancies. Z. Fattahi: None. M. Babanejad: None. F. Peymani: Conclusions: Families affected by ID experience a sig- None. M. Beheshtian: None. F. Larti: None. K. Kahrizi: niﬁcant ﬁnancial and psychosocial burden. This data is None. H. Najmabadi: None. important for benchmarking the potential beneﬁts of WGS in familial ID. P08.32A D. Schoﬁeld: None. O. Tan: None. R. Shrestha: None. Mutation in C1orf131, encoding a novel nucleolar R. Rajkumar: None. N. Kasparian: None. M. Rice: protein,causesintellectualdisabilityinalargePakistani None.L.Rynehart:None.S.West:None.J.Boyle:None. familyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1393 A. I. A. Khayyat1,2,3, S. M. Baig4, U. Abdullah4, P08.33B E. U. Haq4, Z. Ali4, N. A. Malik4, M. Tariq4, B. Budde1, Genetic diagnosis of intellectual disability: results of A. A. Noegel2,5, P. Nürnberg1,5, M. S. Hussain1,2,5 trio-based whole exome sequencing in a cohort of 818 patients 1Cologne center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry I, Medical Faculty, University of T. Courtin1,2, C. Nava1,2, C. Mignot1, J. Buratti1, Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Biochemistry Department, C. Estrade1, S. Karagic1, A. Laﬁtte1, E. Lejeune1, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Human C. Mach1, V. Olin1, A. Afenjar3, D. Doummar3, Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotechnology M. Moutard3, T. Billette de Villemeur3, M. Nougues3, Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic L.Burglen3,S.Valence3,B.Héron-Longé3,D.Rodriguez- Engineering (NIBGE), PIEAS, Faisalabad, Pakistan, Levi3, S. Whalen3, D. Haye1, S. Heide1, P. Charles1, 5Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), C. Depienne1, I. Marey1, D. Héron1, B. Keren1,4 University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany 1Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Sorbonne Introduction:Intellectualdisability(ID)ischaracterizedby Universités, Paris, France, 3Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, substantial limitations in both intellectual functioning and France, 4Sorbonnes Universités, Paris, France adaptive behavior. 50% of ID cases have genetic basis. It can also be categorized as syndromic intellectual disability Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) is a clinically and (S-ID) and non-syndromic intellectual disability (NS-ID). genetically heterogeneous condition affecting 1 to 3% of Worldwideprevalenceofthisdisorderisestimatedtorange population worldwide. Recent improvements of new from 1% to 3%. generation sequencing are transforming medical practice. Material and Methods: For genomic analyses, homo- We present the clinical and genetical characteristics of a zygosity mapping was coupled with whole-exome sequen- large cohort of patients suffering from ID and had a trio- cing (WES) whereas immunoﬂuorescence, confocal based whole exome sequencing (WES). microscopy, pulldown assays and mass spectrometry ana- Patients and Methods: 818 patients were recruited lyses were performed for biochemical analyses. through clinical genetic and/or neuro-pediatric consulta- Results: We studied a Pakistani family of NS-ID and tions. ID was assessed based on neuropsychological tests identiﬁed linkage regions with a maximum possible LOD when available, DSM-5 classiﬁcation was used otherwise. score of 2.4 at chromosomes 1, 2, 15 and 21. WES con- Prior to WES, a DNA micro-array, a search for Fragile-X ducted on DNA of two affected members revealed a mis- syndrome and a targeted-gene analysis in case of high sense mutation (NM_152379.3:c.112G>A,p. Asp38Asn) in syndromicsuspicionwereperformed.Ifnegative,trio-based C1orf131, encoding the uncharacterized protein C1orf131, WES was proposed. Molecular results were discussed in as a likely cause of ID. The mutation replaces a highly multidisciplinaryteammeetingsbeforefeed-backtopatient. conservedasparticacidbyasparagineandispredictedtobe Results: The global diagnostic yield was 42% across all pathogenic by Mutation Taster and Polyphen-2. We show patients (338/818 patients). 41 mutations were found in here that C1orf131 is a novel nucleolar component and candidate genes and contributed to their validation as “ID relocates to the chromosomal periphery during mitosis. genes”, rising the potential diagnostic yield to 47% (379/ Mutant primary ﬁbroblasts exhibit reduced and distorted 818patients).Dominantmutationswerepre-eminent(81%) nucleoli, micronuclei and misshapen nuclei. Similar effects andmostofthemweredenovo(95%)affecting224unique are seen upon overexpression of mutant protein or knock- genes. Interestingly, severity of ID had no statistically sig- downbysiRNA.OurdataalsoshowthatC1orf131interacts niﬁcant effect on diagnostic rate (mild ID, 66/180, 37% - with several nucleolar and centrosomal proteins. moderate to profound ID, 108/419, 44%, p-value = Conclusion: We conclude that C1orf131 is a novel gene 0.1997). Epilepsy and family history of ID were not iden- associated with ID and that its protein product plays a tiﬁed neither as cofounding factors (p-value = 0.132 and crucial role in maintaining the structural integrity of the 0.516). nucleolus.Itisalsoanessentialcomponentfornormalbrain Conclusion: This study emphasizes the considerable functions. genetic heterogeneity of ID and conﬁrms the efﬁciency of A.I.A. Khayyat: None. S.M. Baig: None. U. Abdullah: trio-based WES for its exploration and delineation in a None. E.U. Haq: None. Z. Ali: None. N.A. Malik: None. genotype-ﬁrst approach. M. Tariq: None. B. Budde: None. A.A. Noegel: None. P. T.Courtin:None.C.Nava:None.C.Mignot:None.J. Nürnberg: None. M.S. Hussain: None. Buratti: None. C. Estrade: None. S. Karagic: None. A. Laﬁtte: None. E. Lejeune: None. C. Mach: None. V. Olin: None. A. Afenjar: None. D. Doummar: None. M.1394 Moutard: None. T. Billette de Villemeur: None. M. triggernonsensemediatedmRNAdecay(NMD)orgenerate Nougues: None. L. Burglen: None. S. Valence: None. B. a truncated version of PHF21A. This conﬁrms that Héron-Longé: None. D. Rodriguez-Levi: None. S. haploinsufﬁciency of PHF21A causes not only intellectual Whalen: None. D. Haye: None. S. Heide: None. P. disability and craniofacial anomalies, but also epilepsy, Charles: None. C. Depienne: None. I. Marey: None. D. language delay, hypotonia, and neurobehavioral problems. Héron: None. B. Keren: None. We also found that PHF21A is profoundly expressed in humanfetal brain andskeletalmuscle. Thisemphasizesthe P08.34C role of PHF21A in early human development, which is Haploinsufﬁciency of PHF21A due to frameshift and consistent with developmental delay, autism, ADHD, nonsense mutations causes syndromic autism including epilepsy, and hypotonia observed at an early age in our intellectual disability, craniofacial anomalies, epilepsy, patients. These ﬁndings deﬁnitely provide proof of the hypotonia, and neurobehavioral problems pathogenicity of this gene in a syndromic form of intellectual disability. Furthermore, our studies suggest H. Kim1, J. A. Rosenfeld2, D. A. Scott2, G. Bénédicte3, additional features, in particular autism, which extend the J. D. Labonne4, J. Brown4, M. McGuire5, S. Mahida6, phenotypic spectrum attributable to PHF21A mutations. S. Naidu6, J. Gutierrez2, G. Lesca7, V. D. Portes7, H.Kim:None.J.A.Rosenfeld:None.D.A.Scott:None. A. Bruel8, A. Sorlin9, F. Xia2, Y. Capri10, E. Muller11, G. Bénédicte: None. J.D. Labonne: None. J. Brown: D. McKnight12, E. Torti12, L. C. Layman4, D. Ryu13, None. M. McGuire: None. S. Mahida: None. S. Naidu: I. Kong14, S. Madan-Khetarpal15, C. Kim16 None. J. Gutierrez: None. G. Lesca: None. V.D. Portes: None. A. Bruel: None. A. Sorlin: None. F. Xia: None. Y. 1Qatar Biomedical Research Institute, Doha, Qatar, Capri: None. E. Muller: None. D. McKnight: None. E. 2Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, Torti: None. L.C. Layman: None. D. Ryu: None. I. 3Nouvel Hôpital Civil, Strasbourg, France, 4Augusta Kong:None.S.Madan-Khetarpal:None.C.Kim:None. University, Augusta, GA, United States, 5Baylor Genetic Laboratories, Houston, TX, United States, 6Kennedy P08.35D Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States, 7Lyon RNFT2,a novel gene causing intellectual disability; University Hospital, Lyon, France, 8INSERM, Dijon, functional evidence in Drosophila melanogaster French Southern Territories, 9Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, 10Service de Génétique Clinique, Paris, France, R. Ataei1, M. Haddadi2, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1 11StanfordChildren’sHealthatCPMC,SanFrancisco,CA, UnitedStates,12GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD,UnitedStates, 1University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, 13Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL, United States, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2University of Zabol, 14Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Korea, Republic Zabol, Iran, Islamic Republic of of, 15Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 16Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) as the most Korea, Republic of prevalent disability in the world and a heterogeneous disease is one of the major unsolved issues in health care. PHF21Aencodesaproteinthatspeciﬁcallybindsunmethy- The advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) technol- lated H3K4 as part of a histone demethylase complex that ogy has resulted in an exponential increase in deciphering participates in suppression of neuronal gene expression. It of novel ID-causing genes. Whole exome sequencing had been associated with intellectual disability and (WES) in a part of large cohort study on 404 Iranian craniofacial anomalies, based on its deletion in Potocki- consanguineous families with autosomal recessive intellec- Shaffer syndrome (PSS) interval at 11p11.2 and its tual disability (ARID) led to the identiﬁcation of a novel disruption in three patients with balanced translocations. likely pathogenic missense variant (cT1150C; p.C384R) in However, until now, individuals who carry deleterious RNFT2 gene. This variant is located in highly conserved sequencevariantswithinPHF21Ahavenotbeenidentiﬁed. zinc ﬁngerdomainthat may change the protein structure in Moreover, the identity of a novel gene underlying awaytoreducethezinc2+afﬁnitytoproteinactivesiteand hypotonia or neurobehavioral phenotype at 11p11.2 consequently leading to possible alteration in the DNA remained cryptic. Here, we describe seven individuals bindingsite.Toprovidefunctionalevidencefortheeffectof who carry heterozygous intragenic sequence variants in this gene on cognition, we used transgenic PHF21A: a missense variant, which alters the last Drosophila model. nucleotide of an exon, four frameshift variants, and two Material and Methods: Using Gal4/UAS genetic tool identical nonsense variants. These variants are predicted to RNFT2-ortholog gene (CG13605) in DrosophilaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1395 melanogasterwasdown-regulatedintheﬂybrainbyRNAi Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 17iGE3 Institute of mechanism. Then the impact of this gene manipulation on Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland learning ability and short-term memory of the ﬂies were studied using olfactory conditioning assay. We analyzed two consanguineous families with intellectual Results: Remarkable decrease in olfactory memory per- disabilityinwhichhomozygousmissenselikelypathogenic formance indices were observed in the ﬂies underwent variantswereidentiﬁedintheIQSEC1 (NM_001134382.3) CG13605 down regulation when compared to control gen- gene. In the ﬁrst family with two affecteds from Pakistan, otype (P < 0.05). the IQSEC1 missense segregating variantwas (c.1028C>T: Conclusion: Our ﬁnding suggested the possible role for p.(Thr343Met)) while in the second family of three RNFT2 in functionality of Drosophila brain in terms of affecteds from Saudi Arabia, the missense variant was learningandshort-termmemorywhichsupportitsprobable (c.962G>A:p.(Arg321Gln)). Five affected individuals from role in inducing human cognitive impairment. the two families manifested a similar phenotype that R. Ataei: None. M. Haddadi: None. K. Kahrizi: None. includes intellectual disability, developmental delay, short H. Najmabadi: None. stature, aphasia/speech problems, and hypotonia. Affected individuals with the Arg321Gln biallelic variant also have P08.36A early onset epilepsy. The X-linked paralog IQSEC2 has BiallelicvariantsinIQSEC1causeintellectualdisability, previously been linked with intellectual disability and developmental delay and short stature epilepsy.MicewithaconditionalIqsec1deletionincortical neurons exhibited an increased density of dendritic spines M.Ansar1, A. Al-Otaibi2, H.Chung3,4, M.N.Elagabani5, with an immature morphology. The Drosophila ortholog of S. A. Paracha6, R. Scholz7, T. A. Magid2, M. T. Sarwar6, IQSEC1isschizo(siz).SizisbroadlyexpressedinCNSand S. F. Shah8, A. A. Qaisar9, P. Makrythanasis1,10, PNS from embryo to adult. RNAi knockdown of siz in E. Falconnet1, E. Ranza1,11,12, F. A. Santoni1,13, neurons does not affect viability, whereas glial speciﬁc J.Ahmed6,A.Al-Asmari14,H.Kornau5,7,H.Bellen3,4,15,16, knockdown exhibits severe pupal lethality, suggesting that S. E. Antonarakis1,11,17 siz has a critical role in glia rather than neurons. The identiﬁed IQSEC1 missense variants behave assevere loss- 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, of-functionallelesinﬂygiventhatubiquitousexpressionof University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2King Fahad humanIQSEC1istoxictotheﬂysothatwefailedtoobtain Medical City, National Neuroscience Institute, Riyadh, viable ﬂies, whereas expression of the two missense Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Molecular and Human variants consistently produced viable animals. The pheno- Genetics,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX,United typic similarity of the patients in the two families, and the States, 4Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research functionalexperimentsinmiceandDrosophilasuggestthat Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, United IQSEC1 pathogenic variants cause intellectual disability, States, 5Neuroscience Research Center (NWFZ), Charité - developmental delay and shot stature, in the autosomal Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Institute of recessive manner. Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University, M.Ansar:None.A.Al-Otaibi:None.H.Chung:None. Peshawar, Pakistan, 7Center for Molecular Neurobiology M.N. Elagabani: None. S.A. Paracha: None. R. Scholz: (ZMNH), University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, None.T.A.Magid:None.M.T.Sarwar:None.S.F.Shah: 8Department of Medicine, KMU Institute of Medical None. A.A. Qaisar: None. P. Makrythanasis: None. E. Sciences, Kohat, Pakistan, 9Radiology department, Lady Falconnet:None.E.Ranza:None.F.A.Santoni:None.J. reading Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan, 10Biomedical Ahmed: None. A. Al-Asmari: None. H. Kornau: None. Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, H. Bellen: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. Greece,11ServiceofGeneticMedicine,UniversityHospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 12current address, P08.37B Medigenome, The Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine, Deletion of KCNK9, an imprinted gene on 8q24.3 with Geneva, Switzerland, 13Department of Endocrinology maternal expression, is associated with dysmorphic DiabetesandMetabolism,UniversityhospitalofLausanne, features and developmental delays Lausanne, Switzerland, 14King Fahad Medical City, Pediatric Department Medical Genetics division, Riyadh, P. T. Bhola1, T. Young2, D. Stavropoulos2, P. Sabatini3, Saudi Arabia, 15Howard Hughes Medical Institute, M. T. Geraghty4 Houston, TX, United States, 16Department of Neuroscience and Program inDevelopmental Biology, Baylor College of 1Regional Genetics Program, Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ontario, Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada,1396 2LaboratoryMedicine,HospitalforSickChildren,Toronto, France, 6INSERM, UMR-1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, ON,Canada,3LaboratoryMedicine,UniversityofToronto, France Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Metabolics, Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada Mutations in MED12 gene have been described in association with syndromic et non-syndromic X-linked Introduction: KCNK9 imprinting (Birk-Barel) syndrome intellectual disability (XLID). Up to date at least three (MIM 612292) is a rare syndrome characterized by distinct XLID syndromes have been described: FG congenital hypotonia, dysmorphic features, developmental syndrome,Lujan-Frynssyndrome(LS)andOhdosyndrome delay and intellectual disability. It is caused by pathogenic (OSMKB). In the last years, thanks to the massive use of variants in KCNK9, which is an imprinted gene located on next generation sequencing techniques (NGS) it has been 8q24.3 and is normally expressed on the maternally possible to discover at least 13 others MED12 mutations inherited chromosome. To date, the small number of and to expand the phenotype of MED12-related disorders. reported cases of KCNK9 imprinting syndrome have been Here we report three subjects from a large non- attributed to 3 missense variants. There is no known consanguineous family presenting with a mild to severe phenotype associated with a deletion of KCNK9. ID,importantspeechdelay,behaviorproblems,dysmorphic Methods and Results: We describe the case of a 5 year facialfeaturesandhearingloss.NGSallowsustodetectthe oldmalewhopresentedatage3withglobaldevelopmental MED12missensevariantc.3883C>T(p.R1295C)carriedby delay and dysmorphic features including prominent thethreepatients.Thisvarianthasbeenreportedin2016by supraorbital ridges and a prominent nasal root. A chromo- Hu et al in one family from a big cohort of XLID somal microarray revealed a 0.014 Mb deletion on 8q24.3 unresolvedfamilies.Theclinical andphenotypicvariability of uncertain signiﬁcance, encompassing 1 OMIM gene, between the patients described by the different authors KCNK9. This deletion was maternally inherited. Notably, through the last years is very wide, and it could be the proband’s mother had similar dysmorphic features and explained by the multiple functions of the MED12 protein intellectualdisability.ItwasdeterminedbySNPmicroarray in complex pathways. This clinical report contributes to that the proband’s mother herself had a de novo maternal expanding the phenotype associated with MED12 deletion on 8q24.3. mutations. Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report of a clinically E. Rubinato: None. S. Rondeau: None. F. Giuliano: affected mother and child with deletion of the imprinted None. M. Kossorotoff: None. M. Parodi: None. S. region 8q24.3, encompassing the gene KCNK9. Further Gherbi: None. J. Steffan: None. L. Jonard: None. S. studies will contribute to our understanding of the Marlin: None. mechanism and spectrum of KCNK9 associated disorders. P.T. Bhola: None. T. Young: None. D. Stavropoulos: P08.40A None. P. Sabatini: None. M.T. Geraghty: None. Functional delineation of de novo heterozygous intragenic deletion in MED13L P08.39D MED12missensemutationinathree-generationfamily: E. Siavrienė1, V. Mikštienė1,2, Ž. Maldžienė1,2, further evidences for a fourth distinct phenotype G. Petraitytė1, T. Rančelis1,2, A. Utkus1,2, E. Preikšaitienė1,2, V. Kučinskas1 E.Rubinato1,S.Rondeau2,F.Giuliano3,M.Kossorotoff4, M. Parodi5, S. Gherbi1, J. Steffan2, L. Jonard1,2, 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of S. Marlin1,6 Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Center for Medical 1Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence des Surdités Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Génétiques, Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Vilnius, Lithuania Paris, France, 2Service de génétique moléculaire, Groupe hospitalierNeckerEnfantsmalades,AP-HP,Paris,France, Introduction: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in 3Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nice, Hôpital MED13L (MIM #608771) genecause intellectual disability l'Archet 2, Nice, France, 4Service de Neurologie and distinctive facial features with or without cardiac pédiatrique,CentreNationaldeRéférenceAVCdel’enfant, defects(MIM#616789).Thiscomplexneurodevelopmental Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Paris, France, disorder is characterized by various phenotypic features 5Otorhinolaryngologie pédiatrique, Centre de Référence includingplagiocephaly, strabismus, clubfoot, poorspeech, des Surdités Génétiques, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, Paris, anddevelopmentaldelay,whicharepresentinourproband.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1397 Materials and Methods: SNP-CGH followed by func- weight (BW), HC -5.9 SD, sloped forehead, scalp rugae, tional genome analysis was conducted for the proband. In and hyper- and hypopigmented macules (HHPM). At age order to elucidate the pathogenicity of the intragenic 13, he has spastic quadriparesis, partial complex seizures, MED13L gene deletion, proband’s total blood RNA was short stature, and severe intellectual disability without isolated and cDNA was synthesized. Subsequently, a speech. He is fed by gastrostomy tube. His microcephalic quantitativeRT-PCRusingTaqMangeneexpressionassays sister with HHPM, died hours after birth. In Family 2, two designed for MED13L gene was performed. Lastly, microcephalic Iraqi sisters, with consanguineous parents, MED13Lgenewassequencedinpatient'scDNAsampleby have a homozygous ANKLE2 variant: c.686T>G (p. Sanger method. V229G). They have HC -8-10 SD, scalp rugae, short Results: A de novo 97.88 kb deletion in the cytoband stature (-2-3 SD), and HHPM. Both walk and talk with 12q24.21including3rdand4thexonsofMED13Lgenewas severe neurodevelopmental delay. In Family 3, a Northern detected.Furtherquantitativeexpressionanalysisofseveral European girl with HC -6 SD, without scalp rugae or MED13L exons disclosed the deletion of exons 3-4 but pigmentation, has two ANKLE2 variants: c.325G>C (p. excluded the deletion of exons 1-2 and 16-17. The borders A109P); c.1421-1G>C. She walks & talks with mild- of the deletion in the coding region were narrowed by moderate neurodevelopmental delay. In Family 4, an Sangersequencing.Thedeletionspanningfromtheexon3rd Indian/Filipino girl has low birth weight (-7.08 SD), to 9th was determined. In silico, the deletion was predicted microcephaly (HC -7.08 SD), HHPM and two ANKLE2 to result in truncated protein NP_056150:p.(Val104- variants: c.706C>T (p.R236*); c.1606C>T (p.R536C). She Glyfs*5) partly altering Med13_N domain and losing has a closed anterior fontanel and normal neurologic exam medPIWI and Med13_C domains. at2weeks.Allaffectedchildrenhaveseveremicrocephaly, Conclusions: Based on these ﬁndings, heterozygous simpliﬁed cortical gyri and variable developmental delay. deletionresultsinpartialhaploinsufﬁciencyoftheMED13L Frontal lobe foreshortening, corpus callosal dysgenesis, geneintheaffectedpatientduetotheprematuretermination scalprugae,andHHPMarecommonbutnotuniversal.The of the protein translation. triad of severe congenital microcephaly, scalp rugae and The work was funded by the Research Council of HHPM suggests this diagnosis. Lithuania (No. S-MIP-17-19/LSS-150000-1179, Ingenes R.D.Clark:None.A.Thomas:None.S.Michels:None. project). L. Mizerick: None. L. Robak: None. G.J. Demmler: E.Siavrienė:None.V.Mikštienė:None.Ž.Maldžienė: None. H.T. Chao: None. G. Mirzaa: None. None. G. Petraitytė: None. T. Rančelis: None. A. Utkus: None. E. Preikšaitienė: None. V. Kučinskas: None. P08.42C Neurochondrin missense variant associated with P08.41B autosomal recessive intellectual disability and epilepsy The clinical phenotype of ANKLE2-related microcephaly in 4 families A. Fatima1, J. Schuster1, J. Hoeber1, J. Klar1, L. Laan1, R. Fadoul1, Z. Ali2, M. A. Ali3, C. Castillejo-López1, R. D. Clark1, A. Thomas2,3, S. Michels4, L. Mizerick2,3, S. M. Baig2, N. Dahl1 L.Robak2,3,G.J.Demmler2,3,H.T.Chao2,3,G.Mirzaa5,6 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, 1Loma Linda University School of Medicine, Loma Linda, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, CA, United States, 2Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Sweden, 2Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory; Health TX, United States, 3Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Biotechnology Division, National Institute for TX,UnitedStates,4SeattleChildren'sHospital,Seattle,WA, Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), United States, 5University of Washington School of Fsisalabad, Pakistan, 3Department of Medical Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 6Center for Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala Uinversity, Integrative Brain Research, Seattle, WA, United States Uppsala, Sweden Few patients with autosomal recessive ANKLE2-related Introduction: The NCDN gene encodes neurochondrin, congenital microcephaly have been described since Yama- predominantlyexpressedinneuraltissueswhereitmediates moto’s report in 2014. We describe four families (6 neural outgrowth, synaptic plasticity and signal transduc- children) with ANKLE2-related microcephaly, including tion. Neurochondrin acts as an endogenous modulator of the boy from the original report (Family 1). In Family 1, glutamatereceptormGluR5andinmice,depletionofNcdn two Hispanic siblings have ANKLE2 variants: c.2344C>T causes epileptic seizures, depressive-like behaviors and (p.Q782X);c.1717C>G(p.L573V).Themalehadlowbirth impaired spatial learning.1398 Materialand Methods: We identiﬁed a consanguineous Paz, Madrid, Spain, 6CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Pakistanifamily segregatingmild intellectual disability and BiomédicaenReddeEnfermedadesRaras,ISCIII,Madrid, seizures in three children. Whole-exome sequencing was Spain, 7Neurología Pediátrica y Medicina Genética. performed on samples from two affected siblings. Human Instituto Pediátrico de Enfermedades Raras. Hospital Sant neuroblastoma line SH-SY5Y and CRISPR/Cas9 editing Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain was used to model loss of NCDN in vitro. Results: We identiﬁed a rare homozygous NCDN mis- Introduction: Bainbridge-ropers syndrome (BRPS) is a sense variant (NM_001014841.1:c.1246G>C) in the three neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in affectedfamilymembers.Electroencephalography(EEG)of ASXL3. Patients with BRPS show delayed psychomotor two affected siblings revealed epileptic pattern whereas development, intellectual disability, speech alterations, brain MRI was normal. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we then hypotonia, poor growth and dysmorphic features. It is generated NCDN knockout (KO) in SH-SY5Y cells. The categorized as a syndromic cause of Autism spectrum KO cells exhibited signiﬁcantly reduced neurite outgrowth disorder (ASD). Nowadays, 33 patients with BRPS have as compared to w.t. cells. Neurochondrin modulates the been reported. Our work expands the mutational spectrum activation of mGluR5 of importance for ERK1/2-phos- of the ASXL3 with the genotype-phenotype characterizing phorylation and we then examined the phosphorylation of 11 new patients. ERK1/2 at position threonine 202. The ERK1/2-phosphor- Material and Methods: In a collaborative initiative we ylation was reduced in NCDN KO cells when compared to have identiﬁed 11 patients with neurodevelopmental dis- w.t.SH-SY5Ycells.Conversely,phosphorylationincreased orders and ASD phenotype with loss of function(LoF) when NCDN was overexpressed in both w.t. and KO SH- mutations in the ASXL3 gene. Exome sequencing was used SY5Y cells. as a diagnostic tool and Sanger sequencing was used for Conclusion: NCDN loss of function in SH-SY5Y cells familial segregation. The mutational spectrum of ASXL3 revealed impaired neurite outgrowth and reduced mGlu5R was revised in public_data (PubMed, Clinvar, SFARI). dependent ERK1/2-phosphorylation. Our data support a Results: We identiﬁed 10 new ASXL3 LoF variants and role for neurochondrin in neurodevelopment and show that one recurrent mutation (c.3106C>T;p.Arg1036Ter). The a NCDN missense variant is associated with autosomal main clinical characteristics of our patients included recessiveintellectualdisabilityandepilepsy.Thisstudywas moderate-severe intellectual disability with ASD traits and supported by Swedish Research Council (2015-02424) and neuroconductual disorder including aggressively behavior Hjärnfonden (FO2018-0100) to ND. in adolescence. Dysmorphic features highly suggestive of A. Fatima: None. J. Schuster: None. J. Hoeber: None. ASXL3 were delineated eyebrows and the skeletal pheno- J. Klar: None. L. Laan: None. R. Fadoul: None. Z. Ali: type.Sofar,77differentLoFmutations(48frameshifts,28 None. M.A. Ali: None. C. Castillejo-López: None. S.M. Stop Gain, 1 splicing) have been identiﬁed including our Baig: None. N. Dahl: None. present results. There are 3 recurrent mutations and 73 unique variants. P08.43D Conclusions: The inclusion of new patients with BRPS Genotype-Phenotype correlation of 11 new Spanish increases the knowledge of mutational spectrum of ASXL3 patients with Bainbridge Ropers syndrome and is essential to further delineate the phenotype of this syndrome. The recognition of this syndrome in the context I. Valenzuela1, E. Gabau2, C. Pardo-Domínguez3, of a neurodevelopmental disorder is indispensable for the J. Moreno-Ruiz3, P. Tirado-Requero4, F. Santos- orientation of molecular diagnosis. Simarro5,6, S. García-Miñaur5,6, M. Palomares-Bralo5,6, Grant: FIS_FEDER_PI16/00369; PERIS SLT002/16/ M. Serrano7, A. Cueto1, T. Vendrell1, A. Cordero1, 00174 M. Carcas1, I. Paramonov1, URDCAT consortium, I. Valenzuela: None. E. Gabau: None. C. Pardo- E. Tizzano1, I. Cusco1,6 Domínguez: None. J. Moreno-Ruiz: None. P. Tirado- Requero: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. S. García- 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics. Hospital Miñaur: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. M. Serrano: Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Clinical Genetics, None. A. Cueto: None. T. Vendrell: None. A. Cordero: Pediatrics Department, Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari, None. M. Carcas: None. I. Paramonov: None. E. Tiz- Institut d'Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí., Sabadell, zano: None. I. Cusco: None. Spain, 3Department of Pediatrics. Hospital Costa del Sol, Marbella (Málaga), Spain, 4Neurología Infantil Hospital P08.44A La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Instituto de Genética Médica y Neurodevelopmental disorders: a next generation Molecular (INGEMM)-IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario LaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1399 M. R. F. Reijnders1, T. Kleefstra2, L. E. L. M. Vissers2, Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are clinically and H. G. Brunner1,2 genetically extremely heterogeneous. Shared phenotypes areoftencausedbymutationsingenesinvolvedinthesame 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University networks, complexes or pathways. Mutations in TCF4, Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of MEF2C, UBE3A, ZEB2 or ATRX cause overlapping, Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, syndromic forms of severe NDDs with epilepsy, thus Nijmegen, Netherlands suggesting molecular and functional commonalities. TranscriptomeanalysisonRNAfrompatients’peripheral Since 2010 whole exome sequencing (WES) discovered a blood (mutations in either TCF4, MEF2C, ZEB2 or ATRX) large numbers of novel genes and neurodevelopmental revealed common transcriptional targets as pairwise com- disorders(NDDs),denotedhereas‘next-generationNDDs’. parisons of deregulated genes showed signiﬁcant overlap. Yet, ~40% of NDD patients remain undiagnosed. There- Among these we found enrichment for GO terms such as fore,wepreviouslyestablishedacohortof826patientswith RNA-related and ubiquitin ligase-related processes and unexplained ID, a subtype of NDD, for whom trio-based signiﬁcant enrichment of known NDD associated genes, WES was performed. ID severity ranged from mild (27%) indicating central roles in neurodevelopment. to severe (27%) and 32.2% of patients had other NDD- Next, we screened for genetic interactions in Drosophila subtypes.WeidentiﬁedpathogenicvariantsinknownNDD melanogaster by inducing ubiquitous or tissue speciﬁc genes in 28.6% ofpatients and386patients (46.7%) hadat knockdown or overexpression of each single gene and in least one de novo mutation in a gene not previously pairwise combinations. We assessed parameters such as associatedwithNDDs.Between2014and2018,wehaveso lethality, wing and eye morphology, neuromuscular junc- far conﬁrmed seven of 586genes as next-generation NDD- tion morphology and bang sensitivity and climbing beha- gene (SON,TLK2,RAC1,RHEB,USP9X,RAB11B,WAC). viour. We observed robust genetic interaction between Matchmaking was successful for all but one (RHEB), Ube3aandMef2bymultiplephenotypemodiﬁcationsupon resulting in a maximum of 35 additional patients (TLK2) simultaneous dosage manipulation in different tissues and underscoring the need for data-sharing for next- including glia, wing and eye. E.g. single overexpression of generation NDDs. Additionally, mutations in these genes either Ube3a or Mef2 resulted in mild eye phenotypes together only diagnosed ~1% of patients of our initial (rough surface or reduced bristles), respectively, while cohort, illustrating the rarity of next-generation NDDs. Of combinedoverexpressionledtoasevereeyesize reduction note, for USP9X, WAC and TLK2, most patients were anddisorganizedommatidiastructure,indicatingsynergistic mildly affected. Further systematic analysis of our cohort interaction. showed that overall a similar percentage of de novo Assessment of genes implicated in clinically overlapping mutations in known NDD genes was present in patients NDDs revealed commonly deregulated target genes and withmildID(27.9%)comparedtomoresevereID(27.2%), genetic interactions between Ube3a and Mef2 in the Dro- indicatingthatWESshouldnotberestrictedtopatientswith sophila model system, suggesting that such perturbed more severe phenotypes. Finally, we observed a challenge interactions contribute to the underlying pathomechanisms to translate the discovered next-generation NDDs to clinic. also in humans. To improve patient care, we propose an organizational J.Straub: None.T.Sauerer:None.A.Fliedner: None. model, in which parents have a key role. L. Distel: None. C. Suchy: None. A.B. Ekici: None. F. M.R.F.Reijnders:None.T.Kleefstra:None.L.E.L.M. Ferrazzi: None. A. Gregor: None. C. Zweier: None. Vissers: None. H.G. Brunner: None. P08.46C P08.45B Exome Sequencing and functional follow up reveal Genetic Interaction screen for severe MAB21L1 and PPP1R21 loss of function causes neurodevelopmental disorders reveals a functional link distinctive syndromal neurodevelopmental phenotypes between Ube3a and Mef2 in Drosophila melanogaster M. Najaﬁ J. Straub, T. Sauerer, A. Fliedner, L. Distel, C. Suchy, A. B. Ekici, F. Ferrazzi, A. Gregor, C. Zweier Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander- Introduction: Next-generationsequencinghasbeeninstru- Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany mental in solving the genetic basis of rare inherited diseases, especially neurodevelopmental syndromes. A large number of novel genes has been identiﬁed in the last1400 years, however those account for only 50%-70% of all present ﬁve new male patients with pathogenic variants in cases. Further, functional workup is essential for precise NONO, with several novel features. phenotype deﬁnition and to understand the underlying Methods: All patients were ascertained after routine disease mechanisms. referral to their local Clinical Genetics service. Samples Materials andMethods: Using exome sequencing(ES), fromthreeindividualsunderwentexomesequencingaspart we have analysed a cohort of 100 Iranian individuals of the Wellcome Trust Deciphering Developmental Dis- affected by developmental delay/ intellectual disability. orders study. One patient had whole genome sequencing Results:While49%carriedcausativemutationsingenes performedaspartofthe100,000GenomesProject,andone previouslyassociatedwithneurodevelopmentaldisordersin had service trio exome analysis. human, we identiﬁed novel candidate genes in 29%. 22% Results:Fourpatientshadtruncatingpathogenicvariants remained unsolved. Amongst novel genes, we identiﬁed inNONO,andonesplicesite.Allwerematernallyinherited. MAB21L1 loss of function resulting in cerebellar, ocular, All patients had signiﬁcant developmental delay and facialandgenitalfeatures(COFGsyndrome)andPPP1R21 hypotonia. Three required gastrostomy tube placement, loss of function causing hypotonia, neurodevelopmental which has been reported in only two patients previously. delay, facial dysmorphism, eye sight loss, loss of white Twohadrelativemacrocephaly.Noneofthepatientsinour matter and thinning of the corpus callosum as well as series have left ventricular non-compaction. All had hepatosplenomegaly in some cases. We further established abnormal cranial MRI scans. Novel features include peri- that PPP1R21 was absent in ﬁbroblasts of an affected ventricular leukomalacia, mild aortic root dilatation, and individual and consistent with the subcellular expression Ebsteinanomaly.Recognizableshareddysmorphicfeatures pattern and the clinical phenotype exhibiting features of include frontal bossing, infra-orbital grooves and long storage diseases, we found patient ﬁbroblasts exhibited a ﬁngers. delay in clearance of transferrin-488 while uptake was Discussion:Ourseriesfurtherexpandsanddelineatesthe normal. This suggests a role of PPP1R21 within the endo- phenotypic spectrum associated with variants in NONO. somal sorting process or endosome maturation pathway. This should prove useful to Geneticists, particularly in Conclusions: Our data demonstrates ES is an efﬁcient interpretation of genomic data. diagnostic method for neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In T.M. Yates: None. M. Splitt: None. M. Holder: None. addition, we delineate novel neurodevelopmental syn- A. Kumar: None. C.L. Mercer: None. D.S. dromes and show that bi-allelic PPP1R21 loss of function Johnson: None. variants affect the endosomal sorting process or endosome maturation pathway. P08.49B M. Najaﬁ: None. Improved delineation of the clinical spectrum and identiﬁcation of previously unreported respiratory P08.47D problems in a large participatory cohort study of NONO-relatedsyndromicintellectualdisability:ﬁvenew Koolen-deVriessyndromethroughtheGENIDAproject patients and carrier mothers with novel features F. P. Colin1, D. A. Koolen2, N. Collot1, T. Mazzucotelli1, T. M. Yates1, M. Splitt2, M. Holder3, A. Kumar4, P. Parrend3, J. L. Mandel1 C. L. Mercer5, D. S. Johnson1 1IGBMC, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, 2Radboud 1Clinical Genetics Dept, Shefﬁeld Children's NHS University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3iCube Foundation Trust, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, 2Institute of laboratory, Strasbourg, France Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, Introduction:About50recurrentCNVsand800genesare United Kingdom, 4Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, implicated in genetic forms of intellectual disability (ID) United Kingdom, 5University Hospital Southampton NHS with or without autism (ASD). The extreme heterogeneity Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom of these neurodevelopmental disorders and the rarity of identiﬁedcasesformanyoftheimplicatedgenesrendersthe Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the X-linked NONO goal of deﬁning the clinical spectrum, comorbidities and gene are associated with intellectual disability, abnormal natural history a daunting task. We reasoned that a corpus callosum, left ventricular non-compaction, slender participatory approach would be a relevant alternative and build, macrocephaly and dysmorphism in males. Only used the Koolen-deVries syndrome (KdvS - 17q21.31del / seven patients have previously been reported. Here, we KANSL1mut) for a proof-of-concept.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1401 Methods and Results: We initiated GENIDA, a partici- Lehmann syndrome (BFLS), we performed PHF6 muta- patoryonlinecohortstudyforspeciﬁcgeneticcausesofID/ tional analysis that revealed a de novo missense mutation ASD (https://genida.unistra.fr), whereby clinical informa- within the PHD-type 2 domain; X-inactivation analysis tion is entered and updated by the family of the proband showed skewed X-inactivation in blood lymphocytes. The using a structured online questionnaire currently available second patient had severe delayed language development, in 5 languages, with answers from 650 participating intellectual disability (ID), hypermetropia, strabismus, families. The KdVS cohort is the largest, with 179 partici- linear skin hyperpigmentation and increasing obesity: pating families. Results obtained for the frequency of PWS-AS test and array-CGH resulted normal. Whole- behavioral problems, epilepsy or other previously reported exomesequencing(WES),surprisingly,disclosedadenovo comorbidities are consistent with published data. Our missensemutationinPHF6,inthesamefunctionaldomain approach allowed us to reﬁne frequencies of speciﬁc man- as our ﬁrst patient; in this case, X-inactivation analysis ifestations and their perceived severity. Inclusion of pro- showednormalX-inactivationinbloodlymphocytes.BFLS bands from a wide age range generates data on natural is an X-linked recessive disease, characterized by ID, history. A major ﬁnding is the identiﬁcation of recurrent epilepsy, hypogonadism, hypometabolism, obesity and a respiratory problems in 40% of patients, including asthma typical facial gestalt; female carriers usually not show any (30 cases) and pneumonia (17 cases, mostly before 10y) ﬁndings or present only mild symptoms. To date, de novo that appear uncorrelated with reported laryngo/tracheoma- aberrations in PHF6 were reported in 13 females with a lacia or immunologic problems. variable phenotype, characterized by ID, characteristic Conclusion: Data comparisons show that parents of facial features, ﬁngers and dental anomalies, only partially patients can adequately answer the questionnaire, and overlapping with BFSL as described in males. Molecular validate our participatory approach. The ﬁnding of novel genetics has opened a new path to understand the and relevant comorbidities has now to be translated in complexity of ID, mostly in female patients, where we improved healthcare. would tend to exclude a priori a known as X-linked F.P.Colin:None.D.A.Koolen:None.N.Collot:None. recessive condition. However, in cases with heterogeneous T. Mazzucotelli: None. P. Parrend: None. J.L. ID phenotypes, WES is the instrument to address the exact Mandel: None. diagnosis, as suggested in our second case. A. Pagliazzi: None. R. Artuso: None. G. Traﬁcante: P08.50C None. L. Giunti: None. A. Provenzano: None. G. For- Novel de novo mutations in PHF6: two unrelated zano: None. F. Peluso: None. F. Di Giovanni: None. G. females with Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome Contrò: None. E. Bosi: None. A. La Barbera: None. S. Bargiacchi: None. S. Stagi: None. G. Merla: None. S. A. Pagliazzi1, R. Artuso2, G. Traﬁcante2, L. Giunti2, Guarducci: None. M. Pantaleo: None. B. Lucherini: A. Provenzano1, G. Forzano1, F. Peluso1, F. Di None. S. Giglio: None. Giovanni1, G. Contrò1, E. Bosi1, A. La Barbera1, S. Bargiacchi2, S. Stagi3, G. Merla4, S. Guarducci2, P08.51D M. Pantaleo2, B. Lucherini2, S. Giglio5 Elucidation of the phenotypic spectrum and genetic landscape in primary and secondary microcephaly 1Medical Genetics Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's University P. Boonsawat1, P. Joset1, K. Steindl1, B. Oneda1, Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Division of Pediatric L. Gogoll1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, F. Sheth2, C. Datar3, Endocrinology, Meyer University Children's Hospital, I. Verma4, R. Dua Puri4, M. Zollino5, R. Bachmann- University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 4Division of Gagescu1, D. Niedrist1, M. Papik1, J. Figueiro-Silva1, Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della R. Masood1, M. Zweier1, D. Kraemer1, S. Lincoln6, Sofferenza,SanGiovanniRotondo,Italy,5MedicalGenetics L. Rodan6,7, Undiagnosed Diseases Network (UDN), Unit, University of Florence, Meyer Children's University S. Passemard8,9, S. Drunat9, A. Verloes9, A. Horn10, Hospital, Florence, Italy H. Sticht10, R. Steinfeld11, B. Plecko11,12, B. Latal13, O. Jenni13, R. Asadollahi1, A. Rauch1,14,15 We report two unrelated female patients with variable cognitiveimpairmentanddistinctivefacialappearance.The 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Schlieren-Zürich, ﬁrstpatientshowedseveredevelopmentaldelay,thincorpus Switzerland,2FRIGE'sInstituteofHumanGenetics,FRIGE callosum (CC), prominent supraorbital ridges with House, Satellite, Ahmedabad, India, 3Sahyadri Medical synophrys, deep set eyes and ﬂeshy earlobes: in order to Genetics and Tissue Engineering Facility, Kothrud, Pune validate our clinical suspicion of Borjeson-Forssman- and Bharati Hospital and Research Center Dhankawadi,1402 Pune,India,4InstituteofMedicalGenetics&Genomics,Sir P.Boonsawat:None.P.Joset:None.K.Steindl:None. Ganga Ram Hospital, Rajinder Nagar, New Delhi, India, B. Oneda: None. L. Gogoll: None. S. Azzarello-Burri: 5Institute of Genomic Medicine, Catholic University, None. F. Sheth: None. C. Datar: None. I. Verma: None. Gemelli Hospital Foundation, Rome, Italy, 6Division of R. Dua Puri: None. M. Zollino: None. R. Bachmann- Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston Gagescu: None. D. Niedrist: None. M. Papik: None. J. Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Figueiro-Silva: None. R. Masood: None. M. Zweier: 7Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, None. D. Kraemer: None. S. Lincoln: None. L. Rodan: Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 8Service de None.S.Passemard:None.S.Drunat:None.A.Verloes: Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Universitaire Robert Debré, None. A. Horn: None. H. Sticht: None. R. Steinfeld: APHP,Paris,France,9DépartementdeGénétique,Hôpital None. B. Plecko: None. B. Latal: None. O. Jenni: None. Universitaire Robert Debré, APHP, Paris, France, R. Asadollahi: None. A. Rauch: None. 10Division of Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, P08.52A Erlangen, Germany, 11Division of Pediatric Neurology, New patient with de novo nonsense PRR12 variant UniversityChildren’sHospitalZurich,Zurich,Switzerland, supports role of this gene in neurodevelopmental 12Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, disorder and helps to deﬁne phenotypic spectrum DivisionofGeneralPediatrics,MedicalUniversityofGraz, associated with PRR12 haploinsufﬁciency Graz, Austria, 13Child Development Center, University Children’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, S. Bendova1, A. Baxova2, M. Hancarova1, D. Prchalova1, 14NeuroscienceCenterZurich,UniversityofZurich,Zurich, V. Stranecky3, Z. Sedlacek1 Switzerland, 15Zurich Center of Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University2ndFacultyofMedicineandUniversityHospital Introduction: Microcephaly is a sign of many genetic Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology conditionsbuthasbeenrarelysystematicallyevaluated.We and Medical Genetics, Charles University 1st Faculty of therefore comprehensively studied the clinical and genetic Medicine and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech landscape of an unselected cohort of patients with Republic, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of microcephaly. Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and Materials and Methods: We performed clinical assess- Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Charles University 1st ment, high-resolution chromosomal microarray analysis, Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital, exome sequencing and functional studies in 62 patients Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic (58% with primary microcephaly (PM), 27% with second- ary microcephaly (SM), and 15% of unknown onset). The PRR12 gene (19q13.33) encodes a large (2036 Results: We found severity of developmental delay/ residues) proline-rich nuclear protein suspected to partici- intellectual disability correlating with severity of micro- pate in neural development. The protein interacts with cephalyinPM,butnotSM.Wedetectedcausativevariants FMRP and the gene has high constraint to loss-of-function in 48.4% of patients and found divergent inheritance and variation (gnomAD: 0 variants observed / 58 expected). variant pattern for PM (mainly recessive and likely gene- Three de novo loss-of-function PRR12 variants and one disrupting (LGD)) versus SM (all dominant de novo and translocation disrupting the gene have been reported in the evenly LGD or missense). While centrosome-related path- literature in patients showing global developmental delay, ways were solely identiﬁed in PM, transcriptional regula- intellectual disability, neuropsychiatric problems, eye and tion was the most frequently affected pathway in both SM vision abnormalities, dysmorphic features, hypotonia, and PM. Unexpectedly, we found causative variants in skeletal abnormalities, sleep problems and anxiety. Three different mitochondria-related genesaccountingfor~5%of other de novo PRR12 variants have been identiﬁed in large patients, which emphasizes their role even in syndromic studiesinadditionalpatientsfromwhomnooronlylimited PM. Additionally, we delineated novel candidate genes phenotype information is available. involvedincentrosome-relatedpathway(SPAG5,TEDC1), We describe a 3-year-old boy referred for developmental Wnt signaling (VPS26A, ZNRF3) and RNA trafﬁcking delay, failure to thrive and congenital hypotonia. His facial (DDX1). features included short forehead, bilateral epicanthal folds, Conclusions: Our ﬁndings enable improved evaluation hooded upper eyelids, malar hypoplasia, and borderline and genetic counseling of PM and SM patients and further smallasymmetriclow-setears.Healsoshowedanxietyand elucidate microcephaly pathways. autistictraits,andhadpesplanusandtapereddigits.Exome sequencing revealed a de novo heterozygous PRR12Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1403 nonsense variant NM_020719.2(PRR12):c.3958C>T, p. microcephaly, moderate ID, spastic paraplegia, aggressive (Arg1320*)whichwasabsentfromalldatabases.Thefacial behaviour and convergent strabismus. ES revealed variants phenotype was consistent with previously reported cases, p.(Pro648Ser) and p.(Ile403Thrfs*80) in ALDH18A1. Her except that no signiﬁcant abnormalities in structure and phenotype corresponded to autosomal recessive spastic function of the eyes were present. paraplegiatype9B(MIM616586).Patients3and4,asister Our ﬁndings support the role of PRR12 haploinsufﬁ- and brother with similar neurological impairment, showed ciency ina rare neurodevelopmental disorder,and show,in hypotonia and moderate ID. ES revealed variants p. accord with several other cases, that the eye phenotype (Ser893Arg) and p.(Leu311Trp) in PIGN, associated with originallydescribedasapartofthetypicalpresentationmay multiplecongenitalanomalies-hypotonia-seizuressyndrome be absent. Additional patients will further specify the phe- type 1 (MIM614080). All three conditions belong to very notype associated with de novo PRR12 variants. rare diseases unlikely to be diagnosed solely based on Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203. clinical evaluation and targeted testing. Careful evaluation S. Bendova: None. A. Baxova: None. M. Hancarova: of variants identiﬁed using ES, detailed phenotype re- None. D. Prchalova: None. V. Stranecky: None. Z. evaluation and thorough genotype-phenotype correlation is Sedlacek: None. needed to prevent misinterpretation of ﬁndings in such cases. Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203. P08.53B M. Vlckova: None. M. Hancarova: None. J. Haber- Genotypeﬁrstapproachinfourpatientswiththreerare lova:None.L.Rennerova:None.P.Fuchsova:None.M. autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorders Paclikova:None.S.Bendova:None.D.Prchalova:None. V. Moslerova: None. M. Kudr: None. V. Stranecky: M. Vlckova1, M. Hancarova1, J. Haberlova2, None. M. Havlovicova: None. Z. Sedlacek: None. L.Rennerova3,P.Fuchsova2,M.Paclikova2,S.Bendova1, D. Prchalova1, V. Moslerova1, M. Kudr2, V. Stranecky4, P08.54C M. Havlovicova1, Z. Sedlacek1 SETD1A Loss of function causes a distinct neurodevelopmental disorder in human and impaired 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles memory in Drosophila further highlighting a conserved University2ndFacultyofMedicineandUniversityHospital role of H3K4 methylation in brain function Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Paediatric Neurology,CharlesUniversity2ndFacultyofMedicineand J. Kummeling1, D. Stremmelaar2, N. Raun3, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, M. Reijnders4, C. Man5, M. Schepens5, R. Pfundt2, 3Paediatric Neurology, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic, J. Kramer3, T. Kleefstra1 4Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Charles 1DepartmentofHumanGeneticsRadboudumcandDonders University 1st Faculty of Medicine and General University Centre of Medical Neuroscience, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic 2Department of Human Genetics Radbdoudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Biology, Western University, Neurodevelopmentaldisordersareaheterogeneousgroupof London, ON, Canada, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, very rare conditions which make up a signiﬁcant part of MUMC+,Maastricht,Netherlands,5DepartmentofHuman agendaofmedicalgeneticists.Targeteddiagnosticmethods Genetics Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands have a limited chance to reveal their aetiology. Global "genotypeﬁrst"approachessuchasexomesequencing(ES) Defects in histone methyltransferases (HMTs) are a major have a better diagnostic yield. However, their results and contributing factor to Neurodevelopmental disorders the genotype-phenotype correlation must be thoroughly (NDDs). Loss-of-function (LoF) variants of SETD1A revised to prevent misdiagnosis due to the lack of (KMT2F), one of the genes involved in histone 3 Lysine experience with rare conditions. We present four patients 4 (H3K4) methylation, have been identiﬁed in several withthreesuchconditionsdiagnosedbyES.Inallcasesthe individuals from large schizophrenia cohort studies. Inter- neurological impairment was dominant, and dysmorphic estingly, dominant gene mutations were also identiﬁed in andotherfeatureswereunspeciﬁcorabsent.Patient1wasa children with developmental delay. To provide further girl with progressive spastic tetraplegia, dysarthria and insight in the somatic and behaviour proﬁle, we further intellectual disability (ID). ES identiﬁed variants p. characterized the SETD1A associated Mendelian syndrome (Trp1253*) and p.(Lys849*) in ALS2. Phenotype revision bycollectingthemolecularandclinicalfeaturesof15sofar supportedthediagnosisofjuvenileprimarylateralsclerosis unpublished individuals with SETD1A mutations via a (MIM205100). Patient 2 was a girl with short stature, GeneMatcher collaboration. Furthermore, to gain insight1404 into the role of SETD1A in fundamental learning and Señora de la Merced, Tucumán, Argentina, 17Hospital memoryprocesses,westudiedaDrosophilaknockdownof Clínico Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, Chile, the orthologue Set1. 18Clínica Alemana, Santiago de Chile, Chile, The cohort mainly comprised de novo variants that pre- 19Corporación Sanitaria Parc Taulí,, Sabadell, Spain, dict a loss of function with c.4582-2_4582delAG being a 20Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain, 21Hospital recurrent mutation resulting in intron retention. The pre- Universitario La Paz. Servicio de Neuropediatría, Madrid, dicted LoF of SETD1A leads to a distinct set of symptoms Spain, 22Q-Genomics Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain, comprising global developmental or intellectual disability, 23UnidaddeGenética,HospitalVirgendelaSalud,Toledo, subtle facial features, behaviour and psychiatric problems. Spain, 24Hospital Son Llàtzer, Palma de mallorca, Spain In the Drosophila Set1 knock down, short- and long-term courtship memory were signiﬁcantly reduced. Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS; OMIM 606232), Whiletheprecisebiologicalpathogenicmechanismshave results either from the loss of genetic material at the distal yet to be clariﬁed, disturbed H3K4 methylation likely region of the long arm of chromosome 22 that including underlies this disorder, underscribing the role of H3K4 SHANK3gene,orbypointmutationsinthisgene.SHANK3 methyltransferases in memory, developmental disability or codes for a structural protein, which plays a central role in neuron function in general. theformationofthepostsynapticterminals,aswellasinthe J.Kummeling:None.D.Stremmelaar:None.N.Raun: maintenanceofsynapticstructures.Sofar,morethan1,200 None.M.Reijnders: None.C.Man:None.M.Schepens: cases have been already reported; a non-speciﬁc phenotype None. R. Pfundt: None. J. Kramer: None. T. hasemergedincludingglobaldevelopmentaldelay(>98%), Kleefstra: None. absent to severely delayed speech (>98%), severe neonatal hypotonia (>98%), normal to accelerated growth (95%), P08.55D and minor dysmorphic features, among others. We here Clinical and laboratory management of the largest present the largest cohort of Spanish patients with PMS; cohort of Spanish individuals with Phelan McDermid 181 (mainly from Spain (151) and Latin-America (30 syndrome cases). Patients were characterized by means of deep phenotyping, chromosomal microarrays, and other genetic J. Nevado1,2, M. Palomares1,2, S. García-Miñaúr1,2, approaches (including MLPA, FISH and Karyotype). We M. Mori1,2, F. Santos1,2, E. Vallespín1,2, P. Barrúz1, compareclinical,geneticandfollow-upcharacteristicswith J. A. Tenorio1,2, C. Bel-Fenellós3, E. Guillén-Navarro4,5, previouspublishedseriesofpatientswithPMS.Inaddition, J. Rosell6,7, M. Milá8,9, M. Del Campo10, G. Obregón11, wepresentclinical-moleculardatafromthiscohort;mostof C. Orellana12, H. Pachajoa13, E. Galán14, them, with deletions at 22q13.3 band, including SHANK3 J.C.Cigudosa15,C.Saleme16,S.Castillo17,18,E.Gabau19, anddescribed5newpointmutationsinthisgeneassociated S. Borrego20, P. Tirado21, A. Barcia20, L. Pérez-Jurado22, to PMS. This study set up clinical and laboratory manage- R. Mena1, A. Moresco11, P. García-Murillo23, J. Suela15, ment for the establishment of possible genotype-phenotype Á. Pérez-Granero24, V. López-González4, M. J. Ballesta4, correlations. Based on our data and other previously L. Rodríguez-Revenga8, R. Lleuger1, L. Armengol22, published we propose at ﬁrst time a complete laboratory C. Peña1, S. Martín1, R. Martín-Arenas1, V. Fernández- management algorithm to verify all the genetic aspects in Montaño1, V. Gómez del Pozo1, B. Fernández1,2, PMS individuals and related, as well as a correct genetic E. Mansilla1,2, I. P. Vallcorba1, Asociación Síndrome counselling. Phelan McDermid-España, P. D. Lapunzina1,2 J. Nevado: None. M. Palomares: None. S. García- Miñaúr: None. M. Mori: None. F. Santos: None. E. 1INGEMM-IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Vallespín: None. P. Barrúz: None. J.A. Tenorio: None. Spain, 3Dpto. Investigación y Psicología en Educación, C. Bel-Fenellós: None. E. Guillén-Navarro: None. J. Fac.deEducación.UCM,Madrid,Spain,4HospitalVirgen Rosell: None. M. Milá: None. M. Del Campo: None. G. de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 5CIBERER, Murcia, Spain, Obregón: None. C. Orellana: None. H. Pachajoa: None. 6Hospital Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, E. Galán: None. J.C. Cigudosa: None. C. Saleme: None. 7CIBERER, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 8Hospital Clinic, S. Castillo: None.E. Gabau: None. S. Borrego:None. P. Barcelona,Spain,9CIBERER,Barcelona,Spain,10Hospital Tirado: None. A. Barcia: None. L. Pérez-Jurado: None. Vall D´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 11Hospìtal Juan P. R. Mena: None. A. Moresco: None. P. García-Murillo: Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 12Hospital La Fé, None. J. Suela: None. Á. Pérez-Granero: None. V. Valencia, Spain, 13Universidad Icesi, Cali, Colombia, López-González: None. M.J. Ballesta: None. L. Rodrí- 14Hospital Materno-Infantil Infanta Cristina, Badajoz, guez-Revenga: None. R. Lleuger: None. L. Armengol: Spain,15NIM-Genetics,Madrid,Spain,16MaternityNuestra None. C. Peña: None. S. Martín: None. R. Martín-Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1405 Arenas:None.V.Fernández-Montaño:None.V.Gómez P08.57B delPozo:None.B.Fernández:None.E.Mansilla:None. Identiﬁcation of compound heterozygous SNX14 I.P. Vallcorba: None. P.D. Lapunzina: None. variants in a Portuguese SCAR20 family by a combination of deep phenotyping, exome sequencing P08.56A and targeted quantitative PCR Functional analysis of a novel c.899+1G>A variant in SLC9A6 gene N. Maia1,2, G. Soares3, T. Temudo4, I. Marques1,2, B. Rodrigues1,2, A. M. Fortuna3,2, R. Santos1,2, A. de G. Petraitytė1, E. Siavrienė1, V. Mikštienė1,2, Ž. Brouwer5, P. Jorge1,2 Maldžienė1,2, T. Rančelis1,2, A. Utkus1,2, E. Preikšaitienė1,2, V. Kučinskas1 1Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalhães (CGMJM), Centro 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUP, EPE), Porto, Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Portugal, 2Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigação University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Center for Medical Biomédica (UMIB), Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Vilnius, Lithuania 3Unidade de Genética Médica, Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto de Magalhães (CGMJM), Centro Hospitalar Introduction:SLC9A6(MIM#300231)isacausativegene Universitário do Porto (CHUP, EPE), Porto, Portugal, for Christianson type syndromic mental retardation, also 4Serviço de Neurologia Pediátrica, Centro Hospitalar known as Christianson syndrome, which is inherited in X- Universitário do Porto (CHUP, EPE), Porto, Portugal, linked dominant manner (MRXSCH; MIM# 300243). We 5Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for providetheresultsofthefunctionalanalysisofasplicesite Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University variantc.899+1G>AintheSLC9A6geneidentiﬁedtothree Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands affected individuals in one family. Materials and Methods: SCL9A6 gene variant Pathogenic variants in the SNX14 gene are implicated in NC_000023.11(NM_001042537.1):c.899+1G>A was pre- AutosomalRecessiveSpinocerebellarAtaxia20(SCAR20), viously detected by whole exome sequencing in two arareconditioncharacterizedbyintellectualdisability,lack affected brothers and their mother. To justify the patho- of speech, ataxia with progressive cerebellar hypoplasia, genicityofthevarianttotalbloodRNAofoneaffectedmale coarse facies and macrocephaly. We describe a Portuguese was isolated, template cDNA was synthesized and family withtwosiblings presentingsimilarclinical features sequencing of SLC9A6 gene exons 5-8 was performed by caused by compound heterozygous variants in SNX14. A Sanger method. heterozygousnonsensevariantc.1195C>Tp.(Arg399*)was Results: SLC9A6 gene donor splice site variant initiallyidentiﬁedbyexomesequencing.Duetophenotypic NC_000023.11(NM_001042537.1):c.899+1G>A was similarity with previously published SCAR20 patients, examined by computational algorithms and predicted to further investigation led to the identiﬁcation of the second affect mRNA splicing. Sanger sequencing of cDNA heterozygous variant c.(612+1_613-1)_(1171+1_1172-1) revealedthatc.899+1G>Aproducesskippingofexon6.In del using targeted quantitative PCR. Reverse transcriptase silico, this leads to a frameshift in cDNA and results in a PCR conﬁrmed the frameshift r.613_1171del p. premature stop codon NP_001036002.1:p.(Val264Alaf- (Val205Argfs*47).Breakpointcharacterizationisunderway sTer3). The truncated protein lacks several transmembrane but preliminary results indicate that the underlying helices and a C-terminal domain. mechanism appears to be Alu-induced non-allelic homo- Conclusions: Our study demonstrates that SLC9A6 gene logous recombination. Our results describe the ﬁrst non- splicesitevariantNC_000023.11(NM_001042537.1):c.899 consanguineous SCAR20 family carrying compound het- +1G>A affects mRNA splicing and leads to a truncated erozygouspathogenicvariantsintheSNX14.Inconclusion, protein product, which is the cause of Christianson syn- this case emphasizes the role of Sorting nexin-14 in drome in affected family members. neurodevelopment and cognitive impairment, and high- The work was funded by the Research Council of lights the value of detailed clinical evaluation and deep Lithuania (No. S-MIP-17-19/LSS-150000-1179, Ingenes phenotyping to disclose the molecular defect underlying a project). highly heterogeneous disease suchasintellectual disability. G.Petraitytė:None.E.Siavrienė:None.V.Mikštienė: Funding:UMIBissupportedbyNationalFundsthroughthe None.Ž.Maldžienė:None.T.Rančelis: None.A.Utkus: FCT-Fundaçãopara aCiênciaeaTecnologia(Portuguese None. E. Preikšaitienė: None. V. Kučinskas: None. national funding agency for science, research and1406 technology)intheframeworksoftheUID/Multi/0215/2016 described (De Rubeis et al., 2014); variant calling was project - Unit for Multidisciplinary Research in Biomedi- performed using a bioinformatics pipeline adapted for dif- cine - UMIB/ICBAS/UP.Nuno Maia received a research ferent patterns of inheritance. grant 2015 DEFI-CHUP, E.P.E. Results: We identiﬁed one patient with a de novo likely N. Maia: None. G. Soares: None. T. Temudo: None. I. pathogenic TLK2 variant (p.Asp529Gly) and a family with Marques: None. B. Rodrigues: None. A.M. Fortuna: three siblings who inherited a nonsense variant from an None. R. Santos: None. A. de Brouwer: None. P. affected mother (p.Glu453*). Finally, we report a de novo Jorge: None. 39-kb deletion encompassing the TLK2 and MRC2 genes. Clinicalphenotypespartiallyoverlappedwithknowncases: P08.58C facial dysmorphisms were present in all patients, while Two de novo and one familiar cases of TLK2-associated intellectual disability and microcephaly were not identiﬁed intellectual disability conﬁrm disease variable in the patient with the 39-kb deletion, where the skeletal expressivity anomalies were predominant. Conclusion: Our study describes 6 new cases from 3 L. Pavinato1, E. Giorgio1, V. Antona2, D. Carli3, familieswithTLK2-associateddisease.Ourdatasupportthe K. Ranguin4, C. Colson4, S. De Rubeis5,6,7, T. Pippucci8, recentreportthathaploinsufﬁciencyofthisgeneisinvolved P. Dimartino9, M. Scaramuzzino1, S. Cardaropoli3, in heterogeneous forms of intellectual disability. A. Ciolﬁ10, C. Radio10, J. Buxbaum5,6,7, M. Tartaglia10, L.Pavinato:None.E.Giorgio:None.V.Antona:None. A. Brusco1 D. Carli: None. K. Ranguin: None. C. Colson: None. S. De Rubeis: None. T. Pippucci: None. P. Dimartino: 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, None.M.Scaramuzzino:None.S.Cardaropoli:None.A. Turin,Italy,2DepartmentofSciencesforHealthPromotion Ciolﬁ: None. C. Radio: None. J. Buxbaum: None. M. and Mother and Child Care "G. D'Alessandro", University Tartaglia: None. A. Brusco: None. of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics and Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin, P08.59D Turin, Italy, 4Centre de référence Maladies rares et Intellectual disability: Identiﬁcation of novel genes and Anomalies du développement, Service de génétique, Caen, expansion of genetic and phenotype spectrum by France, 5Seaver Autism Center for Research and multicentercollaboration Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 6Department of Psychiatry, Icahn J. Stephen1, S. Nampoothiri2, J. D. Burke1, K. Steindl3, School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United N.Balanda4,P.Joset3,A.Shukla5,UndiagnosedDiseases States, 7The Mindich Child Health and Development Network members, T. Ben-Omran6, K. M. Girisha5, Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New R. Ali6, A. Rauch3, J. A. Martinez-Agosto7, York,NY,UnitedStates,8MedicalGeneticsUnit,Polyclinic F. S. Alkuraya8,9, W. A. Gahl1,4,10, M. V. Malicdan1,4,10 Sant'Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 9Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University 1SectionofHumanBiochemicalGenetics,MedicalGenetics of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 10Genetics and Rare Diseases Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, NationalInstitutesofHealth,Bethesda,MD,United States, Rome, Italy 2Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, India, Introduction:TheTousled-LikeKinase2(TLK2)genehas 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, recently been associate with “Mental Retardation Auto- Schlieren-Zurich 8952, Switzerland and radiz – “Rare somalDominant57”(MIM:618050),aneurodevelopmental Disease Initiative Zurich, Clinical Research Priority disorder characterized by a highly variable phenotype, Program for Rare Diseases University of Zurich”, Zurich, including mild to moderate intellectual disability, beha- Switzerland, 4NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, vioural abnormalities, facial dysmorphisms, microcephaly, NHGRI and the Common Fund, National Institutes of epilepsy and skeletal anomalies. The role of TLK2 in brain Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Department of is still unknown. Within the Autism Sequencing Con- Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal sortium (ASC) project, we identiﬁed new patients with Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India, 6Clinical variants in the TLK2 gene by whole-exome and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hamad sequencing (WES). MedicalCorporation,Doha,Qatar,7DepartmentofHuman Methods:DNAsamplesfromtriosweresequencedatthe Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of BroadInstituteonIlluminaHiSeqsequencersaspreviously California,LosAngeles,CA,UnitedStates,8DepartmentofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1407 Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,LaTimoneHospital,AP- Center,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,9DepartmentofAnatomyand HM, Marseille, France, 2Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, MMG, Marseille, France, 3Department of Neuropediatrics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 10Ofﬁce of the Clinical Director, La Timone Hospital, AP-HM, Marseille, France National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States Pathogenicvariantsingenesencodingproteinsbelongingto Trafﬁcking Protein Particle (TRAPP) complex have Intellectual disability (ID), a group of neurodevelopmental recentlybeendescribedinseveralhumandiseasesincluding disorders with a global prevalence approximating 2-3% intellectual disability. with severe ID occurring 0.5-1%, is a frequent reason for We report two siblings with a clinical presentation over- referral to pediatric genetics clinics. ID is genetically and lapping TRAPPC9-related disorder (MIM #613192). Preg- phenotypically heterogeneous and can be categorized into nancy and delivery was uneventful. First medical concerns syndromic and non-syndromic forms. Although next appeared before oneyear ofage duetohypotonia andpoor generation sequencing technologies have uncovered more contact. Patients then developed severe intellectual dis- than a thousand underlying genetic causes, many cases ability with neither independent walking nor speech at remain undiagnosed. From our cohort of patients with current age of 11 and 8 yo. They also had stereotypic hand varyingdegreesofID,wegeneticallyevaluated26families movements as well as MRI abnormalities, such as thin whose probands manifested with syndromic intellectual corpuscallosumandcorticalatrophy.Theyhadnoseizures. disability,globaldevelopmentaldelay,andbrainmalforma- Extensive metabolic screening, CGH-array and Intellectual tions. Likely pathogenic variants in known genes were Disability gene panel sequencing were normal. Whole identiﬁed in 57% (15/26), novel genetic causes in 20% (5/ exome sequencing revealed that both affected siblings car- 26) and no pathogenic variants were found in 23% (6/26). riedanovelhomozygousvariant(c.367C>T(NM_016209), For three novel genes of unknown function, matchmaking p.(Gln123*),hg19:chr16:88926373C>T)intheTRAPPC2L platforms and multi-center collaboration identiﬁed an gene. The variant was inherited from heterozygous con- additional 14 families. One novel gene is TMEM94, in sanguineous parents. which bi-allelic truncating variants were identiﬁed in 10 This is the ﬁrst description of a homozygous loss-of- probands from 6 families; all had syndromic ID, speech function variant in the TRAPPC2L gene. Only biallelic delay, facial dysmorphisms and congenital heart defects. missense variants in TRAPPC2L (*610970) have been We have shown that Tmem94 is essential for neurologic previously reported in three patients with global develop- and cardiovascular development in mice. We also demon- mental delay, microcephaly, dystonia, tetraplegia, rhabdo- strated that, in human cells, TMEM94 is a novel protein myolysis, encephalopathy and epilepsy (Sacher et al. 2018, localized in the centrosome, and may very well have Milevetal.2018).TRAPPC2L(TrafﬁckingProteinParticle importantrolesinvolvedincelldivisionandmetabolism.In Complex 2-Like) and TRAPPC9 proteins belong to the conclusion,theidentiﬁcationofnovelIDgenesisfacilitated humanTRAPPIIcomplex,involvedinvesicletrafﬁckingin by matchmaking platforms and collaborative interactions. the secretory pathway by mediating contacts between Efﬁcient analyses using cell and model organisms provide vesicles and target membranes. Our ﬁndings suggest that supporting data for diagnosis and understanding of gene loss-of-function variants in these two genes may cause function. similar phenotypes. Additional cases are needed to conﬁrm J. Stephen: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. J.D. Burke: ourﬁndingsandbetterdelineatetheclinicalspectrumofthis None. K. Steindl: None. N. Balanda: None. P. Joset: TRAPPopathy. None. A. Shukla: None. T. Ben-Omran: None. K.M. M.Abaji:None.C.Ravix:None.F.Riccardi:None.B. Girisha: None. R. Ali: None. A. Rauch: None. J.A. Chabrol: None. L. Villard: None. N. Philip: None. Martinez-Agosto: None. F.S. Alkuraya: None. W.A. Gahl: None. M.V. Malicdan: None. P08.61B ExpandingthephenotypicspectrumofTRIT1mutatins, P08.60A a cause of severe autosomal recessive microcephaly A homozygous loss-of-function variant in the TRAPPC2Lgenecausesaneurodevelopmentaldisorder T. Smol1,2, P. Brunelle1, O. Boute-Benejean3,2, overlapping TRAPPC9-related disorder J. A. Basseti4, M. Figeac5, L. Faivre6,7, F. Petit3,2, C. Thauvin-Robinet6,7, Q. Thomas6, F. Tran-Mau- M. Abaji1, C. Ravix2, F. Riccardi1,2, B. Chabrol3, Them6,7, S. Manouvrier-Hanu3,2, J. Ghoumid3,2 L. Villard1,2, N. Philip1,21408 1CHU Lille, Institut de Genetique Medicale, Lille, France, J. Courraud1, A. Quartier1, I. Boujelbene1, 2Université de Lille, EA7464 RADEME "Research team on V. Kalscheuer2, J. Mandel1, A. Piton1 rare developmental and metabolic diseases", Lille, France, 3CHU Lille, Clinique de Genetique, Lille, France, 4Weill 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Max Planck Institute, Cornell Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, New-York, Berlin, Germany NY, United States, 5Université de Lille, Functional Genomics Platform, Lille, France, 6CHU Dijon, Centre de IntellectualDisability(ID)isaneurodevelopmentaldisorder Génétique, Dijon, France, 7Centre de Référence Maladies characterized by signiﬁcant genetic contribution and Rares "Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes heterogeneity. While exome sequencing has revolutionized Malformatifs de l'Interrégion Est", Dijon, France theidentiﬁcationofnovelIDgenesandpathogenicvariants, a huge challenge that remains is the interpretation of the Introduction: Deciphering genetic basis and identifying vast number of Variants of Unknown Signiﬁcance (VUS). new candidate genes in autosomal recessive microcephaly Acombinationofgenetic,clinicalandfunctionalarguments require high throughput sequencing strategies and data isessentialforbestinterpretingtheseVUS.Developmentof sharing. We identiﬁed compound heterozygous variants in functionalteststocharacterizeVUSeffectsareimportantto TRIT1 gene, encoding a protein involved in i6A37 tRNA make a diagnosis but also to dissect the function of the modiﬁcation. The purpose of our work was to characterize concerned proteins. We illustrate this question by present- the clinical and molecular spectrum that result from ing functional studies performed to reclassify VUS in three pathogenic TRIT1 variants. Patients and methods: We used ID genes. We ﬁrst looked at expression and localization of thematchmakingexchangeplatforms,PhenomeCentraland mutant proteins by overexpressing them. For NLGN3, we GeneMatcher to recruit patients with TRIT1 pathogenic used the unfolded protein response (UPR) as a read-out as variants. Clinical and molecular data were assessed and theinitialpathogenicvariantsidentiﬁedwasshowntocause compared to the four previously published families. endoplasmicreticulumstress.ForDYRK1A,whichrequire Results:Weidentiﬁedthreenewpatientswithcompound anautophosphorylationtobeactivated,westudytheability heterozygous variants in TRIT1 gene. All variations were of mutant proteins to autophosphorylate themselves. As it inherited from a healthy parent in heterozygous state. was shownthat DYRK1Aand PQBP1 might regulate gene Taking into account published cases, all patients presented expressionandsplicing,weanalyzedtranscriptomicproﬁles moderate to severe ID, seizures and severe microcephaly. in patients’ cells or by loss-of-function of the genes in Cerebral atrophy or dysplasia of corpus callosum could be humanneuronalprecursorstosortoutmolecularsignatures. noted in half of patients. In most of cases, each compound Wehavebeenabletoreclassifytwo-thirdsofVUSintothe state associated one missense and one truncating variation. pathogenic categories and we are currently developing Loss of function variants, considered as pathogenic, pre- novel approaches to characterize the effect of the last third. sentedamean allelecount of75inGnomADdatabase.All The better comprehension of mechanisms involved in but one involved variant were reported many times in het- monogenic forms of ID and the development of functional erozygous state in GnomAD [range 2 - 139]. tests for missense variants will be useful to improve Conclusions: Haplo-insufﬁciency of TRIT1 causes an diagnosis of patients. emerging clinical syndrome characterized by moderate to J. Courraud: None. A. Quartier: None. I. Boujelbene: severe ID, microcephaly and epileptic encephalopathy. None. V. Kalscheuer: None. J. Mandel: None. A. Allele counts for each known pathogenic variation in Piton: None. GnomAD raise the issue of an underdiagnosed cause of microcephaly and/or rapidly lethal associations. P08.63D T.Smol:None.P.Brunelle:None.O.Boute-Benejean: Pathogenic WDFY3 variants cause neurodevelopmental None. J.A. Basseti: None. M. Figeac: None. L. Faivre: disorders and opposing effects on brain size None. F. Petit: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. Q. Thomas: None. F. Tran-Mau-Them: None. S. Man- D. Le Duc1, C. Giulivi2, S. M. Hiatt3, E. Napoli2, ouvrier-Hanu: None. J. Ghoumid: None. A. Panoutsopoulos2, A. De Crescenzo2, U. Kotzaeridou4, S. Syrbe4, E. Anagnostou5, M. Azage6, R. Bend7, P08.62C A. Begtrup8, N. J. Brown9, B. Büttner1, M. T. Cho8, Functional investigation for Variant of Unknown G. M. Cooper3, J. H. Doering4, C. Dubourg10, signiﬁcance in intellectual disability genes NLGN3, D. B. Everman7, M. S. Hildebrand9, F. J. Reynoso PQBP1 and DYRK1A Santos11, B. Kellam12, J. Keller-Ramey8, J. R. Lemke1, S.Liu8,D.Niyazov13,K.Payne14,R.Person8,C.Quélin10, R. E. Schnur8, B. T. Smith7, J. Strober15, S. Walker12,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1409 M. Wallis16, L. Walsh14, S. Yang8, R. Yuen12, A. Ziegler4, human phenotype. Consequently, we propose that in H. Sticht17, M. C. Pride2, V. Martínez-Cerdeño2, humans WDFY3 loss-of-function variants lead to macro- J. Silverman2, S. W. Scherer12, K. S. Zarbalis2, R. Abou cephaly via down-regulation of the Wnt-pathway. Jamra1 Conclusion: We present WDFY3 as a novel gene linked tomildtomoderateNDDandIDandconcludethatvariants 1University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany, putativelycausinghaploinsufﬁciencyleadtomacrocephaly, 2University of California at Davis, Davis, CA, United while an opposing pathomechanism due to variants in PH- States, 3HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, domain of WDFY3 leads to microcephaly. Huntsville, AL, United States, 4University Hospital D. Le Duc: None. C. Giulivi: None. S.M. Hiatt: A. Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 5University of Toronto, Employment (full or part-time); Modest; HudsonAlpha Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Ochsner Health System and Institute for Biotechnology. E. Napoli: None. A. Panout- University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia, sopoulos:None.A.DeCrescenzo:None.U.Kotzaeridou: 7Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United None. S. Syrbe: None. E. Anagnostou: None. M. Azage: States, 8GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, None.R.Bend:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest; 9University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, Greenwood Genetic Center. A. Begtrup: A. Employment 10University Rennes, Rennes, France, 11Joe DiMaggio (fullorpart-time);Modest;GeneDX.N.J.Brown:None.B. Children’s Hospital, Hollywood, CA, United States, 12The Büttner: None. M.T. Cho: A. Employment (full or part- Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, time); Modest; GeneDX. G.M. Cooper: A. Employment 13Ochsner Health System and University of Queensland, (full or part-time); Modest; HudsonAlpha Institute for Queensland, CA, United States, 14Riley Hospital for Biotechnology. J.H. Doering: None. C. Dubourg: None. Children, Indianapolis, IN, United States, 15UCSF Benioff D.B.Everman:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest; Children’s Hospital, San Francisco, CA, United States, Greenwood Genetic Center. M.S. Hildebrand: None. F.J. 16Austin Health Clinical Genetics Service, Heidelberg, Reynoso Santos: None. B. Kellam: None. J. Keller- Australia, 17Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen- Ramey: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Gen- Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany eDX. J.R. Lemke: None. S. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDX. D. Niyazov: None. K. Introduction: The underpinnings of mild to moderate Payne: None. R. Person: A. Employment (full or part- neurodevelopmental delay (NDD) remain elusive often time); Modest; GeneDX. C. Quélin: None. R.E. Schnur: leading to late diagnosis and interventions. A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDX. B.T. Materials and Methods: We present data on exome-, Smith: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; genome-sequencing, and array analysis of thirteen indivi- Greenwood Genetic Center. J. Strober: None. S. Walker: duals that point to pathogenic, heterozygous, mostly de None. M. Wallis: None. L. Walsh: None. S. Yang: A. novo variants in WDFY3 (signiﬁcant de novo enrichment Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDX. R. p = 0.0007) as a monogenic cause of mild and non- Yuen: None. A. Ziegler: None. H. Sticht: None. M.C. speciﬁc NDD. Pride: None. V. Martínez-Cerdeño: None. J. Silverman: Results: Nine variants were protein-truncating and four None.S.W.Scherer:None.K.S.Zarbalis:None.R.Abou missense. Overlapping symptoms included NDD, intellec- Jamra: None. tualdisability(ID),macrocephaly,andpsychiatricdisorders (ASD/ADHD). One proband presented with an opposing P08.64A phenotype of microcephaly and the only missense-variant Triple diagnosis of Wiedemann-Steiner, Waardenburg locatedinPH-domainofWDFY3.Findingsofthiscaseare and DLG3-related intellectual disability association supported by previously published data demonstrating that found by WES. A case report pathogenic PH-domain variants can lead to microcephaly via canonical Wnt-pathway up-regulation. T. Matis1, V. Michaud1, J. Van-Gils1,2, V. Raclet1, We previously reported that Wdfy3 is required for cere- C. Plaisant1, P. Fergelot1, E. Lasseaux1, B. Arveiler1,2, bral cortical size regulation in mice, by controlling proper A. Trimouille1,2 division of neural progenitors. Here, we show that pro- liferating cortical neural progenitors of human embryonic 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Bordeaux, brains highly express WDFY3, further supporting a role in Bordeaux, France, 2INSERM U1211 – Maladies Rares, regulation of prenatal neurogenesis. We present data on Génétique et Métabolisme (MRGM), Université de Wnt-pathway dysregulation in Wdfy3-haploinsufﬁcient Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France mice, which display macrocephaly and deﬁcits in motor coordination and associative learning, recapitulating the1410 Thank to performance of whole exome sequencing (WES) hencetoestimatethediagnosticyieldofWESandtoselect or whole genome sequencing, it is now possible to identify novel candidate genes for future functional studies. multiple pathogenic variants in patients with rare disease, Materials and Methods: The institutional ethics com- where a single disease has until now been suspected. We mitteeapprovedthisstudy.168patients(104families)with report the simultaneous discovery of three pathogenic neurodevelopmental disorders were enrolled and all eval- variants in KMT2A, PAX3, and DLG3 genes, for a 8-year- uatedbyclinicalgeneticists.ForWES;DNAwasbarcoded old patient. He has a developmental delay, behavioral and enriched using Agilent SureSelect-V6-60 MB and disorders,associateddysmorphicfeatures,suchtelecanthus, sequenced using HiSeq4000 or NovaSeq6000. Raw data blue coloringoftheirisesandcubitalhypertrichosis. Atrio and Variant Calling Files (VCF) processing and annotation based exome sequencing found three deleterious variants: was carried out at the Department of Genetics, SQU. KMT2A: c.9068delA ;p.Gln3023Argfs*3 de novo, PAX3: Results: A database of clinical phenotypes for 104 c.530C>G;p.Ala177GlydenovoandDLG3:c.127delG;p. familieswasestablished.In-housepipelineforﬁltrationand Asp43Metfs*22 hemizygous inherited from the mother. prioritization of WES data was standardized and validated. KMT2A mutations are involved in Wiedemann-Steiner Prioritized variants found were as following 1) disease- syndrome, and PAX3 mutations are responsible for causativevariants(deﬁnitecause)in21/104families(20%), Waardenburg syndrome. DLG3 mutations are described in 2)possibledisease-causingvariants(VUSs)withsupportive a non-syndromic X-related intellectual disability. This segregationsresultsin28families(27%),and3)variantsin frameshift variant is located on the speciﬁc exon 1 of novel genes (new genes not implicated in human disease transcript NM_020730.2 of DLG3 mostly expressed in before) in 19/104 families (18%). While in 36 families brain. Considering the dysmorphic features and intellectual (35%), we detected no abnormality. disabilitypresentedbythispatient,thesethreevariantswere Conclusion: thediagnostic rate achieved inourcohort is therefore imputed as pathogenic and their association 20% when considering pathogenic variants only and up to responsible for his phenotype. Several multiple molecular 47% with VUSs. Nineteen candidate genes that are con- diagnosiswerealreadyfoundbyWES.Yangetal.reported vincing to be causative of neurodevelopmental syndromes dual diagnosis on 4 patients (6%) [1], Posey et al. within 6 identiﬁed. Further functional studies to be completed to patients (7%) [2], and Rossi & al. within 4 patients (9.5%) conﬁrm causation. [3]. However none triple diagnosis has been reported in G. Al-Kasbi: None. F. Al-Murshedi: None. N. A- literature. This demonstrates and reminds us of the Hashmi: None. K. Althihli: None. A. Al-Kindi: None. A. importance of analyzing exomes in a rigorous and AlSaegh: None. A. Al-Futaisi: None. W. Al-Mamari: exhaustive manner because it can explain in some cases None. A. Al-Yahyaee: None. M. Al-Nabhani: None. S. (<10%) superimposed traits or blended phenotypes. Al-Rashdi: None. S. Al-Yahyaee: None. A. Al- T.Matis:None.V.Michaud:None.J.Van-Gils:None. Maawali: None. V.Raclet:None.C.Plaisant:None.P.Fergelot:None.E. Lasseaux:None.B.Arveiler:None.A.Trimouille:None. P08.66C VariantsinthetranscriptionalcorepressorBCORL1are P08.65B associated with an X-linked disorder of intellectual Diagnostic Yield and Novel Candidate Genes by Exome disability, dysmorphic features, and behavioral Sequencing in 104 Omani Families abnormalities G. Al-Kasbi, F. Al-Murshedi, N. A-Hashmi, K. Althihli, A. Shukla1, K. M. Girisha1, P. H. Somashekar1, A. Al-Kindi, A. AlSaegh, A. Al-Futaisi, W. Al-Mamari, S. Nampoothiri2, R. McClellan3, H. J. Vernon3,4 A. Al-Yahyaee, M. Al-Nabhani, S. Al-Rashdi, S. Al- Yahyaee, A. Al-Maawali 1Kasturba Medical College and Hospital, Manipal, India, 2Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman Kochi, India, 3Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, Background:Autosomalrecessiveinheritedneurodevelop- United States mental disorders are highly heterogeneous, and many causative genes are still unknown. Whole exome sequen- Introduction: BCORL1, a transcriptional corepressor, is cing (WES) becomes the most efﬁcient test to identify involved in negative gene regulation through associations disease-causing variants in monogenic disorders. Aim: To with several protein complexes including Class II histone promote the identiﬁcation of disease genes through WES, deacetylases (HDACs). Acquired somatic mutations in BCORL1 have been implicated in the pathogenesis ofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1411 several malignancies, but germline mutations of BCORL1 Methods: Cases with deletions involving the 13q33.1- have not been associated with a speciﬁc genetic syndrome. q34 cytoband were retrieved using local databases of two However, a hemizygous variant, c.2459A>G [p.(Asn820- largest Israeli centers performing CMA analysis. In addi- Ser)] in BCORL1 was reported in 2 brothers with severe tion, literature search in PubMed database and DECIPHER intellectual disability, coarse facial features, and hypotonia database was performed. previously. Results:Localdatabasesearchyieldedeightnewpatients Materials and Methods: Five individuals from 3 pedi- with 13q33.3-q34 microdeletions, three of which had grees with phenotypes including intellectual disability, additional copy number variants. Combined with 15 cases behavioral difﬁculties, and dysmorphic features were detected by literature search, and additional 23 cases investigated by whole exome sequencing. Our case series reported in DECIPHER database, overall 43 patients with was built via collaborations assisted by GeneMatcher. isolated 13q33.3-q34 microdeletions are described. Devel- Results: Three missense variants c.2345 T>A, c.1487 opmental delay and/or intellectual disability were noted in C>T and c.95C>T were observed in hemizygous state in thevastmajorityofaffected individuals (93.2%),andinall BCORL1. Two of the three BCORL1 variants, c.95C>T [p. casesextendingbeyondthe13q34cytoband(n=27).Ofthe (Pro32Leu)] and c.1487C>T [p.(Ser496Phe)] are not 20 deletions involving the 13q34 cytoband only, in three reported in gnomAD and the third variant, c.2345T>A [p. casesdevelopmentaldelayand/orintellectualdisabilitywas (Val782Glu)] is reported in one individual in hemizygous notreported.Interestingly,intwoofthesecases(66.7%)the state. The amino acids, proline at 32nd and serine at 496th deletions did not involve the terminal CHAMP1 gene, as position are highly conserved with a GERP score of 5.42 opposed to 3/17 (17.6%) of patients with 13q34 deletions and 5.69 respectively. The amino acid, valine at 782th is and neurocognitive disability. Facial dysmorphism and moderately conserved with a GERP score of 2.7. microcephalywerereportedinabouthalfofthecases,while Conclusions: Hemizygous pathogenic variants in convulsions and heart anomalies were noted in one ﬁfth of BCORL1 underlie a new X-linked epigenetic syndrome of the patients. None of the 13q33-q34 deletions were inher- variable degrees of intellectual disability, seizures, beha- ited from a reported healthy parent. vioral abnormalities, and dysmorphisms including tall Discussion: 13q33-q34 microdeletions are associated forehead, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, withhighriskforneurodevelopmentaldisability.Therarity andlongﬁngers.Thisnewlydescribedsyndromeshouldbe of this chromosomal aberration necessitates continuous considered in males with the above described features, reporting and collection of available evidence. especially in the setting of an X-linked familial inheritance I.Maya:None.Y.Goldberg:None.A.Peleg:None.R. pattern. Sukenik-Halevy: None. E. Sofrin-Drucker: None. Z. A. Shukla: None. K.M. Girisha: None. P.H. Soma- Appelman:None.S.JosefsbergBen-Yehoshua:None.S. shekar: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. R. McClellan: Ben-Shachar: None. L. Sagi-Dain: None. None. H.J. Vernon: None. P09.002A P09.001D New name? CD59-related immune-mediated The rare 13q33-q34 microdeletions - eight new patients polyneuropathy with/without hemolytic anemia? and review of the literature A. Aydin Gumus, H. Gerik Celebi, D. Gun Bilgic, I. Maya1, Y. Goldberg1, A. Peleg2, R. Sukenik-Halevy1, E. Genis, S. Cam E. Sofrin-Drucker3, Z. Appelman4, S. Josefsberg Ben- Yehoshua4, S. Ben-Shachar5, L. Sagi-Dain2 Manisa Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey 1Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Carmel Introduction: Hemolytic anemia, CD59-mediated, with or Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 3Schneider Children's without immune-mediated polyneuropathy is a very rare Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel, 4Kaplan autosomal recessive disease, adding to chronic hemolytic MedicalCenter,Rehovot,Israel,5SouraskyMedicalCenter, anemia, infantile-onset polyneuropathy attacks often trig- Tel Aviv, Israel gered by an acute infection. Here, a previously deﬁned mutation in a few cases in the literature will be discussed. Introduction: Deletions of 13q33-q34 cytoband are rare Methods: The girl’s DNA was analyzed bytru sight one chromosomalaberrations,andliteratureevidencedescribing sequencing.Targetsequenceanalysis wasperformed toher the clinical characteristics is scarce. Our objective was to patient brother and healthy parents. shed light on the phenotype and inheritance pattern of this Results:A14-year-oldgirlappliedtouswith neurologic unique microdeletion. attacks as muscle weakness especially in the right side,1412 decreased vision, painful eye movements after acute infec- resonance imaging was suggestive of delayed myelination, tion started at the age of 4. Her 11-year-old brother had and metabolic workup was non-directive. neurologic attacks that began attheageof15months,with Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed a novel lower extremity muscle weakness, tenderness sleep, homozygous c. 1406G>A (p. Ser469Asn) mutation in the walking-standing up difﬁculty. During the attacks, MRI ADCY5 gene (OMIM 600293). The variant was not found ﬁndings were consistent with ADEM/transverse myelitis; in GnomAD or ExAC browsers, was classiﬁed as dama- hematuria and mild anemia with negative direct-indirect ging/disease causing by in-silico prediction programs, and coombs tests was found only once. They beneﬁted from the residue Ser469 was shown to be highly conserved IVIG and steroid treatments. In their physical examination; throughout evolution. Both parents, reported as healthy, ptosis, atrophy, decreased deep tendon reﬂexes, superﬁcial were found to be heterozygous carriers. sensory loss in the right side of the girl’s body and face; Conclusion:Toourbestknowledge,wepresentasecond decreasedmusclestrength,superﬁcialsensoryloss,absence family with biallelic mutations in ADCY5 gene, associated of deep tendon reﬂexes in the boy's lower extremities were with a severe neurologic presentation of ADCY5-Related detected. Homozygous pathogenic c.146delA (p. Dyskinesia spectrum. Asp49Valfs * 3) mutation was detected in the girl’s CD59 L. Sagi-Dain: None. L. Shemer: None. G. Larom: gene. The same mutation was found as homozygous in her None. V. Adir: None. J. Haddah-Halloun: None. A. brother, heterozygous in their parents who had a con- Peleg: None. sanguineous marriage. Conclusions: This family presents new data to the lit- P09.005D eraturebecauseofthebeginningage,shapeofneurological Polygenic risk score improves prediction of alcohol- attacks and absence of chronic hemolysis. related morbidities A. Aydin Gumus: None. H. Gerik Celebi: None. D. Gun Bilgic: None. E. Genis: None. S. Cam: None. T. T. J. Kiiskinen1, N. J. Mars1, T. Palviainen1, J. T. Rämö1, P. Ripatti1, J. Koskela1, J. Kaprio1, P09.003B V. Salomaa2, P. Mäkelä2, A. S. Havulinna1,2, A ﬁrst report of homozygous missense mutation in the S. Ripatti1,3,4, GWAS & Sequencing Consortium of ADCY5 gene related to an autosomal dominant Alcohol and Nicotine use Dyskynesia syndrome 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), L. Sagi-Dain, L. Shemer, G. Larom, V. Adir, J. Haddah- HiLIFE,UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki,Finland,Helsinki, Halloun, A. Peleg Finland, 2National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,Finland,Helsinki,Finland,3DepartmentofPublic Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel Health, Clinicum, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 4The Broad Background: ADCY5-Related Dyskinesia is a diverse Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, group of movement disorders, characterized by dystonia, USA, Cambridge, MA, United States myoclonus or chorea, with variable disability. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; however, Alcohol drinking is a major contributor to global health recently two siblings with generalized dystonia and burden. Affected by genetic factors, genome-wide associa- myoclonus have been reported, associated with compound tion studies (GWAS) have identiﬁed multiple loci asso- heterozygous mutations in ADCY5 gene. ciatedwithalcoholconsumption.Toquantifytheprognostic Patient: We describe girl, born to consanguineous par- information of this polygenic burden, we derived a ents(ﬁrstcousins)followinganuneventfuldeliveryatterm. polygenic risk score (PRS) for alcohol consumption and At the age of 1 year and 9 months she presented a severe tested its association with alcohol use disorder, alcohol- globaldevelopmentaldelay,andwasunabletospeak,sitor related morbidities and mortality. stand. Her neurologic examination showed markedly Wecreated21majoralcohol-inducedhealtheventsusing increased tonus and episodic dystonic postures in trunk, nationwide hospital discharge, cause-of-death and pre- extremities and face, exacerbated by voluntary movement. scriptiondrugpurchaseregistries. Using thelargest GWAS In addition, spontaneous events of ocular convergence summary statistics on alcohol consumption (GSCAN, spasm and orofacial dystonia were observed. However, n=527,282 non-Finns), we built a genome-wide PRS and during sleep a signiﬁcant decrease in the tonus was noted, testeditspredictiononalcohol-relatedeventsinprospective with ﬁll range of joint movements. She had recurrent epi- cohorts (total n=39,243). sodes of hyperthermia and hyperhidrosis. MagneticAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1413 Per 1SD increase, the PRS was associated with a 11.2g mtDNAcopynumberis256.5(SD:93.9).Wedidnothave (0.93 drinks) increase in weekly alcohol intake (95% any stage IV patients. CI=9.85-12.58g, p=2.3*10-58) and a 27% increase in Conclusions: Both telomere length and mitochondrial alcohol-induced events (cases=874, HR=1.27,1.19-1.36, copynumberdecreasedwithdiseaseseverity.Nosigniﬁcant p=1.7*10-12) while the difference between the risk of the difference between sporadic and familial forms have been lowest and highest PRS-quintiles was 102% (HR=2.02, found. Changes in the telomere length are signiﬁcant 1.62-2.52, p=5.4x10-10). Controlling for self-reported (p<0.05) and telomere length appears to be a better bio- alcohol-consumption-estimate, socioeconomical status, marker in late stages. Grant: NTP-NFTÖ-17-B-0595 smoking, and GGT, this increase was 17%/SD (1.17, 1.09- B.A.Fekete:None.A.Illes:None.D.Csaban:None.H. 1.25, p=8.9*10-6). For DSM-IV AUD, a similar increase Zeke: None. V. Molnar: None. I.J. Jimoh: None. P. was observed (cases=713, OR=1.20, 1.11-1.31, Balicza: None. Z. Grosz: None. M.J. Molnar: None. p=2.29*10-5). Adding the PRS over age and sex increased the C-index 2% (p=0.017) and self-reported consumption P09.007B andsocioeconomicfactorsincreasedtheC-indexfurtherby Next Generation Exome Sequencing in a Large Sample 13% (p=3.1*10-11) with the C-index for a model including of Alzheimer’s Patients all being 84.9%. In conclusion, increased polygenic risk for alcohol con- D. Grozeva1, S. Saad1, C. Bresner1, A. Frizzati1, sumption was associated with alcohol-related morbidities M. Bareford1, T. Morgan1, R. Raybould1, E. Rees1, alsowhencontrollingforself-reportedalcoholconsumption N. Denning1, A. Meggy1, R. Marshall1, W. Nash1, and other covariates thus showing potential in utilizing C. Davies1, J. Morgan1, B. Hitchings1, G. Leonenko1, geneticinformation for predictionofalcohol-related harms. G. Menzies2, N. Badarinarayan1, V. Escott-Price2, T.T.J. Kiiskinen: None. N.J. Mars: None. T. Palviai- ARCCA Cardiff University, D. Ivanov2, R. Sims1, nen: None. J.T. Rämö: None. P. Ripatti: None. J. Kos- J. Williams1,2 kela: None. J. Kaprio: None. V. Salomaa: None. P. Mäkelä: None. A.S. Havulinna: None. S. Ripatti: None. 1Institute of Psychological Medicine & Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United P09.006A Kingdom, 2UK Dementia Research Institute at Cardiff, Telomere length and mitochondrial DNA copy number Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom changes as a biomarker in ALS Introduction: Both early- and late-onset types of Alzhei- B. A. Fekete, A. Illes, D. Csaban, H. Zeke, V. Molnar, mer’s disease (EOAD and LOAD) have a substantial I. J. Jimoh, P. Balicza, Z. Grosz, M. J. Molnar genetic component. Despite the high genetic heritability, a largeproportionoftheriskhasnotbeenexplainedthusfar. Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, A considerable proportion of the missing heritability is Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary likely to be accounted for by rare, low frequency and functionalvariants.Hereweapplywholeexomesequencing Introduction:Telomerelengthwaspreviouslyshowntobe (WES) to identify rare genetic variants that inﬂuence decreased in several neurodegenerative disorders while disease risk. mitochondrialDNAcopynumberchangeswerereportedto Methods: We are currently sequencing a large cohort of show conﬂicting results. mtDNA copy numbers and both EOAD (2000 individuals) and LOAD patients (3000) telomerelengtharereportedtobecorrelated.Biggersample and healthy elderly controls (1100). WES is performed sizes, simultaneous measurements and detailed data on using Illumina HiSeq 4000 at a median coverage 40x. The disease severity is lacking. GATKpipelineisutilisedforvariantdiscovery.Thequality Materials and Methods: ALS patients (n=99) were control and statistical analyses are performed within the stagedbasedontheKing’sclinicalstagingsystem(StageI- Hailframework.Wewillperformsingle-variantassociation IV.). mtDNA copy numbers and telomere lengths were analyses as well as gene burden analyses. In addition, we measured with real-time PCR technique. will check if there are rare variants in the genes previously Results: Stage I ALS patients have an average telomere associated with rare forms of dementia. length of 200.6 (kB) (SD: 69.5), mtDNA copy number of Results: We will present our ﬁrst large scale genomic 300.3 (SD: 90.3), while stage II telomere length is 164.9 analysisresultsbasedontheWESdataforthecohortatthe (SD: 77.9) and mtDNA copy number is 280.7 (SD: 85.9) ESHG2019. and stage III telomer lengths is 114.1 (SD: 40.5) while Conclusions:ToidentifynovelgeneticcausesofAD,we are sequencing a large cohort of both EOAD and LOAD1414 patients. Our analysis will utilise this well powered sample to identify novel low frequency loci in addition to func- Introduction: Apolipoprotein E (APOE) is associated with tional variation that have been potentially missed by cognition, longevity, cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer’s GWAS.Identiﬁcationoftheselociwillfurtherelucidatethe disease(AD)andall-causemortality.Homozygosityforthe geneticarchitectureofEOADandLOADandwillimplicate Ɛ4 allele increases AD risk, with homozygotes estimated functionalvariantsformolecularinvestigationandpotential having up to 60-70% lifetime risk (penetrance), with drug targets. average age of onset ~70 years. Some Ɛ4 homozygotes D. Grozeva: None. S. Saad: None. C. Bresner: None. live >75 without AD, suggesting protective factors, yet are A.Frizzati:None.M.Bareford:None.T.Morgan:None. rarely ascertained. We sought to test APOE haplotypes R.Raybould:None.E.Rees:None.N.Denning:None.A. against cognitive function/dementia in a longitudinal study Meggy: None. R. Marshall: None. W. Nash: None. C. and identify Ɛ4 homozygotes aged >75 years without AD. Davies: None. J. Morgan: None. B. Hitchings: None. G. Methods: We sequenced 13,131 healthy elderly partici- Leonenko: None. G. Menzies: None. N. Badarinarayan: pantsintheASPREEstudy.Atbaseline,participantshadno None. V. Escott-Price: None. D. Ivanov: None. R. Sims: history of cardiovascular disease or dementia, and passed a None. J. Williams: None. general cognition screen (Modiﬁed Mini-Mental State Examination ≥78), average age 74 years. We administered P09.008C different cognitive tests (general cognition, verbal learning/ Effect ofAPOE on cognitivefunction and dementia ina memory, verbal ﬂuency, processing speed) over ﬁve-years. longitudinalcohortof13,131healthyelderlyindividuals Wecollectedclinicaloutcomedataonarangeofendpoints, and associated each APOE haplotype with speciﬁc cogni- M. Riaz1, R. Sebra2, A. Huq3,4, J. Ryan1, R. Wolfe1, tive functions and dementia. J. E. Lockery1, S. G. Orchard1, C. M. Reid5, Results: APOE frequencies aligned with other cohorts M. R. Nelson6, J. D. Williamson7, T. T. Chong8, (Ɛ3/Ɛ3=62.3%, Ɛ3/Ɛ4=21.0%, Ɛ2/Ɛ3=12.5%, Ɛ2/ B. Kirpach9, C. Burns9, R. Woods1, E. Store1, Ɛ2=0.6%, Ɛ4/Ɛ4=1.5%). Yet we observed notable differ- R. C. Shah10, A. Murray9, ASPREE Investigator Group, encesincognitivefunction(verballearning/memory),after E. Schadt2, J. McNeil1, P. Lacaze1 controlling for demographic and clinical risk factors. We quantiﬁed the effect of each APOE haplotype on dementia 1Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, riskandage-of-onset.Weidentiﬁed200Ɛ4homozygous,of School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash whomaftermedian4.7yearsfollow-up,only14reachedthe University, Melbourne, Australia., Melbourne, Australia, dementiaendpoint(7%penetrance).Theaverageageofthe 2IcahnInstitute andDept.ofGenetics &GenomicSciences remaining 186 individuals was 78 years, suggesting an at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United enrichment of unaffected individuals in this study. States, NewYork, NY, United States, 3Department of Conclusion: This uniquely ascertained population pro- Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public vides a platform for discovery of protective genetic factors Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, M. Riaz: None. R. Sebra: None. A. Huq: None. J. Melbourne, Australia, Melbourne, Australia, 4Department Ryan: None. R. Wolfe: None. J.E. Lockery: None. S.G. of Genetic Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Orchard:None.C.M.Reid:None.M.R.Nelson:None.J. Melbourne,Australia,Melbourne,Australia,5theSchoolof D. Williamson: None. T.T. Chong: None. B. Kirpach: Public Health, Curtin University, Perth, Australia, None.C.Burns:None.R.Woods:None.E.Store:None. 6Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of R.C.Shah:None.A.Murray: None.E.Schadt:None.J. Tasmania, Hobart, Hobart, Australia, 7Sticht Center on McNeil: None. P. Lacaze: None. healthy Aging and Alzheimer’s Prevention, Section on Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Department of P09.009D Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Evaluation of a novel variant in CR1 in patients with Winston-Salem, NC,Winston-Salem,NC, United States, 87. Alzheimer's disease Monash Institute of Cognitive and Clinical Neurosciences, Monash University, Victoria, 3800, Australia, Melbourne, J. Szymanski1,2, F. Cardona1,2,3, J. Pérez Tur1,2,3 Australia, 9Berman Center for Outcomes and Clinical Research, Hennepin Healthcare Research Institute 1InstitutodeBiomedicinadeValencia,ConsejoSuperiorde Minneapolis, MN, USA, Minneapolis, MN, United States, Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas, Valencia, Spain, 2Centro de 10Department of Family Medicine and Rush Alzheimer’s Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Disease Center, 2468 Rush University Medical Center, Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain, Chicago, IL, USA, Chicago, IL, United States 3InstitutodeInvestigaciónSanitariaLaFe,Valencia,SpainAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1415 5Department of Neurology and Memory Clinics, Hospital Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurode- Network Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 6Department of generative dementia in the elderly. According to the World Neurology, University Hospital Ghent and University of Alzheimer’sReport2018,50millionpeoplearelivingwith Ghent, Ghent, Belgium dementia and its total estimated cost is US$1 trillion worldwide. This poses a signiﬁcant burden to the aging Introduction: Genetic studies in early-onset Alzheimer’s population. disease (EOAD) patients suggested an important role for Previous studies have identiﬁed genes that increase the premature termination codon (PTC) mutations in ABCA7. risk of the late onset form of the disease (LOAD). Among ABCA7wasinitiallyassociatedwithlate-onset Alzheimer’s them CR1, a gene encoding a receptor in the complement disease (AD) in genome-wide association studies. PTC system. By sequencing of exomes of Spanish family mutations are predicted to lead toloss of functional protein members affected by AD, we identiﬁed a novel variant of though active transcript rescue was observed. CR1 gene encoding for a truncated protein caused by a Materials and Methods: Targeted resequencing of the single nucleotide variant (SNV). Allele speciﬁc PCR ABCA7 coding region or whole exome sequencing were revealed the presence of this SNV in 3 members of the used to determine the frequency of ABCA7 PTC mutations family, affected by AD but not the unaffected member nor in757EOADpatients(meanonsetage61.2±7.0years)and 192 controls examined nor any public database. These 757 control individuals. Clinicopathological characteristics results together with the implication of the gene in the of mutation carriers were retrospectively reviewed. disease,indicatespossiblepathogenicsigniﬁcance. Plasmid Results: We identiﬁed 13 different ABCA7 PTC muta- constructs of two most common isoforms and the novel tions in 34 carriers (34/757, 4.49%) and 15 PTC mutations variant of CR1 fused with Flag epitope were used in an incontrols,resultinginanORof2.33(95%CI[1.26-4.31], assay to determine whether the variant mRNA is degraded p=0.006).Carriershadameanonsetageof61.6±5.8(48- bynonsense-mediatedmRNAdecay(NMD).Alsowhether, 70) years. Clinical presentation was predominantly amnes- if translated, the stability of the protein is affected. Pre- tic. A positive ﬁrst-degree familial history was present in liminary results suggest the novel variant in CR1 is degra- 88.8% (16/18). Neuropathological examination (n=5) dedbyNMDastheinhibitionofthispathwayincreasesthe showed hallmark AD lesions, in 80% (4/5) combined with levels of CR1 mRNA and protein. pronounced cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). Missense Funding acknowledgement: GV/2018//166, CIBERNED mutations were enriched in patients versus controls (OR of (group 209) and SAF2014-49469-R 2.20, 95% CI [1.06-2.85], p = 0.028). J. Szymanski: None. F. Cardona: None. J. Pérez Conclusion: PTC mutations in ABCA7 are relatively Tur: None. frequent in Belgian EOAD patients, particularly in familial EOAD. Clinical and neuropathological data exhibited a classical AD phenotype in combination with CAA and P09 highly variable onset ages. Additional information of Neurogenetic and psychiatric disorders mutation frequency and spectrum as well as biological impact is essential before implementation into clinical P09.010A practice, including genetic testing and risk prediction. Genetic and clinicopathological contribution of rare L. Bossaerts: None. E. Hens: None. T. Van den ABCA7 mutations in Belgian early-onset Alzheimer’s Bossche: None. A. De Roeck: None. S. Engelborghs: disease patients None. A. Sieben: None. K. Peeters: None. M. Van den Broeck: None. A. Laureys: None. P. De Deyn: None. K. L. Bossaerts1,2,3, E. Hens1,2,4, T. Van den Bossche1,2,4, Sleegers: None. P. Cras: None. C. Van A. De Roeck1,2,3, S. Engelborghs2,3,5, A. Sieben1,2,6, Broeckhoven: None. K. Peeters1,2, M. Van den Broeck1,2, A. Laureys1,2, P. De Deyn2,3,5, K. Sleegers1,2,3, P. Cras2,4, C. Van P09.012C Broeckhoven1,2,3, Belgian Neurology consortium Anorexia nervosa genome-wide association study identiﬁes eight loci and implicates psychiatric and 1Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Center for metabolic origins Molecular Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, C. Hübel1,2, H. J. Watson3,4,5, Z. Yilmaz3, Eating 3Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Disorders Working Group Psychiatric Genomics Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Department of Neurology, Consortium, M.Landén1,6, N.G.Martin7, P. Mortensen8, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, P. F. Sullivan1,3, G. Breen2,9, C. M. Bulik1,31416 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2King's College 01GV0624, National Genome Research Net-Plus London, London, United Kingdom, 3University of North 01GS0820, 01KU0903); NIAAA (K02AA018755-06, Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, R01AA015416-08); Swiss Anorexia Nervosa Foundation; 4CurtinUniversity,Perth,Australia,5UniversityofWestern MINECO (SAF2013-49108-R); AGAUR (2014 SGR- Australia, Perth, Australia, 6University of Gothenburg, 1138); EC FP7/2007-2013 (ESGI 262055, 245009); EU Gothenburg, Sweden, 7QIMR Berghofer Medical Research H2020 (692145, 676550, 654248); Estonian Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia, 8Aarhus University, Aarhus, Council (IUT20-60), European Regional Development Denmark, 9South London and Maudsley National Health Fund (2014-2020.4.01.15-0012); Instituto de Salud Carlos Service Trust, London, United Kingdom III (FIS PI14/290, CIBERobn); MH CZ - DRO (MMCI, 00209805); EC Framework V ‘Factors in Healthy Eating’ Introduction:Anorexianervosa(AN)isaneatingdisorder (INRA/INSERM 4M406D, PHRC ENDANO 2008- characterised by severe weight loss either through caloric A01636-49); iPSYCH; CHOP; NHI/NHGRI eMERGE restriction or heightened energy expenditure or a combina- Network (U01 HG006830); Kurbert Family; EU Marie tion of both. It has one of the highest mortality rates of all Curie Program (MRTN-CT-2006-035988); Ontario Mental psychiatric disorders and psychological and pharmacologi- Health Foundation; Ministry of Health of Ontario AFP cal treatments show only limited effect. Innovation Fund; European Commission Framework 5; Materials and Methods: As an international collabora- MedicalUniversityofVienna;NetherlandsNWO(ZonMW tion between the Anorexia Nervosa Genetics Initiative and VIDI91786327);UniversityofOtagoResearchGrant;NRF the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium, we performed the Korea (2016R1D1A1A09917877); Bergen Research Foun- worldwidelargestgenome-wide associationstudy(GWAS) dation, NFR (NORMENT-SFF); NCNG; Ontario Mental amassing 16,992AN cases and55,525controls. Secondary Health Foundation; IGA MZ ČR (NT 14094-3/2013, AZV analyses included chromosome conformation capture (i.e., 17-28905A, Progres Q27); LifeGene; Ragnar and Torsten Hi-C), linkage disequilibrium score regression, generalised Söderberg Foundation; AFA Insurance; Stockholm County summary data-based Mendelian randomisation (GSMR), Council/Karolinska Institutet Research funds; Lundbeck gene, and gene-set analysis using MAGMA. Foundation; Aarhus University for CIRRAU; Alexander Results: The GWAS identiﬁed 8 independent loci and von Humboldt Foundation; Academy of Finland (259764, estimated its common genetic variant heritability to be 11- 28327, 286028, 265240, 263278, 308248, 312073); Nor- 17%, indicating a polygenic trait. Enrichment analyses wegian Institute of Public Health; Research Council of implicate central nervous tissues and cell types in AN. Norway (248778, 223273); The Norwegian Foundation for Additionally,ANshowedpositivegeneticcorrelationswith Health and Rehabilitation; Psychiatry Research Trust obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD, r = .45), major (284286); Genome Canada; Government of Ontario; g depressive disorder (r = .28), and anxiety (r = .25), Canadian Institutes of Health Research; University of Tor- g g mirroring its clinical comorbidity proﬁle. Surprisingly, onto McLaughlin Centre; Resnick Family Chair in Eating bidirectional GSMR a showed signiﬁcant bidirectional Disorders; VR (D0886501); DFG (EH 367/5-1, SFB 940, relationship between AN and BMI (β;;;;;AN→BMI = -0.20; HI865/2-1);AustralianNHMRC(310667,324715,480420, ORBMI→AN = 0.96), indicating that genomic variants that 1063061, 1073898, 1058522, APP1103623); NIH predispose to lower body mass may also increase liability (K01MH109782, K01AA025113, K01MH093750, R01 for AN. Complementing these ﬁndings, we also reported MH109528, D0886501, R01 MH092793, K01MH106675, genomic overlap between AN and metabolic traits, such as 2R01DK075787-06A1); Wellcome Trust (WT098051, fasting insulin concentrations (r = -.24) as well as high- WT088827/Z/09) g density lipoprotein concentrations (r = .21). C.Hübel:None.H.J.Watson:None.Z.Yilmaz:None. g Conclusions: Through these ﬁndings, we are encoura- M. Landén: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers ging a reconceptualization of AN as both a psychiatric and bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Lundbeck. metabolic disorder. F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;EPIDResearchOy. Grant numbers: KG Jebsen Stiftelsen (SKGJ‐MED‐ N.G. Martin: None. P. Mortensen: None. P.F. Sullivan: 008); Professional Services Agreement with the Regents of B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or the University of California; Price Foundation; Health consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Research Society of New Zealand (16/600), NIHR Bio- received); Modest; Lundbeck. D. Speakers Bureau/Honor- medical Research Centre (BRC) and NIHR Dementia Bio- aria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); medicalResearch Unit (BRU), King’sCollegeLondonand Modest; Roche. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust; The Lundbeck, Pﬁzer, Element Genomics. G. Breen: B. Klarman Family Foundation; Veneto Region Grant BIO- Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or VEDA (DGR 3984/08); BMBF (01GV0601, ANTOP consultant and pending grants as well as grants alreadyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1417 received);Modest;EliLilly.D.SpeakersBureau/Honoraria None. I. Terczyńska: None. E. Obersztyn: None. B. (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Nowakowska: None. Illumina. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Eli Lilly, Otsuka. C.M. Bulik: B. Research Grant (principal investi- P09.014A gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell Elucidating the genetic background of childhood-onset asgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;ShirePharmaceuticals. ataxias F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Shire. Other; Modest; Pearson and Walker. E. Ignatius1, P. Isohanni1, M. Pohjanpelto2, E. Palin2, V. Brilhante2, S. Ojanen2, A. Suomalainen2, P09.013D T. Lonnqvist1, C. J. Carroll3 The usefulness of array comparative genomic hybridization in detection of copy number variants in 1Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, patients with epilepsy 2Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland, 3St. George's, University of London, London, United Kingdom I. Plaskota, M. Bartnik-Głaska, M. Smyk, K. Sobecka, B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik, J. Bernaciak, E. Szczepanik, Introduction: Despite available genetic testing, a large I. Terczyńska, E. Obersztyn, B. Nowakowska proportion of all documented ataxia cases remain geneti- callyuncharacterized.Childhood-onsetataxiasareclinically Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland and genetically heterogeneous, which makes ﬁnding the moleculardiagnosischallenging.Theaimofthisstudywas Introduction:Epilepsyisoneofthemostcommondiseases to characterize the genetic background of childhood-onset of the central nervous system affecting about 1% of the ataxias in Finland using WES technology. human population. The causes of epilepsy, because of the Methods: Our cohort includes all pediatric patients with clinical and etiological heterogeneity, often remain ataxia as the primary symptom of disease evaluated in unknown. However, it is well known that genetic factors HelsinkiUniversityCentralHospitalduringtheyears1999- areresponsibleforepilepsyin40-60%cases.Recentstudies 2016. Patients with acute, infection related ataxias, ataxias haveshownthatinadditiontothepointmutations,thecopy that follow brain insult and patients with mild ataxia as a number variants (CNVs) are also important factors in this minorpartofadisorderwereexcluded.42familieslackeda disorder. genetic diagnosis and were investigated using WES. MaterialsandMethods:WeusedarrayCGHmethodin Results:Apathogenicorlikelypathogenicmutationwas agroupof54patientswiththeclinicaldiagnosisofepilepsy found for 17 families (40 %). Known or novel autosomal and neurodevelopmental abnormalities with or without recessive variants were found in known ataxia genes dysmorphic features. Array CGH analysis was performed HIBCH,STUB1,ADCK3,B9D1,CLN5,PTRH2,TPP1as using genome-wide microarray with average resolution of well as in the novel ataxia gene SQSTM1, encoding 30 kb (180K, Oxford Gene Technology) with speciﬁcally autophagy receptor p62, we reported recently. De novo or designed coverage for over 212 selected genes, known or dominant variants explained approximately a third of candidate to play an important role in the pathogenesis of genetic causes in our cohort, with variants identiﬁed in epilepsy. EBF3, ITPR1, NKX2-1 and ATP1A3. A de novo variant Results: Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed 20 was identiﬁed in MED23, which has not previously been CNVsin17patients(31%).AlloftheidentiﬁedCNVswere linked to ataxia. submicroscopic in size, ranging from 1.7 kb to 3.84 Mb, Conclusions: WES is an effective way to diagnose and therefore could not have been detected by standard patients with known and novel causes of childhood-onset karyotype analysis. We identiﬁed 6 pathogenic or poten- ataxia, and enables early diagnosis, which is critical for tiallypathogenicCNVs(11%)and14CNVswithunknown patients with treatable forms of genetic ataxia and for clinicalsigniﬁcance(26%).10CNVs(50%)couldnothave genetic counselling. Furthermore, our ﬁndings expand the been detected by our clinical microarray (60K, OGT). genetic spectrum of childhood-onset ataxias and highlight Conclusions: The results of our studies further support novel cellular mechanisms. theroleofsubmicroscopicCNVsintheetiopathogenesisof E.Ignatius:None.P.Isohanni:None.M.Pohjanpelto: epilepsy and demonstrate the usefulness of array CGH in None. E. Palin: None. V. Brilhante: None. S. Ojanen: the genetic diagnosis of this neurodevelopmental disorder. None. A. Suomalainen: None. T. Lonnqvist: None. C.J. I. Plaskota: None. M. Bartnik-Głaska: None. M. Carroll: None. Smyk: None. K. Sobecka: None. B. Wiśniowiecka- Kowalnik: None. J. Bernaciak: None. E. Szczepanik:1418 P09.015B P09.016C Ataxia telangiectasia-like disorder in a family deﬁcient Novel intronic and synonymous variants: validation of for MRE11A, caused by a MRE11 variant bioinformatic splicing effect prediction increases the molecular diagnosis rate H. Tajsharghi1, M. Sedghi2, M. Salari3, A. Moslemi4, A. Kariminejad5, M. Davis6, H. Hayley Goullée7, D. Santos1, J. Damásio1,2,3, S. Morais1, C. Pereira1,4, B. Olsson8, N. Laing7 M. Santos1, J. Sequeiros1,3,4, I. Alonso1,3,4 1Health and education, Translational medicine, Skovde, 1UnIGENe, IBMC – Institute for Molecular and Cell Sweden, 21Medical Genetics Laboratory, Alzahra Biology, i3S – Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em University Hospital, Isfahan University of Medical Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Neurology Sciences,, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 3Department Department, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, of Neurology, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Porto, Portugal, 3CGPP – Centro de Genética Preditiva e Science, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Department of Preventiva, IBMC – Institute for Molecular and Cell Pathology, University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska Biology, i3S – Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em University Hospital, gothenburg, Sweden, 5Kariminejad- Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4ICBAS – Instituto de Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran, Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar, Univ. Porto, Porto, Islamic Republic of, 6Department of Diagnostic Genomics, Portugal Pathwest,QEIIMedicalCentre,Nedlands,Perth,Australia, 7Centre for Medical Research, The University of Western The correct interpretation of biological consequences of Australia and the Harry Perkins Institute for Medical variantsofunknownsigniﬁcance(VUS)onsplicingposesa Research,, Perth, Australia, 8School of Bioscience, major challenge for clinical geneticists in molecular University of Skovde, Skovde, Sweden diagnosis. In silico tools can be used to predict the functional impact of a given VUS; however, software Objective: We report three siblings with the characteristic limitations have not been properly evaluated and ﬁnal features of ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder associated conﬁrmation requires further molecular studies. Therefore, with a homozygous MRE11 synonymous variant causing our aim was to evaluate the functional impact of two novel nonsense-mediatedmRNAdecayandMRE11Adeﬁciency. VUSs(intronicc.1580-18C>GinATP8A2andsynonymous Methods: Clinical assessments, next-generation sequen- c.6819G>T in NIPBL) on splicing, by a minigene assay, cing, transcript and immunohistochemistry analyses were and compare the observed effects with the predictions performed obtained through bioinformatics tools. Minigene constructs Results: The patients presented with poor balance, were generated through PCR ampliﬁcation, from patient´s developmental delay during the ﬁrst year of age and suf- DNA, of genomic sequences surrounding the VUS of feredfromintellectualdisabilityfromearlychildhood.They interest, which were cloned into the pCMVdi vector. showed oculomotor apraxia, slurred and explosive speech, Altered splicing was evaluated by PCR and Sanger limb and gait ataxia, exaggerated deep tendon reﬂex, dys- sequencing of cDNA obtained from HEK293T cells tonic posture and mirror movement in their hands. They expressing the minigene constructs. This strategy showed developed mild cognitive abilities. Brain magnetic reso- thatbothvariantsproducedaberranttranscripts.Thec.1580- nanceimagingintheindexcaserevealedcerebellaratrophy. 18C>G homozygous variant in ATP8A2 leads to the Next-generation sequencing revealed a homozygous retention of 17bp of intron 17, by the use of an alternative synonymous variant in MRE11 (c.657C>T, p.Asn219=) acceptor splice site, resulting in a premature termination that we show affects splicing. A complete absence of codon in the predicted protein sequence. The NIPBL MRE11 transcripts in the index case suggested nonsense- variant, c.6819G>T, leads to a deletion of 137bp in exon mediated mRNA decay and immunohistochemistry con- 40,throughactivationofanexoniccrypticdonorsplicesite, ﬁrmed the absence of a stable protein. also resulting in a premature termination codon. This Conclusions: Despite the critical role of MRE11A in allowedustoclearlyclassifytheseVUSasdisease-causing, double-strand break repair and its contribution to the conﬁrming the bioinformatics prediction of their functional Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 complex, the absence of MRE11A is impact. Furthermore, this work denotes the importance of compatible with life. considering intronic and synonymous variants as a way of H. Tajsharghi: None. M. Sedghi: None. M. Salari: increasing the molecular diagnosis rate. None. A. Moslemi: None. A. Kariminejad: None. M. D. Santos: None. J. Damásio: None. S. Morais: None. Davis:None.H.HayleyGoullée:None.B.Olsson:None. C. Pereira: None. M. Santos: None. J. Sequeiros: None. N. Laing: None. I. Alonso: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1419 P09.017D in childhood and lasts throughout a person's life, character- A novel CDKL5 mutation in an atypical Rett syndrome ized by challenges with social skills, repetitive behaviors, patient and development an efﬁcient method for speech and non-verbal communication. Large genome detecting CDKL5 activity rearrangements are being identiﬁed in ASD as an under- lying cause for development of this syndrome. These T. Inazu, S. Katayama rearrangements are mostly deletions, but duplications can be found. We present case of twin boys with APBA2 gene Ritsumeikan university, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan duplication. MaterialsandMethods:Twinboys,age9werereferred Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe X-linked dominant to genetic counseling and testing with diagnosed ASD inheritance disorder with a wide spectrum of clinical (DSM-IV). DNA was isolated from buccal swabs of the manifestations. Mutations in Methyl CpG binding protein boys, and 3 ml of whole blood from parents. Parents pro- 2 (MECP2), Cyclin dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) and vided completed questionnaires for tick disorders in chil- Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) have been associated with dren as well as Coordination Disorder Questionnaire classic and/or variant RTT. This study was conducted to (DCDQ).IdentiﬁcationofmutationswasmadewithMLPA identifytheresponsiblegene(s)inatypicalRTTpatient,and (multiplexligase-dependentprobeampliﬁcation)technique, to examine the effect of the mutation on protein function. with MLPA kits P343 and P339 (Mrc-Holland). DNA sequence analysis showed a novel heterozygous Results: All samples were typed successfully. We iden- mutationinCDKL5identiﬁedasc.530A>Gwhichresulted tiﬁedde novo APBA2 gene duplicationin both twins. This inanaminoacidsubstitutionatposition177,fromtyrosine gene, located on 15q13.1 locus is already associated with to cysteine. We demonstrated in vitro kinase assay using autism features. DCDQ scores are similar in twins with radioisotope (RI) of mutant protein showed impairment of indication of DCD. Assessment of the Questionnaires for its activity. The results suggested the mutant CDKL5 was tick disorders in children revealed that one sibling is com- responsible for the disease. pletely absent for ticks while other has high score for sec- Next, pathogenic point mutations including Y177C are tion related to vocal and involuntary ticks. mostly observed within the catalytic domain of CDKL5, Conclusions: This ﬁnding require further investigation therefore loss of catalytic activity may be related todisease andfollowuponspatialandtemporaldifferencesinautism onset. However, this hypothesis has rarely been demon- associated traits in APBA2 gene duplication associated strated. We develop an efﬁcient method for detecting autism. CDKL5 activity. Appropriately, CDKL5 underwent autop- N. Lojo-Kadric: None. L. Pojskic: None. hosphorylation following expression in Escherichia coli, with autophosphorylated CDKL5 detected as a band shift P09.019B by phos-tag SDS-PAGE, without enzyme puriﬁcation and MLPA analysis as a diagnostic test in patients with RI.Wetriedtoexaminetheeffectof15pathogenicorlikely autism spectrum disorders pathogenic or uncertain signiﬁcant mutations on their activity,wefoundallvariantsshoweddramaticallyreduced D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, H. Kathom1, T. Delchev1, catalytic function. Thus, the protocol is useful for examin- S. Bichev2 ing the relationship between disease-causing mutations and their activity. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics T. Inazu: None. S. Katayama: None. Hospital, Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2National Genetic Laboratory, University P09.018A Hospital “ Majcin Dom"Medical University, Soﬁa, AutismmonozygotictwinswithAPBA2geneduplication Bulgaria, Soﬁa, Bulgaria vary for tick development Introduction: Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a N. Lojo-Kadric, L. Pojskic heterogeneous group of conditions characterized by impaired reciprocal social interaction, lack of communica- Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, tion, isolated interests and repetitive or stereotyped Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina behaviors. Most cases are idiopathic, although there is increasing evidence that ASDs have an important genetic Introduction: Autism, or autism spectrum disorder (ASD) component with aetiological heterogeneity. The aim of our isneurologicalanddevelopmentaldisorderthatbeginsearly study was to evaluate the role of multiplex ligation-1420 dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) as a screening test We therefore explored the hypothesis that variants in in patients with autism spectrum disorders. CYP450 genes, which deﬁne the rapid or slow metabolizer Materials and Methods: For this study we used MLPA status of their carriers, may render individuals exposed to P245 Microdeletion Syndromes for screening of the most certaintoxicantsmoresusceptibletobraindisruptionduring common microdeletion syndromes and MLPA P036 Sub- early development. To identify rare variants in 57 CYP450 telomeres Mix 1 for screening of subtelomeric deletions/ genes we inspected exome sequence data, from publicly duplicationsin198patientswithautismspectrumdisorders. available ASD datasets, for loss-of-function (LoF) and To conﬁrm alternations discovered with MLPA P036 missenseSingleNucleotideVariants(SNVs)predictedtobe Subtelomeres Mix 1 we used MLPA P070 Subtelomeres detrimental by in silico tools (MAF<5%), as well as rare Mix 2B. (<1%) Copy Number Variants (CNVs). In 2674 ASD Results: We identiﬁed 12 autistic patients with sub- subjects, we found 516 LoF and missense SNVs, targeting microscopic aberrations. There were 2 patients with sub- 54 CYP450 genes, most frequently in CYP2A13, CYP1A1, telomeric deletion at the 14q and 2q regions respectively. CYP2D6 and CYP4B1. Additionally, we identiﬁed 135 Two patients had the same deletion at the 1p36.33 region. CNVs targeting 24 CYP450 genes in 3030 ASD indivi- One patient had a submicroscopic deletion at the 6q region duals.CYP2D6wasexclusivelytargetedbyCNVsin13out and duplication at the 13q region simultaneously. Two of 3030 ASD-subjects, while CYP4X1 was signiﬁcantly patients had the submicroscopic deletions at the 4q region. more frequently targetedbyCNVsinASD cases (22/3030; Three duplications were detected at 3p, 9p, and 17p11.2 0.72%) than controls (2/9649; 0.02%). CYP2D6 metabo- regions. Two patients were with deletion at the 8p and lizes most psychoactive drugs, while CYP1A1 acts on 22q11.21 regions respectively. polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and CYP4X1 is Conclusions:Thepresentstudyshowsthattheincidence involved in the metabolism of endocrine-disrupting chemi- of a submicroscopic aberrations detected by MLPA in cals (e.g. phthalates and bisphenol A). Early exposure to autisticpatientsisapproximately6%.MLPAisarapidand neurotoxic phthalates, bisphenol A and PAHs has been cost effective method for detection of genomic imbalances previously associated with ASD risk, and here we provide in patients with autism spectrum disorders. evidence for an effect of gene-environmental exposure D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. H. Kathom: None. T. interaction mediated by CYP450 gene variants. Delchev: None. S. Bichev: None. J.X. Santos: None. A.R. Marques: None. H. Marti- niano: None. J. Vilela: None. C. Rasga: None. G. Oli- P09.020C veira: None. A.M. Vicente: None. Rare variants targeting genes that encode for cytochromeP450enzymesinAutismSpectrumDisorder P09.021D Autism Spectrum Disorder: gene variants involved in J. X. Santos1,2, A. R. Marques1,2, H. Martiniano2, the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway J. Vilela1,2, C. Rasga1,2, G. Oliveira3,4,5, A. M. Vicente1,2 A. R. Marques1,2, H. Martiniano2,3, J. X. Santos1,2, 1National Health Institute Doutor Ricardo Jorge, Lisbon, J. Vilela1,2, C. Rasga1,2, G. Oliveira4,5, L. Romão6,2, Portugal, 2BioISI - Biosystems & Integrative Sciences A. M. Vicente1,2,7 Institute, Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Unidade de Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo 1Departamento de Promoção da Saúde e Doenças não (UNDA), Serviço do Centro de Desenvolvimento da Transmissíveis, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Doutor Criança, Centro de Investigação e Formação Clínica, Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2BioISI - Biosystems & Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Integrative Sciences Institute, Faculdade de Ciências, Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Institute for Biomedical Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Departamento Imaging and Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, de Informática, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5University Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 4Unidade de Clinic of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Neurodesenvolvimento e Autismo (UNDA), Serviço do Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal Centro de Desenvolvimento da Criança, Centro de Investigação e Formação Clínica, Hospital Pediátrico, Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) heritability estimates of Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Lisboa, 50-80% support the hypothesis that gene-environment Portugal, 5Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life interactions play a role in this pathology. ASD risk has Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade de Coimbra, been associated with early exposure to various xenobiotics Lisboa, Portugal, 6Departamento de Genética Humana, that are cleared in the liver by Cytochrome P450 enzymes. InstitutoNacionaldeSaúdeDoutorRicardoJorge,Lisboa,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1421 Portugal, 7Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, presence of repetitive and stereotyped behaviour. It is Portugal estimated that the prevalence of ASD is 1-2% in general population with the average male to female ratio 4-5:1. Genetic factors account for 50-80% of the familial risk of Research studies have shown that clinically relevant CNVs Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), but most of the genetic (copy number variants) invisible in karyotype analysis are determinants are still unknown and a role for other detected in 7-14% of patients with idiopathic ASD. regulatory mechanisms is likely. The nonsense-mediated We elected to use oligonucleotide microarrays (OGT) decay(NMD)pathwayisessentialtocontrolmRNAquality withaverageresolutionof30kpztoevaluateitsefﬁcacyfor and has an important role in the regulation of the identiﬁcation and characterization of CNVs in a cohort of transcriptome. Mutations in genes involved in the NMD 275 patients with ASDs. The analyses of the patients’ pathway,suchastheUPF3Bgene,acorecomponentofthis genomes were performed using exon-focused, high- pathway, were previously linked to ASD. In this study we resolution (180k) array design covering relevant 227 explored the potential role of other NMD factors in ASD. genes for autism research. We generated a list of 153 genes involved in the NMD Chromosomal microarray analysis revealed 71 non- pathway using AmiGO, Reactome and a systematic litera- polymorphic CNVs in 63 out of 280 (22.5%) patients with ture review. To identify potentially pathogenic variants in ASD. Pathogenicorlikelypathogenic CNVs weredetected theNMDgenes,weanalyzedwholeexomesequencingdata in24(8.6%)patients,whereasCNVswithunknownclinical (WES)datafrom1338ASDsubjects.Wealsosearchedfor signiﬁcance were identiﬁed in 41 (18.2 %) of cases. All of Copy Number Variants (CNVs) targeting NMD genes in the identiﬁed CNVs were submicroscopic in size (between ASD patients (n=3570) and checked their frequency in 15 kb and 3.1 Mb) and therefore could not have been controls (n=9649). detected by standard karyotype analysis. Due to high We identiﬁed 43 high impact variants in28 NMDgenes, resolution of the selected microarray, it was possible to including the UPF3B and ACE, two genes previously identify 24 CNVs that could not have been detected using implicated in ASD. Importantly, 11 were novel candidate the clinical microarrays (OGT, 60k). Our study further genes that carry loss-of-function and missense (deleterious conﬁrmedthepotentialofaCGHinelucidatingtheetiology and damaging) variants withafrequency of1 to5% inthis of ASDs, demonstrated by the identiﬁcation of two novel ASDdataset.Additionally,5NMDgeneswerefoundtobe genes: LRRTM4 and DOCK1 as candidate for ASDs. targeted by CNVs in 12 ASD subjects but none of the B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik: None. I. Plaskota: None. controls. M. Kędzior: None. E. Obersztyn: None. A. Kutkowska- The discovery of 33 NMD genes that are intriguing Kaźmierczak: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. N. Braun- candidates for ASD in large patient genomic datasets sup- Walicka: None. J. Castañeda: None. A. Barczyk: None. ports the involvement of the NMD pathway in ASD A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska: None. K. Czerska: None. pathophysiology. B. Nowakowska: None. A.R. Marques: None. H. Martiniano: None. J.X. Santos: None. J. Vilela: None. C. Rasga: None. G. Oli- P09.024C veira: None. L. Romão: None. A.M. Vicente: None. Genetic determinants for social skill training outcomes in autism spectrum disorder P09.022A Application of oligonucleotide array CGH in 280 D. Li1,2, I. Rabkina1,2, S. Stamouli1,2, H. Jiao3, patients with autism spectrum disorder M. Becker1,2, U. Jonsson1,2,4, N. Choque-Olsson1,2,5, S. Bölte1,2, K. Tammimies1,2 B. Wiśniowiecka-Kowalnik1, I. Plaskota1, M. Kędzior1, E. Obersztyn1, A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, A. Pietrzyk1, 1CenterofNeurodevelopmentalDisorders(KIND),Division N. Braun-Walicka1, J. Castañeda1, A. Barczyk1, of Neuropsychiatry, Department of Women and Children's A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska2, K. Czerska2, Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Child B. Nowakowska1 andAdolescentPsychiatry,CenterforPsychiatryResearch, Stockholm County Council, Stockholm, Sweden, 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska 2MEDGEN, Warsaw, Poland Institutet, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Neuroscience, Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Uppsala AutismSpectrumDisorders(ASD)isaheterogenousgroup University, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Department of Clinical ofneurodevelopmentaldisorderscharacterizedbyproblems Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden in social interaction and communication as well as the1422 Introduction: Social skill group training (SSGT) is one of We identiﬁed this subject in a previous study where we themostcommoninterventionsforchildrenandadolescents observed signiﬁcant changes in the single-channel inositol with autism spectrum disorder(ASD). Individualresponses triphosphate (IP3) receptor kinetics of ASD ﬁbroblasts via to SSGT vary and limited clinical predictors exist for the “optical patch-clamp” and found that this feature could be treatment. visualized with a high-throughput Fluorometric Imaging Material and Methods: Therefore, we performed a Plate Reader (FLIPR) screening assay as a decrease in detailed genetic characterization using genotyping, CNV calcium release from the ER. This release was below the calling and exome sequencing of autistic individuals from lower limit of controls in >75% of ASD subjects, but one of the largest randomized clinical trial for SSGT and uniquelyhighinan18-yearoldautisticfemaleatalevelfar analyzedtheassociationbetweengeneticfactorsandSSGT exceeding the upper limit of controls, nearing levels treatment outcome. Identiﬁed rare copy number variations obtained with ionomycin, an ionophore. (CNVs) were prioritized and polygenic risk score (PRS) To assess the molecular basis of this ﬁnding, we com- was calculated from ASD, education attainment (EA) and pleted a transcription analysisto compare expression levels attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) based on of calcium signaling-related genes in ﬁbroblast-derived different p-value thresholds (Pt < 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1). RNA from this subject to those of two controls and two Results: Individuals who carried large CNVs (> 500kb) typical autism cases. The subject’s transcriptome showed showed signiﬁcant worse outcome at 12 weeks post- increasedexpression(>5sd)ofgenesincludingtheATP2A3 treatment (β = 15.4, p = 0.017) and 3-months follow-up calcium pump and purinergic receptors, and extremely low (β = 14.2, p = 0.028). In addition, inferior outcomes were expression (>24sd) of VDAC2, a mitochondrial calcium implicated for individuals with higher PRS for ASD (Pt = uptake channel. These ﬁndings corroborate suggestions of 0.5: β = 6.5, p = 0.018) and ADHD (Pt 1.0: β = 6.7, p = mitochondrial dysfunction in her clinical biochemical 0.015) at follow-up treatment. Currently, we are analyzing assays and are extended with Seahorse XFp assays. exome sequencing data from the same 205 individuals and R.L. Nguyen: None. P. Flodman: None. M. Smith: then combining different rare and common genetic variant None. J.J. Gargus: None. data carriers together. Conclusion: Autistic individuals with higher genetic P09.026A burden for the disorder, including large rare CNVs and Establishing genotype-phenotype associations for ASD higher load of PRS, have different beneﬁts of SSGT com- pared with individuals with lower genetic risk. Our results A. C. G. Ilhéu, M. Asif, F. M. Couto can aid in personalized intervention modiﬁcations for ASD in the future. LASIGE, Lisbon, Portugal D. Li: None. I. Rabkina: None. S. Stamouli: None. H. Jiao: None. M. Becker: None. U. Jonsson: None. N. Genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity of Autism Spec- Choque-Olsson: None. S. Bölte: Other; Modest; Huber/ trum Disorder (ASD) has hindered the establishment of Hogrefe. K. Tammimies: None. genotype-phenotype associations. Herein, we presented a novel approach that integrates semantic similarity and P09.025B unsupervisedmachinelearningmethodstodissecttheASD Evidence for altered calcium signaling and altered genotypic heterogeneity and to identify phenotypic mani- mitochondrial function in an autism case study festations of ASD genetic variants. This approach was appliedtocopynumbervariants(N=6650),disrupting3998 R. L. Nguyen, P. Flodman, M. Smith, J. J. Gargus genes from 1119 ASD patients. Functional similarities among genes were computed using Resnik semantic University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States similarity measure. Semantic similarity score, ranging from 0 to 1 represents the functional similarity between two Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of neurodeve- genes, where 1 represents identical genes while score 0 lopmental disorders characterized by deﬁcits in social reﬂects functionally dissimilar genes. Agglomerative hier- interaction, communication, and stereotypic behaviors. archical clustering of the computed gene similarity matrix While its etiology is unknown, the large assemblage of identiﬁed four different clusters of functionally related risk variants impacting calcium ion channels and signaling genes. Silhouette analysis indicated that clusters were proteins suggest that a functional disruption of this compact and consistent (average Silhouette value=0.31). signaling hub may be involved in ASD pathogenesis. In The genes (N=519)ofcluster 1was morerelevanttoASD this study, we evaluate how such risk variants exert their asthey wereenrichedfor Cell adhesionmolecules (CAMs) deleterious effects in a unique ASD case. (adjusted p-value=0.00001) and Axon guidance (adjustedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1423 p-value=0.02) pathways, which are known to be strongly differentiating neurons. Transcriptome analysis revealed associated with ASD. Cluster 1 genes were also most dysregulation of genes involved in the synaptic vesicle signiﬁcantly enriched for Schizophrenia Human Phenotype cycle and single-cell RNA-sequencing indicated an imbal- Ontology (HPO) term, which is a co-occurring condition ance in excitatory-inhibitory neuronal populations. Conse- with ASD. The other three clusters were not enriched for quently, we study synapse morphology and spontaneous ASD related HPO terms. The results indicated that ﬁring rates of excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Moreover, phenotypic-genotypic associations can established for we observed neuron subtype-speciﬁc upregulation of WNT ASDbyreducingitsgenotypicheterogeneityi.e.clustering signaling pathway components. of functionally similar genes. However, to associate these Conclusions: We provide strong evidence that CASK clusters with phenotype, further efforts are required to mutations lead to perturbed neurotransmission through enrich HPO resource. (Grant reference: PTDC/CCI-BIO/ dysregulation of synapse vesicle trafﬁcking and differential 28685/2017) distribution of neuronal populations. Our results can guide A.C.G.Ilhéu:None.M.Asif:None.F.M.Couto:None. drugdevelopmentandaidinunderstandingthepathological spectrum of CASK mutations. P09.027B M. Becker: None. F. Mastropasqua: None. J.P. Reis- Resolving effects of CASK mutations in children with ing: None. I. Rabkina: None. L. Ballenberger: None. M. neurodevelopmental disorders Kele: None. C. Willfors: None. E. Herlenius: None. S. Bölte: None. B.M. Anderlid: None. A. Falk: None. K. M. Becker1, F. Mastropasqua1, J. P. Reising2, Tammimies: None. I. Rabkina1, L. Ballenberger1, M. Kele3, C. Willfors1, E. Herlenius2, S. Bölte1, B. M. Anderlid4, A. Falk3, P09.029D K. Tammimies1 Implicating genetic risk variants for circadian rhythm and sleep trait difﬁculties in individuals with autism 1Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (KIND), spectrum disorder Department ofWomen's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden, 2Department of Women’s and Z. Schmilovich1,2, R. Tesfaye1,2, G. Huguet3,4, A. Dionne- Children’s Health, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden, Laporte1, O. Diallo1, B. Chaumette2,5,6, S. Jacquemont3,4, 3Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, M. Elsabbagh1,2, P. A. Dion1,2, G. A. Rouleau1,2 Sweden, 4Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Solna, Sweden 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, Montreal, QC, Introduction:MutationsintheCASKgenecausearangeof Canada, 3CHU Sainte-Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada, childhood neurodevelopmental disorders such as micro- 4Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, cephalywithpontineandcerebellarhypoplasia(MICPCH), 5Université Paris Descartes; Bio Sorbonne Paris Cité; epilepsy, developmental delay and autism. CASK, located INSERM, Laboratoire de Physiopathologie des Maladies on Xp11.4, plays a role in neuronal differentiation and Psychiatriques, Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, synapse function. The molecular consequences of CASK UMR894,GDR3557-InstitutdePsychiatrie,Paris,France, mutations have not been studied in human neurons. Our 6Centre Hospitalier Sainte-Anne, Service hospitalo- projectaimstoelucidatethedownstreameffectsofdifferent universitaire, GHU Paris Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, CASK mutations using patient-derived induced pluripotent Paris, France stem cells (iPSCs). Materials and Methods: Skin cells from two patients, Introduction:Autismspectrumdisorder(ASD)isalargely onefemalewithsevereMICPCHandonemalewithautism, hereditary neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by withdifferentCASKmutationswereprogrammedtoiPSCs difﬁculties in social interaction and communication, and and further differentiated to functional neurons. Bulk and restricted and repetitive behaviour. Sleep is disturbed in up single-cell RNA-sequencing was performed to identify to80%ofaffected youthswithASD.Genesunderlyingthe molecular phenotypes and guide morphological and func- circadian rhythm are proposed to elucidate sleep and other tionalassessmentofneuronalpathologyincomparisonwith timing problems in individuals with ASD. Our ﬁrst aim control iPSCs. investigates whether copy-number variants(CNVs)encom- Results: A splice-site mutation in the ASD patient passing core circadian clock genes, circadian pathway decreases wild-type CASK mRNA and a tandem duplica- genes, and sleep trait candidate genes, detected from tion of two CASK exons is expressed in the MICPCH previous large genome-wide association studies, are patient. The mutations reduce CASK protein levels in1424 signiﬁcantly overrepresented in ASD individuals compared type nucleolin; B. mutant nucleolin with the same C- to their unaffected siblings. terminal sequence predicted for the autism proband; C. Material and Methods: We used microarray data from truncation at Gly664. We co-stained with nucleophosmin probandswithASD(n=2926)andtheirunaffectedsiblings antibodies to show co-localization. Real time ﬂuorescent (n=2434) from the Simons Simplex Collection (SSC). recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) was used to study CNVs were called, validated, and subsequently ﬁltered effects on kinetics/binding dynamics. using established pipelines and detection algorithms Results: we have shown that mutant nucleolin mis- (PennCNV, QuantiSNP, SnipPeep). localizes from the nucleolus tothe nucleoplasm.Moreover, Results: Fisher’s exact test reveal that CNVs encom- aconstructwithanonsensemutationatthesameresidue,p. passed in core circadian clock genes, circadian pathway Gly664*, shows a very similar effect on the location of the genes, and sleep trait candidate genes are signiﬁcantly NCL protein, thus conﬁrming the presence of the nucleolar overrepresented in probands with ASD in comparison to location signal of NCL protein in this region. FRAP shows their unaffected siblings (p=0.003; Odds ratio 1.6; CI95% signiﬁcant changes in the kinetics and mobility of mutant [1.2 ; 2.3]). NCL protein in the nucleoplasm. Conclusions: These preliminary results are the ﬁrst to Conclusions: Several other studies have also reported de implicate a broad network of sleep-related genes in the novo mutations in NCL in ASD or neurodevelopmental dis- etiology of ASD. Using whole-exome sequencing (WES) orders.AlteredmislocalizationanddynamicsofmutantNCL data from the SSC, future investigations will evaluate the (p.G664Glufs*70/ p.G664*) may have relevance to the etio- representationofprobands’SNPswithinsleep-relatedgenes pathlogy of NCL-related neurodevelopmental phenotypes. in comparison to their unaffected siblings. Furthermore, T.I. Sheikh: None. N. Vasli: None. M. Ayub: None. R. SNP-set Kernel Association Test (SKAT) using probands’ Sasanfar: None. J.B. Vincent: None. WESandcorrespondingphenotypicsleepobservationswill identify candidate SNPs that associate signiﬁcantly with P09.031B disturbed sleep traits in individuals with ASD. Screening of ataxia samples reveals potentially Z. Schmilovich: None. R. Tesfaye: None. G. Huguet: pathogenicknownandnovelvariantsinATMandSACS None. A. Dionne-Laporte: None. O. Diallo: None. B. and likely to reveal novel genes and variants associated Chaumette:None.S.Jacquemont:None.M.Elsabbagh: with autosomal recessive ataxia None. P.A. Dion: None. G.A. Rouleau: None. N. Kaya1, M. Al-Muhaizea2, R. Almass1, M. Alsagob1, P09.030A F. BinHumaid1, H. AlDhalaan2, L. AlQuait1, Heterozygous de novo truncating mutation of nucleolin L. Aldosary1,3, A. Alyousef1,3, H. Jaber1,3, in an ASD individual disrupts its nucleolar localization M. M. AlRasheed1,3, M. Aldosary1, D. Colak4 T. I. Sheikh1, N. Vasli2, M. Ayub3, R. Sasanfar4, 1Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital J. B. Vincent1 and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and 1Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3College of Canada, 2Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Canada, 3Queen’s University,, Kingston, ON, Canada, 4Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scientiﬁc 4University of Massachusetts Memorial Hospital, Computing, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Worcester, MA, United States Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Introduction: Nucleolin is a major nucleolar protein, Introduction: Autosomal recessive ataxias (ARAs) repre- playing a critical role in multiple processes, including sent a heterogeneous group of rare neurological disorders ribosome assembly and maturation, chromatin decondensa- involving both the central and peripheral nervous system tion, and pre-rRNA transcription. Due to its diverse encountered in various ethnic groups. Here we report functions, nucleolin’s role has been frequently implicated patients from 14 unrelated consanguineous families in pathological processes, including cancer and viral with ARA. infection. Here, we identiﬁed a de novo frameshifting indel Materials and Methods: Patients were thoroughly mutation,p.Gly664Glufs*70throughwholeexomesequen- examined by neurologists, radiologist, and evaluated and cing of an autism spectrum disorder trio.. referred to gene testing by medical geneticists. Diagnostic Materials and Methods: We transfected mammalian targeted gene panels as well as whole exome sequencing cells with GFP-tagged constructs encoding either A. wild (WES) coupled with autozygosity mapping wereAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1425 performed. Supplementary or conﬁrmatory Sanger sequen- Introduction: The Spanish Undiagnosed Rare Diseases cing was done together with family segregation analysis. Program (SpainUDP) performs extended genetic analyses Brainmagneticresonanceimaging(MRI)weretakenaspart and deep phenotyping to get a deﬁnite diagnosis in rare of radiological exam. syndrome cases. We present the case of a 3-year-old male Results: Among the affected individuals, eight patients with severe generalized hypotonia and muscle weakness were diagnosed with carrying two separate mutations (a together with neurodevelopmental delay. He presents reported deletion and a novel compound heterozygous) in microcephaly and dysmorphic features highlighting micro- ATM.AffectedsfromFamily2,3,and4harboradeletionin retrognathy, low-set ears and hypertelorism. ATM assumingly a founder mutation with an estimated age MaterialsandMethods:Trio-basedexomeanalysiswas of ~879 years. Among the cohort two families were found carried out by using Nextera Truseq Rapid Enrichment kit to carry SACS variants. One was already reported as a and sequenced in NextSeq500 (Illumina). mutation and the other one is novel and likely to be Results: The exome analysis revealed a novel mutation pathogenic. Rest of the families were negative for any consisting on a small de novo 30-bp deletion in exon 9 of known ataxia related genes and variants. AUTS2 gene (Autism susceptibility candidate 2, Conclusions: Our iterative ﬁltering of WES revealed OMIM:607270),whichallowedthediagnosisofthispatient severalnovelcandidategenesinthesefamilies.Ourstudyis as AUTS2 Syndrome or Mental Retardation, autosomal likely to discover previously unknown ARA genes. This dominant 26 (OMIM:615834). AUTS2 gene is involved in study was funded by the grant (No. 14-MED2007-20 to N. the development of neurological disorders. Alterations of K.) from National Plan for Science, Technology and Inno- AUTS2 gene were described as a result of genomic rear- vation program (NSTIP/KACST). rangements, although large copy number variations and N. Kaya: None. M. Al-Muhaizea: None. R. Almass: intragenic deletions or mutations have also been described None. M. Alsagob: None. F. BinHumaid: None. H. to cause this syndrome. It is noteworthy that the deletion AlDhalaan:None.L.AlQuait:None.L.Aldosary:None. found in this patient included the transcription start site of A. Alyousef: None. H. Jaber: None. M.M. AlRasheed: theshortisoformofthegene,whichplaysanimportantrole None. M. Aldosary: None. D. Colak: None. inbraindevelopment.Thegeneexpressionanalysisshowed that the deletion causes reduction inthe level of expression P09.032C not only of the short isoform but also of the complete Novel mutation causing AUTS2 síndrome. A de novo transcript of the gene. small deletion affecting the transcription start site of Conclusions: This case helps in establishing the AUTS2 short isoform genotype-phenotype correlation adding more evidence to theroleofmutationsspeciﬁcallyaffectingtheshortisoform B.Martinez-Delgado1,2,E.López1,2,J.Lara3,S.Monzón4, for the development of a severe phenotype. I. Cuesta4, G. Gómez-Mariano1, V. Aquino1, B. Martinez-Delgado: None. E. López: None. J. Lara: C. Rodríguez-Martín1, A. Damián1, I. Gonzalo1, None. S. Monzón: None. I. Cuesta: None. G. Gómez- B. Baladrón1, R. Cazorla3, G. Iglesias3, E. Román3, Mariano:None.V.Aquino:None.C.Rodríguez-Martín: P. Ros3, P. Tutor5, S. Mellor5, C. Jiménez6, None.A.Damián:None.I.Gonzalo:None.B.Baladrón: M.J.Cabrejas7,E.González7,F.J.Alonso1,E.Bermejo- None. R. Cazorla: None. G. Iglesias: None. E. Román: Sánchez1,2, M. Posada1,2 None.P.Ros:None.P.Tutor:None.S.Mellor:None.C. Jiménez: None. M.J. Cabrejas: None. E. González: 1InstitutodeInvestigacióndeEnfermedadesRaras.Instituto None.F.J.Alonso:None.E.Bermejo-Sánchez:None.M. deSaludCarlosIII,Majadahonda,Madrid,Spain,2CIBER Posada: None. de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario Puerta de P09.033D Hierro., Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain, 4Bioinformatics Comprehensive genetic analysis of whole genome Unit. Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, sequencing data from 108 individuals of 8 Spain, 5Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital multigenerational spanish families affected with bipolar Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, disorder Spain, 6Servicio de Neurología. Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain, 7Servicio S.B.Fischer1,2,C.K.Y.Ng3,4,M.Fink5,C.S.Reinbold1,2, de Bioquímica Clínica. Hospital Universitario Puerta de A. Maaser6, F. Streit7, S. H. Witt7, J. Guzman-Parra8, Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain G. Orozco-Diaz9, G. Auburger10, M. Albus11, M. Borrmann-Hassenbach11, M. J. González8, S. Gil- Flores12,F.J.Cabaleiro-Fabeiro13,F.DelRíoNoriega14,1426 F. Perez-Perez15, J. Haro-González16, F. Rivas17, geneset/pathwayanalysisfortheresultinggenesusingIPA F.Mayoral17,S.Herms1,2,6,M.Rietschel7,M.M.Nöthen6, and ConsensusPathDB. In addition to that we conducted P. Hoffmann1,2,6, A. J. Forstner6,1,18, S. Cichon2,6,19 Polygenic Risk Score analysis in the subset of the 8 families. 1Human Genomics Research Group, Department of In our analysis we focused on rare variants with a minor Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, allele frequency below 1% (ExAC database). Our ﬁrst 2Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University analysisisan“extendedexome”analysisofWGSdata.We Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3Institute of Pathology, applied a narrow analysis model to identify overlapping, UniversityHospitalBasel,Basel,Switzerland,4Department rare, co-segregating variants in the affected individuals in of Biomedicine, Hepatology Laboratory, University of one family which are not shared by healthy individuals Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 5Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, withinthesamefamily.Additionallyweappliedananalysis Switzerland, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University of model for incomplete penetrance. In total we identiﬁed 3 Bonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, proteintruncatingand9missensevariants.PRSanalysesin Bonn, Germany, 7Department of Genetic Epidemiology in the families show very diverse risk proﬁles for healthy and Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, University affected individuals. Gene set enrichment analyses mainly Medical Center Mannheim/University of Heidelberg, highlight immunological genes. Mannheim, Germany, 8Department of Mental Health, S.B. Fischer: None. C.K.Y. Ng: None. M. Fink: A. Institute of Biomedicine IBIMA, University Hospital of Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Novartis Malaga, Malaga, Spain, 9Unidad de Gestión Clínica del Pharma AG. C.S. Reinbold: None. A. Maaser: None. F. Dispositivo de Cuidados Críticos y Urgencias del Distrito Streit: None. S.H. Witt: None. J. Guzman-Parra: None. Sanitario Málaga - Coin-Gudalhorceedicine, Malaga, G. Orozco-Diaz: None. G. Auburger: None. M. Albus: Spain, 10Department of Experimental Neurology, Division None.M.Borrmann-Hassenbach: None.M.J.González: of Neurology, Goethe University Hospital, Frankfurt, None.S.Gil-Flores:None.F.J.Cabaleiro-Fabeiro:None. Germany,11IsarAmperKlinikumMünchenOst,kbo,Haar, F. Del Río Noriega: None. F. Perez-Perez: None. J. Germany, 12Department of Mental Health, University Haro-González: None. F. Rivas: None. F. Mayoral: Hospital of Reina Soﬁa, Cordoba, Spain, 13Department of None. S. Herms: None. M. Rietschel: None. M.M. Mental Health, University Hospital of Jaen, Jaen, Spain, Nöthen:None.P.Hoffmann:None.A.J.Forstner:None. 14Department of Mental Health, University Hospital of S. Cichon: None. Jerez de la Frontera, La Frontera, Spain, 15Department of Mental Health, University Hospital of Puerto Real, P09.036C Department of Mental Health, Cádiz, Spain, 16Department Bi-allelic MYORG variant carriers exhibit primary of Mental Health, Hospital Punta de Europa, Algeciras, brain calciﬁcation with a distinct phenotype Spain, 17Department of Psychiatry, Carlos Haya Regional University Hospital, Malaga, Spain, 18Centre for Human L. Grangeon1, D. Wallon1, C. Charbonnier2, O. Quenez2, Genetics, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany, A.Richard2,S.Rousseau2,C.Budowski1,T.LeBouvier3, 19Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine INM-1, Research C. Anne-Gaëlle4, V. Marie5, M. Aurélie5, R. Emmanuel5, Center Jülich, Jülich, Germany A. Mathieu6, T. Christine6, P. Favrole7, J. Antoine8, L. Defebvre9, X. Ayrignac10, P. Labauge10, J. Pariente11, Bipolar Disorder (BD) is a genetically complex neuropsy- M. Clanet11, D. Maltête12, A. Rovelet-Lecrux2, chiatric disorder with an estimated heritability of approxi- A. Boland13, J. Deleuze13, French PFBC study group, mately 70%. GWAS have shown that common risk factors T. Frebourg2, D. Hannequin1, D. Campion2, G. Nicolas2 substantially contribute to the development of BD and explain 25-38% of the phenotypic variance. Rare variants 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen with higher penetrance might explain some of the hidden University Hospital, Department of Neurology and CNR- heritability. A research strategy to identify such rare MAJ, Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized variantsisWholeGenomeSequencing(WGS)ofpromising Medicine, Rouen, France, 2Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, multigenerationalfamilieswithBD.Inthepresentstudywe Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department conducted WGS of 108 individuals in a set of 8 extended of Genetics and CNR-MAJ, Normandy Center for Genomic multigenerational andmultiply affected families ofSpanish andPersonalizedMedicine,Rouen,France,3Departmentof origin. Neurology, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France, WGS was performed PCR free at 30X. VCFs were cre- 4Department of Neurology, Nantes University Hospital, atedbasedonGATK´sbestpracticeguidelines.Wesetupa Nantes,France,5Départementdeneurologie,HôpitalPitié- WGS analysis workﬂow based on vcfR. We conducted a Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1427 Faculté de médecine de Sorbonne Université, Inserm radiological phenotype in the interface between PFBC and U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, ICM, F-75013, Sorbonne spino-cerebellar ataxias. Universites, Paris, France, 6Service de Neurologie, L. Grangeon: None. D. Wallon: None. C. Charbon- Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Hôpital de nier: None. O. Quenez: None. A. Richard: None. S. Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 7Department of Rousseau: None. C. Budowski: None. T. Le Bouvier: Neurology, Aix Hospital,, Aix en Provence, France, None. C. Anne-Gaëlle: None. V. Marie: None. M. Aur- 8Department of Neurology, Saint-Etienne University élie: None. R. Emmanuel: None. A. Mathieu: None. T. Hospital,SaintEtienne,France,9DepartmentofNeurology Christine: None. P. Favrole: None. J. Antoine: None. L. A, Salengro University Hospital, and EA4559, Lille, Defebvre: None. X. Ayrignac: None. P. Labauge: None. France,10DepartmentofNeurology,MontpellierUniversity J.Pariente:None.M.Clanet:None.D.Maltête:None.A. Hospital, Montpellier, France, 11Toulouse NeuroImaging Rovelet-Lecrux: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze: Center, Toulouse University, Inserm, Toulouse, France, None. T. Frebourg: None. D. Hannequin: None. D. 12DepartmentofNeurology,RouenUniversityHospitaland Campion: None. G. Nicolas: None. University of Rouen, France; INSERM U1239, Laboratory of Neuronal and Neuroendocrine Differentiation and P09.037D Communication, Rouen, France, 13Centre National de Identifying novel KIF1C-cerebellar ataxia variants by Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de exome sequencing and molecular characterization Biologie François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France M.Santos1,2,S.Carmona2,3,J.L.Neto2,4,J.Damásio1,5,6, J.Sequeiros1,5,7,C.Barbot5,P.Coutinho5,R.Guerreiro2,3, Introduction:PrimaryFamilialBrainCalciﬁcation(PFBC) J. Brás2,3, I. Alonso1,5 is a rare disorder with diverse neuropsychiatric expression. Mutations in four genes cause autosomal dominant PFBC 1UnIGENe, IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell (AD-PFBC). Recently, bi-allelic MYORG pathogenic var- Biology, i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em iants have been reported to cause autosomal Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Department of recessive PFBC. Neurodegenerative Disease and UK Dementia Research Methods: We screened MYORG by whole exome Institute, University College London, London, United sequencing in 29 unrelated probands negatively screened Kingdom, 3Center for Neurodegenerative Science, Van for the AD-PFBC genes, studied the clinical and radi- AndelResearch Institute, GrandRapids, MI,United States, ologicalfeaturesinbi-allelicpathogenicvariantcarriersand 4Present address: Instituto de Medicina Molecular João compared them to that of 102 AD-PFBC patients. Lobo Antunes, Univ. Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, 5CGPP, Results:Weidentiﬁed16patientsfrom11familieswitha IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, i3S - bi-allelicrareornovelpredicteddamagingvariant.MYORG Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Univ. patientsexhibitedahighclinicalpenetrance(medianageof Porto, Porto, Portugal, 6Neurology Department, Centro onset of 52 years, range: 21-62) with motor impairment at Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, the forefront. Dysarthria was the presenting sign in 11/16 7ICBAS - Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, patients. In contrast to AD-PFBC patients, 80% sympto- Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal matic patients eventually presented at least 4 of the fol- lowing 5 symptoms: dysarthria, cerebellar syndrome, gait Hereditarycerebellar ataxias areagroup ofneurodegenera- disorder, akinetic-hypertonic syndrome and pyramidal tivedisorderswithahighclinicalandgeneticheterogeneity, signs. In addition, MYORG patients exhibited the most characterized by incoordination of movement and speech, severe pattern of calciﬁcations. Strikingly, 12/15 presented and unsteady gait. Several genes have been identiﬁed as brainstem calciﬁcations in addition to extensive calciﬁca- causative of these diseases; however, several families tions in other brain areas (basal ganglia, cerebellum ± cor- remain without molecular diagnosis. tex). Among them, 8 patients exhibited pontine Inthisstudy,weusedhomozygositymappingandexome calciﬁcations, which were never observed in AD-PDFC. sequencing to study a cohort of Portuguese families with Finally, all patients exhibited cerebellar atrophy as con- autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia, identiﬁed during a ﬁrmed by MRI Voxel Based Morphometry. Of note, in systematic population-based survey. These analyses three families, the father carried small pallido-dentate cal- revealed two novel homozygous variants in KIF1C in two ciﬁcations, suggesting a putative phenotypic expression in families with spastic ataxia: a frameshift variant some heterozygous carriers. (c.393_396del, p.Ser131Argfs*13) and a splice site variant Conclusions: We conﬁrm MYORG as a novel major (c.1166-2A>G), both segregating with the disease and PFBC causative gene and identify a recognizable clinico- conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. Western blot analysis1428 showed that the frameshift variant, located in the motor H. Hu: None. K. Xu: None. D. Liu: None. H. Tang: domain, leads to a truncated protein that lacks most of the None. L. He: None. N. Li: None. KIF1C functional domains. We also demonstrated, using a minigene assay, that the splice variant abolishes the P09.039B acceptorsplicesite,activatinganewone8bpdownstream. TORCH-like encephalopathy due to de novo COL4A1 This change is predicted to cause a frameshift and a pre- mutation mature stop codon, thus leading to a truncated protein (p. Gly389Aspfs*27). A. Gerasimenko1, D. Héron1, T. Billette de Villemeur2, KIF1C encodes amember ofthe kinesin-3 family, which D. Rodriguez2, C. Garel3, E. Tournier-Lasserve4, are microtubule-based motor proteins. Variants in KIF1C F. Chalard3, M. Miné5, T. Coste3, C. Mignot1 have been previously associated with SPG58 and SPAX2, bothautosomal-recessivediseasescombiningspasticityand 1APHP, Department of Genetics, Armand-Trousseau and cerebellar signs. Our study revealed two novel KIF1C Pitié Salpêtrière hospital, Reference Center for Intellectuel variants in two families with a phenotype compatible with disability of Rare Causes, Paris, France, 2APHP, SPAX2. These variants probably cause KIF1C loss-of- Department of pediatric neurology, Armand-Trousseau function, supporting the role of intracellular trafﬁcking in hospital, Paris, France, 3APHP, Department of pediatric the pathogenesis of cerebellar ataxia. radiology, Armand-Trousseau hospital, Paris, France, M.Santos:None.S.Carmona: None.J.L.Neto:None. 4APHP, Department of molecular genetics, Lariboisière- J. Damásio:None. J. Sequeiros: None. C.Barbot: None. Fernand-Widal, Paris, France, 5APHP, Department of P.Coutinho:None.R.Guerreiro:None.J.Brás:None.I. molecular genetics, Lariboisière-Fernand-Widal hospital, Alonso: None. Paris, France P09.038A Cerebrovascular destructive lesions of the brain are well- In-depth genomic investigation reveals a wide spectrum known antenatal manifestations of COL4A1 pathogenic ofdeleteriousvariantsin120casesofidiopathiccerebral variants. These lesions include both limited porencephales palsy and wider lesions such as hydranencephaly and schizence- phaly, sometimes associated with intracranial calciﬁcation. H. HU1,2,3, K. XU4, D. LIU5, H. TANG4, L. HE4, N. LI1 Nature of the lesions depends on timing and anatomical extension of the vascular insufﬁciency. 1GuangzhouInstituteofPediatrics,GuangzhouWomenand We report the case of a girl born in Kazakhstan after Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou, China, prenatal suspicion of microcephaly. She received intensive 2Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China, careafterbirthandshowedinfantilespasmsat3months.At 3Zhengzhou University the third afﬁliated hospital, our ﬁrst examination at 9 months, she presented severe Zhengzhou, China, 4Department of Rehabilitation, development delay, tetrapyramidal involvement, marked Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, microcephaly and epilepsy. At 11 years, the girl was pro- Guangzhou, China, 5Co-innovation Center of foundly intellectually disabled and showed stable micro- Neuroregeneration, Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration cephaly at -7 SD. Initial brain imaging showed widespread of Jiangsu and Ministry of Education, Nantong University, ulegyria, incomplete gyration with major widening of the Nantong, China Sylvian ﬁssure and polymicrogyria, as well as band-like calciﬁcations. This suggested a TORCH infection. Cerebral palsy (CP) is a group of neurodevelopmental Analysis of the OCLN gene, responsible for Pseudo- disordersaffectingmovementandposture,inwhichtherole TORCH syndrome 1, revealed no variation. Cytomegalo- of genetic variation is yet to be fully established. Here we virus fetopathy was suspected since the virus was found in performcomprehensivegenetic analysisonacohortof120 theurine.Finally,targetedsequencingofCOL4A1revealed idiopathic CP families by integrating 35X whole-genome the de novo heterozygous p.Gly148Arg variant, typically sequencing, 500X whole-exome sequencing, 5000X mito- altering a Gly-X-Y motive of the collagen triple helix. chondrialgenomesequencing,andhigh-densitycytogenetic COL4A1 mutations should be considered in unproven microarray. We ﬁnd that up to 40% of idiopathic CP cases TORCH-like encephalopathies combining widespread vas- are attributed to de novo and inherited deleterious variants cularinsufﬁciencyofthefetal brain,gyrationabnormalities in a spectrum of genes, including novel candidate genes and calciﬁcations. such as TYW1 and GPAM, the dysfunctional copies of A.Gerasimenko:None.D.Héron:None.T.Billettede which are shown to cause abnormal neurodevelopment in Villemeur: None. D. Rodriguez: None. C. Garel: None. organismal models.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1429 E. Tournier-Lasserve: None. F. Chalard: None. M. J. Klar, J. Schuster, M. Sobol, L. Laan, A. Fatima, Miné: None. T. Coste: None. C. Mignot: None. G. Annerén, N. Dahl P09.040C Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, DevelopmentofacellularmodeltostudytheroleofCR1 Uppsala, Sweden in Alzheimer's disease Background: Down syndrome (DS) is a leading genetic F. Cardona1,2, J. Szymanski1,2, J. Pérez-Tur1,2,3 cause of intellectual disability and approximately 95% of patientswithDShaveafulltrisomy21(T21).Thisresultin 1UnitatdeGenèticaMolecular,InstitutodeBiomedicinade aglobaltranscriptionaldysregulationandstudiessuggestan Valencia, CSIC, Valencia, Spain, 2CIBERNED, Madrid, altered distributionofneuronalandglialcellsinDSbrains. Spain, 3Unidad mixta de Neurología y Genética, Instituto Methods: We established induced pluripotent stem cells de Investigación Sanitaria la Fe (IIS La Fe), Valencia, (iPSC) from a patient with full T21 and a healthy control Spain individual. The iPSCs were differentiated into neural cells for 30 days using an undirected protocol. Libraries was Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurode- prepared using the Chromium Single Cell 3’Reagent Kits generativedementia inthe elderly,affecting between 5 and v2 (10X Genomics), sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 PE (Illu- 10%ofthepopulationover65yearsofage, andincreasing mina) and analyzed using CellRanger V2.0 (10X Geno- its prevalence with age. The ratio of isoforms F and S of mics) and Monocle 2 (Trapnell Lab). CR1 (CD35), determined by the presence of some Results: Cluster analysis from euploid cells shows that haplotypes or variants, has been related to late onset AD. 63% correspond to radial glia, 6% tointermediate neuronal Particularly thesigniﬁcant presence ofthe long isoform (S) progenitorcells(nIPC),20%toneuronsand5%tovascular is related to a lower total amount of CR1, which leads to a and leptomeningeal cells (VLMCs). In contrast, the cluster worse elimination of the β-amyloid peptide (Aβ), greater analysis of T21 cells shows that 24% correspond to radial activationofthemicrogliaasaninﬂammatoryresponse,and glia, 5% nIPCs and only 4% neurons. Importantly, 56% of neuronal death. trisomic cells correspond to VLMCs, making this cluster Inthisworkwehavegeneratedamixedcellularmodelof predominant. neuroinﬂammation, using as a model the cell lines SH- Conclusion: In our model of T21 neurogenesis we SY5Y (neuron), 1321N1 (astrocyte) and HCM3 (micro- observe a reduced proportion of neuronal cells and an glia). The results shown that these co-cultures are able to increased proportion of glia cell. The formation of the activatetheglialcellswhentreatedwithlipopolysaccharide VLMCpopulationiniPSCneuralcellswithT21appearsto toxin (LPS) or Aβ, increasing the protein markers for each be continuous and with a differentiation trajectory distinct activated cell type. This cellular model also increases the from that of euploid cells consistent with DS brain expression of the genes of the complement complex pro- development. teins (CR1, C1q, C3 and C4) in response to these treat- Grant: This work was supported by the Swedish ments. Preliminary results alsosuggestthat thesilencingof Research Council (VR). CR1 in this model decreases neuronal viability with Aβ, J. Klar: None. J. Schuster: None. M. Sobol: None. L. pointing to the role of this protein in neuronal Laan: None. A. Fatima: None. G. Annerén: None. N. survival in AD. Dahl: None. Thismodelcouldbeausefultooltotesttheeffectofgene orpharmacologicaltherapiestoimprovetheresponsetoAβ P09.042A and neuroinﬂammation, thus improving neuronal Rare complex chromosome mosaic with two different survival in AD. chromosome-15 derived supernumerary marker Funding acknowledgement: GV/2018//166 and chromosomes in a boy with developmental delay and CIBERNED (group 209) behavioural abnormalities F. Cardona: None. J. Szymanski: None. J. Pérez- Tur: None. U. Heinrich1, M. Cohen1,2, S. Upheber2, I. Rost1 P09.041D 1Centre for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Single cell sequencing of iPSC neural cells from Down Martinsried, Germany, 2kbo Children's Centre, Munich, syndrome patients uncovers perturbed cell Germany differentiation1430 Case report: We report on 5 years old boy with global carriers develop dystonia. The underlying mechanisms of developmental delay, short attention span, lack of coopera- the reduced penetrance remain elusive. Maturing neurons tion, sleep disturbance, and microcephaly. He is the only generatedfrominducedpluripotentstemcells(iPSCs)could child of parents of Nepalese descent. serve as an in-vitro model to unravel penetrance-relevant Materials and Methods: Conventional karyotyping was mechanisms. performed using standard GTG banding technique. FISH Material and Methods: Human dermal ﬁbroblasts were analyseswereperformedonmetaphasespreadsaccordingto reprogrammed using non-integrating Sendai virus and the manufacturer’s speciﬁcations. For microarray analysis, iPSCs were cultivated on Matrigel with E8 and mTeSR CytoSure Constitutional 180K microarray was used. media. Neural differentiation of 32 iPSC lines into cortical Results: Chromosome analysis revealed four different neurons was achieved using dual SMAD inhibition, two cell lines: cell line I (28 %): normal karyotype; cell line II: neural rosette stages, and a dissociation step. Cortical neu- bisatellited supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC) (50 rons were harvested on day 44 of differentiation for gene %); cell line III: a different SMC (3 %); cell line IV: both expression analysis by quantitative PCR. SMC’s (19 %). The combined use of FISH probes and Results: In the 44-day old neuronal lines, THAP1 microarray analysis led to the following characterizations: expression was elevated in mutation carriers with p. the bisatellited marker chromosome as monocentric chro- Lys158Asnfs*23 and p.Ser21Cys mutations, but not in p. mosome 15 with no clue for euchromatin; the second Arg13His carriers. A trend of increased THAP1 expression marker chromosome as a complex ring chromosome 15 in affected compared to unaffected carriers was observed. with a 9,8 Mb duplication 15q11.2q13.3 including the Expression of TOR1A, another dystonia gene that possibly Prader-Willi-/Angelman syndrome critical region, together is regulated by the transcription factor THAP1, seemed with a 538 kb gain in band 15q11.2 (Burnside-Butler syn- unaltered. Furthermore, THAP1 expression was indepen- drome region) presumably in triplicated form. dentofaseeminglypenetrance-linkedpolymorphisminthe Conclusion: We present a patient with a partial pentas- KAT6A promotor, a region that loops to the THAP1 pro- omy 15q11.2/tetrasomy 15q11.2q13.3 mosaicism. Patients motor as shown by 4C analysis. with the recurrent chromosome 15q11-q13 duplication Conclusion:WeobservedhigherexpressionofTHAP1in syndrome are characterized by intellectual disability, sei- some mutation carriers compared to controls depending on zures, and behavioural abnormalities, while patients with a themutation,whichmaybeexplainedbytheautoregulation triplication 15q11-q13 have a more severe neurosycholo- of THAP1. Further, the THAP1 expression level might gical phenotype. Due to the mosaicism the further devel- correlate with the disease status. Future transcriptomic opment of our patient is hardly to predict making genetic proﬁlingwillshedlightondysregulatedsignalingpathways counseling a difﬁcult task. Besides, none of the modern resulting in DYT-THAP1 dystonia (FOR2488). NGS-based techniques is able to solve this case correctly. H. Baumann: None. M. Trilck-Winkler: None. M. U. Heinrich: None. M. Cohen: None. S. Upheber: Grosse: None. A. Muenchau: None. V. Kostic: None. C. None. I. Rost: None. Klein: None. F. Kaiser: None. P. Seibler: None. K. Lohmann: None. P09.043B Gene expression analysis in cortical neurons P09.044C differentiated from 32 induced pluripotent stem cell Diagnostic yield and clinical relevance of exome trio (iPSC) lines of THAP1 mutation carriers and controls analysis in patients with epilepsy H. Baumann1, M. Trilck-Winkler1, M. Grosse2, M. Martinez-Garcia, I. Diez, R. Perez-Carro, A. Muenchau1, V. Kostic3, C. Klein1, F. Kaiser2, S. Rosestone, E. Fernandez-Tabanera, C. Rodriguez, P. Seibler1, K. Lohmann1 I. Sanchez-Navarro, R. Sanchez-Alcudia, E. Mata, D. Rodriguez, N. Sanchez-Bolivar, M. Carcajona, 1InstituteofNeurogenetics,UniversityofLuebeck,Luebeck, P. Maietta, S. Alvarez Germany, 2Section of Functional Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Medical Department, NIMGenetics S.L., Madrid, Spain, Germany, 3Clinic of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Madrid, Spain University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia Introduction: Epilepsy is a chronic disorder characterized Introduction: Dystonia is a heterogeneous movement byrecurrentunprovokedseizures.Frequently,thesepatients disorder and can be caused by mutations in THAP1 have different type of seizure and may have other (DYT-THAP1). However, only ~50% of THAP1 mutation neurological symptoms. The goal of this study was toAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1431 identify the genetic causes and to establish the diagnostic responsible for 2-11 % of epilepsies. We present cohort of yield of trio analysis on patients with isolated seizures or 193patientswithepilepsy,bothchildrenandadults,divided with syndromic clinical presentations. in two groups - 49 patients with isolated epilepsy and 144 Patients and Methods: A cohort of 81 probands was patients with syndromic epilepsy (i.e. associated with sequenced by Trio whole exome sequencing. The median developmental delay, dysmorphic features etc). ArrayCGH agewas7yearsold.In78%oftheprobands,seizureswere platform SurePrint G3 ISCA 4x180 and 8x60 (Agilent described as part of a more complex phenotype. Genomic Technologies)wereusedfortheexaminations.Wedetected libraries were generated with Ion AmpliSeqTMor SureS- CNVs in 32/193 of patients (16.6 %): 16 deletions (50 %), electXTand sequenced by Ion ProtonTM/ S5TMXL or Nova- 12duplications(38%),onetriplication(3%)andmorethan Seq 6000. The data were processed using an “in house” one CNV were detected in three patients (9 %). 15 CNVs developed pipeline. werepathogenicandexplainingthephenotype,threeCNVs Results: A genetic diagnosis was obtained on 28 out of were probably pathogenic, two were benign and 12 were 81 patients, leading to a diagnostic yield of 35%. Among variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VOUS). Pathogenic and the identiﬁed variants the distribution was, 64% de novo, probably pathogenic CNVs were detected only in syndro- 18% homozygous, and 14% hemizygous, with a large mic patients. In patients with isolated epilepsy only VOUS proportion of missense variants (64%). Diagnostic yield of and benign variants were detected. Origin of variants was 42%, was obtained in the syndromic cases (n=63), identi- determined as maternal (20 %), paternal (13 %), de novo fying variants not previously reported in targeted analysis. (30 %) and was unknown in 37 % of cases. CNVs size In the cases with isolated seizures (n=22), the genetic ranged from 15 kb to 9 Mb. Except of CNVs located in diagnosis was only established in two cases, through the regions associated with known syndromes and epilepsy identiﬁcation of de novo variants in the genes COL4A3BP "hotspots", we detected new non-recurrent CNVs. Using and TBR1, previously associated to a more complex arrayCGH,weidentiﬁedCNVsasacauseofepilepsyin18/ phenotype. 144 syndromic patients (12.5 %). CNVs play an important Conclusions: Exome trio sequencing is a cost-effective role in aetiology of epilepsies. Therefore arrayCGH should strategy with a high diagnostic yield in syndromic patients be included into diagnostic algorithm as a ﬁrst-choice with epilepsy that enables a phenotypic broad-spectrum genetic method in patients with syndromic epilepsy. diagnosis. This approach contributes signiﬁcantly to the Supported by: 00064203, NF-CZ11-PDP-3-003-2014, 17- identiﬁcation of new candidate genes. 29423A M. Martinez-Garcia: None. I. Diez: None. R. Perez- H. Zůnová: None. T. Rašpličková: None. D. Novotná: Carro: None. S. Rosestone: None. E. Fernandez-Taba- None. M. Štolfa: None. M. Havlovicová: None. M. nera: None. C. Rodriguez: None. I. Sanchez-Navarro: Malíková:None.P. Tesner:None.J. Drábová:None.K. None. R. Sanchez-Alcudia: None. E. Mata: None. D. Štěrbová: None. P. Kršek: None. J. Zárubová: None. H. Rodriguez: None. N. Sanchez-Bolivar: None. M. Car- Krijtová: None. P. Marušič: None. M. Vlčková: None. cajona: None. P. Maietta: None. S. Alvarez: None. P09.047B P09.045D Howfarcanwego?Wholegenomesequencing,periodic CNVs in patients with epilepsy - Czech experience reanalysis and international collaborations expands our understanding of the causes of developmental and H. Zůnová1, T. Rašpličková1, D. Novotná1, M. Štolfa1, epileptic encephalopathy M. Havlovicová1, M. Malíková1, P. Tesner1, J. Drábová1, K. Štěrbová2, P. Kršek2, J. Zárubová3, H. Krijtová3, E. E. Palmer1,2, R. Sachdev3,2, R. Macintosh3, P. Marušič3, M. Vlčková1 T. Kandula2,3, A. Minoche4, C. Puttick4, V. Gayevskiy4, T. Roscioli3,5, M. Dinger2, L. Hesson6, C. Shoubridge7, 1DBMG, 2nd Faculty of Medicine Charles University and A. Drew4, R. Davis8,9,4, S. Kummerfeld4, M. Cowley10, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, A. Bye2,3, E. Kirk2,3 2Department od Paediactric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine Charles University and University Hospital 1GeneticsofLearningDisability(GoLD)Service,Waratah, Motol,Prague,CzechRepublic,3DepartmentofNeurology, Australia, 2University of New South Wales, Sydney, 2ndFacultyofMedicineCharlesUniversityandUniversity Australia, 3Sydney Children's Hospital, Sydney, Australia, Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic 4Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 5NeuRA, Sydney, Epilepsy is heterogeneous chronic neurological disorder Australia, 6Garvan Institute for Medical Research, Sydney, with prevalence 8/1000. Copy number variants (CNVs) are Australia, 7University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia,1432 8Kolling Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 1Montréal Neurological Institute, Montréal, QC, Canada, 9Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 2McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada, 3University of 10Children's Cancer Institute, Sydney, Australia Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, 4Montréal Neurological Institute, Montréal, ON, Canada Introduction:Thereisapressingclinicalneedtodetermine the molecular causes of DEE to guide management and Introduction: The genetic etiology of one of the most genetic counselling. Our trio exome sequencing (ES) study common movement disorders, essential tremor (ET), is not (2016-2017) had a high diagnostic yield (15/30: 50%), yet fully characterized. Currently, studies have focused on demonstrated cost-effectiveness and delineated novel investigating common or rare genetic variants but have yet geneticcausesofDEE;butcouldweimprovethediagnostic to investigate ET transcriptomes. yield further? Methods: To identify relevant pathways and genes, the Materials and Methods: Trio WGS (Illumina HiSeqX transcriptomeoftwocerebellarregions(dentatenucleusand platform)wasappliedto15individualsundiagnosedbyour cortex)derivedfrom16casesand16age-andsex-matched ES study and 16 individuals undiagnosed by massively- controls was interrogated by RNA sequencing. A genome- parallel sequencing panel. In-house platforms Seave, Mity, wide gene association study (GWGAS) was conducted ClinSV,IntromeandROHmerfacilitatedvariantannotation using1,778casesand5,376controlindividuals.Afterward, and ﬁltration and identiﬁcation of regions of homozygosity pathway enrichment was done using genes shown to be and mitochondrial, non-coding and structural variants. signiﬁcant after Bonferroni correction (P<2.7E-06) to nar- Collaborations were initiated to clarify pathogenicity of row down transcriptomic pathways. novel variants. Results: We identiﬁed several novel dysregulated genes Results: 8 additional diagnoses were made in the 15 including CACNA1A, a calcium voltage-gated channel individualsfromtheESstudy:5weredetectablebyESbut implicated in ataxia and reported to cause tremor in Cac- required collaborative clinical/functional studies to prove na1a-knockout mice. Furthermore, several pathways pathogenicity; 3 (20%) were genomic mechanisms unde- includingaxonguidanceandcalcium channel activity were tectable by ES (complex structural variants). 11 diagnoses signiﬁcantly enriched. The GWGAS also revealed a sig- were made in the 16 panel-negative individuals (68%): the niﬁcant enrichment across genes associated with calcium majority (n=10) in genes excluded from the panel, 1 was ion-regulated exocytosis of neurotransmitter. Finally, the missed for technical reasons. dentate nucleus and cerebellar cortex appeared to have Conclusions: An ES or WGS approach plus periodic different transcriptomes, supporting the notion of spatially reanalysis and international collaborations can result in a different transcriptomes across the cerebellum. cumulative diagnostic yield of over 75% for DEE. WGS Conclusions: The identiﬁcation of dysregulated path- canrobustlydetectstructuralvariants;ongoingresearchwill ways in post-mortem cerebellum from patients can increa- assist non-coding variant interpretation. Individuals ses our understanding of the pathogenesis for this undiagnosed after intensive genomic analysis often had understudied condition, which may reveal potential targets normal development prior to seizure onset, and lacked for therapeutic treatment. Calcium-related pathways were congenital anomalies and neurological progression: they shown to be relevant to ET and future studies should may have alternative causes such as somatic mosaicism or investigate the underlying mechanisms of this disruption. polygenic variants. Funding: NHMRC, NSW Health, We thank the participants for providing DNA and the Kinghorn Foundation Canadian Institutes of Health Research (#RN254517- E.E. Palmer: None. R. Sachdev: None. R. Macintosh: 332736). None.T.Kandula:None.A.Minoche: None.C.Puttick: C.Liao:None.F.Sarayloo:None.D.Rochefort:None. None.V.Gayevskiy:None.T.Roscioli:None.M.Dinger: F. Akçimen: None. A.D. Laporte: None. D. Spiegelman: None. L. Hesson: None. C. Shoubridge: None. A. Drew: None. A. Rajput: None. P.A. Dion: None. G.A. None. R. Davis: None. S. Kummerfeld: None. M. Cow- Rouleau: None. ley: None. A. Bye: None. E. Kirk: None. P09.049D P09.048C StudyofTTRfamilialamyloidpolyneuropathyinGreek Multi-omic approaches implicate dysregulated calcium patients pathways in essential tremor C.Kartanou1,M.Breza1,A.Papathoma2,T.Bagratouni2, C. Liao1,2, F. Sarayloo1,2, D. Rochefort1, F. Akçimen1,2, Z. Kontogeorgiou1, A. Georghiou3, P. Koutsou3, A.D.Laporte1,D.Spiegelman1,A.Rajput3,P.A.Dion4,2, K. Christodoulou3, M. Panas1, E. Kastritis2, G. Koutsis1, G. A. Rouleau1,2 G. Karadima1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1433 1Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, Signiﬁcant; Teva Pharmaceuticals, Genesis Pharma. Other; University of Athens Medical School, Eginition Hospital, Signiﬁcant; Novartis, Genesis Pharma, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Clinical Therapeutics, Teva Pharmaceuticals. G. Karadima: None. Alexandra Hospital National and Kapodistrian, University ofAthens,Athens,Greece,3NeurogeneticsDepartment,The P09.050A Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus InvestigationoftheroleofGRNupstream openreading frames in frontotemporal dementia Introduction: Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is a rare, autosomal dominant, neurodegenerative disorder, A. Frydas1,2, E. Wauters1,2, B. Heeman1,2, J. v. d. Zee1,2, usually associated with mutations in the transthyretin gene C. V. Broeckhoven1,2 (TTR). The most common mutation worldwide is p. Val30Met. The present study aims to identify TTR gene 1Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases, Center for Molecular mutations in Greek patients and attempt genotype- Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Biomedical Sciences, phenotype correlations. University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium Materials and Methods: We studied 16 Greek indivi- duals belonging to 10 families. These included 8 patients Introduction: Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the referred for suspected FAP, 6 asymptomatic relatives of secondmostcommonsubtypeofdementiaregardingpeople patients,and2patientswithanFAPclinicalphenotypethat under 65 years old. It is featured by degeneration of the were,however,originallyreferredforCharcot-Marie-Tooth frontal and temporal lobes of the brain and leads to (CMT) gene testing and selected from a group of 800 sus- behavioral and language impairments. Upstream open pected CMT patients, negative for CMT1A. The molecular reading frames (uORFs) play an important role in control- diagnosis included screening for p.Val30Met with restric- ling protein expression. Variants in these elements have tion fragment length polymorphism analysis (RFLP) and been linked with certain diseases. In this project, we will Sanger sequencing of the entire coding region of the investigate the role of uORFs in granulin (GRN)- TTR gene. associated FTD. Results: The p.Val30Met mutationwas detected in3 out Materials and Methods: Targeted resequencing of of10index-cases(30%).Intheremainingprobands,Sanger uORF-harboring regions of GRN by design of an amplicon sequencing identiﬁed the p.Cys10Arg, p.Arg34Gly, p. target ampliﬁcation assay (Agilent, https://www.agilent. Arg54Thr, p.Ala81Thr, p.Glu89Gln, p.Glu89Lys and p. com) was performed. Screening was done in the Belgian Val94Ala mutations. The p.Val30Met cases had the typical cohort, consisting of 389 patients and 415 control early-onset neuropathic phenotype, without early cardio- individuals. myopathy. The remaining patients had later onset neuro- Results: Investigation of ribosome proﬁling databases pathyandconcomitantcardiacamyloidosis.Intwoofthese and literature allowed us to identify four uORFs for GRN. patients the presenting symptom was exertional dyspnea. Preliminary screening in the Belgian cohort revealed 2 Conclusions:The p.Val30Metmutationisafrequentbut variants present within a GRN uORF. First variant (2/415 not universal cause of FAP in the Greek population. It controls, 1/389 patients) is within a splice region and its seems to present with the early-onset classic phenotype. presence could promote differential splicing by the spli- Other mutations exhibit more varied phenotypes with later ceosome machinery. The second variant (3/415 controls, 2/ onset. Interestingly, some FAP patients are hidden within 389 patients) leads to a change in the amino acid sequence the large group of “suspected CMT”. of the uORF close to the termination codon, which could C. Kartanou: None. M. Breza: None. A. Papathoma: inﬂuence ribosomal occupancy, thus affecting translations None.T.Bagratouni:None.Z.Kontogeorgiou:None.A. of the downstream protein. Georghiou: None. P. Koutsou: None. K. Christodoulou: Conclusions: These variants could act as potential None. M. Panas: None. E. Kastritis: B. Research Grant modiﬁers, affecting GRN serum levels or age at onset. (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and Therefore,functionalvalidationofthesevariantscouldlead pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; to the development of biomarkers and provide novel Janssen, Amgen. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers mechanistic insights in FTD. bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Janssen, A.Frydas:None.E.Wauters:None.B.Heeman:None. Celgene, Genesis, Takeda, Millennium-Takeda, Pharma- J.V.D. Zee: None. C.V. Broeckhoven: None. cyclics. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Janssen, Amgen, Takeda, Prothena. G. Koutsis: B. Research Grant P09.051 (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and bdetection of gene dosage alterations in patients with pending grants as well as grants already received); spinocerebellar disease using an exon-dense snp array1434 B. Quintans1, F. Barros2, I. Quintela3, A. Ordóñez- P09.053D Ugalde4, C. Castro-Fernández1, P. Blanco-Arias2, Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia with ﬁrst D. García-Estévez5, I. Sanz6, M. Arias7, M. Sobrido1 homozygous duplication in GRID2 and review of the literature 1NeurogeneticsGroup,InstitutodeInvestigaciónSanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Fundación Pública A. Ceylan1, E. Acar Arslan2, H. Erdem3, H. Kavus4, Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, M. Arslan5, H. Topaloğlu6 Spain, 3Centro Nacional de Genotipado, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 1Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Ankara Ataturk 4Laboratorio Biomolecular, Hospital José Carrasco Training and Research Hospital, Department of Medical Arteaga IESS, Cuenca, Ecuador, 5Department of Genetics,Ankara,Turkey,2KaradenizTechnicalUniversity, Neurology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Faculty of Medicine, Department of Child Neurology, Ourense, Ourense, Spain, 6Department of Neurology, Trabzon, Turkey, 3Ankara Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit Hospital Nuestra Señora de Sonsoles, Ávila, Spain, Training and Research Hospital, Department of Medical 7Department of Neurology, Complexo Hospitalario Genetics,Ankara,Turkey,4GulhaneTrainingandResearch Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain Hospital,DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Ankara,Turkey, 5Gulhane Training and Research Hospital, Department of AIMS: In spite of NGS many patients remain without a Child Neurology, Ankara, Turkey, 6Hacettepe University, diagnosis. In some cases this might be due to undetected Faculty of Medicine, Department of Child Neurology, pathogenic copy number variants. We evaluated a high- Ankara, Turkey density SNP-array to assess dosage abnormalities in ataxia and spastic paraplegia. Introduction: Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias are Methods: 10 patients were genotyped with CytoScan_- characterized by abnormal structure of the cerebellum and XON_array (ThermoFisher). The following deletions had spinalcord.GRID2isinvolvedinataxiathroughbothloss- beenpreviouslydetectedbyMLPA:SPASTexon1(1.52kb, of-functionmutationsandgain-of-functionmutationsdueto N=2), exons 6-7 (0.58kb, N=2) and exons 2-17 (154.4kb, respective deletions and missense variations. Here, we N=1); SPG11 exon29(0.21kb, N=1);ABCD1exons 3-10 report the identiﬁcation and characterisation of a novel (10.11kb, N=4). We included 94 control samples from the ARCA caused by bi-allelic duplication of GRID2 in two 1000G_IBS collection. Patients with deletion of SPAST siblings. exon1andSPG11exon29weregenotypesinduplicateand Methods: Illuminia® Truesight One clinical exome was triplicate, respectively, to evaluate inter-experiment repro- performed on one of the siblings with MiSeq next‐genera- ducibility. Data analysis was carried out with CHAS® tion sequencing platform. Whereas chromosomal micro- software. array analysis was performed on the entire family by using Results: All assays passed quality check and were con- Afﬁmetrix Optima® chips. Variants were evaluated based sistent between replications. Concordant results from on the phenotype and standard in silico tools. MLPA and array were obtained in 5/10 cases: ABCD1 Results:Nodiseasecausingmutationswerereportedasa exons 3-10, SPAST exons 1, 6-7, and 2-17, the latter result of the clinical exome test.Chromosomal microarray including contiguous genes (SLC30A6, NLRC4). In 3 analysis showed a ~121 kb homozygous duplication of patients ABCD1 deletion was partially detected, exons 3-5 GRID2 (chr4:94,447,511-94,569,021), including exon 14, (3.51kb).Thedeletionwasnotdetectedbythearrayin2/10 in two siblings. cases:SPAST exons 6-7,SPG11 exon29,albeitobservable Conclusion: Previously there has been reports of homo- upon visual examination in all 13 assays. There were no zygousdeletionsandmissensemutationsofGRID2,butour gains or losses in control samples. study is the ﬁrst one to identify a homozygous duplication Conclusions: CytoScan_XON array is useful to identify ofthegene.Thismutation,whichsegregatedintwosiblings genedeletionsinparallel,evenatexonlevel.Falsenegative withautosomalrecessivespinocerebellarataxia,willhelpus ratewas20%(2/10),howeverthesedeletionswerevisually understand the effect of the exon 14 of GRID2 on the observable. Factors inﬂuencing the efﬁciency of the phenotype and the structure of the GluRD2 protein. These approach include the size of the deletion and presence of ﬁndings provide us with the conclusion that chromosomal pseudogenes. Funding: ISCIII (PS09/01830; PI17/01582) microarrayshouldbetheﬁrststepofthediagnosticprocess B.Quintans:None.F.Barros:None.I.Quintela:None. of autosomal recessive ataxia types. A. Ordóñez-Ugalde: None. C. Castro-Fernández: None. A. Ceylan: None. E. Acar Arslan: None. H. Erdem: P. Blanco-Arias: None. D. García-Estévez: None. I. None. H. Kavus: None. M. Arslan: None. H. Sanz: None. M. Arias: None. M. Sobrido: None. Topaloğlu: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1435 P09.054A P09.055B Cadherin13interactswithIntegrinBeta-1andIntegrin A rare etiology of epileptic encephalopathy: HECW2 Beta-3 to regulate inhibitory synaptic function in a mutations human neuronal model M. H. Demirbas1, P. Özbudak2, A. Serdaroğlu2, B. Mossink1,2, J. v. Rhijn3,2, M. Selten3,2, K. Linda1,2, M. A. Ergün1, E. F. Perçin1 E. v. Hughte1,2, J. Bak3,2, M. Frega1,2, D. Schubert3,2, N. Nadif Kasri1,2,3 1Medical Genetics Department, Gazi University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 2Pediatric Neurology Department, Gazi 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, University Hospital, Ankara, Turkey Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Introduction: Heterozygous mutations in the HECW2 Cognitive Neurosciences, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, cause ‘’Neurodevelopmental Disorder with Hypotonia, Netherlands Seizures, and Absent Language; NDHSAL’’ (#617268), which is characterized by severe developmental delay, The brain is a complex neural network that requires a absent speech, epilepsy, hypotonia, dystonia/dyskinesia, preciselytunedinterplayofexcitatoryandinhibitorysignals microcephaly, and structural brain anomalies. Here we inordertofunction.Disruptionsinsynapticconnectivity,in present a novel de novo heterozygous mutation in the particular the balance between excitation (E) and inhibition HECW2 gene in a patient with growth retardation and (I), have been shown to underlie neurodevelopmental epileptic encephalopathy. Material-Methods: A seven-year- disorders (NDDs). However, the mechanisms underlying old boy who referred to our clinic with epileptic this coordination remain elusive. One gene that is encephalopathy had severely delayed psychomotor devel- implicatedNDDsisCadherin13(CDH13).Dysregulations opment, absent speech and feeding difﬁculty. His height, of CDH13 have been linked to attention-deﬁcit/hyperactiv- weight and head circumference measurements were less ity disorder and comorbid disorders such as autism and than 3rd centile. His motor tonic seizures were reported to schizophrenia.StudiesinmiceshowedthatCdh13localises start at the age of two and to continue daily. Generalized attheinhibitorypresynapse,andwhenknockedoutleadsto epileptic changes were present in his EEG. Progressive increased inhibitory drive onto hippocampal CA1 pyrami- atrophyofcerebrum,cerebellumandbrainstemwasseenin dal neurons. However, the mechanism by which CDH13 the cranial MRI. WES analysis was performed in order to regulates the function of inhibitory synapses in human elucidate theaetiology oftheneurodevelopmental disorder. neurons remains unknown. To understand the function of Results: A novel de novo heterozygous mutation CDH13 in human neurons, we generated both GABAergic c.4484G>A (p.Arg1495Lys) was found in the and Glutamatergic neurons via controlled differentiation of HECW2 gene. Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (hIPSC). Using RNA Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, only four interference we reduced CDH13 expression in GABAergic mutations in the HECW2 have been identiﬁed in ten neurons.Weinvestigatedneuronalnetworkcommunication patients.Becauseoftherarenessofthereportedcases,here by means of Micro-Electrode Arrays, whereas on a single- we present the patient with a novel HECW2 variant asso- cell level, inhibitory synaptic transmission was assessed ciating with his clinical ﬁndings. Similar reports are still using whole-cell patch-clamp recordings. Our data shows needed to clarify genotype-phenotype correlations of that CDH13 knockdown in human GABAergic neurons NDHSAL. increases inhibitory control on glutamatergic neurons M.H. Demirbas: None. P. Özbudak: None. A. Ser- recorded by MEA. Moreover, cell-adhesion assay revealed daroğlu: None. M.A. Ergün: None. E.F. Perçin: None. that ITGβ1 and ITGβ3 play an opposite role in the regulation of inhibitory synaptic strength via interaction P09.056C with CDH13. In summary, these results point towards an Dominant negative heterozygous mutation in Erlin2 important role for CDH13 in inhibitory synapses via preventsdegradationofIP3receptorsandisresponsible CDH13-ITGβ1/ITGβ3 interaction, which could be critical for hereditary spastic paraplegia 37 in the maintenance of the E/I balance. B. Mossink: None. J.V. Rhijn: None. M. Selten: None. G. Stevanin1, A. Rastetter1, T. Esteves1, S. Hanein1, K. Linda: None. E.V. Hughte: None. J. Bak: None. M. C. Depienne2, A. Brice2, A. Durr2, F. Darios2 Frega: None. D. Schubert: None. N. Nadif Kasri: None.1436 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Inserm, 1Faculty of Medicine, Khartoum, Sudan, 2Institut du CNRS,SU,EPHE,Paris,France,2InstitutduCerveauetde cerveau et de la moelle épinière, Paris, France, 3Ecole la Moelle épinière, Inserm, CNRS, SU, Paris, France pratique des hautes etudes, EPHE, PSL université, Paris, France,4Departmentofneurologyandepileptology,Hertie Introduction: Erlin 2 is an endoplasmic reticulum protein instituteforclinicalbrainresearch,UniversityofTübingen, mediating the degradation of IP3 receptors. Autosomal Tübingen, Germany, 5Inistitute of endemic diseases, recessive or dominant mutations of Erlin2 have been University ofKhartoum, Khartoum, Sudan,6Departmentof implicatedincomplexmotorneurondiseaseswithcognitive radiology, Dar Al Elaj specialized hospital, Khartoum, impairment,includinghereditaryspasticparaplegiaSPG18. Sudan, 7Alnelain medical center, Khartoum, Sudan, Materials and Methods: We analysed the exome 8Departmentofphysiology,Collegeofmedicine,KingSaud sequencingoffourpatientsofalargefamilywithautosomal University, Ryiadh, Saudi Arabia, 9Department of dominant spastic paraplegia signiﬁcantly linked to the pediatrics, College of medicine, King Saud University, SPG37 locus, a chromosomal region containing the Erlin2 Ryiadh, Saudi Arabia, 10APHP Pitié-Salpêtrière hospital, gene and overlapping the SPG18 locus. Fibroblasts of an Department of genetics, Paris, France affected patient and of a sex and age-matched control were subjected to an agonist of IP3 receptors to analyse their Introduction: Hereditary spinocerebellar degeneration degradation by the proteasome. Fibroblasts were also (SCD)encompassesaspectrumofclinicallyandgenetically transfected withsiRNAs targeting the pathological allele to heterogeneous disorders, with phenotypes ranging from observe the reversal of the phenotype. pure spastic paraplegia or pure cerebellar ataxia to more Results: We identiﬁed the heterozygous c.194C>T (p. complex forms. Sudan is located in east Africa which is a T65I) missense variant in Erlin2 segregating in the family. region known for the high genetic diversity among its Mutated and wild type alleles were expressed at the same population. The Sudanese population is characterized by level in ﬁbroblasts. Compared to controls, IP3 receptors high rates of consanguineous marriages (40-49%). degradationwasslowerinmutatedﬁbroblasts,suggestinga Methodology: We used next generation sequencing tar- degradation process blockage. To test the hypothesis that geted genes panel screening and whole exome sequencing the variant acts as a dominant negative, we speciﬁcally to study 25 Sudanese families with SCD. We analyzed the downregulated the p.T65I variant using siRNA. While sequencing data using online and in-house bioinformatic Erlin2 levels remained normal in control lines, a 50% tools. We conﬁrmed the segregation of the identiﬁed can- downregulation of the p.T65I allele was observed in the didate variants with the disease phenotype in the studied SPG37 line with reduced degradation capacities of IP3 families using Sanger sequencing. receptors. Results: We identiﬁed 24 culprit variants, 18 of these Conclusion: We report that a heterozygous missense were in 15 genes previously linked to SCD and six were variant of Erlin2 accounts for SPG37 through a dominant located in six new candidate genes never linked to patho- negative effect on the IP3 receptors degradation in vitro. logical phenotypes in man. Out of the 18 variants in the G. Stevanin: None. A. Rastetter: None. T. Esteves: known SCD genes, 11 variants were novel, one was auto- None. S. Hanein: None. C. Depienne: None. A. Brice: somal dominant, six were compound heterozygous and 11 None. A. Durr: None. F. Darios: None. were homozygous. Three of the variants were possible founder variants: NM_024306.4(FA2H):c.674T>C and P09.057D NM_021222.2(PRUNE1):c.132+2T>C, each in two famil- Hereditary spinocerebellar degeneration in Sudan: ies; NM_138422.3(ADAT3):c.430G>A in one of our identiﬁcation of variants in known and new genes in a families and was previously identiﬁed in families from the large cohort gulf area. Conclusion: We studied 25 Sudanese families with her- A. Yahia Osman Mohamed1,2,3, M. Papin2,3, T. Esteve2,3, editary spinocerebellar degeneration, and we identiﬁed the I. Mohammed1, A. Hamed1, M. Elseed1, A. Mutwakil1, causativemutationsin88%ofthesefamilies.The24culprit S. Elsadig1, M. Elzubir1, M. Koko4, J. Schubert4, variants were found in 15 genes previously linked to the R. Abubakr5, F. Abuzar1, S. Emad1, M. Musallam1, phenotype and in six new candidate genes under validation R. Adil1, M. Osama1, E. Osama1, A. Babai5, H. Malik1, through functional studies. Z. Omer1, A. Ahmed1, M. Amin1, A. Khalid1, R. Idris5, A.YahiaOsmanMohamed:None.M.Papin:None.T. S. O. Taha6, H. Mohamed7, E. F. Bushara1, S. Elmalik8, Esteve:None.I.Mohammed:None.A.Hamed:None.M. M.Hamad9,M.A.Salih9,M.I.Elbashir1,M.E.Ibrahim5, Elseed: None. A. Mutwakil: None. S. Elsadig: None. M. H.Lerche4,A.Brice2,10,L.E.O.Elsayed1,A.E.Ahmed1, Elzubir: None. M. Koko: None. J. Schubert: None. R. G. Stevanin2,3,10 Abubakr: None. F. Abuzar: None. S. Emad: None. M.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1437 Musallam: None. R. Adil: None. M. Osama: None. E. commitment. Our study will elucidate the molecular Osama: None. A. Babai: None. H. Malik: None. Z. mechanisms that could underlie the NDDs associated with Omer: None. A. Ahmed: None. M. Amin: None. A. HNRNPU mutations and 1q44 deletions. Khalid: None. R. Idris: None. S.O. Taha: None. H. F.Mastropasqua:None.I.Rabkina:None.M.Becker: Mohamed:None.E.F.Bushara:None.S.Elmalik:None. None.B.Anderlid:None.S.Bölte: None.A.Falk:None. M. Hamad: None. M.A. Salih: None. M.I. Elbashir: K. Tammimies: None. None. M.E. Ibrahim: None. H. Lerche: None. A. Brice: None. L.E.O. Elsayed: None. A.E. Ahmed: None. G. P09.059B Stevanin: None. Heterozygous mutations of HTRA1 and cerebral small vessel diseases, a diagnostic challenge P09.058A Understanding the role of HNRNPU in brain T. Coste1, D. Hervé2, M. Miné1, F. Marchelli1, development and neurodevelopmental disorders E. Tournier-Lasserve1 F.Mastropasqua1,I.Rabkina1,M.Becker1,B.Anderlid2, 1Service de GénétiqueMoléculaire Neurovasculaire,Paris, S. Bölte1, A. Falk3, K. Tammimies1 France, 2Service de Neurologie, Paris, France 1Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (KIND), Heterozygous HTRA1 missense mutations have recently Karolinska Institute, Solna, Sweden, 2Department of been involved in an autosomal dominant Cerebral Small Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute, Vessel Disease (cSVD). Functional in vitro analysis has Solna, Sweden, 3Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska beenperformedforaverylimitednumberofthesevariants, Institutet, Solna, Sweden suggestingaprobabledominantnegativeeffect.Theaimof this study was to investigate the implication of HTRA1 Background: Mutations affecting HNRNPU (Heteroge- heterozygous mutations in cSVD in a large consecutive neous nuclear ribonucleoprotein U) located on chr1q44 series of patients. Samples from 2135 unrelated adult have been described in individuals with various neurode- patients were referred consecutively from 2016 to 2018 in velopmentaldisorders. HNRNPUisoneofthecomponents the neurovascular genetics department of Lariboisière of the spliceosome and shown to regulate the 3D genome hospital for targeted sequencing of known cSVD genes, organization. However, the role of HNRNPU in neuronal including HTRA1. Heterozygous HTRA1 missense variants development has not been characterized. with a prevalence < 1/10 000 in polymorphism databases Material and Methods: Induced pluripotent stem cells and predicted to be pathogenic by at least 2 in silico from controls and individuals with HNRPU mutations will prediction softwares were retained. Among these 2135 be used to investigate its role in neuronal development. patients, 35 patients (1.6%) showed a heterozygous HNRNPUexpressionismeasuredduringtheearlystagesof candidate missense variation. Only 7 of the detected the neuronal differentiation using the neuroepithelial stem variations were previously described (and 5 functionally cell-like(NES)modelfollowedwithdetailedinvestigations tested). 16 of them predicted as being pathogenic have not of the 3D genome organization, transcriptomics including yetbeenreported.Frequenciesofcandidatemissenseinour splicingpatternsandDNA/RNAtargetsofHNRNPUusing series and control samples from GnomAD are signiﬁcantly high-throughput methods. different (p=6.4E-7,OR:1.8-3.7),conﬁrmingtheinvolve- Results:Wehaveidentiﬁedamonozygotictwinpairwith ment of HTRA1 in cSVD pathogenesis. Co-segregation of severe ID, autism and epilepsy carrying a ~44.3Kb het- these variants in affected relatives is ongoing. However, erozygous deletion of HNRNPU and COX20. The expres- additional functional screening of these variants, including sionofHNRNPUinNEScellswasconﬁrmedtobereduced residual htra1 enzyme activity measurement and trimeriza- ~50% due to the deletion as expected. In control cell lines, tion analysis are now required to establish or inﬁrm their the HNRNPU expression was reduced upon neuronal dif- pathogenicity, raising a strong challenge in a diagnosis ferentiation, however similar pattern was not seen in the context. deletion carrier. We are currently investigating the early T. Coste: None. D. Hervé: None. M. Miné: None. F. timepointsofneuronaldifferentiationandhowthemultiple Marchelli: None. E. Tournier-Lasserve: None. rolesofHNRNPUareconnectedtothetypicalandatypical trajectories of the neuronal development using multiple P09.060C omics-methods. Genetic epidemiology analysis of Huntington and Conclusions: Reduction of HNRNPU levels interfere Huntington like disease among Hungarian patients with differentiation at an early phase of neuronal1438 A. Gal, K. Bathori, V. S. Farkas, F. Szabo, A. Suveges, 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Casa H. Zeke, Z. Grosz, M. J. Molnar Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Fondazione Lega Italiana Ricerca Huntington (LIRH) e Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, malattie correlate, Rome, Italy, 3Huntington and Rare Semmelweis Universitiy, Budapest, Hungary, Budapest, Diseases Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Hungary Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy Introduction:HuntingtonandHuntington-likediseasesare AccuratedeterminationoftheCAGrepeatnumberiscrucial progressive neurodegenerative disorders which are char- inHuntington'sdisease(HD)toeitherconﬁrmthediagnosis acterized by uncontrolled movements (chorea), emotional in symptomatic patients or to predict the genetic condition problems, and loss of thinking ability. The classical in subjects at risk of HD, including prenatal testing. We Huntington chorea is associated with the abnormal evaluated a novel tripled repeat primed PCR-based trinucleotide (CAG) repeat expansion in the huntingtin technology for estimation of HTT CAG repeats in 46 HD (HTT) gene. In the remaining cases, mutations of the reference DNA samples, including 34 samples carrying C9ORF72 hexanucleotide- (G C ), TBP (TATA box- alleles with full penetrance (> 40 CAGs). Of the samples 4 2 bindingprotein)trinucleotide(CAG/CAA)repeatandprion with full penetrance alleles, 20 harbored alleles larger than protein (PRNP) genes mutations may also cause a 60 CAG repeats, generally seen in subjects with juvenile Huntington-like clinical phenotype. Aims: In this study onset HD < 20 years and in the rarest pediatric variant. the genetic background of chorea-like movement distur- Analyzed samples had been previously tested using either bances were investigated among our Hungarian cohort. ﬂurescentrepeat-ﬂankingPCRortripledrepeatprimedPCR Patients and Methods: In 375 (mean age 45.2 years) method,orboth.Allsamplesshowedfullconcordancewith patients with choreiform movement disorder, the HTT, the previously veriﬁed allele sizes. Identical repeat size or C9ORF72, TBP repeats and PRNP mutations were sizing errors within ±1 CAG were obtained for alleles ≤42 analysed. CAGrepeats,whereassizingerrorswithin±3wereobtained Results: The expanded HTT allele (>40 CAG repeat) for alleles > 43 CAG repeats, conforming to established repeatexpansionwerefoundin335cases.Themeanofthe guidelines.Theassaywasabletoaccuratelysize18samples expanded repeat numbers is 44.6. Abnormal C9ORF72 withverylargeallelescomprisedbetween60and100CAG hexanucleotiderepeatsweredetectedin3cases(onepatient repeats, and to detect two exceptionally large alleles with has full mutation (>30 G C repeat) and two others have morethan200CAGrepeats.Thismethodprovidesarapid, 4 2 intermedier-range (24-29 G C repeat) hexanucleotide sensitive and reliable method to accurately genotype the 4 2 repeatexpansions).TheTBPrepeatdiseasewasdetermined HTTCAGrepeatstretch,andextendsthedetectionlimitof in one patient, and in further one case a PRNP octa- large expanded alleles to over 200 CAG repeats, thus nuclteotide in frame deletion was detected. providingacomprehensivemoleculardiagnosticevaluation Discussion: The rate of occurrence of HTT gene abnor- ofallHDsamples,includingthosepediatricformscarrying mal trinucleotide expansion in our investigated cohorts is extremely large, hard to detect, alleles. 90%. The remaining 10% of patients are classiﬁed as F. Consoli: None. A. Morella: None. A. Onori: None. Huntington-like clinical phenotypes. In this group, the M. D’Asdia: None. B. D’Alessio: None. A. De Luca: C9ORF72hexanucleotidegenewasdetectedin7.5%,while None. F. Squitieri: None. in the TBP and PRNP mutations were present in 2.5-2.5%. This study was supported by KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6 to V. P09.062A A-V. grant. Psychological reactions when coping with predictive A.Gal:None.K.Bathori:None.V.S.Farkas:None.F. genetic testing for Huntington’s disease: A qualitative Szabo: None. A. Suveges: None. H. Zeke: None. Z. study Grosz: None. M.J. Molnar: None. C. von der Lippe1, K. H. Tillerås1, S. H. Kjølaas1, P09.061D E. Dramstad2, K. B. Feragen1 A novel repeat-primed PCR assay to detect the full range of trinucleotide CAG repeats in Huntingtin gene 1CentreforRareDisorders,Rikshospitalet,OsloUniversity (HTT) Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Dep. of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway F. Consoli1, A. Morella1, A. Onori1, M. D’Asdia1, B. D’Alessio2, A. De Luca1, F. Squitieri3 Introduction: Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by progressive weakeningAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1439 of the cognitive, psychological and motoric systems. HD common congenital disorder (1.1/1000), the genetic aetiol- mayhaveasevereimpactonfamilydynamics,andgrowing ogy of hydrocephalus remains unclear. up with a parent with HD may be challenging. Adult Objectives: 1. Candidate gene analysis of 113 genes in individuals at risk can get predictive genetic testing. 6,077 whole exome sequenced individuals (50 with Materials and Methods: We used an explorative quali- hydrocephalus) tative study design and interviewed 36 persons who cur- 2.Explorethecellularpathwaysinvolvingtheimplicated rently grow up or grew up with a parent with HD, and genes to understand better, how dysfunction of these genes analyzed the interviews using thematic analysis. might lead toorinﬂuencetheexpression ofhydrocephalus. Results: Participants described several challenges related Materials and Methods: This register-based cohort tothedecisionregardingpredictivetesting.Somewantedto study is a sub-study of the Lundbeck Foundation Initiative enjoy life without knowing. Others lacked motivation for for Integrative Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH) and com- getting an education and limited their involvement in bines data from The National Patient Registry, and The romantic relationships, even though they did not know Danish Neonatal Screening Biobank. Genetic variants whethertheyhadthemutationornot.Participantsdescribed identiﬁed in the candidate genes were ﬁltered based on ineffective coping mechanisms and a search for symptoms minor allele frequency (MAF) data. We removed variants before predictive testing, continuing after they had tested with MAF >2 x 10-5 in gnomAD or >5 x 10-3 in controls. positive for the mutation. Others, positive for the mutation, Results: Forty-nine mutations were identiﬁed in 31 described a relief of ﬁnally having the knowledge, and an genes. Interestingly, along with the known hydrocephalus- increased understanding of affected family members. Par- causing genes (CCDC88C, MPDZ) several of the genes ticipants who had tested negative for the mutation were implicated are involved cilia formation and function surprised by ambivalent feelings, and described a need for (CEP290, USP9X, SNX10, TMEM67) as well as cortico- follow-up after they had received a negative test result. genesis and neuronal adhesion and migration (CELSR2, Conclusion: Predictive testing for HD is a demanding FLNA). process. Individuals who grow up in families affected by Conclusions:Theresultsofthisstudysuggestthatahigh HD, worry about the potential genetic risk for themselves proportion of Danish hydrocephalus patients have an and their siblings. The current study indicates that indivi- underlying genetic predisposition and the genes involved duals may need long-term follow-up from the healthcare affect pathways of importance for Cilia, corticogenesis as system whether they test positive or negative for the well as neuronal adhesion and migration. mutation. T.M. Munch: None. P.L. Hedley: None. C.M. Hagen: C. von der Lippe: None. K.H. Tillerås: None. S.H. None.M.Bækvad-Hansen:None.J.Bybjerg-Grauholm: Kjølaas:None.E.Dramstad:None.K.B.Feragen:None. None. M. Melbye: None. D. Hougaard: None. M. Christiansen: None. P09.063B The genetic background of hydrocephalus - candidate P09.065D gene analysis from +6,000 exomes Evaluation of targeted sequencing as the ﬁrst-tier genetic test for intellectual disability and autism T. M. Munch1,2, P. L. Hedley1,3, C. M. Hagen1,3, spectrum disorders diagnosis M. Bækvad-Hansen1,3, J. Bybjerg-Grauholm1,3, M. Melbye1, D. Hougaard1,3, M. Christiansen1,3,4 M. Peña-Vilabelda, L. Rausell, M. Lázaro, S. Vidal, M. Molero, L. Cabrera, M. J. García, C. Pérez, P. Cano, 1Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark, E. Férriz, G. Cartagena, M. Bermejo, S. Santamaría, 2Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, C. Ruiz, J. García-Planells, M. García-Hoyos 3The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research (iPSYCH), Aarhus, Denmark, Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN), Valencia, 4University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark Spain Introduction: Congenital hydrocephalus, a condition Identiﬁcation of the genetic aetiology of intellectual characterised by relatively excessive intracranialcerebrosp- disability (ID) or autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) inal ﬂuid, is often considered to present neonatally. provides beneﬁts, like speciﬁc genetic counselling, more However, in practise, most patients present during infancy accurate prognosis and specialized treatment. The world- withslowlydevelopingsymptoms,orevenlaterinlifewith wide average prevalence of ASDs is 1 in 160 children and subtle or neglected symptoms. Despite being a relatively 1-3% of ID. Due to the genetic heterogeneity of these pathologies different genetic tests are available. Today,1440 chromosomal microarray is the ﬁrst-tier recommended P09.066A diagnostic test and provides a yield around 10-15% for ID Development of a LYST deﬁcient glutamatergic patients and around 9% for ASDs patients, depending on neuronal model of Chediak-Higashi Syndrome the cohort. Our goal is to evaluate if the diagnostic yield estimated by targeted sequencing in our cohorts of ID or J. Serra-Vinardell1, D. Chauss2, K. Keyvanfar3, ASDs subjects is higher than that obtained by CGH array. W. J. Introne1, M. E. Ward4, W. A. Gahl1,5, M. C. V. We screened 701 in-house selected ID-related genes and Malicdan1,5 189 autism-related genes in a cohort of more than 100 and 60 patients, respectively. Libraries were prepared with 1SectionofHumanBiochemicalGenetics,MedicalGenetics differentcapturekitsandtheIlluminaNextSeq500platform Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, was used to sequence targeted regions. Bioinformatic NationalInstitutesofHealth,Bethesda,MD,United States, analysis was performed with an in-house pipeline. The 2Section of Immunoregulation, Kidney Diseases Branch, diagnostic yield was 41% in the ID cohort and 20% in the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney ASDs cohort. Variants of uncertain signiﬁcance were Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, identiﬁed in 50% of the ID patients and 72% of the autism United States, 3Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, patientsandnegativeresultswereobtainedin9%and8%of andBloodInstitute,NationalInstitutesofHealth,Bethesda, the ID and autism individuals, respectively. ID or autism- MD, United States, 4National Institute of Neurological related genes sequencing provide higher diagnostic yields Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, than CGH array. Furthermore, copy number variants Bethesda,MD,UnitedStates,5NationalInstitutesofHealth evaluation could be performed simultaneously with our Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, Ofﬁce of pipeline. For this reason, we proposed targeted sequencing the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, as the ﬁrst-tier genetic test for ID and autism diagnosis. United States M. Peña-Vilabelda: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant;InstitutodeMedicinaGenómica(IMEGEN).L. Chediak-Higashi Syndrome (CHS) is an autosomal reces- Rausell: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; sivedisordercausedbybiallelicmutationsinthelysosomal Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). M. Lázaro: trafﬁcking regulator gene (LYST) that results to impaired A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Instituto de functionoflysosomeandlysosome-relatedorganelles.CHS MedicinaGenómica(IMEGEN).S.Vidal:A.Employment ischaracterized byoculocutaneous albinism,predisposition (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Gen- to bleeding, immunodeﬁciency and progressive neurologi- ómica (IMEGEN). M. Molero: A. Employment (full or cal dysfunction. Bone marrow transplantation has been a part-time); Signiﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica symptomatictreatmentfortheimmunedefectsbutdoesnot (IMEGEN). L. Cabrera: A. Employment (full or part- alterthecourseoftherelentlessneurodegeneration.Todate, time); Signiﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IME- several animal models of CHS have been identiﬁed, but GEN). M.J. García: A. Employment (full or part-time); none of them consistently recapitulate the neurological Signiﬁcant;InstitutodeMedicinaGenómica(IMEGEN).C. phenotype seen in patients. Additionally, the role of LYST Pérez: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; in lysosome biology is still is poorly understood and could Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). P. Cano: A. be cell-dependent. For these reasons, we aim to investigate Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Instituto de the function of LYST in a neuronal cell model and to Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). E. Férriz: A. Employ- identify targets for therapy. We used clustered regularly ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) and Genómica(IMEGEN).G.Cartagena:A.Employment(full CRISPR interference technologies to knock-out or knock- or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica down the expression of endogenous LYST in induced (IMEGEN). M. Bermejo: A. Employment (full or part- pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), which were genetically time); Signiﬁcant; Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IME- engineered to facilitate an inducible expression of Neuro- GEN). S. Santamaría: A. Employment (full or part-time); genin 2. With this approach, we have established a Signiﬁcant;InstitutodeMedicinaGenómica(IMEGEN).C. glutamatergic neuronal CHS model deﬁcient for LYST Ruiz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; expression, to analyze the localization, size and function of Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). J. García- lysosomesinneurons.Usingthistechnique,wewereableto Planells: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; generateahomogenouspopulationofneuronalcells,which Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). M. García- are essential for global proteome, transcriptome and Hoyos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; metabolome studies not only of CHS, but also for other Instituto de Medicina Genómica (IMEGEN). Mendelian loss-of-function neurogenetic diseases.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1441 J. Serra-Vinardell: None. D. Chauss: None. K. Key- P09.068C vanfar: None. W.J. Introne: None. M.E. Ward: None. Genome wide association study for late-onset W.A. Gahl: None. M.C.V. Malicdan: None. Alzheimer's disease in Japanese population P09.067B K. Ozaki, R. Mitsumori, S. Niida, D. Shigemizu Gene-phenotype correlation of myoclonic progressive epilepsy type 3 National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu, Japan A. Borovikov1, A. Sharkov2, I. Akimova1, S. Michailova3, A. Filatova1, A. Marakhonov4, E. Dadali1, M. Skoblov1 By 2025, the number of people living with dementia in Japan is expected to increase to 7 million. Most common 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian form of dementia is late-onset Alzheimer’s disease Federation, 2Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics (LOAD). The pathogenesis of LOAD is result from at the Pirogov Russian National Research Medical interactions among multiple environmental and genetic University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian factors which consist of considerable hereditary compo- Children's Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation, nents. Recent large scale genome wide association studies 4Far East Federal University, Vladivostok, Russian (GWAS) in Caucasian have revealed more than 30 genetic Federation locifor LOADsusceptibility.Incontrast, GWAS for Asian groups including Japanese are relatively modest, and have Progressive myoclonic epilepsies (PME) are a group of poor reproducibility of associations for identiﬁed loci in clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders charac- Caucasianduetopossibledifferenceofgeneticarchitecture terized by myoclonus, seizures, and neurological deteriora- among ethnicity in addition to lack of study power. In this tion. PME type 3 is an autosomal recessive disease and is context, we launched GWAS using an ethnicity speciﬁc associatedwithpathogenicvariantsinthegeneKCTD7that SNP array, Japonica. To date, we obtained the genotype encode potassium channel tetramerization domain- data for approximately 7,000 Japanese individuals (includ- containing protein 7. Disruption of the function of this ing2,400LOAD,1,400otherdementiaand3,200controls) genecanleadtoachangeinthepotassiumioncurrentinthe and imputed the data with a Japanese reference panel neurons of the brain. We investigate 9 patients with an (ToMMo 3.5KJ) constructed using whole genome average age of debut of the ﬁrst attacks between 1 and 2 sequences from 3,500 Japanese. We tentatively conducted yearsoflifeandtrytoestablishgenephenotypecorrelation. a GWAS using the imputed genotype data (~10,000,000 Theﬁrstsymptomsstartedafteranepisodeoffebrile fever: SNPs) for approximately 2,400 LOAD cases and 3,200 sudden falls without loss of consciousness, and with controls. We combined this GWAS result and the data of episodes of fading. All patients had the drug-resistant another Japanese GWAS reported elsewhere for meta- generalized myoclonic seizures. MRI of the brain, long- analysis (a total of 8,000 individuals), and found GWAS term video EEG monitoring, examination by various signiﬁcance for the APOE and SORL1 loci and a novel clinical specialists were performed for each patient. NGS locus with LOAD. We further identiﬁed several new sequencing revealed seven previously undescribed non- candidate susceptible loci for LOAD with suggestive synonymous variants and one previously undescribed signiﬁcance. We also found convincing associations for dinucleotide frame shift deletion in the last exon. Four severalknownADloci,suchasCLU,PICALMandABCA7 chromosomal microarray analysis were performed for discovered in Caucasian population. patients with large deletions suspected by NGS affecting K. Ozaki: None. R. Mitsumori: None. S. Niida: None. the locus of the KCTD7 gene. Segregation analysis by D. Shigemizu: None. Sanger sequencing were performed for all families and conﬁrmed genotypes. Most of known likely pathogenic or P09.069D pathogenic variants are located in BTB/POZ domain. Leukocyte telomere length in Huntington's Disease. A However, we observed several variants located outside of study in fully penetrant and reduced penetrant alleles thisdomain.Itisnecessarytoconductafunctionalanalysis to conﬁrm the pathogenic effect of the substitutions on the M. Peconi1, D. Scarabino2, E. Mantuano1, M. Frontali1, protein function. M. Morello3, A. Copponi4, R. M. Corbo5, L. Veneziano1 A. Borovikov: None. A. Sharkov: None. I. Akimova: None. S. Michailova: None. A. Filatova: None. A. Mar- 1Institute of Translational Pharmacology. National akhonov: None. E. Dadali: None. M. Skoblov: None. Research Council of Italy, Rome, Italy, 2Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology. National Research1442 Council of Italy, Rome, Italy, 3Clinical Biochemistry and 1UniversityParisDiderot,Paris,France,2INSERMU1141, Molecular Biology. Dpt of Experimental Medicine and Paris, France, 3University ofKhartoum, Khartoum, Sudan, Surgery. Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 4Clinical 4Hospital Robert Debre, Paris, France Biochemistry. Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 5Dpt of BiologyandBiothechnology.LaSapenzaUniversity,Rome, Background: Leukodystrophies are a group of inherited Italy disorders primarily affecting the white matter of the CNS. There are currently 30 recognized forms of leukodystro- Introduction: Huntington’s Disease (HD), an autosomal phies with distinct clinical, biochemical and radiological dominant neurodegenerative disease, is caused by an characteristics. However, the genetics of these classical expanded CAG repeat in the ﬁrst exon of HTT gene. The forms of leukodystrophies remain unknown in many parts disease is fully penetrant in individuals with 40 or more of the world especially in Sub-Saharan Africa. CAG repeats, and has reduced penetrance in the range of Methods: In this study, we selected 5 consanguineous 36-39 repeats. Overall the age at onset, usually at midlife, leukodystrophic families from Sudan using clinical and inversely correlates with the number of CAG repeats, and MRI recognition pattern. GenomicDNAwas extractedand severity of symptoms vary widely between individuals. In screened for mutations using NGS panel testing 153 leu- the present study, we investigated the relationship between kodystrophies and leucoencephalopathies causing genes LeukocyteTelomereLength(LTL)anddiseaseprogression. (NextSeq500 Illumina). Methods: LTL(T/Sratio) wasmeasuredinmanifest HD Results: Three novel homozygous variants were dis- patients(HD,n=62)andpre-manifestHDpatients(pre-HD, covered: one (c.380G>C, p.Arg127Pro) in PSAP gene n=38)withfullypenetrant alleles,insubjectswithreduced causing MLD, and two (c.831_838DUPATATCTGT, p. penetrant alleles (rp-HD, n=23), and age-matched controls Ser280Tyrfs*8 and c.971T>G, p.Ile324Ser) in MLC1 gene (n= 76). inthetwofamilieswith MLC.The segregationpatternwas Results: Mean LTL values of controls, pre-HD and HD consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. The patients were signiﬁcantly different (p< 0.0001), in the pathogenicity of these variants was predicted using order: HD (0.58 ± 0.07) <pre-HD (0.78 ± 0.16) <controls bioinformatics tools. (0.92 ± 0.09). Mean LTL values of rp-HD subjects (0.82± Conclusion:Thisistheﬁrststudytounderliethegenetics 0.16) were signiﬁcantly lower than controls (p=0.003), but of leukodystrophies in Sudan. Analysis of additional similartopre-HDpatients.Aninverserelationshipbetween families are in progress in order to establish the whole mean LTL and CAG repeat number was found in the pre- spectrum of genetic variations causing inherited leukody- HD (p=0.03). strophies in Sudanese families. Conclusion: In pre-HD patients, LTL shorten gradually M. Amin: None. I. Dorboz: None. I. Mohamed: None. accordingtoadvancingageandCAGnumber,uptothelow A. Hamad: None. M. Elseed: None. A. Yahia: None. A. values observed in HD patients. A similar LTL shortening Babai:None.E.Badi:None.M.Hassan:None.E.Emad: seems to be present in rp-HD, but at more advanced age. None. S. Samaan: None. L. Elsayed: None. A. Ahmed: The possible use of LTL as biomarker of disease progres- None. O. Boespﬂug-Tanguy: None. sion is discussed. Supportedby:grantEHDN0942toLV;grants2017La P09.071B Sapienza University to RMC Two associated mutations in the glutamyl-prolyl and M. Peconi: None. D. Scarabino: None. E. Mantuano: isoleucyl -tRNA synthetases in patients with a fatal None.M.Frontali:None.M.Morello:None.A.Copponi: leukodystrophy None. R.M. Corbo: None. L. Veneziano: None. I. DORBOZ1, K. Boussaid2, F. Renaldo2, A. Odoul1, P09.070A M. Abuawad1, S. Samaan2, E. Eymard-Pierre3, Novel variants causing inherited leukodystrophies in M. Elmaleh- Bergès2, O. Boespﬂug-Tanguy2,1 Sudanese families 1INSERM, Paris, France, 2CHU APHP Robert-Debré, M. Amin1, I. Dorboz2, I. Mohamed3, A. Hamad3, Paris, France, 3CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont- M. Elseed3, A. Yahia3, A. Babai3, E. Badi3, M. Hassan3, Ferrand, France E. Emad3, S. Samaan2, L. Elsayed3, A. Ahmed3, O. Boespﬂug-Tanguy1,2,4 Aminoacyl-tRNAsynthetases(ARSs)havebeenimplicated in leukodystrophies. We report a consanguineous family with two affected children. Both children presented a neurodegenerative disorder with a motor degradation andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1443 nystagmus after 15 months, spastic quadriplegia after 3y Skövde, Sweden, 9The Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, andepilepsiaafter7yleadingtodeathatrespectively8and Gotenborg, Sweden 10yofage.MRIdemonstrated aprogressiveatrophyofthe spinal cord, the optic nerve, the corpus callosum and the Background: Pathogenic variants in the KIF1A gene have cortex associated with a demyelinating aspect of the been reported in autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 30, sustentorial periventricular WM. Axonal peripheral neuro- autosomal recessive hereditary sensory neuropathy, and pathywasobservedinbothpatients.Biochemichalanalysis autosomal (de novo) dominant mental retardation type 9. were negative More recently, variants in KIF1A have also been described Homozygosity mapping combined to whole-exome in a few cases with autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia. sequencing revealed two homozygous mutations in two Methods: Clinical exome sequencing data of 315 unre- ARSs.OnemutationinEPRS(c.3344C>T/p.Pro1115Leu)a lated patients with mostly ‘pure’ spastic paraplegia were bifunctional aminoacyl tRNA synthetase that catalyzes the analysed for KIF1A variants. Clinical characteristics of aminoacylation of both glutamic acid and proline tRNA patients with KIF1A variants were analysed, segregation species, recently involved in a hypomyelinating Leukody- analyses were performed, and types of variants were strophy and a second mutation in IARS2 encodes a mito- compared. chondrial isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase reported to cause Results: In 21 patients we identiﬁed 19 different KIF1A CAGSSSthatischaracterisedbycataracts,growthhormone variants. Patients and affected family members showed a deﬁciency, sensory neuropathy, sensorineural hearing loss, slowly progressive, mostly pure form of spastic paraplegia, and skeletal dysplasia. Co-segregation analysis conﬁrmed but with a highly variable disease onset (0-57 years). Seg- that the two mutations were inherited from heterozygous regation analyses showed a de novo occurrence in ﬁve carrierparents.Insilicoanalysispredictedthesevariationto cases, and a dominant inheritance pattern in eight families. be deleterious. The phenotype of our patients were more The motor domain of KIF1A seems to be the hotspot for severe than the reported patient with the same mutation in pathogenic variants in autosomal dominant spastic para- ERPS gene. Our patients had no cataract or dysplasia or plegia, similar to mental retardation type 9 and recessive growth hormone deﬁciency reported in IARS2 patient. The spastic paraplegia type 30. Unlike these allelic disorders, phenotype may be the result of the mutation of the two however, dominant spastic paraplegia was also caused by genes. Further analysis are required to gain a better under- loss-of-functionvariantsoutsidethisdomaininsixfamilies. standing of the interaction or not of the two ARSs. Three missense variants were identiﬁed outside the motor I. Dorboz: None. K. Boussaid: None. F. Renaldo: domain and need further characterization. None. A. Odoul: None. M. Abuawad: None. S. Samaan: Conclusions: KIF1A variants are a frequent cause of None. E. Eymard-Pierre: None. M. Elmaleh- Bergès: autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia in our cohort (5- None. O. Boespﬂug-Tanguy: None. 7%), with a high de novo rate. The identiﬁcation of KIF1A loss-of-function variants suggests haploinsufﬁciency as a P09.072 possible mechanism in autosomal dominant spastic CKIF1A variants are a frequent cause of autosomal paraplegia. dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia E.Kamsteeg:None.M.Pennings:None.M.Schouten: None.R.Meyer:None.J.vanGaalen:None.S.T.deBot: E. Kamsteeg1, M. Pennings1, M. Schouten1, R. Meyer1, None.M.Kriek:None.C.G.J.Saris:None.L.H.vanden J. van Gaalen1, S. T. de Bot2, M. Kriek2, C. G. J. Saris1, Berg: None. M.A. van Es: None. D.M.H. Zuidgeest: L.H.vandenBerg3,M.A.vanEs3,D.M.H.Zuidgeest4, None. M.W. Elting: None. J.M. van de Kamp: None. K. M. W. Elting5, J. M. van de Kamp5, K. Y. van Y. van Spaendonck-Zwarts: None. C. de Die-Smulders: Spaendonck-Zwarts5, C. de Die-Smulders6, None. E.H. Brilstra: None. C.C. Verschuuren: None. B. E. H. Brilstra3, C. C. Verschuuren7, B. B. A. de Vries1, B.A.deVries:None.J.Bruijn:None.K.Sofou:None.B. J. Bruijn8, K. Sofou9, B. P. van de Warrenburg1 P. van de Warrenburg: None. 1Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, P09.073D Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Obesity-related genes and the atypical symptoms of Netherlands, 3Utrecht University Medical Centre, Utrecht, major depressive disorder: ﬁndings from two large Netherlands, 4Ikazia Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, European epidemiological studies 5Amsterdam University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Maastricht University Medical Centre, G. Pistis1, Y. Milaneschi2, D. I. Boomsma3, E. Castelao1, Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Groningen University Medical M. Gholam-Rezaee1, Z. Kutalik4,5, A. M. Lasserre1, Centre, Groningen, Netherlands, 8Skaraborg Hospital, B. W. J. H. Penninx2, M. Preisig1, C. L. Vandeleur11444 1Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital of P09.074A Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department of Entire structure ofMECP2cDNA expressed in a patient Psychiatry, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit and GGZ withRettsyndromebearingalargedeletionbetweenthe inGeest, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Netherlands Twin exon 4 of MECP2 and the upstream region of IRAK Register, Dept Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4University Institute for Social K. Yanagi1, M. Minatogawa1, M. Takeshita1, K. Satou1, and Preventive Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital, N. Okamoto2, Y. Matsubara1, T. Kaname1 Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland 1National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 2Osaka Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Introduction: Disentangling the heterogeneity of depres- Osaka, Japan sion by subtyping according to clinical manifestations has beenshowntobeapertinentapproachtogainmoreinsight Methyl-CpG- binding protein 2 (MECP2) is a responsible into relationships with obesity. Indeed, previous research gene for Rett syndrome (RTT, OMIM#312750) that is suggeststhatonlytheatypicalMDDsubtype,characterized inherited in an X-linked dominant manner. Pathogenic by ﬁve symptoms (increased appetite, hypersomnia, mood variant of MECP2 are found in approximately 80% of reactivity, leaden paralysis and interpersonal rejection patients with RTT. Partial and whole-gene deletions are sensitivity), is associated with obesity. We investigated accounting for 7.3% in all variants observed. We encoun- whethertheassociationbetweenatypicalMDDandgenetic tered a patient of RTT with large deletion of MECP2. variants related to obesity is accounted for by the appetite A patient is 7-year-old girl born to non-consanguineous criterion alone or whether the other atypical criteria also parentsat40weekswithbirthweightof2,484,heightof47 contribute to this association. cm and head circumstance of 31.5 cm. Amniotic ﬂuid Materials and Methods: Two studies, CoLaus|PsyCo- karyotyping showed 46,XX. She was clinically suspected Laus (Switzerland) and NESDA|NTR (Netherlands), that RTT based on neurodevelopmental disorder characterized assessed MDD subtypes and symptoms, were meta- by psychomotor regression with the development of dis- analysed to evaluate the associations between atypical tinctive hand stereotypies. However, no pathogenic variant MDD symptoms (386 and 179 participants, respectively) was detected in the MECP2 gene by direct-sequencing with the rs9939609 FTO polymorphism and the polygenic and MLPA. risk score (PRS) from 76 loci signiﬁcantly associated with Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed. Map- Body Mass Index according to a recent GWAS meta- ping images of WES suggested a heterozygous large dele- analysis. tionbetween theexon4ofMECP2andupstreamregionof Results: Our meta-analysis shows positive associations IRAKinthepatient.Thedeletionwasveriﬁedbylong-range between the symptom increased appetite and both the FTO PCR and following sequencing. Transcripts of MECP2 variant and the PRS (odds ratio (OR)=1.37; 95% con- were conﬁrmed by 3’RACE analysis. The deletion was ﬁdence interval (CI)=1.17-1.62, P=1.33x10-04 and occurred in father’s allele. A novel transcript derived from OR=1.15, 95%CI=1.03-1.29, P=0.014, respectively), a the deleted allele consisted of exon 3 and alternatively negative association between the FTO and the symptom splicedregionsofexon4underGT-ATrule.Codinglength leaden paralysis (OR=0.82, 95%CI=0.72-0.93, P=0.003) was expected 582 bp (194 amino acid). The translated and a negative association between the PRS and the product lacked two AT-hook domains, which are essential symptom rejection sensitivity (OR=0.92, 95%CI=0.85- forDNAbinding.Brainspeciﬁcpolyadenylationsignalwas 0.99, P=0.036). found 17 bp upstream of poly A site. This work was sup- Conclusions:Theassociation between increased appetite ported by grants from the AMED. and obesity-related genetic variants drives the association K. Yanagi: None. M. Minatogawa: None. M. Take- betweenthesevariantsandtheatypicalsubtype,suggesting shita: None. K. Satou: None. N. Okamoto: None. Y. that other genes could be involved in the regulation of the Matsubara: None. T. Kaname: None. other atypical symptoms, reﬂecting the genetic hetero- geneity of MDD. P09.075B G. Pistis: None. Y. Milaneschi: None. D.I. Boomsma: Molecular characterization of Spanish MECP2 None. E. Castelao: None. M. Gholam-Rezaee: None. Z. duplication syndrome patients: more IRAK1 than we Kutalik:None.A.M.Lasserre:None.B.W.J.H.Penninx: thought None. M. Preisig: None. C.L. Vandeleur: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1445 L. Blasco1, S. Vidal1, A. Pascual-Alonso1, E. Gean2, Results:Wehavenoticedthatintheminimumduplicated M. O'Callaghan2, A. Martínez2, A. Castells3, C. Xiol1, region (MDR) of all our patients there are MECP2 and N. Brandi4, P. Pacheco4, V. Català5, M. del Campo6, IRAK1 genes and both are overexpressed. The cohort was E. Guillén7, P. Lapunzina8, E. Lloveras9, D. Ortigoza2, classiﬁed according to different chromosomal localizations H. Maortua10, F. Martínez11, A. Mesas12, J. Nevado8, of the MDR: tandem in ChrXq28, ChrXp and ChrY. The M. Obón13, C. Orellana11, A. Plaja14, M. Roselló11, clinical severity seems to be related to the position of the M. Tejada10, F. Santos8, M. Sánchez7, J. Fernández15, duplication, where the insertion in ChrY leads to the most E. Tizzano16, S. Alcántara3, J. Armstrong4 severe phenotype. Conclusions: Due to thefact that IRAK1 ispresent in all 1Sant Joan de Déu research foundation, Barcelona, Spain, the duplications we hypothesize that it must be implicated 2Unidad de Consejo Genético, Hospital Universitario San in the disorder. We encourage the study of the pathways in Juan de Dios, Barcelona, Spain, 3Departament de whichIRAK1participates.Besides,thepointofinsertionof Patologia i Terapèutica Experimental, Campus de the duplication seems to be crucial for the severity of the Bellvitge, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, patient, as well as the genes involved in each rearrange- 4Servicio de Medicina Genètica i Molecular, Hospital ment. Grants: Miradas que Hablan-Duplicación MECP2 UniversitarioSanJuandeDios,Barcelona,Spain,5Unitad parents' association. de genética médica i biologia celular, Universidad L. Blasco: None. S. Vidal: None. A. Pascual-Alonso: Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6Pediatrics, None. E. Gean: None. M. O'Callaghan: None. A. Genetic Epidemiology, Hospital Vall d'Hebrón, Barcelona, Martínez: None. A. Castells: None. C. Xiol: None. N. Spain, 7Unidad de Genética, Hospital Virgen de la Brandi:None.P.Pacheco:None.V.Català:None.M.del Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 8Instituto de Genética Médica y Campo:None.E.Guillén:None.P.Lapunzina:None.E. Molecular,InstitutodeInvestigaciónSanitariadelHospital Lloveras: None. D. Ortigoza: None. H. Maortua: None. Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 9Departamento de F.Martínez:None.A.Mesas:None.J.Nevado:None.M. genètica, LABCO-Iberia, Barcelona, Spain, 10Laboratorio Obón: None. C. Orellana: None. A. Plaja: None. M. de Genética Molecular, Servicio de Genética, Hospital Roselló: None. M. Tejada: None. F. Santos: None. M. Universitario de Cruces, Bilbao, Spain, 11Unidad de Sánchez: None. J. Fernández: None. E. Tizzano: None. genètica, Hospital Universitario y Politécnico La Fe, S. Alcántara: None. J. Armstrong: None. Valencia, Spain, 12Gastroenterologia, Hospital Xanit, Málaga, Spain, 13Area de Genètica clínica i Consell P09.077D Genètic, Laboratoris ICS, Girona, Spain, 14Institut de Population incidence of congenital microcephaly in the Recerca (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Czech Republic Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 15Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain, N. Friedova1,2, A. Sipek Jr1,3, V. Gregor3,4, A. Sipek 16AreaGenéticaClínicayMolecular,HospitalUniversitari Sr3,4,5,6, J. Klaschka7,8, M. Maly7,9 Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain 1InstituteofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,FirstFacultyof Introduction: MECP2 duplication syndrome Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, (OMIM#300260) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental dis- 2Department of Internal Medicine, Third Faculty of order characterized by severe to profound intellectual Medicine, Charles University and Thomayer Hospital, disability, early infantile hypotonia, autistic traits, seizures Prague,CzechRepublic,3DepartmentofMedicalGenetics, andrecurrentrespiratoryinfections.Duplicationcouldbede Thomayer Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department novoorinheritedfromanasymptomaticcarriermother.We of Medical Genetics, Pronatal Sanatorium, Prague, Czech have molecularly characterized 22 Spanish children with Republic, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Third Faculty of MECP2 duplication syndrome and their carrier mothers. Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, Materials and Methods: Clinical characterization was 6GENNET,Prague,CzechRepublic,7InstituteofComputer doneusingachecklistdesignedfortheproject.Duplications Science of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech were detected by MLPA and/or CGH-array and conﬁrmed Republic, 8Institute of Biophysics and Informatics, First by Real-Time qPCR. Localization of the duplication was Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech studied by FISH. MECP2 expression was checked by RT- Republic, 9National Institute of Public Health, Prague, qPCR in blood cells and skin ﬁbroblast cells when avail- Czech Republic able. We performed XCI assay to affected females and carrier mothers. Introduction: Microcephaly is deﬁned as a congenital anomaly of the central nervous system which is1446 characterized by the decreased head circumference. The exact deﬁnition may be slightly different for different Introduction: Microcephaly is a genetically heterogenous countries, in the Czech Republic the microcephaly is condition which may be an isolated trait or in combination deﬁned as the head circumference under the 3rd percentile with other major malformations. The molecular diagnosis for speciﬁc age and sex of the particular individual. remains unknown in about 40% cases. Methods: We present a retrospective epidemiological Materials and Methods: Patients with microcephaly study of theincidence ofmicrocephaly(ICD-10 code Q02) with unknown etiology based on preliminary evaluation inthelivebirthsandintheprenatallydiagnosedcasesinthe were enrolled. CMA was done using Affymetrix 750K. Czech Republic (time period 1994-2015). The data were Where no pathogenic CNVs were identiﬁed, WES obtained from the National Registry of Congenital was done. Anomalies. During the selected time period the registry Results: Out of total 51 patients, CMA was done in 34 included only the cases of congenital anomalies in children patients. Pathogenic/likely pathogenic CNVs were identi- under 15 years of age. Surveillance program is ﬁedin6caseswhilecandidategenesinROHwasidentiﬁed population based. in 4 cases. WES was done in 32 patients (12 con- Results: There were 2 140 009 livebirths in the Czech sanguineous). Pathogenic/likely pathogenic SNVs were Republic during 1994-2015 time period. The average inci- identiﬁed in 14 patients. Biallelic variations were identiﬁed dence of microcephaly was 1.07 per 10 000 of livebirths in CIT, ANKLE2, ORC1, RNASEH2A, ASPM, PEX7, (highest was 1.72 in 2002 and lowest was 0.33 in 1998). CENPF, PCNT, AIMP2 and RNU4ATAC. Siblings with The anomaly was more common amongst girls - F/M ratio likely pathogenic variation in CENPF had severe short was 1.32/1.0. Only few cases of microcephaly were diag- stature (-3.5SD) and microcephaly (-8SD) without oph- nosed prenatally (average incidence in prenatal diagnostics thalmological abnormalities as reported in cases of 0.12 per 10 000). Stromme syndrome suggesting that CENPF mutation can Discussion:Theoverallincidenceofmicrocephalyinthe result in phenotypes of isolated microcephaly. Previously Czech Republic is low - compared to the data from other reportedheterozygouspathogenicvariationswereidentiﬁed population based registries. We believe, that the clinicians in 3 patients (heterozygous in MECP2 and TUBA1A and tendtoreportonlyseverecasesofcongenitalmicrocephaly hemizygous deletion in PQBP1). One patient showed with neurological symptoms. double heterozygous likely pathogenic variations in Acknowledgements: The study is supported by the MCPH1 and ASPM inherited from asymptomatic parents Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV indicating the possibility of digenic inheritance. 17-29622A Conclusions: Genomic techniques gave diagnostic yield N. Friedova: None. A. Sipek Jr: B. Research Grant of 39% [20 out of 51]. The study identiﬁed 8 novel likely (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pathogenic SNVs and 4 likely pathogenic CNVs and pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; expanded the phenotypic spectrum of CENPF. Pathogenic Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV variations in Xlinked genes were identiﬁed in2 cases; one 17-29622A. V. Gregor: B. Research Grant (principal withmultipleaffectedfamilymembers.(ICMR:63/8/2010- investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants BMS) as well as grants already received); Modest; Ministry of S.Masih:None.M.Amita:None.A.Dwivedi:None.D. Health of the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. Saxena: None. K. Mandal: None. S.R. Phadke: None. A. Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as P09.079B grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Ministry of Health of Genomic and phenotypic delineation of congenital the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. J. microcephaly Klaschka: None. M. Maly: None. A. M. Alhashem1,2,3, F. Alkuraya1,2, R. Shaheen3 P09.078A Application of genomic tools in understanding the 1Prince sultan military and medical city, Riyadh, Saudi etiologies of microcephaly Arabia, 2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3King Faisal Specialist Hospital & research Center, Riyadh, S. Masih, M. Amita, A. Dwivedi, D. Saxena, K. Mandal, Saudi Arabia S. R. Phadke Background: Congenital microcephaly (CM) is an impor- SanjayGandhiPostGraduateInstituteofMedicalSciences, tant birth defect with long term neurological sequelae. We Lucknow, IndiaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1447 aimedtoperformdetailedphenotypicandgenomicanalysis gene panel to investigate the genetic bases of CP and MD of patients with Mendelian forms of CM. with childhood onset. The panel includes 59 genes Methods: Clinical phenotyping, targeted or exome considered disease-causing or related with primitive MD/ sequencing, and autozygome analysis. CPconditions.In9of18subjectstestedsofar,weselected Results:Wedescribe150patients(104families) with56 14neworlow-frequencysinglenucleotidevariants(SNVs) Mendelian forms of CM. Our data show little overlap with in 10 of the 59 selected genes. Five variants in genes thegeneticcausesofpostnatalmicrocephaly.Wealsoshow associatedwithpediatric-onsetMD(ANO3,AP4S1,AP4E1 that a broad deﬁnition of primary microcephaly —as an and VPS13D), two (one missense and one intronic) in autosomalrecessiveformofnonsyndromicCMwithsevere GAD1 a gene considered tobe associated to CP, and seven postnatal deceleration of occipitofrontal circumference—is missense variants in candidate CP genes (ITPR1, NAA35, highlysensitivebuthasalimitedspeciﬁcity.Inaddition,we MCPH1,PACRG,SCN8A, SPTBN2 andTENM1).Ahomo- expand the overlap between primary microcephaly and zygous truncating mutation, already described in literature, microcephalic primordial dwarﬁsm both clinically (short was found in AP4S1. A few potentially disease-related staturein>52%ofpatientswithprimarymicrocephaly)and variants were detected in genes associated with recessive molecularly (e.g., we report the ﬁrst instance of CEP135- phenotypes:anapparentlyhomozygousmissensevariantin relatedmicrocephalicprimordialdwarﬁsm).Weexpandthe MCPH1 suspected tomask a heterozygous genedeletion is allelicandlocusheterogeneityofCMbyreporting37novel currently under characterization. A VPS13D and a GAD1 likely disease-causing variants in 27 disease genes, con- likely pathogenic variants were detected as compound ﬁrming the candidacy of ANKLE2, YARS, FRMD4A, and heterozygous in association respectively with a samesense THG1L, and proposing the candidacy of BPTF, MAP1B, and an intronic VUS both predicted as possibly altering CCNH, and PPFIBP1. splicing mechanisms. Although preliminary these results Conclusion: Our study reﬁnes the phenotype of CM, may contribute to the recently highlighted evidence of a expandsitsgeneticsheterogeneity,andinformstheworkup strong genetic base for these rare disorders. of children born with this developmental brain defect. M. Aspromonte: None. R. Polli: None. E. Leonardi: A.M. Alhashem: None. F. Alkuraya: None. R. None. E. Bettella: None. F. Cesca: None. M. Bellini: Shaheen: None. None. M. Nosadini: None. S. Bugin: None. M. Petrella: None. S. Sartori: None. A. Murgia: None. P09.080C Targeted gene panel for pediatric Movement Disorders P09.081D and Cerebral Palsy The Genetic Basis of paediatric movement disorders: experience from the SYNaPS Study M.Aspromonte1,2,R.Polli1,2,E.Leonardi1,2,E.Bettella1,2, F. Cesca1,2, M. Bellini1,2, M. Nosadini3, S. Bugin4, R. Marooﬁan, V. Salpietro, H. Houlden M. Petrella5, S. Sartori3, A. Murgia1,2 Molecular Neuroscience Institute of Neurology, london, 1Laboratory Molecular Genetics of Neurodevelopment, United Kingdom Department ofWomen’sand Children’sHealth; University of Padua, Padova, Italy, 2Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Introduction: Pediatric movement disorders which are Pediatrica (IRP), Città della Speranza, Padova, Italy, usually part of complex neurodevelopmental disorders 3Paediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology Unit, compriseawidegroupofneurologicaldiseaseswithhighly Department of Women's and Children's Health, University variable, often complex clinical presentation. Although of Padua, Padova, Italy, 4UOC Pediatrics San Bortolo causative mutations in >200 genes have been associated Hospital, Vicenza, Italy, 5UOC Pediatrics Angelo Hospital with various movement disorders, many patients remain Mestre, Venice, Italy without a precise genetic diagnosis. The SYNaPS Study, which is IRB/ethics approved and aimed at analysing Childhood Movement Disorders (MD), represent a hetero- unexplained ultra-rare neurological conditions, aim to geneous group of neurological conditions characterized by identifyunderlyinggeneticcausesinpatientswithpediatric abnormal voluntary or involuntary movements also recur- movement disorders by high-throughput genetic ring in Cerebral Palsy (CP), a permanent non progressive investigations. neurodevelopmental condition involving movement and Materials and Methods: As part of SYNaPS study a posturealterations.Althoughtheetiologyisoftenunknown, large cohort of well-phenotyped families recruited from thisspectrumofconditionshasastronggeneticcomponent. multiplepaediatricneurologyclinicsaroundtheworldwith The aim of this study was to design a customized targeted adiverseethnicbackgroundaffectedbydifferentchildhood1448 and early-onset movement disorders were genetically and microRNAs. Clinical data contains motor function score, clinically investigated. exome sequencing was performed muscleelastography(shearwaveelastography(SWE)),and for probands of around 500 families with any forms of whole body muscle computed tomography with ultralow movement disorders. Some of the unsolved individuals level irradiation. As a result, miR206 was signiﬁcantly weresubjectedtoacombinationofSNP-Arraygenotyping/ overexpressed in FCMD patients compared to normal homozygosity mapping, whole genome sequencing and controls. Correlation coefﬁcient of miR206 with serum long-read sequencing. CKlevel,serumcreatininelevel,andmotorfunctionscores Results:Overall,inthisstudyweresolvedaround50%of were also high. MiR 206 was especially high in FCMD the patients with movement disorders. We also uncovered patients with high muscle contents, suggesting remaining novel disease-causing genes in various families. Re-anno- sparing capacity of muscle regeneration. SWE showed tating/re-analysing the exome data along with more exten- signiﬁcantly high elasticity in biceps brachii and brachial sive data sharing and also employing homozygosity musclebutnothighinlowerextremitiesinFCMDpatients, mapping in some of the families increased the rate of compared to normal control, because of high content of fat diagnosis. inﬁltrationduetodisuseoflowerextremities.Inconclusion, Discussion: We made a molecular diagnosis for around serum miR206 and SWE is useful for monitoring muscle half of the families and characterised multiple new genes wasting progression and motor function level of FCMD. and ultra-rare movement disorders. A genetic diagnosis M. Taniguchi-Ikeda: None. R. Harada: None. M. provided either disease-speciﬁc treatment or effected man- Nagasaka: None. H. Kurahashi: None. T. Toda: None. agement for some patients with a genetic diagnosis, high- lighting the importance of early and speciﬁc diagnosis. P09.083B R. Marooﬁan: None. V. Salpietro: None. H. New genes involved in diseases with neurodegeneration Houlden: None. with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) P09.082A D. Martínez-Rubio1, C. Tello1, V. Lupo1, V. Rejas1, Evaluating motor functions and biomarkers for A. Darling2, S. Aguilera3, B. Pérez-Dueñas4, C. Espinos1 Fukuyama muscular dystrophy 1CentrodeInvestigaciónPríncipeFelipe(CIPF),Valencia, M. Taniguchi-Ikeda1, R. Harada2, M. Nagasaka3, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, H. Kurahashi4, T. Toda5 3Complejo Universitario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 4Hospital U. Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain 1DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,FujitaHealthUniversity, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan, 2Department of Rehabilitation, Introduction: Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumu- Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, lation (NBIA) is a heterogeneous group of inherited Japan, 3Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University neurologic disorders characterized by progressive move- Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan, 4Molecular ment disorders and abnormal accumulation of iron in the Genetics, Fujita Health University, Toyoake,Aichi, Japan, basalganglia.Thereare12genesthatresolve80%ofcases. 5DepartmentofNeurology,TheTokyoUniversityGraduate Our clinical series comprises 134 probands who suffered School of Medicine, Toyoake,Aichi, Japan fromNBIA andothermovementdisorders. Afteranalyzing theNBIAgenes,wehaveachievedthegeneticdiagnosisin Fukuyama muscular dystrophy (FCMD) is an autosomal 54 cases. The aim of the present study is to establish the recessive, severe childhood muscular dystrophy with brain molecular bases in patients without mutation in known anomaly.FCMD ismainlycaused byanancestral insertion NBIA genes. of 3-kb retrotransposal element into the 3’ untranslated MaterialsandMethods:Thirty-eightpatientshavebeen region of the causative gene, fukutin. Recently, we testiﬁed studied by a customized gene panel based on SureSelect that pathogenic exon trapping by the transposon cause Technology(Agilent),whichcomprises498genesinvolved splicing abnormality in FCMD. We have testiﬁed that inNBIA,ataxia,chorea,dystonia,parkinson,spasticataxia, antisenseoligonucleotidestargetingthissplicingcouldbea and spastic paraplegia. possible therapy in the future. However, there has been no Results: We have achieved a deﬁnite diagnosis in 19 biomarkersorfewreportonnaturalhistoryforassessingthe probands. Four of them presented with a neuroimaging disease level of FCMD. To ﬁnd speciﬁc serum biomarkers phenotypesuggestiveofNBIAandcarriednovelmutations and to comprehend natural history of FCMD patients, we in GLB1, FUCA1 and TPP1, and in one patient born to collected serum and clinical data from patients. We tested consanguineous parents, homozygote mutations were on serum biomarkers by measuring muscle speciﬁc identiﬁed in two genes, FBOX7 and DLD.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1449 Conclusions: We have solved 50% of cases. Except for ataxia (42%), 12 neuromuscular diseases (25%), 8 spastic FUCA1, these are the ﬁrst cases described of NBIA with paraplegia(17%),2abnormalmovements(4%)and6others mutations in GLB1, TPP1, and DLD/FBXO7. According (12%)forwhomthephenotypecouldnotbelabelledunder new cases are reported, the clinical and genetic spectrum a usual neurological syndrome. ES was interpreted in a associated with NBIA are expanding. Funding: Fundació solo-basedstrategy(94%)orintriowithparentalpool(6%). LaMaratódelaTV3,PROMETEO/2018/135,ISCIII-PI15/ Results: ES identiﬁed a causal diagnosis in 4/8 indivi- 00187 and ISCIII-P18/00147, cofund with FEDER funds. dualswithspasticparaplegia(50%),3/6“other”(50%),1/2 D. Martínez-Rubio: None. C. Tello: None. V. Lupo: withabnormalmovements(50%),5/12withneuromuscular None. V. Rejas: None. A. Darling: None. S. Aguilera: diseases (42%), 4/11 with isolated cerebellar ataxia (37%) None. B. Pérez-Dueñas: None. C. Espinos: None. and 2/9 with spinocerebellar ataxia (22%). Overall diag- nostic yield was of 40 %. P09.084C Conclusions: With such overall diagnostic yield, this Strong interest of exome sequencing in progressive study reinforces the diagnostic interest of ES in neuroge- neurological diseases netics, in all its ﬁelds, as this diagnostic yield ranges from 22% in spinocerebellar ataxia (which is higher than current Q. H. C. Thomas1,2,3, F. Tran Mau-Them2,4, A. Bruel2,4, yield of gene panels) to 50% in spastic paraplegia. It also A. Sorlin1,2,4, A. Fromont5, Y. Béjot3,6, M. Giroud3, includes situations in which clinical displays may be com- B. Daubail3, A. Jacquin-Piques3, M. Hervieu-Begue3, plex and hard to systematize. First-tier implementation T. Moreau5, G. Osseby3, P. Soichot3, S. Nambot2,1, would signiﬁcantly improve diagnostic yield in P. Callier2,4, A. Denomme-Pichon2,4, L. Faivre2,1, neurogenetics. A. Vitobello2,4, C. Philippe2,4, C. Thauvin-Robinet2,1,4, Q.H.C. Thomas: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. S. Moutton1,2 Bruel: None. A. Sorlin: None. A. Fromont: None. Y. Béjot: None. M. Giroud: None. B. Daubail: None. A. 1Genetics Center, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon Bourgogne Jacquin-Piques: None. M. Hervieu-Begue: None. T. University Hospital, F-21000 Dijon, France, Dijon, Moreau: None. G. Osseby: None. P. Soichot: None. S. France, 2INSERM, LNC UMR1231 team GAD, University Nambot: None. P. Callier: None. A. Denomme-Pichon: of Burgundy and Franche-Comté, F-21000 Dijon, France, None. L. Faivre: None. A. Vitobello: None. C. Philippe: Dijon, France, 3Service de Neurologie, Dijon University None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. S. Moutton: None. Hospital, F-21000 Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 4Functional Unity of innovative diagnosis for rare disease, P09.085D Dijon Bourgogne University Hospital, F-21000 Dijon, Elevated impact of chromatin regulating genes in the France, Dijon, France, 5Service de Pathologies genetic diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disabilities Inﬂammatoires du système nerveux central, Neurologie Général, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France, 6Dijon I. Diez, M. Martinez-Garcia, R. Sanchez-Alcudia, Stroke Registry, EA7460, Pathophysiology and C.Rodriguez-Solera,R.Perez-Carro,I.Sanchez-Navarro, Epidemiology of Cerebro-Cardiovascular Diseases E. Mata, E. Fernandez-Tabanera, S. Rosenstone, (PEC2), University Hospital of Dijon, University of D. Rodríguez, G. Benito, N. Sanchez-Bolivar, Burgundy, Dijon, France, Dijon, France M. Carcajona, P. Maietta, S. Alvarez Introduction: Neurogenetics represents a vast, complex, NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain everchangingdisciplinewhosediagnosiscurrentlyremains challenging, since clinical and/or imaging features fre- Introduction: Exome trio analysis is an effective strategy quently appear very unspeciﬁc, especially early in the toidentifypotentialcausalvariantsinraregeneticdisorders evolution (cerebellar ataxia, tremor, dystonia⋯). In mole- withclinicalheterogeneity.Inthisstudy,wefocusedonthe culardiagnosis,currentstrategiesusuallyincludesequential 404 probands with neurodevelopmental disabilities (NDD) investigationsthatmayleadtolong,tedious,expensiveand with causal variants on chromatin-regulating genes to disappointing patients care. Exome sequencing (ES) determine their frequency and their genotypic/phenotypic appearsapromisingapproachforneurogenetics,apartfrom characteristics by trio analysis. when nucleotide motif expansion disorders can be Patients and Methods: A cohort of 259 males and 145 suspected. females, with a median of 7 years old, was studied by trio Materials and Methods: We recruited 48 individuals wholeexomesequencing.LibrariesweregeneratedwithIon without cognitive development impairment, referred to our AmpliSeqTM or SureSelectXT and sequenced with Ion center for suspected neurogenetic disease: 20 cerebellar1450 ProtonTM/S5TMXL or NovaSeq 6000. The data were pro- by bioinformatic analysis. Parents and healthy offspring cessed using an in-house pipeline. were assessed for the candidate gene variants. We Results: A genetic diagnosis was established in 129 of delineated a novel neurodevelopmental disorders caused the 404 studied probands, leading to a diagnostic yield of by biallelic PPP1R21 loss of function variants, and 32%. Among the positive cases, 82 and 47 variants, were identiﬁed four previously unreported homozygous truncat- considered as casual or probably casual, respectively. Of ing PPP1R21 alleles. Pathogenic variants have been that diagnosed patients cohort, 26 probands (20%) had identiﬁed in a number of patients presenting broad clinical variants in chromatin-regulating genes (ARID1B, ATRX, phenotypes with autosomal recessive inheritance. By using EHMT1,SATB2,SMARCA2,andKMTfamily).Ofthe26 linkage analysis and exome or genome sequencing, variants identiﬁed, 58% were loss of function de novo recessive inactivating mutations in ADPRHL2 in six variantsassociatedwithanautosomaldominantinheritance. families have been recognized. It has been demonstrated Clinically, these patients shared NDDs phenotypic char- that SLC10A7 mutations reduce SLC10A7 protein expres- acteristics (psychomotor delay and/or autism spectrum dis- sionbyinvitrostudies.Wealsodescribedtheparticipation order)withshortstature,dysmorphicfeatures,epilepsyand/ of the APC2 and DEAF1 Genes as potential functional or digital malformations. candidates in neurodevelopmental diseases based on Conclusions:Thehaploinsufﬁciencyassociatedwithloss computational prediction by using several cellular tools. offunctionvariantsinthegenesimplicatedintheregulation Thecurrentfocusofourresearchisonneurodevelopmental of chromatin played a crucial role in neurodevelopment disorders, especially autosomal recessive. To further, disorders. These deleterious variants seemed to be asso- workup with next generation technologies, using several ciated with a common phenotype. A better delineation of cellular tools is essential for precise phenotype deﬁnition these clinical manifestations could help to better recognize and to understand the underlying disease mechanisms them in the clinical setting. E. Ghayoor Karimiani: None. I.Diez:None.M.Martinez-Garcia:None.R.Sanchez- Alcudia: None. C. Rodriguez-Solera: None. R. Perez- P09.087B Carro:None.I.Sanchez-Navarro:None.E.Mata:None. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 mutational spectrum in E. Fernandez-Tabanera: None. S. Rosenstone: None. D. Macedonian patients: A report of seven novel Rodríguez: None. G. Benito: None. N. Sanchez-Bolivar: pathogenic variants None. M. Carcajona: None. P. Maietta: None. S. Alvarez: None. M.Dimishkovska1,V.SabolicAvramovska2,E.Sukarova- Angelovska2, M. Kocova2, D. Plaseska-Karanﬁlska1 P09.086A Novel candidate genes in autosomal recessive 1Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and neurodevelopmental disorders: A three year cohort Biotechnology “Georgi D. Efremov”, Skopje, Macedonia, study The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and E. Ghayoor Karimiani Methodius”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Next Generation Genetic Clinic, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of Introduction: Pathogenic variants in NF1 gene are associated with autosomal dominant Neuroﬁbromatosis In a three-year cohort study, 313 Families with autosomal type 1 (NF1) which is a multi-systemic, neurocutaneous recessive pattern compatible with genetic disorders such as disorder with predisposition to benign or malignant lesions seizures, hypotonia, neurodegenerative disorder, progres- of the skin, nervous system and bone. Here we present the sive brain atrophy, developmental regression have been ﬁrst genetic study of NF1 in R. Macedonia. conducted. The progression in diagnosis of neurodevelop- MaterialandMethods:Since2014,atotalof33patients mental disorders has undergone considerable in the past suspected for NF1 were referred to our laboratory. The decade. In this cohort study we aim to explain our broad methodology included cDNA sequencing, next-generation research on identiﬁcation of six novel candidate genes sequencing using Illumina’s TruSight Cancer panel, direct (PPP1R21, ADPRHL2, APC2, SLC10A7, APC2, DEAF1) DNA sequencing and multiplex ligation probe on the patients with autosomal recessive neurodevelop- ampliﬁcation. mental disorders. A complete clinical and paraclinical Results: A total of 21 different pathogenic variants were examinationhasbeendonebyexpertspecialistsandclinical detected in 22 unrelated patients. The variants comprised geneticist.ExomeSequencingwasperformedandfollowed nine nonsense, six frameshift, two splicing, two missenseAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1451 mutations, one multi-exon deletion (exons 9-51) and one suspected, but genetic analysis of known NCL genes 1.4MbdeletionincludingtheentireNF1gene.Allvariants yielded negative results. were unique, detected in one patient/family with the Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was exception of 1.4 Mb deletion which was detected in two performedongenomicDNAoftheprobandandbothparents, unrelated patients. Genetic testing of family members was uponwritteninformedconsent.Variantswerealigned,ﬁltered available for 20 patients; the NF1 variation was inherited and prioritized to identify candidate variants. Validation and from an affected parent in 11 (55%), while in nine patients segregationanalysiswereperformedwithSangersequencing. (45%) it has arisen as a de novo event. Seven mutations Results: The proband was found to carry a novel het- were novel: one nonsense (c.5844C>G, p.Tyr1948Ter) and erozygous truncating variant in the IRF2BPL (Interferon sixframeshiftmutationsthatcauseprematureterminationof regulatory factor 2 binding protein-like) gene, arisen de the protein (c.208delA; c.1104_1107delTCAG; novo. Very recently, de novo heterozygous variants in this c.1480_1481delTT; c.2495_2496dupAC; c.4517delC; gene have been reported in 18 patients showing neurode- c.6971delA). Five of the novel mutations were inherited generative phenotypes variably deﬁned as neurodevelop- from an affected parent, while c.2495_2496dupAC and mental disorders with regression, abnormal movements, c.6971delA have occurred de novo. loss of speech and seizures or developmental epileptic Conclusion: Our study presents the NF1 mutational encephalopathies. spectruminR.Macedoniaandexpandstheglobalspectrum Conclusions:Thiscaseexpandsthephenotypicspectrum of NF1 pathogenic variants. of IRF2BPL to include NCL-like phenotypes. M. Dimishkovska: None. V. Sabolic Avramovska: Acknowledgements: This work was funded by the Eur- None. E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. M. Kocova: opean Research Council (ERC Starting Grant 260888), the None. D. Plaseska-Karanﬁlska: None. Pierfranco and Luisa Mariani Foundation (PADAPORT project) and the Italian Ministry of Health (Ricerca Fina- P09.088C lizzata 2013 NET-2013-02356160, Ricerca Corrente ‘Neu- A novel IRF2BPL truncating variant is responsible for roscienze Sperimentali’ and 5x1000 Anno 2016 to infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis-like phenotype Fondazione Santa Lucia). M.Ginevrino:None.R.Battini:None.S.Nuovo:None. M. Ginevrino1,2, R. Battini3,4, S. Nuovo5,2, A. Micalizzi6, A. Micalizzi: None. A. Simonati: None. I. Contaldo: A. Simonati7, I. Contaldo8, E. M. Valente1,2 None. E.M. Valente: None. 1Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, P09.089D Pavia, Italy, 2Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Fondazione Santa Genetic analysis of early-onset schizophrenia Lucia, Rome, Italy, 3IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa, Italy, 4Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, D. Krgović1,2, Š. Stangler Herodež1,2, N. Šenica3, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 5DepartmentofMedicine and H. Gregorič Kumperščak3,2, B. Aleksić4, N. Nemec5, Surgery,UniversityofSalerno,Salerno,Italy,6Laboratoryof A. Zagorac1, N. Kokalj Vokač1,2 MedicalGenetics,BambinoGesùChildren'sHospital,Rome, Italy,7DepartmentofNeuroscience,Biomedicine,Movement- 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Medical Neurology (Child Neurology) and Neuropathology, Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Medical Faculty, Policlinico GB Rossi, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 3Department of 8Unit of Child Neurology, IRCCS Policlinico Gemelli Paediatrics, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Foundation, Catholic University, Rome, Italy Slovenia, 4Graduate School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan, Introduction: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are 5Department of Animal Science, Chair of Genetics, Animal neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorders character- Biotechnology and Immunology, Biotechnical faculty, ized by the progressive loss of both motor and cognitive University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia skills, myoclonic epilepsy and the presence of lysosomal deposits with characteristic ultrastructural features, due to Introduction: Early onset schizophrenia (EOS) is rare mutationsinthirteendistinctgenes. Here,wereport achild complex psychiatric disorder with polygenic inheritance. presenting a neurological disorder characterized by motor PreliminarydatasuggestthatEOShashighergeneticliability and cognitive regression, spastic-dystonic tetraparesis, tothedisease. Therefore,we preformedgenetictestingusing sporadic myoclonus, typical EEG abnormalities and lyso- both molecular karyotyping (arrayCGH) and next generation somedepositsofgranularosmiophilicmaterialwithtubular sequencing (NGS) for determination of copy number and ﬁngerprint-like structures. A diagnosis of NCL was variations (CNVs) and single nucleotide variants (SNVs),1452 affecting the possible schizophrenia-associated genes in a patients with suspected monogenic disorders using Illumina small group of Slovenian children diagnosed with EOS. NextSeq 500 and in-house analysis software. 3110 samples Material and Methods: Our study included 49 patients. were sequenced using Illumina TruSightOne enrichment In all patients molecular karyotyping was performed, fol- (“clinicalexome”);594samplesbywhole-exomesequencing; lowing the medical exome sequencing (Illumina TruSight 3142samplesusingourcustom2000-genesplatform,focused One capture). Considering the polygenicity of the disorder, on epilepsy and neuromuscular disorders. A deﬁnitive wealsoanalysedenrichmentofthelistofgenesharbouring molecular diagnosis could be estimated in 2238 cases possibly deleterious variants in Gene Ontology terms (GO) (32,69%), 1043 (15,24%) having a possible diagnosis with by using GeneMania version 3.4.1 Cytoscape plugin. a need for additional testing. We compare a diagnostic yield Results: In 12% (6/49) of children a clinically signiﬁcant our epilepsy panel (Table 1) and neuromuscular diseases CNVwasdetected,thatcouldbeassociatedwiththedisorder. panel (Table 2) with results of other published studies. In 14% (6/43) of patients pathogenic SNV were detected, although no clear genotype-phenotype correlations could be Table 1 made.Therefore,usingtheGOterms,weassembledalistof GenomedKodera Trump Møller Butler genes harbouring probably deleterious variants. etal.,2013 etal.,2016etal.,2016etal.,2017 Conclusion:Theaimofthisstudywastoassemblealistof Deﬁnitive 27,7% 23% 18,58% 22,67% 18,29% genes harbouring probably pathogenic variants in Slovenian diagnosis patients with EOS by performing the molecular karyotyping Possible 15,48% andNGSmethod.A12%ofpatientsarecarriersofclinically diagnosis signiﬁcant CNV. NGS analysis and enrichment analysis No 56,82% showedthatgeneontologytermsrelatedtoschizophreniaare diagnosis enriched in genes, selected by our ﬁltering. The over- Genecount 1081 35 46 46 110 represented pathways could be associated with pathology of Numberof 1693 53 323 216 339 schizophrenia in Slovenian population. patients D. Krgović: None. Š. Stangler Herodež: None. N. Šenica: None. H. Gregorič Kumperščak: None. B. Aleksić: None. N. Nemec: None. A. Zagorac: None. N. Table 2 Kokalj Vokač: None. GenomedEvilä Chae Dai etal.,2016 etal.,2015 etal.,2015 P09.090A Diagnostic yield of ngs-based epilepsy and Deﬁnitive 44,67% 15% 48,8% 65% neuromuscular disease panel in russia population diagnosis Possible 12,12% I. V. Kanivets1,2, A. A. Sharkov1,3, S. A. Korostelev4,1, diagnosis D. V. Pyankov1, F. A. Konovalov1, I. F. Komar'kov1, Nodiagnosis 43,21% K. V. Gorgisheli1, O. G. Novoselova1, L. O. Rash1, Genecount 836 180 579 399 V. V. Zakharova1 Numberof 553 61 43 55 patients 1Genomedltd,Moscow,RussianFederation,2Fsbeirussian medical academy continuous professional education, Mutationfrequencyanalysisshowedthatthetop20genes Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Veltischev Research and account for 57,51% and 46,72% deﬁnitive diagnosis in Clinical Institute for Pediatrics of the Pirogov RNRMU, epilepsy and neuromuscular disease panel respectively. Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Federal Nevertheless, the use of large panels is justiﬁed due to State Autonomous Educational Institution of Higher higher diagnostic yield and cost-effectiveness. Education I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical I.V. Kanivets: None. A.A. Sharkov: None. S.A. Kor- University of the Ministry of Health of the Russian ostelev: None. D.V. Pyankov: None. F.A. Konovalov: Federation (Sechenov University), Moscow, Russian None. I.F. Komar'kov: None. K.V. Gorgisheli: None. O. Federation G. Novoselova: None. L.O. Rash: None. V.V. Zakharova: None. Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) are a common cause of congenital anomalies, developmental delay, epilepsy, neuro- P09.091B muscular disorders, cardiovascular and other disorders. In Identiﬁcation of potential new genes involved in 2014-2019 we are performed 6846 NGS-based tests for autosomal recessive form of Parkinson's diseaseAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1453 C.Tesson,A.Honoré,H.Bertrand,V.Drouet,S.Lesage, Radiology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of A. Brice Tartu,Tartu,Estonia,6YaleUniversitySchoolofMedicine, Department of Genetics, New Haven, CT, United States, - INSERM U1127, CNRS UMR 7225, UPMC Université 7Eye Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, Paris 06 UMR S1127, Sorbonne Université Institut du C, 8Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, Paris, France United States, 9Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston Children`s Hospital, Parkinson disease (PD) affects 1% of the population above Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States 65 years. It is characterized by the triad of symptoms: tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia. To date the identiﬁed PEHO syndrome (MIM 260565) is characterized by genes associated with early-onset (EO, >40 years) auto- progressive encephalopathy with edema, hypsarrhythmia, somal recessive (AR) PD only explain 45%, other genes and optic atrophy, ﬁrst described in 14 Finnish patients. A remaintobediscovered. The aim oftheworkistoidentify homozygous missense substitution c.92C>T (p.Ser31Leu) new genes involved in AR EO PD, using consanguineous in ZNHIT3 was identiﬁed as the primary cause of PEHO PD families and applying genotyping on DNA microarrays syndrome in Finland. and NGS technologies. Case report: The index patient was hospitalised at 1m Using a series of 99 families with conﬁrmed con- duetomuscularhypotoniaandlethargy.BrainMRIshowed sanguinity, we looked for homozygous loss of function or mildlydilatedlateralventricles,aporencephaliccystonthe missensemutationspredicteddeleteriousinregionoflossof left,hypoplasticoccipitallobesandabsenceofmyelininthe homozygosity.Thenweﬁrstfocusedonvariantsharedbyat cerebellarwhitematter.At10m,generalizedseizuresstarted least two families. We identiﬁed mutations in PSMF1 an (myoclonus and infantile spasms). EEG showed hypsar- interactor of FBXO7. In one family, only this variant rhythmia. The child was blind at 17m; she had pale and remains, moreover both mutations code for amino acid smalldisks,andtemporaldiskpallor.At8y,shehassevere highly conserved upon evolution. microcephaly (-4SD), no active movements, severe spasti- Most of the candidate’s genes are private genes high- city, and scoliosis. Her face is edematous with an opened lightinggeneticheterogeneityofPD.Therefore,inasecond mouth appearance. Brain MRI showed severe cerebral, time we hypothesized that some candidate’s genes can be cerebellar and brainstem atrophy, thin and short corpus involved in a common pathway. Using ClusterProﬁler we callosumandalmostabsentperiventricularwhitematter.To performedGOtermenrichmentanalyses,thenwewereable identify the underlying etiology of this phenotype, trio to grouped together some genes and were able to see an exome was performed and negative, after which trio gen- statistical enrichment in autophagy pathway. ome sequencing was performed. We identiﬁed a strong candidate gene for AR-PD: Result:Twohighqualityheterozygousmissensevariants PSMF1.Furtherfunctionaldataareneededtostrengthenthe inZNHIT3genewereidentiﬁed:thec.92C>Tp.(Ser31Leu) role of this gene in PD, possibly affecting the proteasome variant(NM_004773.3),whichwaspreviouslydescribedin activity and α-synucleine aggregation. We will also con- Finnish patients and the novel variant c.41G>T p.(Cys14- tinue to investigate pathway analyses in order to identify Phe).Thereareeightheterozygotesandnohomozygotesfor candidates for PD in our families. thelattervariantingnomADdatabaseandmultiplein-silico C. Tesson: None. A. Honoré: None. H. Bertrand: pathogenicity predicting algorithms indicated a damaging None.V.Drouet:None.S.Lesage:None.A.Brice:None. effect. Conclusion:WereportedtheﬁrstpatientoutsideFinland P09.093D with conﬁrmed ZNHIT3 variants causing PEHO syndrome. PEHO syndrome caused by compound heterozygote Funding: Estonian Research Council grants PUT355, variants in ZNHIT3 gene PRG471, and PUTJD827. K. Muru: None. E. Õiglane-Shlik: None. P. Ilves: K. Muru1,2, E. Õiglane-Shlik3, P. Ilves4,5, S. Pajusalu1,2,6, None. S. Pajusalu: None. I. Kuus: None. M.H. Wojcik: I. Kuus7, M. H. Wojcik8,9, T. Reimand1,2, K. Õunap1,2,8 None. T. Reimand: None. K. Õunap: None. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, P09.094A Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Exome-based bottom-up approach of molecular ClinicalGenetics,InstituteofClinicalMedicine,University diagnostics in a clinically ambiguous family with a of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Children`s Clinic, Tartu polystigmatized patient revealed ultra-rare NEDD4L University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Radiology Clinic of associated periventricular nodular heterotopia Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Department1454 M.Pecimonova1,2,D.Smolak1,2,J.Budis1,3,4,M.Lichvar1, P09.095B J. Turna2,3,4, J. Radvanszky1,4,5, T. Szemes1,2,4 Pitt-Hopkins syndrome caused by a pathogenic splicing variant 1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius P. Sparber1, A. Filatova1, I. Anisimova1, A. Chuhrova1, University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Slovak Centre of M. Skoblov1,2 Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia, 1Research center of medical genetics, Moscow, Russian 5Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Federation, 2School of Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, University, Vladivostok, Russian Federation Bratislava, Slovakia Introduction: Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a rare inherited Introduction: Periventricular nodular heterotopia-7 neurologicalcondition,associatedwithheterozygouspatho- (PVNH7) is an ultra-rare neurodegenerative disorder genic variant in the TCF4 gene or with deletion of the affecting proper neuronal migration during neurogenesis. 18q21.2 chromosome region, in which the TCF4 gene is Only seven patients carrying pathogenic variants in the located.Inthepresentstudy wereport anovel clinicalcase NEDD4L gene, associated with PVNH7, were reported so of a 7-year-old patient with global development delay and far. We report a polystigmatized 2-year-old boy having multiply minor dysmorphic features. signiﬁcant symptomatologic overlap with PVNH7, how- Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was ever, showing also symptoms falling outside performed on Ion S5 next-generation sequencing system. PVNH7 symptomatology. His brother presents with some TheidentiﬁedvariantwasconﬁrmedbySangersequencing. of the proband´s symptoms, speciﬁcally those falling RT-PCR analysis was performed using total RNA isolated outside PVNH7 symptomatology. from patient ﬁbroblasts. HEK293 cells were transfected Materials and Methods: The boy, his brother and their with minigene plasmid vector containing the variant of parentsweresubjectedtowhole-exomesequencing.Variant interest. Splicing alterations were validated using RT-PCR prioritization was performed using an inheritance-pattern with further Sanger sequencing. and phenotype-driven top-down approach, or by a bottom- Results: Whole exome sequencing revealed a previously up approach, beginning with the identiﬁed known patho- undescribed heterozygous variant in the intron 11 of the genic variants in the proband’s data. TCF4 gene - NM_001083962: c.922+5G>C. Segregation Results:Becauseofuncertaintiesinsymptomatologyand analysis showed that the variant is de novo. Functional inheritance pattern, the top-down approach was hard to analysis using two independent approaches: RT-PCR ana- apply. The bottom-up approach, however, identiﬁed a lysis of total RNA extracted from patient ﬁbroblast and a known pathogenic variant, NM_001144967.2(NEDD4L): splicing minigene assay, showed that c.922+5G>C variant c.2677G>A:p.Glu893Lys, in the proband’s genome, disrupt the donor splicing site of the intron 11 leading to a absenting in any other analyzed family member. This de completeskippingofexon11,resultinginaframeshiftand novo variant explained symptoms overlapping those repor- premature stop codon formation p.(Ser264GlnFsTer83). tedforPVNH7,suchasdelayedpsychomotordevelopment Conclusion: Therefore, after performing functional ana- and intellectual disability, absenting speech and walking, lysisweclassifythec.922+5G>Cvariantaspathogenicand hypotonia, strabismus, cleft palate, microretrognathia, and disease causing in our patient. 2-3 toe syndactyly. Symptoms shared with the brother, on P. Sparber: None. A. Filatova: None. I. Anisimova: theotherhand,werenotexplainedbythisvariant.Theseare None. A. Chuhrova: None. M. Skoblov: None. most probably not extended phenotypes of PVNH7, rather an independent clinical entity. P09.096C Conclusion: Our case highlights: 1) the usefulness of a Expanding the phenotypic spectrum associated to bottom-up approach of causative variant identiﬁcation PMPCA mutations during differential diagnostics of patients/families having unclear/overlapping phenotypes; 2) the importance of V. Serpieri1, R. Battini2,3, S. Nuovo4,5, M. Ginevrino1,4, reporting yet undescribed symptoms of known disorders, F. Tinelli2, E. Valente1,4 found in single patients/families, with special care. M. Pecimonova: None. D. Smolak: None. J. Budis: 1Dept. of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, None. M. Lichvar: None. J. Turna: None. J. Rad- Italy, 2IRCCS Stella Maris Foundation, Pisa, Italy, 3Dept. vanszky: None. T. Szemes: None. of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, PIsa, Italy, 4Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Fondazione SantaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1455 Lucia, Rome, Italy, 5Dept. of Medicine and Surgery, 1ClinicalinstituteofMedicalGenetics,Ljubljana,Slovenia, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy 2University of Udine, Udine, Italy Introduction: Biallelic missense mutations in the PMPCA The pontocerebellar hypoplasias (PCH) represent a hetero- gene, encoding mitochondrial processing peptidase alpha- geneous group of conditions characterized by structural subunit,wereinitiallyidentiﬁed in19individualsfrom ﬁve abnormalitiesofcentralnervoussystem,typicallyinvolving familieswithearlyonset,non-progressivecerebellarataxia, cerebellum and ventral pons. In the present study, we developmental delay and intellectual disability. Brain MRI propose a novel association between biallelic variants in showed non-progressive cerebellar atrophy; muscle biopsy ATOH1 and PCH with severe neurodevelopmental dis- wasnormal,althoughmitochondrialcomplexesactivitywas order. We report a family with two children affected with mildly decreased insome cases. Subsequently, twocousins pontocerebellar dysplasia, severe motor and speech delay were reported with amore severe phenotypeofprogressive and sensorineural hearing loss. Using exome sequencing, mitochondrial encephalopathy, including profound devel- we identiﬁed a homozygous rare missense variant in opmentaldelay,ptosis,ophthalmoplegia,weakness,respira- ATOH1 in both affected probands. ATOH1 encodes atonal toryinsufﬁciency,blindnessandlacticacidemia.BrainMRI bHLHtranscriptionfactor1,acoreneurogenictranscription showed progressive cerebral-cerebellar atrophy, with a factorthatregulatescelldifferentiationincerebellum,drives lactate peak at spectroscopy. Muscle biopsy demonstrated development of inner ear hair cells and is essential in enlarged, structurally abnormal mitochondria. Finally, a 7- developmentofneurosensorysystems.DisruptionofAtoh1 year-oldboywasrecentlyreportedwithpsychomotordelay, in mouse models was previously shown to result in severe spastic-ataxic gait and regression. He had elevated blood cerebellar hypoplasia and hearing loss. The identiﬁed lactate and abnormal muscle biopsy with mitochondrial variant (NM_005172.1:c.481C>G, p.Arg161Gly) substi- damage. Besides cerebellar atrophy, brain MRI showed tutes a highly conserved residue in the DNA binding bilateral symmetric hyperintensity in the striatum (Leigh- domain of Atoh1. It is absent from control populations of like features). the gnomAD project and our in-house database of 3000 Case Report: We report a 12-year-old girl carrying two exomes. We performed molecular modelling, which novel, likely pathogenic PMPCA missense variants, who predicted that this change can affect DNA binding afﬁnity presented a complex, non-progressive early-onset pheno- of Atoh1 through distortion of its contacts to DNA and type of spastic ataxia with superimposed generalized through remodelling of the helical part of HLH domain. In hyperkinetic movements, intellectual disability, micro- conclusion, we report a novel potential genetic cause of cephaly and epilepsy. Several brain MRIs showed non- developmental brain anomalies, due to mutations in progressive cerebellar atrophy and bilateral symmetric T2- ATOH1. Although the evidence is currently too limited to hyperintensity and hypotrophy of both caudate and puta- conclusively establish its causality, this report may present men, resembling striatal necrosis. Blood lactate and MRI basis for further studies on the role of ATOH1 in human spectroscopy were normal. disease. Conclusions: This case further expands the clinical T. Višnjar: None. K. Writzl: None. G. Bergant: None. spectrum associated with PMPCA mutations to include a O.Maloku:None.F.Fogolari:None.A.Maver:None.B. complex encephalopathy without obvious mitochondrial Peterlin: None. involvement. The association of non-progressive cerebellar atrophywithbilateralstriatalhyperintensitymayrepresenta P09.098A “red ﬂag” for this genetic condition. The effect of APOE in Alzheimer’s disease is age Acknowledgements:MarianiFoundation,ItalianMinistry dependent; demonstrated in the UK Biobank data of Health V. Serpieri: None. R. Battini: None. S. Nuovo: None. E. A. Baker1, M. Bracher-Smith2, G. Menzies1, M. Ginevrino: None. F. Tinelli: None. E. Valente: None. J. Williams1,2, V. Escott-Price1,2 P09.097D 1UK Dementia Research Institute at Cardiff University, Novel association of biallelic ATOH1 variants with Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Medical Research Council pontocerebellar hypoplasia, developmental delay and Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, hearing loss Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United T. Višnjar1, K. Writzl1, G. Bergant1, O. Maloku2, Kingdom F. Fogolari2, A. Maver1, B. Peterlin11456 Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a devastating neurodegenera- Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7Universidade Federal do tive condition with signiﬁcant genetic heritability. The ABC, Santo André, Brazil apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the strongest genetic risk factor for AD. The risk of APOE in AD varies with age. DNA methylation plays a role in the regulation of gene This age-related genetic heterogeneity has been shown in expressioninresponsetoenvironmentalfactors.Aprevious theAlzheimer’sDiseaseGeneticsConsortiumdata;thereis longitudinal study of our group found 66 genes differen- little genetic correlation between two age groups (60-79 tially expressed in the blood of youths who presented an yearsvs.80+years)andtheheritabilityexplainedbySNPs increase of dimensional psychopathology after a 3-year on chromosome-19 was larger at younger ages. follow-up.Thesegeneswereexclusivelyfoundinthegroup WeaimtofurtherdemonstratethatAPOEimpactstherisk with the emergence of psychopathology and were not of AD in younger subjects, whereas older subjects are differentially expressed in the longitudinal control groups. inﬂuenced by the polygenic effect of variants outside the Here, we aimed to identify whether the gene expression of APOE region. these 65 genes were inﬂuenced by changes in DNA TheUKBiobankdataisalarge(N=443,019)prospective methylationinthebloodofthesameindividuals.Moreover, cohort of individuals containing genetic data for 7,654,308 for those markers associated with gene expression, we imputedSNPs.IndividualsinBiobankarerelativelyyoung, veriﬁed whether DNA methylation was inﬂuenced by with only 92 AD cases. Polygenic risk score (PRS) is a adversities experienced by the youths during the 3-year method to combine the effect of genetic variants. We follow-up. Then, we compared gene expression and DNA computed the PRS for individuals in Biobank, using sum- methylation data in peripheral blood samples (n=44) mary statistics from the largest AD GWAS to weight obtainedfrom22youthsbeforeandafterdevelopingsevere the score. psychopathology. Life adversities variables were generated ADPRSshowsanassociationwith AD,butthiseffect is by using a latent modelling approach with a bifactor removed when the PRS excludes chromosome-19. When structure. We identiﬁed 11 differentially expressed genes consideringfamilyproxiesofAD;siblingproxiesshowthe regulatedbyDNAmethylation.Amongthese11genes,the same pattern, however, parental proxies remain associated methylation of LMF2 and ETS1 was inﬂuenced by factors withPRSevenaftertheremovalofchromosome-19.Thisis describing adversities related to interpersonal, context similarly shown in biological pathways; beta-amyloid reg- change, school, health/loss and unpredictable events. Also, ulation, protein-lipid complex and APP regulation. This is these inﬂuences persisted when modelling a general also demonstrated using age-stratiﬁed analyses which dis- adversity factor. LMF2 methylation has been associated play a stronger association with AD and higher mean PRS with Alzheimer's disease and ETS1 is a transcriptional in AD cases in the older cohort. factor involved in downstream biological pathways. These E.A. Baker: None. M. Bracher-Smith: None. G. results provide further evidence that life adversities and the Menzies: None. J. Williams: None. V. Escott- emergence of psychopathology are functionally linked by Price: None. changes in DNA methylation and, consequently, in gene expression. P09.099B L.M. Spíndola: None. D. Micali: None. M.L. Santoro: DNA methylation as link between life adversities and None. J. Schafer: None. P.M. Pan: None. V.K. Ota: emergence of psychopathology None. G. Xavier: None. C.M. Carvalho: None. F. Talarico: None. R. Pellegrino: None. E. Brietzke: None. L. M. Spíndola1, D. Micali1, M. L. Santoro1, J. Schafer2, R. Grassi-Oliveira: None. J.J. Mari: None. A. Gadelha: P. M. Pan1, V. K. Ota1, G. Xavier1, C. M. Carvalho1, None. E.C. Miguel: None. L.A. Rohde: None. R.A. F. Talarico1, R. Pellegrino3, E. Brietzke1, R. Grassi- Bressan: None.D.R.Mazzoti:None.J.R.Sato:None.G. Oliveira4, J. J. Mari1, A. Gadelha1, E. C. Miguel5, A. Salum: None. H. Hakonarson: None. S.I. L. A. Rohde2, R. A. Bressan1, D.R. Mazzoti6, J. R. Sato7, Belangero: None. G. A. Salum2, H. Hakonarson3, S. I. Belangero1 P09.100C 1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, No individual prediction of clinical outcome of ultra- 2UniversidadeFederaldoRioGrandedoSul,PortoAlegre, high-risk individuals by the polygenic risk scores Brazil, 3The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Pontifícia Universidade Q. He1, O. Kebir2,3, G. Houle1, P. A. Dion1, Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil, G. A. Rouleau1, M. Krebs2,4, B. Chaumette1,2,4 5Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 6University of Pennsylvania,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1457 1Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada, F.Sarayloo,A.Dionne-Laporte,H.Catoire,D.Rochefort, 2Université Paris Descartes; Bio Sorbonne Paris Cité; P. Dion, G. Rouleau INSERM, Laboratoire de Physiopathologie des Maladies Psychiatriques, Centre de Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada UMR894,GDR3557-InstitutdePsychiatrie,Paris,France, 3Centre Hospitalier Sainte-Anne, Service d’Addictologie « Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a common complex Moreau de Tours », GHU Paris Psychiatrie et disorder for which different genes and environmental Neurosciences, Paris, France, 4Centre Hospitalier Sainte- elements are considered risk factors. Such a mixed nature Anne, Service hospitalo-universitaire, GHU Paris makes itchallengingtocharacterizethedefective pathways Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, Paris, France associated with the condition. Here we conducted a genome-widetranscriptome(RNA-Seq)studyandobserved Introduction: The identiﬁcation of clinical ultra-high-risk how the gene reported to present the most signiﬁcant state for psychosis (UHR) is now allowed in clinical association with RLS, MEIS1, acts as a regulator over the practice by assessing attenuated symptoms. Prediction of expression of additional genes. Interestingly these addi- the emergence of psychosis and dimensional clinical tional genes appear to entail some of the pathogenic outcomes is important for early intervention. The results pathways known to be linked to RLS. Our data revealed of recent large-scale genome-wide association studies HMOX1, TFR2 and VDR, three genes encoding products (GWAS) expanded our knowledge of the genetic factors with RLS relevant functions, to be regulated by MEIS1 in and suggested a polygenic model of inheritance of human cells where the expression of MEIS1 was either psychiatric disorders. We aimed to test if the individual increased or prevented. These manipulations of MEIS1 in polygenicrisk scores(PRS)couldpredictfor conversionto cellsrevealedmineralabsorptiontobeanenrichedpathway psychosis and dimensional outcomes and if the converters inregardtoMEIS1regulatoryroleasatranscriptionfactor. to psychosis have polygenic risk for psychiatric disorders. The same enrichment is observed in postmortem brain Materials and Methods: In the French cohort ICAAR, regions(thalamusandpons)obtainedfromasubsetofRLS we collected longitudinal data of 104 individuals with at- patients presenting changes in MEIS1 expression. The risk mental state enrolled in a 1-year follow-up study. expression of genes encoding metallothioneins (MTs) was Clinical assessments included CAARMS, PANSS, observed to be affected across the different RNA-Seq MADRS, YMRS, SOFAS and CGI. The conversion to datasets. MTs are highly relevant to RLS as they bind psychosis was characterized using the CAARMS-deﬁned intracellularmetalsandinteractwithferritinswhichmanage psychosis onset threshold. We genotyped more than iron levels. Overall, our study suggests that in a subset of 500,000commonvariantsandcomputedfourdifferentPRS patients, the contribution of MEIS1 to RLS is associated to based on the data of four GWAS from the Psychiatric its transcriptional regulation of other genes more directly Genomics Consortium. involved in cellular pathways relevant to RLS. Results: The PRS from currently available GWAS were F. Sarayloo: None. A. Dionne-Laporte: None. H. poor predictors of the conversion to psychosis, and there Catoire: None. D. Rochefort: None. P. Dion: None. G. was no signiﬁcant difference between converters and non- Rouleau: None. converters. The PRS were not correlated with any pheno- typicscaleatthebaselinemeasurement(M0)andatthelast P09.102A measurement (after 6 months or 12 months). AlterationsinGABAA1ReceptorinRettsyndrome:the Conclusion: The PRS cannot be used in clinical practice necessity of early GABAergic modulation as a to predict the individual risk of conversion to psychosis. therapeutic strategy Further studies are needed to examine the correlation between genetic variance and clinical outcomes in psy- A.Oyarzabal1,2,3,C.Xiol-Viñas2,4,A.Castells5,C.Grau1,2, chiatric disorders. M.O'Callaghan2,3,6,G.Fernández5,A.Pascual-Alonso2,4, Q. He: None. O. Kebir: None. G. Houle: None. P.A. S.Alcántara7,M.Pineda2,J.Armstrong2,5,X.Altafaj8,À. Dion: None. G.A. Rouleau: None. M. Krebs: None. B. García-Cazorla1,2,3 Chaumette: None. 1Synaptic Metabolism Lab, Neurology Department, P09.101D Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut Mineralabsorption is an enriched pathwayin the brain Pediàtric de Recerca, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, regions of restless legs syndrome patients with lower Barcelona, Spain, 3CIBERER (Biomedical Network MEIS1 expression Research Center for Rare Diseases), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 4Sant Joan de Déu research1458 foundation, Barcelona, Spain, 5Genetics Department, L. Li1, A. Knickle2, J. Dooley1,2, K. Harrison1,2, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 6Neurology L. Penney1,2 Department,HospitalSantJoandeDéu,Barcelona,Spain, 7Neural Development Lab, Departament de Patologia i 1Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 2IWK Health Terapèutica Experimental, Institut de Neurociències, Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada Universidat de Barcelona, IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 8Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, Neonatal Lethal Rigidity and Multifocal Seizure Syndrome Neuropharmacology and Pain Unit, University of (RMFSL)isarareautosomalrecessiveconditioncharacter- Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain izedbyintractableseizures,hypertonia,autonomicinstabil- ity and early death. Mutations in BRAT1 (Breast Cancer 1- Introduction: Rett syndrome (RTT; OMIM#312750) is a associated ataxia telangiectasia mutated activation-1) have severe neurological disorder which mainly affects young been associated with severe RMFSL as well as related females and is usually caused by mutations in the gene phenotypes of varying clinical severity. We report on a MECP2. However, not much is known about which femalebaby who presentedwithmild dysmorphic features, pathways can be disrupted in RTT downstream MeCP2 striking hypertonicity, seizures with a burst suppression dysfunction. Nevertheless, recent studies demonstrate the pattern on EEG and apneic spells shortly after birth who possible implication of a disturbance in inhibitory circuits, died at 2 months of age. Chromosomal microarray analysis especially of the GABAergic inhibitory neurons, in RTT using a combined non-polymorphic /SNP probe based pathophysiology. platform (Affymetrix CytoScan HD) did not identify any Methods: This work analyses changes in expression of copy number variations but several stretches of absence of the most common subunits of GABA(A) ionotropic recep- heterozygosity(AOH)wereidentiﬁedincludingaregionon tors in different models of RTT (in vitro cell culture and chromosome 7p22.3p22.1. As BRAT1 is contained within in vivo mouse model) by shRNA knock-down, qRT-PCR, this region and the clinical phenotype was suggestive of western blot and immunocytochemistry, as well as in post- RMFSL, BRAT1 sequencing was performed. A homozy- mortembrainsamplesofRTTpatientsbyRNAseq,withthe gous, previously unreported pathogenic mutation aimofﬁndingasuitabletherapeutictargetfortreatingRTT. (c.1013dupC) was identiﬁed, conﬁrming the diagnosis of Results: We observed a direct relationship between RFMSL. To our knowledge, this is the seventh report of MeCP2 and GABA (A) receptor subunit a1 (Gabra1) RFMSL due to a homozygous BRAT1 mutation in the expression in cell lines and primary cultured neurons. Pro- literature, and the ﬁrst one reported in a family of French tein analyses of female Mecp2+/- and control mice at dif- Acadian background from Atlantic Canada. This case ferent developmental stages conﬁrmed our previous demonstrates the utility of SNP-based microarrays which ﬁndings and pointed towards the importance of the devel- can detect regions of AOH and help narrow the differential opmental status in this relationship, highlighting synaptic diagnosis and approach to subsequent diagnostic protein expression changes in presymptomatic stages of investigations. RTT. RNAseq results in brain samples of RTT patients L. Li: None. A. Knickle: None. J. Dooley: None. K. conﬁrmed the importance of the time frame when studying Harrison: None. L. Penney: None. RTT unbalanced neurotransmission. Conclusions: Our results strongly support Gabra1 as a P09.104C noveltherapeutictargetfortreatingRTT.Proteinexpression Changes in expression levels of some microRNAs in the changes in presymptomatic stages of RTT highlight the ratfrontallobeatdifferenttimesofhealingperiodafter importance of early therapeutic strategies targeting neuro- experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage transmission. Grants: Mi Princesa Rett and FIS (PI15/ 01159, PI16/00851 and PI15/01082 ISCIII and FEDER). F. B. Ergen1, D. Turgut Cosan2,1, T. Kandemir3, A.Oyarzabal:None.C.Xiol-Viñas:None.A.Castells: F. Mutlu4, T. E. Cosan3,1 None. C. Grau: None. M. O'Callaghan: None. G. Fer- nández: None. A. Pascual-Alonso: None. S. Alcántara: 1Department of Interdisciplinary Neuroscience, Health None.M.Pineda:None.J.Armstrong:None.X.Altafaj: Science Institute, Eskişehir Osmangazi University, None. À. García-Cazorla: None. Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Department ofMedicalBiology, Health Science Institute, Eskişehir Osmangazi University, P09.103B Eskisehir,Turkey,3DepartmentofNeurosurgery,Facultyof Absence of Heterozygosity Flags BRAT1 and Leads to Medicine, Eskişehir Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, theDiagnosisofNeonatalLethalRigidityandMultifocal Turkey, 4Department of Biostatistics, Health Science Seizure Syndrome Institute,EskişehirOsmangaziUniversity,Eskisehir,TurkeyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1459 the NOP56 gene causing RNA gain of function is Introduction: The expression of certain miRNAs, such as responsible for the disease. Normal size alleles vary from miR-132, miR-134 and miR-138, which are thought to be 3 to 14 repeats, pathogenic alleles have more than 650 associated with synaptic plasticity and neurological func- repeats, and intermediate alleles are of uncertain tions,canaffectthedensityandvolumeofdendriticspines. signiﬁcance. In this study, it was aimed to observe how the levels of Materials and Methods: Our cohort consisted of different miRNAs in the frontal lobes of experimental 98 selected index patients. 92 patients came from an ataxia subarachnoidhemorrhage(SAH)inducedratswerechanged cohort (n=600), negative for the most common SCAs in different time intervals (SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, SCA7), with pedigree and Materials and Methods: Adult female Sprague-Dawley phenotype consistent with SCA36 and 6 came from a sus- rats(n=21)aredividedinto3groups:control-group(n=7), pected Kennedy’s disease cohort (n=200), negative for the 7th day post-SAH-group (n=7) and 14th day post-SAH- CAG trinucleotide repeat in AR and pedigree consistent group (n=7). Experimental-SAH was induced in SAH- with SCA36. The number of GGCCTG hexanucleotide groups. The levels of miR-132, miR-134 and miR-138 in repeats was determined with conventional PCR for the the frontal lobes were determined by qPCR and statistical smaller alleles andRP-PCR for thelargeralleles. Fragment differences were calculated using one-way ANOVA test. length analysis was performed and positive controls were Results: A statistically signiﬁcant increase in expression used in every run. levels of miR-132,miR-134 and miR-138 was observed on Results:NopathologicrepeatexpansionsinNOP56were day7 post-SAH (p<0,001). On the 14th day, it was deter- detected in our cohort. mined that the level of miRNAs which were increased Conclusion:SupplementarytoourpreviousstudyofAD earlier, decreased to the control values (p>0.05). spinocerebellar ataxias in the Greek population, we Conclusions: Expressions of microRNAs are elevated screened a less common gene causing inherited ataxia. In during 1-7 days post-SAH, and decreased again in the line with SCA3, SCA36 seems to be a very rare ﬁnding in interval of 7-14 days. These results show that miR-132, the Greek population. miR-134 and miR-138 levels were affected during the ﬁrst D.Katsimpouris:None.C.Kartanou:None.M.Breza: week of recovery post-SAH. This increase in microRNA None. M. Panas: None. G. Koutsis: B. Research Grant levels,whichhavedifferenteffectsonsynapticconnections, (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and intheshort-termafterSAHmayplayaroleintheinaccurate pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig- arrangement of synaptic structures and in the emergence of niﬁcant; Teva Pharmaceuticals, Genesis Pharma. Other; neurological dysfunctions. Further studies needed to sup- Signiﬁcant; Novartis, Genesis Pharma, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, port our data. Teva Pharmaceuticals, Merck. G. Karadima: None. This study was supported by ESOGÜ Scientiﬁc Research ProjectCommitteewithprojectsupportnumber:201611003. P09.106A F.B. Ergen: None. D. Turgut Cosan: None. T. Kan- Rare genetic variants in SHANK1 and SHANK2 genes demir: None. F. Mutlu: None. T.E. Cosan: None. found in Bulgarian patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder P09.105D Screeningforspinocerebellar ataxiatype36(SCA36) in R. Bozhilova1, I. Popov1, M. Penchev2, G. dzhebir1, the Greek population O. Beltcheva1, V. Stoyanova2, G. Kirov3, V. Milanova2, R. Kaneva1 D. Katsimpouris, C. Kartanou, M. Breza, M. Panas, G. Koutsis, G. Karadima 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University - Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Psychiatry, Alexandrovska Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Medical University – Soﬁa, Soﬁa, University of Athens Medical School, Eginition Hospital, Bulgaria, 3Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom ATHENS, Greece Genes associated in postsynaptic plasticity have been Introduction:Spinocerebellarataxiatype36(SCA36)isan shown to contribute to schizophrenia (SCZ) and bipolar autosomal dominant (AD) disorder, characterized by late- affective disorder (BAD), so is reasonable to hypothesize onset cerebellar ataxia (5th and 6th decade of life), thattheetiologyofpsychiatricdiseasesislinkedtosynapse dysarthria, sensorineural hearing loss and lower motor structure,transmissionandpostsynapticdensity.Shanksare neuron involvement, particularly tongue atrophy. A adapter proteins in the postsynaptic density that intercon- GGCCTG hexanucleotide repeat expansion in intron1 of nect receptors of the postsynaptic membrane.The members1460 of SHANK gene family are candidate genes for psychiatric characterized by repeated episodes of hemiplegia. Genes disorders. associated with AHC are known and guided our genetic A total of 300 individuals with BAD, 151 with SCZ, exploration of these two patients using the targeted 15SAD diagnosed based on DSMIV, 85 healthy controls sequencing of the ATP1A3 gene. Then, we replicated our and 40 healthy relatives were recruited. The samples were ﬁndings in a database of whole exome sequencing of 17 sequenced on the IonPROTON. The sequencing panel independent COS cases. In the cases with comorbid AHC, comprised of 187 genes, including SHANK1 and SHANK2 two distinct pathogenic de novo variants were identiﬁed in genes.Only samples with coverage of at least 95% were theATP1A3gene.Inthereplicationcohort,weidentiﬁeda included in the analyses.SIFT&PolyPhen2 were used to thirdcasewithapossiblydamagingmissensevariantinthe identify pathogenic variants. The identiﬁed rare variants same exon of ATP1A3. Three other cases with predicted within SHANK1 and SHANK2 genes were validated by pathogenic missense variants in the FXYD gene family Sanger sequencing and tested in group of 100 patients and (FXYD1,FXYD6,andFXYD6-FXYD2readthrough)were 100 controls. found. ATP1A3 encodes the α-subunit of a neuron-speciﬁc Altogether 17 rare variants in SHANK1 and SHANK2, ATP-dependent transmembrane sodium-potassium pump. presentinaffectedonlywerefound.Amongthe16missense Thefunctionofthispumpismodulatedbyproteinsencoded variants, 12 were potentially damaging. One splice variant by the FXYD genes. Our report is the ﬁrst to identify was detected. Two of the missense variants in SHANK2, variants in the same pathway for COS. It illustrates the rs117843717 and rs150857128, were found both in schi- interestofexploringmedicalcomorbiditiesandstratifyinga zophrenia and BAD patients. In the mutation burden ana- complex condition according to the age of onset for the lysis, SHANK1 was one of the genes with more variants identiﬁcation of deleterious missense variants. Whereas than expected in the BAD patients compared to controls. ATP1A3isareplicatedgeneinrareneuropediatricdiseases, SHANK1 and SHANK2 mutations have been previously we extended the phenotype to a pure psychiatric presenta- implicated in neuropsychiatric disorders. Recent functional tion. Our study highlights the interest of DNA sequencing analysis of SHANK2 mutations found in schizophrenia in psychiatry and opens the way to develop genetic patients support their causative role. The current data adds counseling in COS. totheevidencethatpostsynapticplasticityisinvolvedinthe B. Chaumette: None. V. Ferraﬁat: None. A. Ambala- pathogenesis of psychiatric disorder. The work was sup- vanan:None.A.Goldenberg:None.A.Dionne-Laporte: ported by projects DUNK01-2/2009 and D-131/2018MU- None.D.Spiegelman:None.P.Dion:None.P.Gerardin: Soﬁa None. C. Laurent: None. D. Cohen: None. J. Rapoport: R. Bozhilova: None. I. Popov: None. M. Penchev: None. G. Rouleau: None. None. G. dzhebir: None. O. Beltcheva: None. V. Stoya- nova: None. G. Kirov: None. V. Milanova: None. R. P09.108C Kaneva: None. Transcriptome analysis of post-mortem brain tissue reveals up-regulation of immune response genes in a P09.107B subset of schizophrenia patients IdentiﬁcationofNewGenesAssociatedwithChildhood- Onset Schizophrenia, ATP1A3 and the FXYD Gene M. Etemadikhah1, E. Lindholm Carlström1, Family J. Halvardson1, A. Niazi1, S. Enroth1, A. Stockmeier Craig2, G. Rajkowska2, B. Nilsson1, L. Feuk1 B. Chaumette1,2, V. Ferraﬁat3, A. Ambalavanan1, A. Goldenberg3, A. Dionne-Laporte1, D. Spiegelman1, 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, P. Dion1, P. Gerardin3, C. Laurent4, D. Cohen4, Science for Life Laboratory Uppsala, Uppsala University, J. Rapoport5, G. Rouleau1 Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2INSERM Jackson, MS, United States U1266, Paris, France, 3CHU, Rouen, France, 4Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5NIMH, Bethesda, MD, Introduction: Schizophrenia is a genetically complex United States neuropsychiatric disorder. While the heritability of schizo- phrenia is around 80%, the precise underlying molecular Childhood-onset schizophrenia (COS) is a rare and severe mechanisms and pathways are still unclear. To investigate form of schizophrenia starting before age of 13. We pathways associated with schizophrenia, we performed identiﬁedtwounrelatedcasesdiagnosedwithbothCOSand gene expression study and we are now following up by alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC), a rare disease measurement of protein expression.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1461 Materials and Methods: Whole transcriptome poly-A Denmark, 3Department of Neurology and Epileptology, selected paired-end RNA sequencing was performed on Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of post-mortem brain tissue samples from 68 schizophrenia Tuebingen,, Tuebingen, Germany, 4Department of Child patients and 44 matched controls. Differential RNA Neurology, Charles University, 2nd Faculty of Medicine expression was detected between cases and controls. The and University Hospital Motol, P, rague, Czech Republic, results were validated with RT-qPCR. Expression analysis 5Department of Pediatrics, Copenhagen University for >100 proteins is currently under way using proximity Hospital,Copenhagen,Denmark,6PediatricNeurologyand extension assay. Muscular Diseases Unit, Department of Neurosciences, Results:Signiﬁcantdifferentialexpressionwasfoundfor Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and 71 genes in cases compared to unaffected controls. Gene Child Health, University of Genoa, Genova, Italy, ontology of differentially expressed genes revealed an up- 7Department of Paediatrics, Divison of Paediatric regulationofmultiplegenesinimmuneresponseamongthe Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, patients as the most signiﬁcant category. Several genes of 8Academic Center for Epileptology, Heeze, Netherlands, complement system, including C1R, C1S, C7, FCN3 and 9Department of Genetics, University Medical Center SERPING1 were also in the category. The increased com- Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 10Department of Neurology, plement expression was stronger in a subgroup of patients Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, whichmightbeduetodifferencesindiseaseetiologywithin 11Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University patients. Speciﬁc proteins were also associated with dif- Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 12: Department of ferential expression in this subgroup of patients. Weighted Neuropediatrics, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig Holstein gene co-expression network analysis highlighted networks Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 13Pediatric Neurology Unit, associated with synaptic transmission and activation of Department of Pediatrics, Lausanne University Hospital, immune response. Lausanne, Switzerland, 14Department of Neurology, Conclusions: Our results implicate upregulation of the HospitalItalianodeBuenosAires,BuenoAires,Argentina, complement cascade as a crucial pathway associated with 15Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig schizophrenia pathology. Hospitals and Clinics, Leipzig, Germany, 16Center for This work was supported by grants from the European Pediatric Neurology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, Research Council ERC Starting Grant Agreement n. United States, 17Department of Neurology, Aarhus 282330 and the Swedish Medical Research Council to University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 18Department of Lars Feuk. Neuropediatrics, Klinikum Weiden, Weiden, Germany, M. Etemadikhah: None. E. Lindholm Carlström: 19Department of Neuroscience and Neurorehabilitation, None. J. Halvardson: None. A. Niazi: None. S. Enroth: Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 20: None.A.Stockmeier Craig: None.G.Rajkowska:None. Department of Neuroscience and Neurorehabilitation, B. Nilsson: None. L. Feuk: None. Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 21Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and P09.109D Child,Warsaw,Poland,22PediatricNeurologyUnit,Vittore SCN8A-related epilepsies: phenotypic overview and Buzzi Hospital, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milan, Italy, correlation with antiepileptic treatment 23Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, K.M.Johannesen1,2,Y.Liu3,C.Tronhjem1,K.Stêrbová4, 24Child Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology Unit, C.Høi-Hansen5,P.Striano6,H.Verhelst7,J.Verhoeven8, Department of Women's and Children's Health, University R. Oegema9, A. Harder10,11, M. Pendziwiat12, S. Lebon13, Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy, 25Department of M. Vaccarezza14, C. Heine15, J. Lemke15, N. Le16, Pediatrics, Østfold Hospital, Graalum, Norway, J. Christensen17, A. Berger18, M. Trivisano19, 26Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical N. Specchio20, D. Hoffman-Zacharska21, Center at the University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, M. Mastrangelo22, E. Brilstra23, M. Vecchi24, A. Vallø25, Netherlands, 27Unit of Medical Genetics, Necker Enfants- M.Motazacker26,P.Lakeman26,M.Nizon27,C.Betzler28, Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 28Clinic for S. Masnada29, P. Vegiotti30, C. Marini31, R. Guerrini31, Neuropediatrics and Neurorehabilitation, Epilepsy Center G. Rubboli1, G. Lesca32, E. Gardella1, H. Lerche33, for Children and Adolescents, Schön Klinik, Vogtareuth, R. S. Møller1 Germany, 29Department of Brain and Behavioural Sciences,UniversityofPavia,Pavia,Italy,30Departmentof 1Department of Epilepsy Genetics and Personalized Child Neurology, V. Buzzi Children's Hospital, University Treatment, Dianalund, Denmark, 2Institute for Regional of Milan, Milan, Italy, 31Pediatric Neurology, HealthServices,UniversityofSouthernDenmarkj,Odense, Neurogenetics and Neurobiology Unit and Laboratories,1462 Meyer Children's Hospital, University of Florence, Vegiotti: None. C. Marini: None. R. Guerrini: None. G. Florence, Italy, 32Service de génétique clinique, Centre de Rubboli: None. G. Lesca: None. E. Gardella: None. H. Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Lerche: None. R.S. Møller: None. Malformatifs Centre Est- HCL, Lyon, France, 33Department of Neurology and Epileptology, Hertie P09.110A Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of Severe neurodevelopmental disorder with intractable Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany seizures due to a novel SLC1A4 homozygous mutation Introduction: SCN8A is well-known gene being the L. Sedlackova1, K. Sterbova2, M. Vlckova3, monogenic cause of SCN8A-related developmental and P. Lassuthova1, P. Seeman1 epileptic encephalopathy, as well as self-limiting epilepsies and epilepsies with an intermediate phenotype, with mild 1DNA laboratory, Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd intellectual disability and treatable seizures. Reports so far, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and suggest that sodium channel blockers (SCBs) have a University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, positive effect on seizure in SCN8A-related epilepsy. In 2Department of Pediatric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of this overview, we sought to describe the complete Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University phenotypic spectrum, provide novel data on functional Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of studies, as well as evaluate treatment response in the Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, patients suffering from epilepsy. Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Methods: Clinical information on cognitive status, epi- Motol, Prague, Czech Republic lepsy onset, epilepsy type and treatment response was col- lected via standardized spreadsheets. Clinicians and Introduction:BiallelicmutationsintheSLC1A4genehave geneticists worldwide participated in the study. Previously been identiﬁed as a very rare cause of neurodevelopmental published cases were included via a PubMed search. All disorders with or without epilepsy and almost exclusively patients signed informed consent, and the study was described in the Ashkenazi-Jewish population. That is why approved by the local ethical committee. the SLC1A4 gene is not routinely included in the genetic Results: In total, we investigated 36 previously unpub- diagnostic panels for neurological diseases or epilepsy. lished patients, and 246 patients in total. We found ﬁve Patients and Methods: Here we present a 5-year-old Czech distinct clinical subgroups; BFNIS, intermediate epilepsy, boywithmicrocephaly,severepsychomotorretardationand DEE, severe DEE (non-ambulant, no speech, cortical intractable seizures who remained unsolved using clinical blindness) and patients without epilepsy. The DEE sub- experience and standard diagnostic methods including groups comprise 74% of the total cohort. SCBs were the examination by an epilepsy targeted gene panel. Whole- most efﬁcient anti-epileptic drug.Several recurrentvariants exomesequencing(WES)wasﬁnallyusedtoobtaingenetic were found. Some of these variants showed a persistent diagnosis. phenotype and others not. The underlying reasons for this Results:Anovelmutation,p.Arg457Gln(c.1370G>A)of remain unexplained. the SLC1A4 gene, was detected in homozygous state by Conclusion: The phenotypic range of SCN8A is wide WESinthepatient,andafterwardsbySangersequencingin ranging from self-limiting epilepsies to severe DEEs, and heterozygous state in both parents conﬁrming the biallelic also including patients without epilepsy. Phenotypic varia- originofthemutation.ThisvariantisnotreportedinExAC/ bility within the same genetic variants are common, so gnomAD databases in homozygous state, in heterozygous geneticcounsellingmustbedonecarefully.SCBsshouldbe state in a very low frequency (0.002%), it affects a highly ﬁrst-line treatment in SCN8A-related epilepsy. conserved aminoacid predicted to be deleterious. Mutation K.M. Johannesen: None. Y. Liu: None. C. Tronhjem: in the same codon but different aminoacid exchange was None. K. Stêrbová: None. C. Høi-Hansen: None. P. previously described in a patient with very similar pheno- Striano: None. H. Verhelst: None. J. Verhoeven: None. type, however, without epilepsy. Our patient suffers from R. Oegema: None. A. Harder: None. M. Pendziwiat: microcephaly, global developmental delay, axial hypotonia None. S. Lebon: None. M. Vaccarezza: None. C. Heine: with acral spasticity, brain and corpus callosum atrophy, None. J. Lemke: None. N. Le: None. J. Christensen: impaired visual function and drug-resistant epilepsy. None. A. Berger: None. M. Trivisano: None. N. Spec- Conclusion: Our data suggest that the SLC1A4 gene chio: None. D. Hoffman-Zacharska: None. M. Mas- should be considered in the diagnosis of patients with trangelo: None. E. Brilstra: None. M. Vecchi: None. A. severe early onset neurodevelopmental impairment with Vallø: None. M. Motazacker: None. P. Lakeman: None. epilepsy and encourages SLC1A4 gene variants’ analysis M.Nizon:None.C.Betzler:None.S.Masnada:None.P.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1463 via targeted gene panel or WES. Supported by: NV19-08- the gene’s implication in complex neuropsychiatric dis- 00194 orders should be re-evaluated. L.Sedlackova:None.K.Sterbova:None.M.Vlckova: M.A.Khan:None.J.Blatterer:None.M.Z.Ali:None. None. P. Lassuthova: None. P. Seeman: None. L. Baufeld: None. E. Petek: None. K. Wagner: None. J. Ramadani-Muja:None.R.Malli: None.M.Muzammal: P09.111B None. C. Windpassinger: None. Molecular genetic and cellular characterization of a missense mutation in SLITRK1 associated with non- P09.112C syndromic autosomal recessive intellectual disability Somatic mutation that affects transcription factor binding upstream of CD55 in the temporal cortex of a M. A. Khan1, J. Blatterer2, M. Z. Ali1, L. Baufeld2, late-onset Alzheimer disease patient E. Petek2, K. Wagner2, J. Ramadani-Muja3, R. Malli3, M. Muzammal1, C. Windpassinger2 H. T. Helgadottir1, P. Lundin2, E. Wallén Arzt1, A. Lindström3, C. Graff3, M. Eriksson1 1Gomal Centre of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Gomal University, D.I.Khan, Pakistan, 2Diagnostic & Research 1Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Center for Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Innovative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Graz, Austria, 3Gottfried Schatz Research Center, Division Sweden, 2Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden, ofMolecularBiologyandBiochemistry,MedicalUniversity 3Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, of Graz, Graz, Austria Center for Alzheimer Research, Division for Neurogeriatrics, Solna, Sweden Introduction:Intellectualdisabilityisaphenotypicallyand genetically heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common neurode- with an estimated prevalence of 1 % in the general generative disease worldwide. Familial cases suggest population. So far sixty-nine gene loci have been reported genetic components, however monogenetic causes are few to be involved in autosomal recessive non-syndromic and the vast majority of incidences have unknown cause. intellectual disability (NS-ARID). Sequencingeffortshavefocusedongermlinemutations,but Materials and Methods: A novel disease locus was improved technology has opened up for studies on somatic identiﬁed using homozygosity by descent (HBD) mapping mutations in affected brain tissue samples. Here we use coupled with whole exome sequencing in a large con- ultra-deep sequencing on brain and blood from early and sanguineous Pakistani family. On the cellular level, the late onset AD patients, and non-AD individuals (n=16). In impact of the novel mutation on protein expression was total 2.86 Megabases of genomic regions, previously characterized in subcellular colocalization experiments. associated with AD was targeted, included 28 genes and Results: Herein this study, HBD mapping identiﬁed a upstream and downstream regulatory regions. Tailored single shared homozygous region on chromosome 13 downstream bioinformatics ﬁltering identiﬁed 11 somatic between markers rs9531043 to rs7318889. The subsequent single nucleotide variants in the temporal cortex in AD exome sequence analysis identiﬁed a novel SLITRK1 gene patientsandnoneinthecontrols.Onevariantwasvalidated mutation, which segregated with the disease phenotype. tobepresentat0.4%allelefrequencyintemporalcortexof SLITRK1 is an adhesion molecule located in the post- alate-onsetADpatient.Thisvariantwaspredictedtoaffect synaptic membrane of excitatory synapses. Cellular assays transcription factor binding sites upstream of the CD55 showed that the identiﬁed novel mutation results in loss of gene, contributing to AD pathogenesis by affecting the protein function by trapping mutated SLITRK1 intracellu- complement system. Our results suggest that future studies larly in the endoplasmic reticulum and thus preventing targetinglargerportionsofthegenomeforsomaticmutation surface transport and ligand-binding. Additionally, several analysisareimportanttoobtainan increased understanding reportedmutationsshowingdecreasedsurfaceexpressionof for the molecular basis of both early and late onset AD. SLITRK1 were selected for colocalization analysis. We H.T. Helgadottir: None. P. Lundin: None. E. Wallén proof that all variants are transported into the plasma Arzt: None. A. Lindström: None. C. Graff: None. M. membrane with the exception of SLITRK1 harboring the Eriksson: None. novel mutation. Conclusions: SLITRK1 has previously been associated P09.113D with a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders. However, our Ddhd1knockout mouse as a model for familial spastic ﬁndings suggest a possible, to date unreported, association paraplegia ofSLITRK1inNS-ARID.Thus,inthelightofourﬁndings,1464 T. Morikawa1, S. Miura2,3, H. Ohishi4, K. Kosaka1, M. Takahashi: None. M. Nakao: None. Y. Izumi: None. T. Shimojo1, A. Nagano1, R. Fujioka5, K. Moriyama6, T. Bamba: None. H. Sasaki: None. H. Shibata: None. M. Unoki4, M. Takahashi7, M. Nakao7, Y. Izumi7, T. Bamba7, H. Sasaki4, H. Shibata1 P09.114A Blood-based gene expression analysis in children with 1Division of Genomics, Medical Institute of bioregulation, speciﬁc language impairment Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 2Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology, Department of I. Y. Hristo1, I. G. Sotkova-Ivanova1, T. Vachev2, Medicine, Kurume University, Fukuoka, Japan, N. Popov3, I. Ivanov1, I. Pacheva1, R. Yordanova1, 3Department of Geriatric Medicine and Neurology, Ehime V. Stoyanova1 University Graduate School of Medicine, Toon, Japan, 4Division of Epigenomics and Development Medical 1Medical University Plovdiv, Departament of Pediatrics Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, and Medical Genetics, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2University of Japan, 5Department of Food and Nutrition, Beppu Plovdiv, Department of Plant Physiology and Molecular University Junior College, Beppu, Japan, 6Department of Biology, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3State Phsychiatry Hospital Nutritional Sciences, Nakamra Gakuen University, Pazardzhik, Psychiatric ward for active treatment, Fukuoka, Japan, 7Division of Metabolomics, Medical Pazardzhik, Bulgaria Institute of bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan Introduction: Comparative gene expression proﬁling dis- covers differentially expressed genes associated with Wehavepreviouslyidentiﬁedahomozygous4-bpdeletion, various diseases, including neurodevelopment disorders. in exon2 in DDHD1as the responsible variant for spastic Speciﬁc language impairment (SLI) is deﬁned as an paraplegiatype28(SPG28)(Miuraetal2016).Thevariant unexpected and persistent impairment in language ability is expected to cause a premature termination resulting in a despiteadequatesocialenvironmentandintelligenceandin functionally null allele. DDHD1encodes phospholipase A the absence of any explanatory medical conditions. This 1 (PA-PLA ),anenzymecatalyzingphosphatidylinositol(PI) condition is highly heritable and affects around 7% of pre- 1 to lysophosphatidylinositol (LPI). Towards the clariﬁcation school children. of the pathogenic mechanism of SPG28, we established Materials and Methods: The study aimed to examine Ddhd1knockout(KO)micecarryinga1-bpdeletioninexon gene expression proﬁling in the peripheral blood of 60 2 in Ddhd1, resulting in a frameshift and premature individuals divided into two groups: children with SLI and termination at the very similar position with the patient. age- and gender-matched healthy controls. A genome-wide Since we observed no obvious abnormalities in their sequencing of copy DNA molecules was conducted in the locomotion, we measured foot-base-angle (FBA) which is pooled probes of the two groups investigating the quanti- an established character to evaluate SPG phenotypes. We tative expression of the genes and Kyoto Encyclopedia of observed a signiﬁcant decrease of FBA in the homozygous Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway-based analysis was KOs, as a partial replication of SPG phenotypes. By RNA used to further understand genes’ biological functions. sequencing, we identiﬁed 22 genes showing signiﬁcantly Results:Asaresultoftheconductedexpressionanalysis, changed expressions in cerebrum of the homozygous KOs. 60 differentially expressed genes and 7 KEGG signaling The 22 genes are characterized by a GO term, ”positive pathways with statistical signiﬁcant change were identiﬁed. regulationofGTPaseactivity”andaKEGGpathway,”NF- The KEGG names of these pathways were: "Hepatitis C", kappa B signaling pathway”. By lipidome analyses using "Herpes simplex infection", "Leukocyte transendothelial supercriticalﬂuidchromatographymassspectrometry(SFC/ migration", "Primary immunodeﬁciency", "Calcium sig- MS) we observed signiﬁcant increase of PI and signiﬁcant naling pathway" and "Tight junction". decrease of LPI in cerebrum of the homozygous KOs. LPI Conclusions: Clear and signiﬁcant abnormalities exist in isknowntobetheagonistforaGproteincoupledreceptor, thegeneexpressioninperipheralbloodsamplesofchildren GPR55 triggering mobilization of intracellular Ca2+. Our withSLIcomparedtohealthycontrols.Wesuggestthatnot currentdatasuggestthemechanismofSPGthatthereduced only cellular signaling but immune mechanisms may also LPI level in cerebrum triggers abnormal reduction of be involved in the pathogenesis of SLI. intracellularCa2+,resultinginneuralapoptosisbyabnormal I.Y. Hristo: None. I.G. Sotkova-Ivanova: None. T. NF-kappa B signaling. Vachev: None. N. Popov: None. I. Ivanov: None. I. T.Morikawa:None.S.Miura:None.H.Ohishi:None. Pacheva: None. R. Yordanova: None. V. K. Kosaka: None. T. Shimojo: None. A. Nagano: None. Stoyanova: None. R.Fujioka:None.K.Moriyama:None.M.Unoki:None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1465 P09.115B P09.116C Overview of molecular diagnostic testing of Identiﬁcationof geneticfactorsthat modify age atonset spinocerebellar ataxias in Estonia of spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 T. Kahre1,2, Ü. Murumets1, H. Roomere1, S. Sarv2, F. Akcimen1, S. Martins2, C. V. Bourassa3, C. Liao1, K. Gross-Paju3, K. Õunap1,2,4, S. Pajusalu1,2,5 M.Lima4,I.Lopes-Cendes5,L.B.Jardim6,J.Sequeiros7, P. A. Dion3, G. A. Rouleau1 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of 1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University; ClinicalGenetics,InstituteofClinicalMedicine,University Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada, of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Neurology Clinic, West Tallinn 2Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Broad Institute of MIT University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Montreal and Harvard,, Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Yale Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, University School of Medicine, Department of Genetics, Canada, 4Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, New Haven, CT, United States Universidade dos Açores, Ponta Delgada, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 5Faculty of Medical Sciences, Department of Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a heterogeneous group Medical Genetics, (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil, of neurodegenerative disorders. Due to extensive clinical 6Medical Genetics Service, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto overlap among different forms of hereditary ataxia Alegre (HCPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil, 7Institute for (>35 subtypes known), genetic testing is required to MolecularandCellBiology,UniversidadedoPorto,Porto, establish a diagnosis. The most common causes of SCAs Portugal are expansions of trinucleotide CAG repeats within genes ATXN1, ATXN2, ATXN3, ATXN7 and CACNA1A. Next- Introduction: There is a strong correlation between CAG generationsequencing(NGS)assayshaveabledtodelineate repeat size of ATXN3 and the age at onset (AAO) of other types of hereditary ataxias caused by other variant spinocerebellar ataxia type-3 (SCA3). However, AAO types. The aim of this study was to clarify which types of variability is not entirely explained by the length of the SCAs are most prevalent in Estonia and to compare the repeat, suggesting the existence of additional modifying diagnostic yield of trinucleotide repeat assay and factors. (NGS) panel. Materials and Methods: To examine the residual Patientsandmethods:TheSCArepeatexpansionassay variability in AAO, a genome-wide association study wasperformedin317EstonianpatientsreferredtotheTartu (GWAS)wasconductedacrossacohortof700SCA3cases University Hospital during the years 2000-2018. All indi- fromNorthAmerica,BrazilandPortugal.Theﬁrstphaseof viduals were tested for triplet expansions in ATXN1, the study established the CAG repeat size in cases as it ATXN2, ATXN3, CACNA1A genes with PCR based frag- assessed the proportion of AAO variability that could be ment analysis, and since 2012 ATXN7 was added to the accounted to the repeat size. In the second phase, a linear standard panel. Since 2016, 72 patients were studied using regression analysis tested for genomic factors affecting the NGS based panel (Illumina TruSight One) with ataxia residual AAO. subpanel (151 genes included). Results: The inverse relationship between CAG repeat Results: In 35 (11.0%) patients, repeat extension (34 size and AAO was conﬁrmed (ρ=0.62). No loci reached SCA2cases,1SCA1case)wasdetected.FromNGS-based genome-wide signiﬁcance but eight suggestive loci paneltesting,7(9.7%)diagnosticﬁndingswerereportedin (p<1×10-5). We also observed 80 loci with a p<1×10-4; 6 different genes (PRKCG, TGM6, ITPR1, SACS, 2x some of which revealed associations with genes causing ANO10, and XPA). other forms of ataxia. The later would be good candidates Conclusion:ThemostprevalentformofSCAsinEstonia for the AAO of SCA3. is SCA2. Triplet repeat expansion assay and NGS panel Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst GWAS to focus on the sequencing showed similar diagnostic yields, but it is more identiﬁcationofvariantsthatcouldrevealmodiﬁersofAAO cost-efﬁcienttostartwithrepeat expansionassay.Funding: in SCA3. We conﬁrmed the known inverse correlation Estonian Research Council grants PRG471, and between CAG repeat size and AAO as we provided evi- PUTJD827. denceforothermodifyingfactors.Areplicationstudyusing T. Kahre: None. Ü. Murumets: None. H. Roomere: a well-powered independent cohort is now required to None. S. Sarv: None. K. Gross-Paju: None. K. Õunap: conﬁrm our results. None. S. Pajusalu: None.1466 Acknowledgement:F.A.issupportedbyaHealthyBrains similarinage (mean age atbaseline 35.7±7.8),quantitative andHealthyLives(HBHL)scholarshipandtheDepartment cerebellar functional score (CCFS), cognitive evaluation of Human Genetics of McGill University. (MMS, BREF and Stroop) and DOP at the baseline. Inter- F. Akcimen: None. S. Martins: None. C.V. Bourassa: estingly,SARAscoreatbaselinewasbelowﬁvebuthigher None. C. Liao: None. M. Lima: None. I. Lopes-Cendes: incarriers(1.47±0.85vs0.78±0.72,p<0.05).Atfollow-up, None.L.B.Jardim:None.J.Sequeiros:None.P.A.Dion: DOPincreasedfrom2.2±1.7to2.2±3.8innon-carriers and None. G.A. Rouleau: None. from 3.5±3.6 to 8.2±8.2 in carriers (p<0.05). For the con- verterswithSARA>5,meanDOPreached12.5±8.2whileit P09.117D remained at 3.3±5.3 in non-converters (p=<0.01). There Distance between oculomotor patterns in premanifest was a positive correlation between DOP and CCFS spinocerebellar ataxias reﬂects disease onset (p=0.01) and SARA (p=0.001). No changes in cognitive assessments were found at follow-up. G.Coarelli1,2,S.Rivaud-Pechoux1,S.Sayah1,P.Pouget1, Conclusions: DOP and CCFS reﬂect disease conversion C. Cazeneuve2,M.Monin1,2,M.Anheim3,4, B.Gaymard5, andareindependentfromtheraterthusmorereliableinpre- T. Klockgether6,7, S. Tezenas du Montcel8, A. Durr1,2 symptomatic carriers. Grant references: NCT01037777, Institut National de la 1ICM (Brain and Spine Institute), Paris, France, Santé Et de la Recherche Médicale. 2Department of Genetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière Charles-Foix G. Coarelli: None. S. Rivaud-Pechoux: None. S. University Hospital, Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Sayah: None. P. Pouget: None. C. Cazeneuve: None. M. Paris (AP-HP), Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, Monin: None. M. Anheim: None. B. Gaymard:None. T. 3Department of Neurology, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Klockgether: None. S. Tezenas du Montcel: None. A. Strasbourg, France, 4Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Durr: None. Moléculaire etCellulaire(IGBMC),INSERM-U964/CNRS- UMR7104; Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de P09.118A Strasbourg (FMTS), Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, Novel glycine receptor variants identiﬁed in startle France, 5Department of Neurophysiology, AP-HP, disease patients Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 6Department of G. Aboheimed1,2,3, M. ALRasheed2, M. Salih4, Neurology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7German M. AlOwain5, M. Alsagob1, R. Almass1, L. AlQuait1, Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, R. Harvey6,7, H. AlDhallaan8, O. Dabbagh5, A. Ruiz3, Germany,8INSERMU1136,SorbonneUniversités,Institut N. Kaya1 Pierre Louis d’Epidémiologie et de Santé Publique, AssistancePublique–HôpitauxdeParisAP-HP,Hôpitaux 1Department of Genetics, KFSHRC, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Universitaires Pitié-Salpêtrière – Charles Foix, Paris, 2College of Pharmacy, Clinical Pharmacy Department, France Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3UCL School of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacology, London,WC1N 1AX, United Introduction: Knowledge about premanifest stage of Kingdom, 4Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) will guide therapeutic Pediatrics, College of Medicine,, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, preventive interventions. The aim of this work was to 5DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,KFSHRC,Riyadh,Saudi follow oculomotor and cognitive changes over time in Arabia,6SchoolofHealthandSportSciences,Universityof unaffected premanifest SCAs carriers. the Sunshine Coast, Sippy Downs, QLD, Australia, MaterialsandMethods:AspartoftheRISCAstudy,we 7Sunshine Coast Health Institute, Birtiny,QLD, Australia, assessed preclinical SCA1-2-3 carriers and non-carriers at 8Department of Neurosciences, KFSHRC, Riyadh, Saudi baseline and at 72 months follow-up. Distance between Arabia OculomotorPatterns(DOP)weredeterminedbycombining values of standard deviation from the norm of prosaccades Startle disease, also known as hyperekplexia, is a rare latency, velocity and gain for leftward and rightward pro- inherited neurological disorder that affects newborn chil- saccade, antisaccade latencies and square-wave jerks dren. The predominant genetic causes are mutations in the (pathologicalif>4)andcorrelatedwithcognitiveoutcomes. genesGLRA1 and GLRB, encoding glycine receptor alpha Quantitative motor battery and volumetric MRI were and beta subunits, respectively, and SLC6A5 encoding the performed. glycine transporter GlyT2. The disease has hallmark Results: There were 16 carriers (3 SCA1 carriers, 4 characteristics of noise- or touch-induced non-epileptic SCA2 carriers, 9 SCA3 carriers) and 16 non-carriers, seizures resulting in muscle stiffness and apnea. However,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1467 cases are often misdiagnosed as spastic quadriplegia or Results: All injected eggs showed high frequency of epilepsy. Our study focuses on likely disease causative modiﬁcations at the stub1 locus at 48 hours post injection. mutations in startle disease patients in the Kingdom of F1 heterozygous carriers with a 7 nucleotide-deletions at Saudi Arabia. Sanger sequencing, homozygosity mapping, position 10800 in the stub1 gene were produced from the and targeted next-generationsequencing were conductedin founder ﬁsh, and further used to obtain homozygous off- ﬁfteenpatients.Functionalanalysisofselectedvariantswas spring. Immunohistochemistry studies provided initial evi- performedusing whole-cellrecordings andconfocalmicro- dences regarding localization of CHIP protein in Purkinje scopy in acutely transfected N2A cells. We identiﬁed one cells in the cerebellum of WT ﬁsh. novel (p.A455P) and two (p.Q195X and p. M177R) Conclusions: We here described the use of CRISPR/ recurrent variants in the GLRB. We also identiﬁed one Cas9 system to induce modiﬁcations of the stub1 gene in novel frameshift mutation in the SLC6A5(p.I692fs) and zebraﬁshandcontributetoestablishinganewanimalmodel threerecurrentvariantsinGLRA1(p.G342S,p.R252H,and for studying STUB1-related ataxia diseases. Future work p.R218Q). Cells transfected with mutant GLRB showed a will focus on phenotypic and behavior analysis of homo- reduction in glycine-evoked currents compared to those of zygous mutant zebraﬁsh lines. wild type. Tagging of glycine receptor subunits further This study has received funding from Helse Vest (grant revealed disrupted membrane localisation of the mutated 911810) and the University of Bergen. proteins. Our results uncover novel mutations in glycine Y. Pakdaman: None. E. Austad: None. E. Denker: receptorgenesthatarepotentiallylinkedtotheaetiologyof None. S. Johansson: None. I. Aukrust: None. P.M. startle disease Knappskog: None. S. Ellingsen: None. G.Aboheimed:None.M.ALRasheed:None.M.Salih: None.M.AlOwain:None.M.Alsagob:None.R.Almass: P09.120C None. L. AlQuait: None. R. Harvey: None. H. AlDhal- Proposal for a new subcategory in the classiﬁcation of laan: None. O. Dabbagh: None. A. Ruiz: None. N. the Copy Number Variants as Factor of susceptibility Kaya: None. N.Baena1,E.Gabau2,N.Capdevila2,A.Ruiz1,L.Capel1, P09.119B C. Aguilera1, S. Ourani2, N. Spataro1, M. Guitart1 Characterization ofSTUB1in zebraﬁsh - development of a new knock-out model to study neurodegeneration 1Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic. Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d’Investigació i Y.Pakdaman1,2,3,E.Austad3,E.Denker3,S.Johansson1,2, Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de I. Aukrust1,2, P. M. Knappskog1,2, S. Ellingsen3 Barcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain, 2Paediatric Unit. Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari. Institut d’Investigació i 1Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de Bergen, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Barcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Introduction: The interpretation of variants of uncertain Bergen, Norway signiﬁcance (VOUS) remains a challenge for geneticists since the criteria used and the continuous updating of the Introduction: Autosomal Recessive Spinocerebellar databases may change their classiﬁcation. We reviewed the Ataxia-16 (SCAR16) is caused by deﬁciencies in the postnatal recurrent CNV in neurodevelopmental disorders STUB1 gene encoding the ubiquitin E3 ligase and co- withlackofagreementintheinterpretationacrossdatabases chaperone CHIP. There is limited knowledge regarding the and labelled as VOUS, probably pathogenic or probably pathogenicroleofmutantCHIPinvivo.Thisstudyaimsto benignwiththeaimofreclassifyingthemasasusceptibility establish a zebraﬁsh model for SCAR16 by CRISPR/Cas9- factor. mediatedmutagenesisofthezebraﬁshorthologueofhuman Materials and Methods: A CGH array (8x60K ISCA, STUB1. Agilent Technologies) was performed on 2,858 patients Material and Methods: Single guide RNAs targeting with neurodevelopmental disorders. We deﬁne a suscept- a 20 nucleotide-sequence in stub1 gene were injected ibility factor as a CNV with reduced penetrance, variable together with Cas9 proteins into wild type zebraﬁsh clinical expressivity and complex to associate with a spe- embryos atone-cell stage. Offspring ﬁsh were analyzed for ciﬁc phenotype. transmitted germline mutations. The expression of CHIP Results: A total of 69 (2.4%) patients with a CNV clas- protein was also examined in WT ﬁsh brain using siﬁed as a susceptibility factor have been identiﬁed. immunohistochemistry. Dup3p26.2 (CNTN4 / CNTN6) in 7 cases, del15q11.21468 (NIPA1)in22cases,dup15q13.3(CHNRNA7-OTUD7A)in Patient 1 molecular testing (via Whole Exome Sequen- 17 cases, dup16p13.11 (NDE1, NTAN1) in 5 cases, cing): De Novo, SYNGAP1 p.Q1106X dup16p13.3 (RBFOX1) in 3 cases and dupXp22.33 Patient2EEG:Rhythmicposteriornotcheddeltaslowing (SHOX1) in 16 cases. A second CNV was detected in 11 increasedwitheyeclosure,generalizedandleftcentralfocal cases and was classiﬁed mostly as VOUS. The variable epileptiform activity clinicalexpressionobservedineachofthesevariantsagrees Patient 2 molecular testing (via Whole Exome Sequen- with what is described in the literature. cing): De Novo, SYNGAP1 p.R967X Conclusions: A new subcategory of susceptibility factor Conclusions: Given the degree of clinical and EEG is proposed for these CNVs classiﬁed in the VOUS group. ﬁndingoverlap,SYNGAP1syndromeshouldbeconsidered Its clinical signiﬁcance is subject to the penetrance and in patients with an Angelman-like phenotype. expression in each individual. Given the wide hetero- A.K.Petersen:None.A.Golden:None.K.Magnussen: geneity, the clinical geneticist must decide if the CNV is None. L. Durham: None. responsible for the phenotype and determine if the family segregation study is necessary. P09.122A N.Baena:None.E.Gabau:None.N.Capdevila:None. Familial Adult Myoclonic Epilepsy linked to A. Ruiz: None. L. Capel: None. C. Aguilera: None. S. chromosome 5p15 (FAME3) is caused by an intronic Ourani: None. N. Spataro: None. M. Guitart: None. ATTTT/ATTTC expansion in MARCH6 P09.121D R.T.Florian1,F.Kraft2,S.Klebe3,E.Magnin4,A.F.Van Expandingthe“Angelman-like”spectrum:patientswith Rootselaar5, S. Kaya1, J. Buratti6, E. Leitao1, SYNGAP1-related disorders show EEG ﬁndings most S. Giesselmann2, I. Kurth2, N. Tschernoster7, often attributed to Angelman syndrome J. Altmueller7, A. Lamiral4, L. Thivard8,9, FAME consortium, E. Leguern6, P. Labauge10, P. S. Reif11, A. K. Petersen1, A. Golden2, K. Magnussen1, L. Durham1 F. Rosenow11,12, K. M. Klein11,12, M. Bennett13,14, M. Bahlo13,14, J. Gecz15,16, M. A. Corbett15, M. A. J. 1Divison of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Tijssen17, A. M. J. M. van den Maagdenberg18, Development and Rehabilitation, Randall Children’s C. DEPIENNE1 Hospital, Portland, OR, United States, 2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Randall Children’s Hospital, 1Institüt für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Institüt für Portland, OR, United States Humangenetik, Aachen, Germany, 3Department of Neurology, UK Essen, Essen, Germany, 4Department of Introduction: The group of Angelman-like neurodevelop- Neurology, CHU Jean Minjoz, Besançon, France, mental syndromes continues to expand. In patients with 5Departments of Neurology and Clinical Neurophysiology, characteristic behaviors, developmental delays, speech Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam impairment and seizures, speciﬁc EEG patterns have been Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Département de proposed as having relative speciﬁcity for Angelman. Here Génétique, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, we report on two patients with Angelman-associated France, 7Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), Cologne, phenotypes and EEG ﬁndings who were ultimately Germany, 8Département de Neurologie, AP-HP, Hôpital diagnosed with SYNGAP1 syndrome. Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 9Sorbonne Université, Materials and Methods: Patient 1 is a female with Faculté de Médecine; CNRS UMR 7225, UMR S 1127, infantile onset oropharyngeal dysphagia, hypotonia, global InstitutduCerveauetdelaMoelleépinière,Paris,France, developmental delays, and early childhood epilepsy. EEG 10MS Unit. Montpellier Universitary Hospital, Montpellier, ﬁndings appeared to suggest Angelman syndrome, how- France, 11Department of Neurology, Epilepsy Center ever, targeted testing was negative. Further molecular test- Frankfurt Rhine-Main, Frankfurt, Germany, 12Department ing conﬁrmed a pathogenic variant in SYNGAP1. ofNeurology,Epilepsy CenterHessen, Philipps University, Patient 2 is a male with similar history of oropharyngeal Margburg, Germany, 13Department of Medical Biology, dysphagia, hypotonia, global developmental delays, and University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, childhood onset epilepsy in addition to tremors and ataxia. 14Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter EEG ﬁndings showed patterns suggestive of Angelman, and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, with a ﬁnal diagnosis of SYNGAP1 syndrome. Australia, 15University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, Results:Patient1EEG:rhythmicposteriordeltaslowing 16School of Biological Sciences, School of Medicine, with embedded spikes, generalized epileptiform activity Robinson Research Institute, and South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, Australia,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1469 17University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Department of Paediatrics, The University of Hong Kong, Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 18Department of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Neurology and Department of Human Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands An autosomal dominant type of spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), SCA35, has been associated with pathogenic Introduction:FamilialAdultMyoclonicEpilepsy(FAME) mutations in the gene TGM6. In a Chinese exome isanautosomaldominantdisordercharacterizedbycortical sequencingcohort with 116indexesand135asymptomatic or myoclonic tremor occurring in association with general- parents, we identiﬁed 8 families with reported TGM6 ized seizures typically beginning in adulthood. Despite the variants sharing no features of SCA35. Considering this early identiﬁcation of multiple loci on chromosomes 8, 2 ﬁnding, we reviewed the public database gnomAD, these and 5, the genetic basis of this condition has remained reported pathogenic variants are signiﬁcantly more com- elusive for 20 years. Recently, intronic expansions of monly found in theEast Asians than inother ethnicgroups ATTTT/ATTTC pentanucleotide repeats in SAMD12 on (P<0.0001). Bioinformatics analysis of gene constraint chromosome 8 have been identiﬁed as a major cause of showed that both missense and loss-of-function variants in FAME in Asia. TGM6arelikelytobetoleratedwithnoregionalconstraint. Methods and Results: In this study, we used genome Byperforminginﬂationanalysistoempiricallyevaluatethe sequencing (Illumina, short-read technology) and repeat- pathogenicity of TGM6, it is found that there is an over- primedPCRtoidentifyanewexpandedsiteinMARCH6on representation of reported pathogenic variants in the chromosome 5p15 in four European families. Further ana- population. The cumulative frequency of reported patho- lysis of single DNA molecules using long-read nanopore genic TGM6 variants is at least 111-fold inﬂated over the sequencing and, in parallel, molecular combing combined combined prevalence of all autosomal dominant SCAs withﬂuorescentstainingoftheATTTCrepeatsandﬂanking (<5.6 per 100,000), indicating a high chance of misdiag- regions,revealedthattheexpansionsrangeonaveragefrom nosisorverylowpenetrance.Misclassiﬁcationofbenignor 4 to 13 kb. However, we observed a high variability in lowpenetrantvariantsaspathogenicisasigniﬁcantproblem expansion length and structure, compatible with the exis- that often results in genetic misdiagnosis and premature tence of different expansion conﬁgurations in the blood ending of diagnostic odyssey. This highlights the necessity cells of the same individual. Moreover, the largest expan- of evaluating variant pathogenicity with sequencing of sions were associated with complex microrearrangements genomesfromdiversepopulations,bothfromasymptomatic occurring at the expanded site in up to 20% of the cells. controls and phenotypically different patients, in order to Conclusion: This study provides further evidence that ensure accurate classiﬁcation of variants. FAME is homogeneously caused by intronic ATTTT/ H. Chung: None. J. Fung: None. M. Tsang: None. M. ATTTC expansions in distinct genes and shows that Yu: None. expansions exhibit a high somatic instability that can ulti- mately result in genomic rearrangements. P09.124C R.T.Florian:None.F.Kraft:None.S.Klebe:None.E. Autosomal recessive tubulinopathy-like disorder caused Magnin: None. A.F. Van Rootselaar: None. S. Kaya: by loss of function of the tubulin-modifying enzyme None.J.Buratti:None.E.Leitao:None.S.Giesselmann: Tubulin Tyrosine Ligase None. I. Kurth: None. N. Tschernoster: None. J. Alt- mueller: None. A. Lamiral: None. L. Thivard: None. E. R. De Mori1, M. Magiera2, S. Tardivo1, P. Accorsi3, Leguern: None. P. Labauge: None. P.S. Reif: None. F. M. Ginevrino1,4, S. Bodakuntla2, S. Nuovo1,5, Rosenow: None. K.M. Klein: None. M. Bennett: None. L. Giordano3, E. Loreﬁce6, R. Liserre7, L. Pinelli7, M.Bahlo:None.J.Gecz:None.M.A.Corbett:None.M. T. Biagini8, A. Micalizzi9, A. Casella4, T. Mazza8, A.J. Tijssen: None. A.M.J.M. van den Maagdenberg: M. O. Steinmetz10, C. Janke2, E. Valente1,4 None. C. Depienne: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); 1NeurogeneticUnit,IRCCSFondazioneSantaLucia,Rome, Modest; Genomic Vision. Italy, 2Institut Curie, Dept. "Genotoxic stress and Cancer", Orsay Cedex, France, 3UOC Neuroradiologia, UOS P09.123B Neuroradiologia Pediatrica, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy, AsigniﬁcantinﬂationinTGM6geneticriskcastsdoubtin 4Detp. of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, its causation in spinocerebellar ataxia type 35 Italy,5DeptofMedicineandSurgery,UniversityofSalerno, Salerno, Italy, 6Dept. Of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza H. Chung, J. Fung, M. Tsang, M. Yu University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 7UOC Neuroradiologia, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy, 8IRCCS Casa Sollievo della1470 Sofferenza, Laboratory of Bioinformatics, San Giovanni S. Smolders1,2, S. Philtjens1,2, D. Crosiers1,2,3, S. Van Rotondo, Italy, 9Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Mossevelde1,2,3,4, B. Heeman1,2, A. Sieben1,2,5, P. Pals2,3, Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy, 10Laboratory of S. Engelborghs2,4, P. De Deyn2,4, P. Cras2,3, C. Van Biomolecular Rese rach, Division of Biology and Broeckhoven1,2, BELNEU Consortium Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland 1VIB Center for Molecular Neurology, University of Introduction: Tubulin Tyrosine Ligase (TTL) is a Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute Born-Bunge, ubiquitous enzyme that catalyzes the convertion of University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of detyrosinated to tyrosinated α-tubulin, a process that Neurology,AntwerpUniversityHospital,Edegem,Belgium, regulatesmultiple essential microtubulefunctions.Deletion 4Memory Clinic, Department of Neurology, Hospital of TTL in mice causes perinatal death due to a strong Network Antwerp Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, Antwerp, accumulationofdetyrosinatedα-tubulininthebrain,which Belgium, 5Department of Neurology, University Hospital leads to massive aberrations in brain development. More- Ghent and University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium over, TTL has recently been demonstrated to be crucial for post-injury axon regeneration. Introduction: Lewy body disease (LBD) and Parkinson Materials and Methods: We describe two sisters from Disease (PD) share clinical and pathological features. healthy consanguineous parents, presenting with global VPS13C was identiﬁed as a risk factor for PD in GWAS, developmental delay, intellectual disability, cerebellar and premature termination codon (PTC) mutations in ataxia, hypotonia and microcephaly. Brain MRI ﬁndings VPS13C were associated with recessive PD. We identiﬁed was suggestive of a tubulinopathy, showing dysmorphic inwholegenomesequencingdataofarecessiveearly-onset basal ganglia, commissural agenesis or hypoplasia, dys- age LBD family (AAO: 41-42 years) compound hetero- plasia of the cerebellar vermis and brainstem. After zygous VPS13C missense mutations reducing VPS13C excluding mutations in tubulin genes, whole exome protein expression. sequencing analysis was performed. Materials and Methods: Targeted resequencing of cod- Results: Both siblings shared the homozygous missense ing VPS13C in 230 LBD patients (AAO: 70.8±9.7 years), variant c.1013G>A (Cys338Thr) in the TTL gene 612 PD patients (AAO: 60.5±11.1 years) and 663 control (NM_153712.4). The variant was predicted as pathogenic individuals (AAI: 72.0±9.4 years). Protein analysis was by all prediction software and was absent from population performed in lymphoblast cells and brain lysates of LBD databases. Molecular dynamics simulation demonstrated compound heterozygous VPS13C mutations carriers. that the mutant protein is more ﬂexible than wild type, Results: We identiﬁed 4 LBD carries of compound het- whichcouldleadtoimpairedinteractionwithα-tubulin,and erozygous missense mutations in VPS13C. Two mutant thus, impaired enzymatic function. Indeed, enzymatic alleles decreased protein expression by near 90% in lym- activity assays showed that mutant TTL protein is inactive, phoblast cells. VPS13C reduction was also observed in while patient ﬁbroblasts show signiﬁcantly higher levels of autopsy brain of two LBD carriers. In the PD cohort, we detyrosinated α-tubulin compared to healthy controls. identiﬁed 7 patients compound heterozygous (splice site/ Conclusion: We report the ﬁrst recessively inherited missense or missense/missense) and 1 patient homozygous tubulinopathy-like disorder, caused by biallelic loss of (missense) for VPS13C mutations. In control individuals, functionmutationsintheTTLgene.Funding:ERCStarting we observed 6 carriers of compound heterozygous muta- Grant 260888; Ricerca Finalizzata NET-2013-02356160 tions of which 3 shared the same variants suggesting cis R. De Mori: None. M. Magiera: None. S. Tardivo: conﬁguration. Trans/cis position of the heterozygous None. P. Accorsi: None. M. Ginevrino: None. S. Boda- VPS13C alleles are being determined by long-read kuntla: None. S. Nuovo: None. L. Giordano: None. E. sequencing on VPS13C cDNA. Loreﬁce: None. R. Liserre: None. L. Pinelli: None. T. Conclusion:Ourgeneticandexpressiondatasuggestthat Biagini: None. A. Micalizzi: None. A. Casella: None. T. alsoVPS13CmissensemutationscontributetoriskforLBD Mazza:None.M.O.Steinmetz:None.C.Janke:None.E. orPDbyloss-of-functionmechanism.Additionalfunctional Valente: None. studieswillbeneeded tounderstandthecontributionofthe different mutated VPS13C alleles to LBD and PD. P09.125D S. Smolders: None. S. Philtjens: None. D. Crosiers: Reduced VPS13C protein expression caused by None. S. Van Mossevelde: None. B. Heeman: None. A. recessivemissenseandsplicesitemutationsisassociated Sieben: None. P. Pals: None. S. Engelborghs: None. P. with Lewy body disease and Parkinson disease De Deyn: None. P. Cras: None. C. Van Broeckhoven: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1471 P09.126A methods. Furthermore, 7 pathogenic intronic variants were Comprehensiverarevariantanalysisofindividualswith identiﬁed, as well as 3 likely pathogenic variants in the neurodevelopmental disorders by whole-genome mitochondrial genome. This study demonstrates the value sequencing ofusingWGStoinvestigatethegeneticcausesofNDDasa single pass investigation. It also corroborates previous A. Sanchis-Juan1, C. Armirola1, K. Megy1, K. Low1, reports that reanalysis of data allows more patients to C. E. French2, D. Grozeva3, E. Dewhurst1, J. Stephens1, receive genetic diagnoses. WGS provides comprehensive K. Stirrups1, M. Erwood1, C. Penkett1, O. Shamardina1, andunbiasedcoveragefacilitatingidentiﬁcationofalltypes G. Ambegaonkar4, M. Chitre3, D. Josifova5, M. Kurian6, ofvariantsthroughoutthehumannuclearandmitochondrial A. Parker7, J. Rankin8, E. Reid9, E. Wakeling10, genome. Importantly, this includes variants that would not E. Wassmer11, G. Woods3, NIHR Bioresource, have been identiﬁed using the more commonly used whole W. H. Ouwehand1, F. Raymond3, K. J. Carss1 exome sequence approach. A. Sanchis-Juan: None. C. Armirola: None. K. Megy: 1Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, None. K. Low: None. C.E. French: None. D. Grozeva: Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Department of Paediatrics, None. E. Dewhurst: None. J. Stephens: None. K. Stir- University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, rups: None. M. Erwood: None. C. Penkett: None. O. 3DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,UniversityofCambridge, Shamardina: None. G. Ambegaonkar: None. M. Chitre: Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Child Development Centre, None. D. Josifova: None. M. Kurian: None. A. Parker: Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, None. J. Rankin: None. E. Reid: None. E. Wakeling: 5Guy'sandStThomas'Hospital,Guy'sandStThomas'NHS None. E. Wassmer: None. G. Woods: None. W.H. Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 6Department Ouwehand:None.F.Raymond:None.K.J.Carss:None. of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, P09.127B 7Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals Denovo,heterozygousmissensevariantsinYWHAGasa NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, novel cause of developmental and epileptic 8Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, encephalopathy United Kingdom, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, F. Kanani1, H. Titheradge2, N. Cooper2, F. Elmslie3, 10North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London M.Lees4,J.Juusola5,L.Pisani6,C.Mignot7,S.Valence8, North West Healthcare NHS Trust, Harrow, United B. Keren9, I. Guella10, DDD Study, Kingdom, 11Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham M. Balasubramanian1,11 Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom 1Shefﬁeld Clinical Genetics Service, Shefﬁeld Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Shefﬁeld, UK, Shefﬁeld, United Despitethesigniﬁcantprogressinunravellingtheoriginsof Kingdom, 2Birmingham Women’s and Children’s NHS neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), up to 50% of Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3South affected individuals remain without a genetic diagnosis. West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George's Here we demonstrate the power of using whole-genome Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4North East Regional sequencing(WGS)toidentifypathogenicvariantsinNDDs, Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, inoneofthelargeststudiestodate.WGSwasperformedon United Kingdom, 5Clinical Genomics and Research 691individuals(488affectedand201unaffectedrelatives). Programs, GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, Initially, pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in 31% 6HumanGeneticsandGenomics,NorthwellHealthSystem, individuals, and 21% had a variant of uncertain signiﬁ- New York, NY, United States, 7Assistance Publique – cance. Reanalysis of the data two years later increased the HôpitauxdeParis,ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,Groupe yieldto36%and23%respectively.Ofallreportedvariants, Hospitalier Pitié Slapêtrière, Paris, France, 8APHP, 90% were SNVs/indels in coding regions of NDD- Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, associatedgenes. However,WGS providedpowertodetect Paris, France, 9Département de génétique, hôpital Pitié- three additional categories of variants: structural, intronic Salpêtrière, Assistance publique, Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, and mitochondrial variants. Structural variants (SVs) France, 10Centre for Applied Neurogenetics, Djavad comprised 25 deletions, 6 duplications, 2 inversions, one MowafaghianCentreforBrainHealth,UniversityofBritish partial uniparental isodisomy and one complex SV. Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 11Academic Unit of Nanopore long-read WGS was used to resolve the genetic Child Health, University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, United architecture of SVs that could not be resolved by other Kingdom1472 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Introduction: Developmental and Epileptic encephalopa- Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, thies (DEE) describe heterogeneous epilepsy syndromes, Slovenia,2InstituteofClinicalNeurophysiology,Divisionof characterised by early-onset, refractory seizures and devel- Neurology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, opmental delay (DD). With increased access to whole Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Neurology, Faculty of exome sequencing (WES), new candidate genes are being Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, identiﬁed. YWHAG (*605356) on Chr 7q11.23 encodes for 4Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University YWHAG, from the 14-3-3 protein family, playing impor- of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia tant roles in signal transduction and cellular proliferation. YWHAG is highly expressed in brain, skeletal and heart Introduction:ManymicroRNAs(miRNAs)areaberrantly muscle. Mouse models suggest alterations in Ywhag level expressedinALSpatientsasaresultofinterruptedmiRNA cause delayed neuronal migration and interstitial deletions biogenesis and processing or due to other changes that at Chr 7q11.23 result in infantile seizures and cardiomyo- affect miRNA expression levels, including DNA methyla- pathy, suggesting haploinsufﬁciency as an explanation. tion. Several studies showed global methylation changes in Materials and Methods: We present 12 patients with ALS patients that could lead to altered expression levels. YWHAG de novo missense variants. We describe a syn- However, none of them focused on the inﬂuence of dromal phenotype, report novel and a recurrent p.Arg132- promoter methylation on miRNA expression. CysYWHAGvariantandcomparedevelopmentaltrajectory Materials and Methods: We identiﬁed methylated and treatment strategies in this cohort. Patients 1-9 had regions in the genome of ALS patients through MeDIP WES via Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study. sequencing (methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and Patients10-12wereidentiﬁedviaGenematcherandAnnEX sequencing of precipitated DNA fragments). databases. De novo variants from exome data were vali- Results: Sequenced fragments were mapped to a total of dated using Sanger sequencing. 1321 miRNA promoters. Based on the methylation differ- Results: 12/12 patients in the cohort have de novo, het- ences between samples we selected 358 ofthem for further erozygous missense variants in YWHAG including 4/12 assessment. Using KEGG analysis it turned out that miR- patients with a recurrent c.394C >T, p.Arg132Cys variant. NAs with altered methylation status in promoter region Characteristic features included: early-onset seizures, pre- target numerous genes including those involved in ErbB dominantly generalised tonic-clonic and absence type with signalling pathway (p= 1*10-8), Hippo signalling pathway good response to standard anti-epileptic medications; DD; (p=2*10-8), prion diseases (p=9*10-6), long-term depres- IntellectualDisability(ID)andarecognisablefacialgestalt. sion (p=9*10-6), endocytosis (p=2*10-5), adherens junc- Conclusions: Our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that tions (p=3*10-5), and axon guidance (p=4*10-5). YWHAG loss-of-function causes a neurological phenotype. Conclusions: Promoter methylation of miRNA genes Although the exact mechanism of YWHAG is not fully couldbeanimportantfactorfortheiraberrantexpressionin known, it is likely that YWHAG haploinsufﬁciency in ALS. Since miRNA target genes are involved in diverse developing cerebral cortex leads to abnormal neuronal biochemicalpathwaysandprocesses,aberrantexpressionof migration resulting in DEE. miRNAs may contribute to ALS pathology. However, fur- F. Kanani: None. H. Titheradge: None. N. Cooper: ther validation studies are needed to conﬁrm this. None.F.Elmslie:None.M.Lees:None.J.Juusola:None. Acknowledgements: This work was supported by Slove- L. Pisani: None. C. Mignot: None. S. Valence: None. B. nianResearch Agency(ARRS)underPhDthesisgrantsfor Keren: None. I. Guella: None. M. young researchers Ana Dolinar and Katarina Vrabec, and Balasubramanian: None. under research program P3-0054. Authors thank all the patients and healthy controls for their participation in the study. P10 A.Dolinar:None.K.Vrabec:None.B.Koritnik:None. Neuromuscular disorders D. Glavač: None. M. Ravnik-Glavač: None. P10.01D P10.02A Analysis of miRNA promoter methylation proﬁles in Comprehensive genetic analysis in a cohort of 107 ALS patients Hungarian patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis A. Dolinar1, K. Vrabec1, B. Koritnik2,3, D. Glavač1, K. Tripolszki1, P. Gampawar2, H. Schmidt2, Z. F. Nagy1, M. Ravnik-Glavač1,4 P. Klivenyi3, J. I. Engelhardt3, M. Szell1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1473 1University of Szeged, Department of Medical Genetics, 1Department of Neurology, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute Szeged, Hungary, 2Research Unit for Genetic of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Epidemiology, Gottfried Schatz Research Center, Hannover, Germany MolecularBiologyandBiochemistry,MedicalUniversityof Graz, Graz,Austria,3Department ofNeurology, University Introduction: The neuromuscular disorder SMA is the of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary most frequent genetic cause of death in children. Due to lower motor neuron loss caused by homozygous deletions Introduction:Amyotrophiclateralsclerosis(ALS)isafatal in the survival of motor neuron (SMN) 1 gene patients neurodegenerative disease characterized by the degenera- suffer from progressive muscular atrophy and paralysis. tion of upper and lower motor neurons. The frequency of Whereas SMA 1 and 2 patients never walk independently, mutationsinALSpatientshasbeenextensivelyinvestigated SMA 3 patients present with a milder phenotype and later in populations of various ethnic origins. Patients and onset mainly attributable to higher copy numbers of the methods: All investigated ALS patients (n=107) were of only partially functional SMN2 gene. In 2017 the Hungarian origin. Repeat sizing of C9orf72 and ATXN2 intrathecally administered antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) genes andtargetednext generationsequencing(NGS)were Nusinersenhasbeenapprovedasﬁrsttreatmentforalltypes used to comprehensively assess genetic variation in 35 of SMA by the EU, based on results from phase 3 trials in major ALS genes. The cohort was previously screened for pediatric patients. Nusinersen alters the splicing of SMN2 SOD1 and TARDBP genes, with negative results. Variants pre-mRNA in order to increase production of full-length from whole-exome sequencing data of other studies (200 SMNprotein.Longtermevaluationoftreatmenteffectsand individuals of Hungarian or Austrian origin) were used as impactofSMN2carrierstatus inadultSMApatientsunder in-house control database. ASO therapy is urgently needed. Results: Pathogenic repeat expansions in the C9orf72 Materials and Methods: In our center, 24 patients aged gene were detected in 10 patients (9.3%); intermediate 18-65yearshavebeentreatedwithintrathecalloadingdoses polyQlengths(27-33)intheATXN2genewereidentiﬁedin of Nusinersen at day 1, 14, 28 and 63, followed by main- 9 (8.4%) patients. Using panel sequencing, 31 rare, poten- tenance doses every 4 months so far. Treatment efﬁcacy tially pathogenic variants were detected in 16 genes. was assessed by monitoring of muscular functions and According to the NGS results, the most frequently mutated patient reported outcome measures in correlation to the geneswereNEK1(5.6%),NEFH,SQSTM1(3.7%),KIF5A, SMN2 carrier status. SPG11 (2.8%), ALS2, CCNF, FUS, MATR3, TBK1 and Results:Intrathecaladministrationeitherbyconventional UBQLN2 (1.9%). Furthermore, potentially pathogenic var- orcomputedtomography(CT)-guidedlumbarpuncturewas iants were found in ERBB4, FIG4, GRN and SIGMAR1 well tolerated. No patient has developed communicating genes in single patients. hydrocephalus. First objective and subjective results indi- Conclusion: Combining targeted NGS and repeat sizing, cate a beneﬁt in motor function in dependence of disease potentially causative variants were detected in 41% of severityandSMAtypewhichcorrelates totheSMN2copy patientsincludingpatientswithvariantsconsideredtobeof number. uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS). Our ﬁndings highlight the A. Osmanovic: None. G. Ranxha: None. M. Kumpe: necessity for large-scale multi-center studies on ALS None. K. Kollewe: None. L. Müschen: None. O. Abu- patients to better understand the underlying genetic causes. Fares:None.F.Götz:None.O.Schreiber-Katz:None.S. Funding: Hungarian Brain Research Program (Grant No. Petri: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- 2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002). borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants K.Tripolszki:None.P.Gampawar:None.H.Schmidt: already received); Modest; Biogen, Cytokinetics Inc, None. Z.F. Nagy: None. P. Klivenyi: None. J.I. Engel- GlaxoSminthKline GmbH,, Orion Pharma. D. Speakers hardt: None. M. Szell: None. Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Desitin Arzneimittel GmbH, TEVA, P10.03B Novartis, Biogen. Bringing genetics into clinical practice: antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) therapy in 5q-associated spinal P10.04C muscular atrophy (SMA) A de novo mutation of the stress granules-associated CAPRIN1causesanovelprogressiveneurodegenerative A. Osmanovic1, G. Ranxha1, M. Kumpe1, K. Kollewe1, disorder L. Müschen1, O. Abu-Fares2, F. Götz2, O. Schreiber- Katz1, S. Petri1 A. Delle Vedove1,2,3, M. Storbeck1,2,3, M. Eckenweiler4, S. Hosseinibarkooie1,2,3, N. Mendoza Ferreira1,2,3,1474 R. Heller1, I. Hölker1,2,3, O. Magnusson5, F. Körber6, P10.05D M. Kye1,2, J. Kirschner4, B. Wirth1,2,3 Neuropathy related genes as possible modiﬁers of PMP22 related neuropathies 1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, B.W.vanPaassen1,F.vanRuissen2,A.J.vanderKooi2, 3Institute for Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 4Clinic for M. de Visser2, C. Verhamme2, F. Baas3 Neuropediatrics and Muscular Disorders, Freiburg, Germany, 5deCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 6Institute 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2, of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Cologne, Amsterdam University Medical Center, location Academic Germany Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands Introduction: Motor neuron disorders (MNDs) are neuro- logical diseases whose diagnosis is still challenging due to Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) and their highly overlapping phenotypes and genetic hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies heterogeneity. (HNPP) are autosomal dominantly inherited peripheral Materials and Methods: An eight year-old girl born neuropathies caused by copy number variation of the fromanon-consanguineouscouple,presentedaprogressive PMP22 gene. Considerable phenotypic variation is known motor-sensory axonal polyneuropathy and subsequently for both disorders, suggesting modiﬁers. developed cerebellar ataxia, dysphagia and cognitive We undertook a search for genetic modiﬁers of PMP22 decline. She underwent SMN1 deletion testing, NMD-gene related neuropathies by selecting the extremes of the spec- panel analysis and a trio WES. trum of CMT1A and HNPP patients, based on disability Results: WES led to the identiﬁcation of a de novo assessed by the Overall Neuropathy Limitation Scale c.1535C>T variant (p.Pro512Leu) in the CAPRIN1 (Cell (ONLS).TheONLSdataof287patients(184CMT1Aand CycleAssociatedProtein1)gene.Thisvariantisnotpresent 103 HNPP patients) showed a Gaussian distribution for in1000GandgnomAD.CAPRIN1hasreducedtoleranceto both disorders. The median score for CMT1A patients was missense (Z = 1.79) and is intolerant to nonsense variants 4 and for HNPP patients 3. Twenty-one mild CMT1A (pLI=1.0).CAPRIN1isabundantintheadultbrain,where (ONLS<2),26severeCMT1A(ONLS>5),25mildHNPP itregulatesthetransportandtranslationofmRNAsofgenes (ONLS <2) and 25 severe HNPP patients (ONLS >4) were involvedinsynapticplasticity.Moreover,itcontainsanLC/ clinically evaluated to further characterize disease severity. ID domain and it is a component of stress granules. A next generation sequencing gene panel containing 147 Mutations in proteins containing LC/ID domains (TDP43, genes related to neuropathies and hereditary motor syn- TIA1, hnRNPA1/2) cause MNDs and increase the like- dromes was tested in this selection of patients. lihood of protein aggregates formation. Several in silico Missense, frameshift, nonsense and intronic mutations tools predict that the p.P512L mutation to increase the possibly affecting splicing were selected. No signiﬁcant aggregation propensity. Indeed, experiments in difference was found in the mean number of variants HEK293T cells show that CAPRIN1P512L forms bulky (mutation burden) per patient between the mild and severe aggregates as compared to CAPRIN1WT. Moreover, an groups. Further selection of variants with an allele fre- insoluble protein extraction assay demonstrates that quency of ≤4% in a control population was done. A sig- CAPRIN1WT elutes in the RIPA-soluble fraction while niﬁcant difference between the mild and the severe HNPP CAPRIN1P512L in the urea-soluble one. group was found. In several patients double trouble was Conclusions: Our results suggest that CAPRIN1P512L is found (another likely pathogenic mutation in a neuropathy prone to aggregation. As CAPRIN1 deﬁciency is linked to related gene). Replication of these resultsin a largercohort autism-spectrum disorders (ASD) in human and mice, we are needed. propose CAPRIN1P512L as a novel gain-of-function NMD B.W. van Paassen: None. F. van Ruissen: None. A.J. candidate gene. vanderKooi:None.M.deVisser:None.C.Verhamme: A. Delle Vedove: None. M. Storbeck: None. M. Eck- None. F. Baas: None. enweiler: None. S. Hosseinibarkooie: None. N. Mendoza Ferreira: None. R. Heller: None. I. Hölker: None. O. P10.06A Magnusson: None. F. Körber: None. M. Kye: None. J. A novel ddPCR method for the copy number variation Kirschner: None. B. Wirth: None. analysis of the segmental duplication regions in nebulin and titinAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1475 L. J. Sagath1, V. Lehtokari1, C. Wallgren-Pettersson1, surveyed 10 pairs of DMD participants and their parents K. B. Pelin2, K. J. Kiiski1 withinthisclinicaltrialviaaniPadsurveyformandthrough interviews regarding their understanding of the trial, 1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 2Faculty expectations, anxieties, and reasons for participating in the of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of trial.Approximatelyhalfoftheparticipantsactivelydecided Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland to participate of their own volition, and none considered quittingthetrial.Thisindicatesthatparticipantsparticipated Introduction: The giant genes nebulin (NEB) and titin more positively in this clinical trial than previously (TTN) both harbour large expressed segmental duplication expected. However, some potential concerns were also (SD) regions. Mutations in NEB cause nemaline myopathy revealed, with one being that the desire to please those (NM), and mutations in TTN cause myopathies and around them might be more important to the DMD cardiomyopathy. Using custom, targeted Comparative participants than the effects of the drug. Another issue is Genomic Hybridization arrays for NM and other neuro- the possibility of biased information originating from the muscular disorders, we have shown that copy number studysubjects’parents;whilesevenoutof10oftheparents variations (CNVs) in the NEB SD are potentially patho- toldtheirchildrenthatthestudydrugmightwork,onlyfour genic. We have also shown that the TTN SD harbours oftheseparentsalsoexplainedthatitmightnotwork.Only recurrent and potentially pathogenic CNVs. For validation, two study participants received an explanation concerning we have established custom Digital Droplet PCR (ddPCR) thedrug’ssideeffectsfromtheirparents.Thisresultimplies assays targeting the SD regions of NEB and TTN. that caution should be taken when family expectations are Materials and Methods: We created custom assays for high, and there is a possibility that subjects will be given exons 4 and 8 of the NEB SD, and exon-intron regions 1-2 biased information from their parents. This work was and 7-8 of the TTN SD. The ddPCR method was validated supportedgrantfromthe[IntramuralResearchGrant(26-6) using 70 controls previously run on our CGH-arrays. for Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders of National Results:WeshowthatCNVsintheTTNSDarerecurrent Center of Neurology and Psychiatry] andappearin25%ofbothhealthyandaffectedindividuals. R. Shimizu: None. M. Ohata: None. H. Tachimori: The ddPCR method is sensitive, and reliably detects CNV None.E.Kimura:None.Y.Harada:None.E.Takeshita: in both NEB and TTN SDs. None. A. Tamaura: None. S. Takeda: None. H. Conclusions: Our ddPCR assay for the SD regions of Komaki: None. NEB and TTN allows for rapid, speciﬁc and inexpensive assessmentofCNVswithintheseregions.Currently,weare P10.08C investigating the potential pathogenicity of TTN SD Genomic proﬁling of adult onset isolated focal dystonia region CNVs. in a group of Romanian patients Funding: This study is supported by Muscular Dystrophy UK R. Cocos1, I. Popescu-Olaru2,3, O. Băjenaru4,5, L.J. Sagath: None. V. Lehtokari: None. C. Wallgren- L. Cozma4,3, L. Dumitrescu4,3, R. Tănăsescu4,3,6, Pettersson: None. K.B. Pelin: None. K.J. Kiiski: None. F. Raicu1,7, B. Popescu4,3,8 P10.07B 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy - Department of Expectations and anxieties of Duchenne muscular Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of dystrophypatientsandtheirfamiliesduringtheﬁrst-in- Medicine and Pharmacy -Department of Clinical human clinical trial of NS-065/NCNP-01 Neurosciences, Bucharest, Romania, 3Colentina Clinical Hospital - Department of Neurology, Bucharest, Romania, R. Shimizu, M. Ohata, H. Tachimori, E. Kimura, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy - Department of Y. Harada, E. Takeshita, A. Tamaura, S. Takeda, ClinicalNeurosciences,Bucharest,Romania,5“AnaAslan” H. Komaki National Institute of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Bucharest,Romania,6UniversityofNottingham-Academic National Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan Clinical Neurology, Division of Clinical Neuroscience, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 7Institute of Anthropology Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a recessive X- Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania, 8“Victor Babeş linked genetic disease caused by a mutation in the National Institute of Pathology - Laboratory of dystrophin gene. The new drug NS-065/NCNP-01 utilizing Ultrastructural Pathology, Bucharest, Romania exon-skipping therapy targeting speciﬁc deletions has been usedinaﬁrst-in-humantrialforthetreatmentofDMD.We1476 Introduction: We proposed to identify the relevant genomic proﬁles of adult-onset isolated focal dystonia by Single-cellanalyseshavebecomeincreasinglyimportantfor gaining insights into the interplay of potential causative uncovering cellular dynamics during health and disease. disease-associated genetic variants at the genomic level. Not only have they began to unravel a greater level of Isolatedfocaldystoniaisthethirdmostcommonmovement cellular heterogeneity than previously could have been disorderafterParkinson’sdiseaseandessential tremor. The appreciated, it also enables the identiﬁcation of sporadic etiology is genetic in some cases, but over 75% are cellular aberrations involved in disease etiology and idiopathic. development. Materials and Methods: In the ﬁrst stage of our study, One prime example of disease-associated cellular het- we analyzed onto the Ion Torrent PGM platform a well- erogeneity is found in facioscapulohumeral muscular dys- described homogenous group of 120 Romanian dystonia trophy (FSHD), which is characterized by sporadic de- cases using our own designed Targeted Sequencing repression of the cleavage-stage transcription factor DUX4 AmpliSeq panel of 30 genes previously found to be asso- in ~1:200 myonuclei. Yet, with the sporadic nature of ciated with dystonia (DYT) and other movement disorders. DUX4 de-repression limiting the resolution of bulk RNA- All samples had 97.85% average of target regions with seq analyses, essential insights in the cascade of events coverage by at least 30 folds. Data were analyzed using a leadingtoapoptosisandseveremusclewastingobservedin bioinformatics in house pipeline based on GATK, Picard patients are currently limited. and Annovar software for reading alignments, variant call- We used single-cell RNA-sequencing combined with ing, ﬁltering and annotation. pseudotime trajectory modeling to generate a detailed Results:Moleculargeneticscreeningidentiﬁedmutations FSHDcellularprogressionmodel.Weshowthatourmodel in 46/120 (38%) of the clinically diagnosed adult-onset detectsFSHD-associatedcellularprogressioninapprox.1% isolated focal dystonia subjects. All identiﬁed mutations ofallcells,andfaithfullyreﬂectsboth theburst-likeDUX4 were previously reported to be associated with DYTs. expression as well as the downstream activation of various Conclusions:Thesubsequentanalysisofnegative-known pathwayspreviouslyimplicatedinFSHD.Inaddition,using DYTs patients for the genes in the customized panel using our model we were now able to identify new expression the Whole Exome Sequencing could offer the opportunity signatures that are likely related to both direct and indirect to assess extensively the genomic proﬁles of adult-onset effects of DUX4. idiopathic isolated focal dystonia and could result in iden- Our data therefore highlights the potential for single-cell tiﬁcation of new genes and variants causing-disease. This transcriptomics in studying disease etiology in genetic dis- workwassupportedbytheCNCS-UEFISCDIgrantPN-III- eases,evenwhenhallmarkedbyhighcellularheterogeneity P4-ID-PCE-2016-0696. asinFSHD,andshowsthatpseudotimetrajectorieslikeour R.Cocos:None.I.Popescu-Olaru:None.O.Băjenaru: FSHDpseudotimemodelmaycontainvaluableinformation None. L. Cozma: None. L. Dumitrescu: None. R. for further unraveling the role of cellular heterogeneity in Tănăsescu: None. F. Raicu: None. B. Popescu: None. disease etiology and progression. A. van den Heuvel: None. A. Mahfouz: None. S.L. P10.09D Kloet:None.J.Balog:None.B.G.M.VanEngelen:None. Cellular heterogeneity in FSHD R. Tawil: None. S.J. Tapscott: None. S.M. van der Maarel: None. A.vandenHeuvel1,A.Mahfouz2,3,S.L.Kloet1,J.Balog1, B. G. M. Van Engelen4, R. Tawil5, S. J. Tapscott6, P10.10A S. M. van der Maarel1 Functional analysis of an intronic variant of uncertain signiﬁcance c.911-13A>G in the FKTN gene 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Leiden V. Freire1, A. Filatova1, I. Akimova1, M. Bulakh1, Computational Biology Center, Leiden University Medical M. Skoblov1,2 Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Bioinformatics Lab, Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands, 4Department 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain Cognition and Federation, 2School of Biomedicine, Far Eastern Federal Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, University, Vladivostok, Russian Federation Netherlands, 5Department of Neurology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States, 6Division of Introduction: Next generation sequencing methods allow HumanBiology,FredHutchinsonCancerResearchCenter, the identiﬁcation of previously ignored deep intronic Seattle, WA, United States variants, but it is still difﬁcult to determine theirAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1477 pathogenicity. In a patient with congenital muscular makesdiagnosticofFSHDcomplicatedforbasicdiagnostic dystrophy and cardiomyopathy, two heterozygous variants laboratories. in the FKTN gene were identiﬁed: previously described Materials and Methods: Blood-derived DNA was iso- pathogenic variant NM_001079802.1(FKTN_v001): lated from 55 FSHD patients and its relatives. For the c.509C>A p.(Ala170Glu) and a previously undescribed molecular-genetic diagnostic, we used three methods: intronic variant of uncertain signiﬁcance NG_008754.1 Southern blotting, molecular combing and a newly devel- (FKTN_v001): c.911-13A>G, inherited from the mother. oped PCR based method. Materials and Methods: In order to study the effect of Results: Totally 55 individuals were analyzed by the c.911-13A>G on FKTN splicing and conﬁrm its patho- Southern blotting, among them 12 parents/children, genicity,weperformedRT-PCRoftotalRNAisolatedfrom 28 sporadic cases. Six patients with difﬁcult interpretation peripheralbloodmononuclearcellsandﬁbroblastsobtained of the Southern blotting results were further analyzed by fromtheproband,hismotherandhealthydonors,aswellas molecular combing. For all cases we determined the D4Z4 using a FKTN minigene expression system in a HEK293T repeat size and haplotype. The PCR based diagnostic was cell model line. applied to 7 FSHD patients with one 4qA repeat below 10 Results: When studying the obtained mRNA structure, units and to 8 healthy relatives with normal-sized D4Z4 three FKTN isoforms were identiﬁed: two normal (present repeats.ThePCRresultswereconcordantwiththeSouthern incontrolsamplesofhealthydonors)andoneaberrantwith blottingin57.1%forthepatientsandin88%forthehealthy exon 9 skipping. The minigene expression analysis con- relatives. We suggest that the discordant results were ﬁrmed this data. The short isoform canbe explained bythe obtained due to high background of ampliﬁcation or to destruction of the intron 8 acceptor splice-site. Thus, the DNA quality issues. work showed that the presence of a deep intronic variant Conclusions: The Southern blot and the molecular c.911-13A>G in the FKTN gene leads to the loss of 133 combing results are highly correlated. The PCR-based nucleotides, with an open reading frame shifting and a 145 method shows potential to diagnose FSHD; however needs amino acid shortening (p.W301Rfs*13) of the protein. further optimization. Improvement of the PCR-based Conclusions: Functional analysis of intron variants method may simplify FSHD diagnostic for basic diag- allowstoestablishthepathogenicityofvariantsofuncertain nostic laboratories. clinical signiﬁcance and conﬁrm the diagnosis in patients. Acknowledgments: We are grateful to Genomic Vision Inthisstudy,thepathogenicityofthec.911-13A>Gvariant Company for the ability to test DNA samples. in the FKTN gene was demonstrated. M.Y. Skoblov: None. N.V. Zernov: None. A.A. Gus- V.Freire:None.A.Filatova:None.I.Akimova:None. kova:None.P.J.vanderVliet:None.G.E.Rudenskaya: M. Bulakh: None. M. Skoblov: None. None. I.A. Sharkova: None. I.A. Akimova: None. R.J. Lemmers: None. N.A. Semenova: None. N.A. Demina: P10.12C None. V.A. Galkina: None. T.V. Markova: None. O.E. Methods of the DNA diagnostics for Zinovyeva: None. E.L. Dadali: None. facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) P10.13D M. Y. Skoblov1, N. V. Zernov1, A. A. Guskova1, P. J. van Genetic analysis of autosomal dominant motor and der Vliet2, G. E. Rudenskaya1, I. A. Sharkova1, sensory neuropathy with proximal dominancy in the I. A. Akimova1, R. J. Lemmers2, N. A. Semenova1, lower extremities, urinary disturbance, and paroxysmal N. A. Demina1, V. A. Galkina1, T. V. Markova1, dry cough O. E. Zinovyeva3, E. L. Dadali1 S. MIURA1,2, K. Kosaka3, R. Fujioka4, S. Mori1, 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian H. Shibata5 Federation, 2Department of Human Genetics, Leiden UniversityMedicalCenter,Leiden,Netherlands,3Sechenov 1Division of Respirology, Neurology and Rheumatology, First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Department of Medicine, Kurume University School of Federation Medicine, Kurume, Japan, 2Department of Geriatric Medicine and Neurology, Ehime University Graduate Introduction:In95%FSHDcausedbyapartialcontraction School of Medicine, Toon, Japan, 3Division of Human oftheD4Z4arrayupto10-1repeatsata4qAhaplotypeof Molecular Genetics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, chromosome 4q35. The size of D4Z4 repeats and its high Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 4Department of Food similarity with the D4Z4 locus on chromosome 10q26 and Nutrition, Beppu University Junior College, Beppu,1478 Japan, 5Division of Genomics, Medical Institute of characterized by progressive spasticity and weakness in Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan lower limbs. The mode of inheritance in HSP can be autosomal-dominant, autosomal-recessive, X-linked, or We have reported a clinically new type of autosomal mitochondrial. There is signiﬁcant genetic heterogeneity dominant disorders of motor and sensory neuropathy inHSP,withatleast65genesand80lociidentiﬁedthusfar. (Miura et al. J Neurol Sci 2008). The cardinal clinical Whole exome sequencing (WES) has been used for gene features of the disease were slow progression, muscular discoveryinHSPsince2011,resultinginamarkedincrease weakness with dominancy in the proximal portion of the in the rate of novel disease-causing genes being identiﬁed. lower limbs and in the distal portion of the upper limbs, Despite the use of WES, genetic analysis has failed in sensory involvement with dominancy in the lower limbs ﬁnding of causative genes in ~45%-60% in the autosomal (gloveandstockingtype),areﬂexia,ﬁneposturalandaction dominant-HSP(AD-HSP)and~71%-80%intheautosomal tremors, painful muscle cramps, elevated serum creatine recessive-HSP (AR-HSP) groups, indicating that, the kinaselevels,urinarydisfunction,andrecurrentparoxysmal majority of HSP-genes especially AR-HSPs have remained dry cough. Sural nerve biopsy showed moderate, chronic, unknown. mainly axonal neuropathy. To identify the causative Materials and Methods: In order to identiﬁcation of nucleotide variant for the disease, we studied the Japanese novel HSP-disease causing genes, we investigated the pedigree with the disease of 19 family members including causes of AR-HSP in 12 unrelated Iranian families ninepatientsinﬁvegenerations.Bythelinkageanalysis,we using WES. mapped the disease locus to 1p13.3-q23 (maximum Results:Thisapproachledustoidentifythemutationsin logarithm-of-oddsscore=2.24).Thewhole-exomesequen- seven known disease-causing genes including SPG7 (two cing upon ﬁve patients and one healthy relative from the cases), CAPN1, CYP7B1, ENTPD1, GJC2, ERLIN2, and pedigree revealed 2,526 patient-speciﬁc single nucleotide SPG11 (two cases) and three novel candidate HSP genes. variants(SNVs).Bytheﬁlteringprocessesusingthepublic Functionalanalysestoevaluateofthebiologicalimplication SNP databases, our linkage analysis, validation by Sanger of the novel genes are ongoing. sequencing, conﬁrming cosegregation, genotyping 520 Conclusions: Here, we could ﬁnd nine variations in healthy Japanese individuals, and functional predictions, seven known HSP-causing genes in 12 cases (75%) and weidentiﬁedoneSNVlocated inIQGAP3whichisknown three novel HSP-genes in the remaining ones using WES tobeassociatedwithneuriteoutgrowth.Immunohistochem- method. Identiﬁcation of novel genes and novel molecular istryshowincreasedexpressionofIQGAP3inlymphocytes pathways will greatly enhance our understanding of the andsuralnervesofapatientcomparedtothoseofacontrol. cellular pathways that are critical for axonal health and our We conclude that IQGAP3 is a causative gene for the knowledge about pathogenesis of the disease. disease. This is the ﬁrst record of a disease caused by an M.Rahimi Bidgoli:None.A.Alavi:None.M.Rohani: IQGAP3 variant. None. L. Javan Parast: None. M. Pashaei: None. F. S. Miura: None. K. Kosaka: None. R. Fujioka: None. Fatehi: None. S. Naﬁssi: None. K. Kahrizi: None. H. S. Mori: None. H. Shibata: None. Najmabadi: None. P10.14A P10.15B Genetics heterogeneity and novel genes in autosomal Clinical background of hyper creatine kinase in girls recessive Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (AR-HSP) without a family history of genetic muscular disease M. Rahimi Bidgoli1, A. Alavi1, M. Rohani2, L. Javan T. Lee1, S. Tokunaga1, C. Mure1, M. Misaki1, Parast1, M. Pashaei1, F. Fatehi3, S. Naﬁssi3, K. Kahrizi1, H. Shimomura1, I. Nishino2, K. Ito3, Y. Takeshima1 H. Najmabadi1 1Department of Pediatrics, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1Geneticsresearchcenter,UniversityofSocialWelfareand Nishinomiya, Japan, 2National Center of Neurology and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan, 3Department of Pathology and 2Department of Neurology, Iran University of Medical Applied Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Medicine Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto, Republic of, 3Department of Neurology, Tehran University Japan of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Persistent elevated plasma creatine kinase (CK) raises the Introduction: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSPs) is a suspicion of various conditions such as genetic muscular group of inherited neurodegenerative disorders disease, inﬂammatory muscular disease, metabolicAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1479 myopathy, or hypothyroidism. In girls, carrier status of Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 6Northcott Neuroscience Duchenne/Beckermusculardystrophy(DMD/BMD)should Laboratory, ANZAC Research Institute, Concord NSW, be taken into consideration so that the diagnostic process Australia, 7Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, mightincludebothtechnicalandethicalaspects.Therefore, Sydney, Australia, 8The R&D Unit, Stiftelsen Stockholms no diagnostic system has been established and the clinical Sjukhem, Stockholm, Sweden, 9Division of background is still unclear. This study aimed to investigate Neurodegeneration, Department of Neurobiology, Care theclinicalbackgroundofhyper-creatine-kinase-emiagirls. Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Fifteen girls, who were referred to our hospital between Sweden, 10Department of Pediatric Neurology, DNA April 2014 and August 2018 with persistent elevated Laboratory,2ndFacultyofMedicine,CharlesUniversityin plasma CK without a family history of muscular disease, Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech were included. Age and Value of CK at the ﬁrst visit were Republic, 11Neuropediatrics Department, Hospital 0-12 years old and 740-21,944 IU/L. Eight cases exhibited Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 12Department of clinical symptoms (symptomatic group), while seven cases Neurology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La Fe, and showed no symptoms (asymptomatic group). Genetic CIBER of Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, muscular disease was diagnosed using muscle biopsy or 13Department of Medicine, University of Valencia, geneticanalysis.Inthesymptomaticgroup,diagnoseswere Valencia, Spain, 14Molecular Medicine Laboratory, DMD/BMD carrier (3 cases), Fukuyama congenital mus- Concord Hospital, Concord NSW, Australia, 15INCLIVA & cular dystrophy (1 case), sarcoglycanopathy (1 case), IIS-La Fe Rare Diseases Joint Units, Centro de dermatomyositis (1 case), and undiagnosed (2 cases). One Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain girlpresentingwithmarkedelevatedCKanddevelopmental delay was diagnosed with balanced translocation with the Introduction:MutationsinMORC2leadtoanaxonalform breakpointlocatedwithintheDMDgeneandskewingofX- of Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMT2Z). To date, chromosome inactivation. Diagnoses in the asymptomatic thirty-one families have been reported, showing that this group were DMD/BMD carrier (3 cases), calpainopathy gene is frequently involved in CMT. However, the (1case), and undiagnosed (3cases). Both groups included phenotypic consequences of MORC2 in patients and its patients affected by muscular disease and DMD/BMD role in neuronal biology remain to be clariﬁed. carriers, suggesting that both conditions should be con- Materials and Methods: A gene capture panel was sidered regardless of presence of symptoms. Building a performed to screen undiagnosed patients with CMT. To diagnostic system is necessary based on the clinical determine the effect of the most common MORC2 muta- background shown in this study. tions in a neural context, p.S87L and p.R252W, we used a T. Lee: None. S. Tokunaga: None. C. Mure: None. M. virus-based system in vitro to overexpress MORC2 in Misaki: None. H. Shimomura: None. I. Nishino: None. sensoryneurons.ATPaseactivityofMORC2wasmeasured K. Ito: None. Y. Takeshima: None. bycolorimetricassay.Apatients-derivedﬁbroblastsandrat sensory neurons overexpressing clinical mutations were P10.16C investigatedbybothtranscriptomicsandproteomicsstudies Expanding the molecular characterization of the to gain an insight into the pathogenic mechanisms CMT2Z disease associated gene MORC2 of MORC2. Results:Here,we report the MORC2 mutations detected P. Sancho1, L. Bartesaghi2,3, O. Moissec2,3, F. García- in our clinical series, including a review of the reported García4,L.Ramírez-Jiménez5,A.Siddell6,7,E.Åkesson8,9, literature.Moreover,we show that the overexpression ofp. E. Hedlund2, P. Laššuthová10, S. Pascual-Pascual11, S87L mutantinsensory neurons inducedsigniﬁcant axonal T. Sevilla12,13, M. Kennerson6,7,14, V. Lupo1,5,15, phenotype.Inaddition,weobservedthatp.S87Lmutanthas R. Chrast2,3, C. Espinós1,5,15 an impaired ATPase activity. The data analysis of tran- scriptomic and proteomic approach in sensory neurons and 1Unit of Genetics and Genomics of Neuromuscular and patients’ ﬁbroblasts indicate complex changes affecting Neurodegenerative Disorders, Centro de Investigación transcripts involved in neuronal and axonal functions. Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 2Department of Conclusions: Our data expand the spectrum of clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, mutationsinMORC2andprovideanimportantinsightinto 3Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska the pathophysiological role of MORC2 in the nervous Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Unit of Bioinformatics and system. Funds: AFM-Téléthon, ISCIII (Grant PI15/00187) Biostatistics, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe co-funded with FEDER funds, Prometeo Program from the (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 5Department of Genomics and Generalitat Valenciana and Fundación Ramón Areces. Translational Genetics, Centro de Investigación Príncipe1480 P. Sancho: None. L. Bartesaghi: None. O. Moissec: P10.18A None. F. García-García: None. L. Ramírez-Jiménez: IdentiﬁcationofCAPN3genenovelvariationsinIranian None. A. Siddell: None. E. Åkesson: None. E. Hedlund: LGMD patients None.P.Laššuthová:None.S.Pascual-Pascual:None.T. Sevilla: None. M. Kennerson: None. V. Lupo: None. R. M. Fadaee1, Z. Fattahi1,2, R. Vazehan1, F. Ahangari1, Chrast: None. C. Espinós: None. A.Abolhassani1,Z.Kalhor1,S.Dehdahsi1,E.Parsimehr1, M. Faraji Zonooz1, M. Beheshtian1,2, A. Kariminejad1, P10.17D H. Najmabadi1,2 Molecular analysis of sarcoglycanopathies in Russian LGMD patients 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Genetics Research M. V. Bulakh, O. P. Ryzhkova, A. V. Polyakov Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation Introduction: Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type2A (LGMD2A), caused by mutations in CAPN3 gene, is the Introduction: Sarcoglycanopathies (SGCs, LGMD2C-F) most common LGMD form worldwide (30-40% of all areasubgroupofautosomal-recessivelimb-girdlemuscular LGMD2 cases). LGMD2A is an autosomal recessive dystrophies (LGMD), caused by mutations in four sarco- disorderhighlightedbyweaknessofthepelvicandshoulder glycan genes (SGCG, SGCA, SGCB, SGCD). These forms girdle muscles. Recently, CAPN3 heterozygous mutations are characterized by childhood onset and rapidly progres- have been known to cause dominant LGMD type4 sive course with loss of ability to walk during a second (LGMDD4). decade of progression. In general, SGCs could hardly be Materials and Methods: We investigated a large cohort distinguished from Duchenne/Becker myopathy and other of 192 Iranian patients with different grades of muscular pseudohypertrophic LGMDs due to quite similar clinical dystrophy who referred to Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathol- symptoms. ogy and Genetics Center during 2012-2018 by exome and Materials and Methods: Targeted massive parallel targeted next-generation sequencing. sequencing was performed in 290 Russian patients with Results: Twenty nine LGMD2A cases were identiﬁed, progressive muscle weakness using a custom gene panel carrying 22 different CAPN3 gene variants. Approximately covering four sarcoglycan genes. 15% of participants possessed variations in CAPN3 gene; Results: Genetic analysis revealed homozygous and including 10 missense, 5 frameshift, 1 inframe, 2 nonsense compound-heterozygous mutations in 16 patients in 3 of and 4 splice site changes; in which 9 variants were novel 4 sarcoglycan genes. The SGCA mutations have been compromises p.Gly127Glu, p.Ile266_Asp267del, p. detected in 13 cases (4,5%); the SGCB and SGCG muta- Ser265Pro, p.Gly221Cys, p.Ser432*, p.Tyr507Cys, p. tions have been found in 2 (0,7%) and 1 (0,3%) cases Gln545Serfs*50, c.1115+1dup and c.1353A>G at splice respectively. Mutation spectrum of SGCA gene was repre- donor site. Moreover, 4 variants occurred multiple times in sented by 12 different mutations, 4 of them are recurrent. the cohort (p.Ile266_Asp267del, p.Ser432*, p.Arg748Gln Previously we also identiﬁed 4 patients with SGCA muta- and c.1115+1dup). In 3 patients, the second causative tionsinaDuchenne/Beckermyopathycohort.Astheresult, variant has not been found which suggests diagnosing of twopathogenicSGCAvariantsc.229C>T(p.Arg77Cys)and LGMDD4. c.271G>A (p.Gly91Ser) were deﬁned as the most common Conclusions:Basedonﬁndings,itseemsthatprevalence SGCA mutations in Russian patients accounting 29,4% and of LGMD2A is high in Iranian LGMD patients and some 26,5% of all mutant alleles respectively. mutations are more frequent. Besides, most of the variants Conclusions: This study revealed that LGMD2D is the have been occurred in Domain III and the catalytic domain mostcommonformofSGCs inRussianLGMD cohort.To (domain II) of the calpain3 protein involved in Ca2 sum up, SGCs account 5,5% of all LGMDs in total that +-induced activation of the protein. Defects in these makethemthethirdLGMDsubgroupfollowingLGMD2A domains lead to impair its autolytic activity. Therefore, and LGMD2I. However, in contrast to other European designing drugs to target this part of the Calpain3 protein populations, SGCs are very uncommon in Russia. might help to improve the quality of life in patients. M.V. Bulakh: None. O.P. Ryzhkova: None. A.V. M.Fadaee:None.Z.Fattahi:None.R.Vazehan:None. Polyakov: None. F. Ahangari: None. A. Abolhassani: None. Z. Kalhor: None.S.Dehdahsi:None.E.Parsimehr:None.M.FarajiAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1481 Zonooz: None. M. Beheshtian: None. A. Kariminejad: Foundation [2013-14290]); NIH K99/R00 Pathway to None. H. Najmabadi: None. IndependenceAward;CancerPreventionResearchInstitute of Texas Recruitment Award. P10.19B L.Nazaryan-Petersen:None.I.RodriguesdeOliveira: Multigenic involvement of the semaphorin-plexin None. M.M. Mehrjouy: None. J.M. Medina Mendez: pathway in Moebius syndrome by a germline None.M.Bak:None.M.Bugge:None.V.M.Kalscheuer: chromothriptic rearrangement None. I. Bache: None. D.C. Hancks: None. N. Tommerup: None. L. Nazaryan-Petersen1, I. Rodrigues de Oliveira1,2, M. M. Mehrjouy1, J. M. Medina Mendez1, M. Bak1,3, P10.20C M.Bugge1,V.M.Kalscheuer4,I.Bache1,3,D.C.Hancks5, Inactivation of KLHL24 results in myopathy and N. Tommerup1 cardiomyopathy 1Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty C. Hedberg-Oldfors1, A. Abramsson1, D. Osborn2, ofHealthScience,UniversityofCopenhagen,Copenhagen, O. Danielsson3, A. Fazlinezhad4, Y. Nilipour5, Denmark, 2Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Lisbon, L. Hübbert6, I. Nennesmo7, K. Visuttijai1, J. Bharj2, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, E. Petropoulou2, A. Shoreim2, B. Vona8, N. Ahangari9, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, M. Dávila López1, M. Doosti10, R. Kumar Banote1, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Group Development and Disease, R. Marooﬁan2, M. Edling1, M. Taherpour4, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, H. Zetterberg1, E. Ghayoor Karimiani4, A. Oldfors1, Germany, 5Department of Immunology, The University of Y. Jamshidi2 Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States 1University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2St George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom, Moebius syndrome (MBS) is a congenital disorder 3Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 4Imam Reza primarily caused by unilateral or bilateral paralysis of the International University, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic facial and abducens nerves. Both genetic defects and of, 5Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, environmental toxic factors leading to abnormal brainstem Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 6Linkoping University, developmentareproposedtobeinvolvedintheaetiologyof Linköping, Sweden, 7Karolinska University Hospital, MBS. Recently, mutations in PLXND1 and REV3L were Stockholm, Sweden, 8Julius Maximilians University conﬁrmed to cause MBS.Here,we appliednext generation Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 9Mashhad University of mate-pair sequencing to map the breakpoints of a complex Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, chromosomalrearrangement(CCR)46,XY,t(7;8;11;13)ina 10Next Generation Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran, previously reported patient with MBS, and conﬁrmed 39 Islamic Republic of out of 41 breakpoint-junctions by Sanger sequencing. Molecular mapping revealed 41 clustered breakpoints, Introduction: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the involving chromosomes 7, 8, 11 and 13, resulting in heavy most common inherited cardiovascular disorder, yet the intra- and interchromosomal rearrangements with typical genetic cause remains unknown in up to 50% of the hallmarks of chromothripsis. Among 12 truncated protein- individuals who lack sarcomere gene mutations. We report coding genes, SEMA3A and SEMA3D are attractive anovelgeneticcauseofacardiomyopathymimickingHCM candidates for the MBS features, as they encode class in two consanguineous families with a high incidence of 3 semaphorins, where SEMA3A is known to bind to the suddencardiacarrest.Theageatonsetinthepatientswasin MBS-associated PLXND1. Intriguingly, the CCR also adolescence or in young adulthood. truncated PIK3CG, which in silico interacts with a protein Material and Methods: Investigations included clinical encoded by the other known MBS-gene REV3L, and with examination, endomyocardial and skeletal muscle biopsy the SEMA3A/PLXND1 complex via the vascular endothe- and genetic analyses by exome sequencing and homo- lial growth factor FLT1. In conclusion, the simultaneous zygosity mapping. Functional studies were performed in truncation of several interactors of the known MBS-genes zebraﬁsh by expression analysis and genetic down- by a single CCR suggests that the multiple breakpoints in regulation using antisense morpholino oligomers. germline chromothripsis may predispose to complex multi- Results: Endomyocardial biopsy and skeletal muscle genic disorders. Grants: Danish Council for Independent biopsy of individuals from both families demonstrated Research[4183-00482B];UniversityofCopenhagenExcel- characteristic alterations including muscle ﬁbers with a lence Programme for Interdisciplinary Research; Lundbeck “cogwheel” appearance, and desmin accumulation.1482 Homozygositymappingandexome sequencingidentiﬁed a TP-PCR method (Radvansky et al.) in which ampliﬁcation homozygous missense mutation in KLHL24, c.917G>A, p. products are anchored at the 3’end of a CTG repeat Arg306His in one family and a nonsense mutation, expansionratherthanthe5’end.Theeffectofthisredesign c.1048G>T, p.Glu350* in the second family. KLHL24 is that it may prevent the failure in detecting expansion- encodes a conserved protein, which is highly expressed in positive patients carrying repeat interruptions. striated muscle. Studies in zebraﬁsh revealed expression of Results: TP-PCR reverse primer combinations showed the homolog gene klhl24a in the heart and downregulation expansion above 50 repeats at the 3'end of the CTG repeat by antisense morpholino oligomers resulted in cardiac sequence. dysfunction. Conclusions:Thankstothecombinationofboth:forward Conclusions: We have identiﬁed a novel form of cardi- andreverseTP-PCRprimersthereisasimpleandeffective omyopathy that mimics HCM with recessive inheritance method of identifying the presence or absence of expanded and onset in adolescence or young adulthood. Genetic, CTGrepeatallelesintheDMPKgene.Itseemsnecessaryto morphological and functional studies demonstrated that use forward and reverse TP-PCR primers, due to the pos- inactivation of KLHL24 is associated with the disease. sibilityofoccurrenceofinterruptionsobservedatbothends Several individuals had died of sudden cardiac arrest indi- of the CTG repeat sequence. cating that lethal arrhythmias may be a common A. Bialek-Proscinska: None. J. Muszynski: None. M. complication. Jopek:None.M.Przyborska:None.K.Lacna:None.M. C. Hedberg-Oldfors: None. A. Abramsson: None. D. Piechota: None. M. Krawczynski: None. Osborn: None. O. Danielsson: None. A. Fazlinezhad: None. Y. Nilipour: None. L. Hübbert: None. I. Nen- P10.22A nesmo: None. K. Visuttijai: None. J. Bharj: None. E. Validation of a fast, robust, inexpensive, two-tiered Petropoulou: None. A. Shoreim: None. B. Vona: None. neonatal ncreening test algorithm on dried blood spots N. Ahangari: None. M. Dávila López: None. M. Doosti: for spinal muscular atrophy None.R.KumarBanote:None.R.Marooﬁan:None.M. Edling: None. M. Taherpour: None. H. Zetterberg: A. Strunk1, A. Abbes1, A. R. Stuitje2, C. Hettinga2, None. E. Ghayoor Karimiani: None. A. Oldfors: None. E. Sepers2, R. Snetselaar2, J. Schouten2, F. Asselman3, Y. Jamshidi: None. I. Cuppen3, H. Lemmink4, W. L. van der Pol3, H. Engel1 P10.21D 1Department of Clinical Chemistry and Neonatal InterruptionsintheCTGrepeatsequenceintheDMPK Screening, Isala Hospital, Zwolle, Netherlands, 2MRC- gene in a 40-year-old patient with myotonic dystrophy Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of type I Neurology, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, A. Bialek-Proscinska1, J. Muszynski1, M. Jopek1, 4Department of Genetics, University Medical Center M. Przyborska1, K. Lacna1, M. Piechota1, Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands M. Krawczynski1,2 Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is one of the leading 1Centre for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, genetic causes of infant mortality with an incidence of 2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of 1:10,000. Recently introduced antisense oligonucleotide Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland treatment improves outcome, in particular when applied presymptomatically.Thegeneticcause ofSMA isin>95% Introduction: Myotonic dystrophy type 1 is an autosomal of cases a homozygous deletion of the survival motor dominant neuromuscular disorder that is caused by the neuron (SMN1)1 gene,which makes low costdetection of expansionofaCTGtripletsintheDMPKgene.Wewantto SMAcasesaspartofnewbornscreeningprogramsfeasible. present that using a standard TP-PCR method it is possible WedevelopedandvalidatedanewSALSAMC002melting to skip expansion of CTG triplets due to interruptions curve assay that meets Dutch legal requirements of not present in the CTG repeat sequences. detectingasymptomaticcarriersandthatdetectstheabsence Materials and Methods: Patient- female (40 years old) of the SMN1 exon 7 DNA sequence using crude extracts symptomsofdystrophiaappearedattheageof30:problems from dried blood spot (DBS) newborn screening cards. withwalking,balancedisordersandweaknessinthelimbs. Melting curve analysis shows speciﬁc peaks of both the A test for dynamic mutation in the DMPK gene was per- SMN1 and the disease modifying SMN2 homolog, and in formed.StandardTP-PCRmethoddidn'tshowexpansionof case of insufﬁcient amounts of sample DNA, a warning CTG repeat sequence. We used a bidirectionally labeled peak. We retrieved 47 DBS samples from children withAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1483 genetically conﬁrmed SMA (identiﬁed by using the Dutch total, 6novel and 8known pathogenic variants in12genes SMAdatabase)afterconsentfromparentsand375controls were identiﬁed. Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy fromthenationalarchiveoftheDutchNationalInstitutefor with neuromyotonia was the most prevalent type in our Public Health and the Environment (RIVM). The assay cohort (4 patients). Additionally, autosomal recessive correctly identiﬁed all anonymized SMA and control inheritance was conﬁrmed in patients harbouring GDAP1 samples (i.e. sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 100%), without and FIG4 variants. Our targeted gene panel allowed us to the detection of carriers, on 3 most commonly used PCR perform a very rapid and cost-effective screening of genes platforms with melting curve analysis. Concordance with associated with CMT. We expanded a spectrum of the second-tier ‘golden standard’ P021 SMA MLPA test genotypes of CMT and clinical phenotypes of known was 100%. Using the new P021-B1 version, crude extracts CMT related genes. This diagnostic rate was achieved by fromDBScardscouldalsobeusedtodeterminetheSMN2 performing accurate neurologic examination prior to copy number of SMA patients with high accuracy. enrolment patients in the study and interpreting the A. Strunk: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equip- NGS data. ment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; B. Burnyte: None. K. Grigalioniene: None. A. Mor- MRC-Holland. A. Abbes: C. Other Research Support kuniene:None.L. Ambrozaityte: None.A.Utkus: None. (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; MRC-Holland. A.R. Stuitje: A. P10.25D Employment(fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant;MRC-Holland. Identiﬁcation and characterization of disease-causing C. Hettinga: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- genes in non-5q-SMA by next-generation sequencing niﬁcant;MRC-Holland.E.Sepers:A.Employment(fullor technology: Lessons learned from NeurOmics study part-time); Signiﬁcant; MRC-Holland. R. Snetselaar: A. Employment(fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant;MRC-Holland. M. Karakaya1, M. Storbeck1, E. Strathmann1, A. Delle J. Schouten: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, Vedove1, I. Hoelker1, J. Altmueller2, S. Motameny2, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; MRC- S. Alawbathani2, H. Thiele2, I. Polat3, G. Wunderlich4, Holland. F. Asselman: None. I. Cuppen: None. H. Lem- D. Ardicli5, H. Topaloglu5, J. Kirschner6, B. Schrank7, mink:None.W.L.vanderPol:None.H.Engel:C.Other R. Marooﬁan8, O. Magnusson9, U. Yis3, P. Nuernberg2, Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or R. Heller1,10, B. Wirth1 other in-kind support); Modest; MRC-Holland. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Center for Molecular P10.23B Medicine Cologne, Institute of Genetics, and Center for ImprovingmoleculardiagnosisofCharcot-Marie-Tooth Rare Diseases Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Cologne disease by targeted next-generation sequencing in a Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 3Dokuz Eylul cohort of Lithuanian patients University, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Izmir, Turkey, 4University Hospital Cologne, Department of B. Burnyte, K. Grigalioniene, A. Morkuniene, Neurology, Cologne, Germany, 5Hacettepe University, L. Ambrozaityte, A. Utkus Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ankara, Turkey, 6Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle Disorders, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Center, University of Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 7DKD Helios Kliniken, Department of Neurology, Wiesbaden, Germany, 8Genetics Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common andMolecularCellSciencesResearchCentre,St.George's hereditary neuropathy with over 100 causative genes UniversityofLondon,London,United Kingdom,9deCODE identiﬁed to date. Next generation sequencing (NGS) Genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland, 10GHSNZ approaches represent a powerful tool to identify genetic Northern Hub, ADHB, Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, variantsinCMTincontrasttoclassictimeconsuminggene New Zealand bygeneapproach.However,approximately50%ofpatients remainundiagnosedafteruseofNGStools.Theaimofthis Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) without study was to identify the molecular diagnosis in a group of deletions/mutations in SMN1(non-5q-SMA) is genetically patients with CMT using targeted NGS. 38 patients very heterogeneous. Due to strongly overlapping pheno- presenting with hereditary neuropathies were tested by types of neuromuscular disorders, the differential diagnosis targeted NGS for 150 nuclear genes associated with CMT of non-5q-SMAs is challenging. and related neuropathies. In 15 of the 38 patients, we Materials and Methods: For the last 23 years, we have identiﬁed the deﬁnite molecular diagnosis (39.47%). In performedSMN1deletionanalysisto3,535individualswith1484 suspected SMA. In 1,715 (48.5%) of these individuals, no includes agenesis of corpus callosum, severe congenital SMN1 deletion/mutation was detected. Review of the clin- truncal hypotonia, severe scoliosis, short stature, delay in ical data with respect to a possible motor neuron disorder bone age, ataxic gait / jerky walking, triangular face with led to 114 patients who were available and consented to narrow maxilla affecting speech, congenital clasped thumb participate. These 114 patients were analysed by two dif- and congenital clubfoot (female patient), lateral deviation ferent gene panels. Of these, 24 unresolved patients and 49 deformityof foot bilaterallyand upper and lower extremity new patients were analysed by WES or/and WGS. spasticity. Phenotype-driven WES analysis did not identify Results: Gene panel provided a diagnosis in 39% (44/ any known pathogenic or novel predicted damaging 114)oftheprobands.Theneuromusculardiseasepanelwith variants in known genes. Genotype-driven WES analysis 479 genes outperformed the lower motor neuron disease for known pathogenic mutations and novel variants panel with 62 genes with a 44% to 13% diagnostic yield, predicted as damaging in MIM genes, identiﬁed two novel respectively. WES/WGS revealed the disease-causing PIEZO2 exon 27 splice site mutations (c.4093-1G>C and mutation in 38% (28/73) of these patients. Within the c.4189+1G>A, both predicted damaging). Recessive NeurOmics project, we published ﬁve novel disease- PIEZO2 pathogenic mutations cause Distal Arthrogryposis causing genes (BICD2, CHP1, PIEZO2, VAMP1, with Impaired Proprioception & Touch (DAIPT) with ADPRHL2) and introduced three novel genes (PRUNE1, clinical presentation that overlaps that of the patients under MCM3AP, AGTPBP1) with recently published overlapping investigation. Mutation-to-disease co-segregation in the phenotypes. nuclear family by Sanger sequencing, showed the variants Discussion:NGSisapowerfulmethodfordiagnosticand in “trans” conﬁguration as both parents were carriers of a gene identiﬁcation purposes in non-5q-SMA, and illustrate different mutation and the affected siblings compound the wide spectrum of neuromuscular disorders that initially heterozygotes. Phenotype-driven WES analysis failed to present as motor neuron disease. Gene panels with larger identify the offending gene most likely due to clinical generepresentationperformbestinclinical conditionswith heterogeneity. Agenesis of corpus callosum has not been heterogenic genetic background. For phenotypes that are associated with DAIPT. Impaired proprioception was not not fulﬁlling the core clinical criteria for motor neuron properly diagnosed, and arthrogryposis was erroneously disorders, a more comprehensive WES or WGS methods referred as “spasticity”. Genotype-driven WES analysis is should be used. an invaluable tool that should be utilized rather than M. Karakaya: None. M. Storbeck: None. E. Strath- phenotype-driving analysis to accommodate for clinical mann:None.A.DelleVedove:None.I.Hoelker:None.J. heterogeneity and variability in clinical presentation. Altmueller: None. S. Motameny: None. S. Alawbathani: E. Darmani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- None. H. Thiele: None. I. Polat: None. G. Wunderlich: niﬁcant; ANALYSI IATRIKI SA. K. Kydonopoulou: A. None. D. Ardicli: None. H. Topaloglu: None. J. Kirsch- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ANALYSI ner: None. B. Schrank: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. O. IATRIKI SA. E. Papadopoulou: A. Employment (full or Magnusson:None.U.Yis:None.P.Nuernberg:None.R. part-time);Signiﬁcant;ANALYSIIATRIKISA.S.Gerou: Heller: None. B. Wirth: None. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ANALYSI IATRIKI SA. M. Kambouris: None. P10.26A Genotype-driven WES analysis identiﬁes novel P10.27B compound heterozygous splice-site mutations Distinguishing Highly Similar SMN1/2 Genes and inPIEZO2causing a unique variant of distal Identifying Novel SMN Transcripts by Targeted arthrogryposis with impaired proprioception & touch Capture of PacBio Single-molecule Long-read Sequencing E. Darmani1, K. Kydonopoulou1, E. Papadopoulou1, S. Gerou1, M. Kambouris2 M. Dai, Y. Xu, X. Ji 1Analysi Iatriki S.A, Thessaloniki, Greece, 2Division of Department of Genetic Counseling, Xinhua Hospital, Genetics, Department of Pathology & Laboratory School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Medicine, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar shanghai, China Afamilywithtwosiblings(20-yearoldmale&18-yearold Introduction:Spinalmuscularatrophy(SMA)isautosomal female)affected byanundiagnosed Neuromusculardisease recessively inherited disease with a high carrier frequency was analyzed by WES of a single affected individual to caused by biallelic mutations in SMN1 gene. As high identifytheoffendinggenedefect.Theclinicalpresentation homology between SMN1 and SMN2, it would be difﬁcultAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1485 to distinguish the mutations in SMN1 from SMN2. PacBio group of patients with a clinical suspect of FSHD, by single molecule real time (SMRT) sequencing techniques molecular analysis of SMCHD1 sequence. can aids the identiﬁcation of transcript variants due to the Materials and Methods: 58 patients with a clinical longer read lengths suspectofFSHDwereenrolledandwereanalyzedbyNGS Materials and Methods: Twenty-one study subjects methodology and direct sequencing. The detected variants were selected from the diagnostic laboratory. Multiplex wereinvestigatedbybioinformaticstoolsinordertopredict PCR with four pairs of speciﬁc-primers to enrich SMN their impact on the protein and evaluate the potential transcripts. Enriched products sequenced by long-read pathogenic effect on FSHD. sequencing approach using SMRT. An 20bp anchor Results: Molecular analysis of SMCHD1 sequence sequences were used to distinguish SMN1 and SMN2. revealed the presence of exonic, intronic and 3’UTR var- Marked with SMN1/SMN2 reads utilized GATK for varia- iants. Among them, ﬁve novel variants (c.183_184insGT; tion calling. c.1131+2delTAAG; c.2130insC; c.3469G>T; Results:Forthemajorityofsubjectsinthisstudy,SMN1 c.5150_5151delAA) were predicted to be pathogenic for transcripts full-length SMN mRNA (FL-SMN) and SMN2 FSHD, causing a substantial alteration of protein structure transcripts lacking exon 7 mRNA (SMNΔ7) as reported. and function. In addition, four variants (c.7394A>C; Nine in ten subjects with subtle mutation are detected by c.7597G>A; c.*1397A>G; c.*1889G>C) in 3’UTR were long-readsequencing.DetectedmutationofM0areexisting predicted to affect the binding of different miRNAs. in SMNΔ7, all the other detected mutation are existing in Conclusions:MolecularanalysisofSMCHD1allowedto FL-SMN. There are ten novel transcripts detected. Six of detectnovelpotentialpathogenicvariantsinpatientswitha ten are successfully ampliﬁed by PCR. clinical suspect of FSHD. In particular, those variants may Conclusions: We have developed a novel method to modify the structure and function of SMCHD1 protein, distinguish highly similar SMN1 and SMN2 genes and leadingtherebytothedisruptionofitsphysiologicalactivity identify affected mutationsinSMN1orSMN2bylong-read and, ultimately, contributing to FSHD etiopathogenesis. SMRT sequencing. Meanwhile, the method can compre- Moreover,the3’UTRvariantsunveiledapossibleimpactof hensively illustrate SMN transcripts existed. miRNA-dependent regulation on FSHD-related pathways. M. Dai: None. Y. Xu: None. X. Ji: None. V.Caputo:None.R.Galota:None.G.Campoli:None. S. Chimienti: None. S. Zampatti: None. L. Colantoni: P10.28C None.C.Strafella:None.G.Minozzi:None.R.Cascella: Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy (FSHD): None. E. Ricci: None. L. Politano: None. E. insights into the genetic characterization of SMCHD1 Giardina: None. V. Caputo1, R. Galota2, G. Campoli2, S. Chimienti2, P10.29D S. Zampatti2, L. Colantoni2, C. Strafella1, G. Minozzi3, Screening multiple populations reveals large differences R. Cascella2,4, E. Ricci5, L. Politano6, E. Giardina1,2 intheprevalenceofatruncatedSMNgenelackingexon 7 and 8 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, “Tor Vergata” University, Rome, Italy, 2Molecular Genetics R. Vijzelaar, R. Snetselaar, M. Clausen, A. Mason, Laboratory UILDM, Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy, M. Rinsma, M. Zegers, N. Molleman, R. Boschloo, 3Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, R. Yilmaz, R. Kuilboer, S. Sulchan, J. Schouten Milan, Italy,4DepartmentofBiomedicalSciences,Catholic University Our Lady of Good Counsel, Tirana, Albania, MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands 5Institute of Neurology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart,Rome,Italy,6DepartmentofExperimentalMedicine, Introduction:Spinalmuscularatrophy(SMA)isoneofthe Cardiomyology and Medical Genetics, University of most frequent genetic disorders in Caucasians, with an Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy incidence of approximately 1:10.000 in newborns. SMA is an autosomal recessive disorder with a population depen- Introduction: SMCHD1 (18p11.32) is a gene coding for a dent carrier frequency ranging from 1:35 in Caucasians to chromatinremodellerinvolvedintheepigeneticsilencingof 1:91 in African Americans. In the majority of populations, different targets, including genes located in D4Z4 locus most individuals have two copies of both SMN1 and the (4q35).SMCHD1lossoffunctionmutationscanhamperits almost identical SMN2 gene. Previous studies have function, leading to the aberrant expression of D4Z4 genes identiﬁed the presence of SMN1 or SMN2 gene copies associated with FSHD. This study aimed to characterize a lackingthelasttwoexons,exons7and8,in8%and23%of healthy Swedish and Spanish individuals respectively. No1486 information on the presence of these truncated gene copies SPAST, encoding Spastin, are the most frequent cause of in other populations has been reported. HSP.Recently,throughtheanalysisof842SPASTmutated Methods: A new version of the SALSA MLPA P021 patients,weshowedthatmutationnatureaccountsforsome SMA probemix was tested on 1255 samples from the 1000 of the age at onset variability and that sex inﬂuences the genomes / HapMap projects from 15 different populations. disorder penetrance. To identify additional age at onset TheprobemixcoversallSMN1andSMN2exonsbyatleast modiﬁers, a GWAS analysiswas performed on 134 SPAST one probe and contains four SMN1 or SMN2 speciﬁc truncating mutations carriers. probes. Materials and Methods: Patients were genotyped using Results:Largedifferencesinthefrequencyofatruncated Illumina InﬁniumOmni2.5Exome-8 kit. Single variant test SMN gene were observed between all the different popu- wasperformedusingalogisticmixedmodelforbinarytraits lations tested, ranging from 0 to 20%. Frequencies in the available with GMMAT R package, adjusted for sex and different populations were as follows: 8-20% in European patients’ relatedness. Patients with very discordant age at populations, 7-11% in American populations, and 0-1% in onset were compared (≤15 years versus ≥45 years). both the Asian and African populations. Results: A group of SNPs in linkage disequilibrium Conclusion:TheimprovedP021MLPAProbemixmakes (r2>0.8)reachedap-valuesuggestiveforassociation(topp- the identiﬁcation of truncated SMN genes straightforward. value = 10e-6). The 7 suggestive SNPs are located on ThesetruncatedSMNgenesarefoundfrequentlyinseveral chromosome 19, in the 3’UTR region of SARS2 gene and populations while they are relatively non-existent in other are described as eQTLs of this gene in the GTEx database. populations with their clinical signiﬁcance still unknown. Among the genotyped patients, a signiﬁcantly lower age at R. Vijzelaar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- onset (p<0.0001, Mann-Whitney test) was associated with niﬁcant; MRC-Holland. R. Snetselaar: A. Employment the minor allele at all SNPs, as well as a tendency to a (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;MRC-Holland.M.Clausen: decreased disorder severity. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; MRC- Conclusions: Pathogenic mutations affecting SARS2, Holland. A. Mason: A. Employment (full or part-time); encoding a mitochondrial seryl-tRNA synthetase, have Signiﬁcant; MRC-Holland. M. Rinsma: A. Employment alreadybeenlinkedtoprogressivespasticparaparesisonset, (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; MRC-Holland. M. Zegers: suggesting it as a good candidate. iPSCs-derived neurons A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; MRC- and Drosophila model are being used to further conﬁrm its Holland.N.Molleman:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); role as SPAST-HSP age of onset modiﬁer. Signiﬁcant; MRC-Holland. R. Boschloo: A. Employment L.Parodi:None.F.Lejeune:None.M.Barbier:None. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; MRC-Holland. R. Yilmaz: A. Brice: None. G. Stevanin: None. A. Durr: None. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; MRC- Holland. R. Kuilboer: A. Employment (full or part-time); P10.31B Signiﬁcant; MRC-Holland. S. Sulchan: A. Employment Development of motor function in late vs early (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;MRC-Holland.J.Schouten: treatment with nusinersen for SMA type 1 and 2 E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other patients intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; MRC-Holland. I.Henriksson1,L.Alberg2,A.Kroksmark2,L.Wahlgren2, P10.30A M. Tulinius2 SARS2 modiﬁes spastic paraplegia type 4 age at onset 1Department of Clinical Pathology and Genetics, L. Parodi1, F. Lejeune1, M. Barbier1, A. Brice1, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, G. Stevanin1,2, A. Durr1 2Department of Pediatrics, Gothenburg University, Queen Silvia Children’s Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (ICM), INSERM, CNRS, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an (AP-HP), Sorbonne Université, Pitié-Salpêtrère University autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder caused by Hospital,Paris,France,2EcolePratiquedesHautesEtudes mutations in the SMN1-gene (5q 12.2-13.3) generating (EPHE), Paris Sciences et Lettres (PSL) Research atrophy of anterior horn cells in the spinal cord and University, Neurogenetics Group, Paris, France brainstem leading to muscle weakness. The antisense oligonucleotide nusinersen was recently approved in Introduction: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegias (HSPs) are Sweden for treatment of SMA in the public health care rare neurological disorders caused by the progressive distal system.Inthisstudywecomparethedevelopmentinmotor degeneration of the corticospinal tracts. Mutations in function in patients who received treatment within threeAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1487 months of symptom onset for SMA type 1, and within additional factors such as DNA methylation is also twelve months for SMA type 2, to the patients receiving examined. Previous studies have demonstrated correlation treatment later in the course of disease. between methylation proﬁles of several genes and SMA Materials and Methods: All patients diagnosed with severity. Current study is devoted to investigation of SMAtype1or2treatedwithnusinersenforatleasttwelve methylation level of genes in SMA patients’ derived cells months at the Department of Pediatrics, Queen Silvia onsequentialstagesofdifferentiationofinducedpluripotent Children's Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden are included in stem cells (iPS) into motor neurons. The level of the study. The motor function is assessed by standardized methylation of SMN2 gene as well as genes playing role motorfunctionscales;CHOP-INTEND/HFMSE,developed in neural cells (OLIG2, ISL1, SLC23A2, DYNC1H1) and and validated for SMA patients. pluripotency-regulating genes (Oct4, SALL4) has been Results: Data regarding age of onset, age at start of determined by means of methylation-sensitive high-resolu- treatment, genetic constitution and development of motor tionmelting.Signiﬁcantdifferenceshavebeenfoundinthe function will be presented. methylationleveloftheregulatoryregionsofOCT4,SALL4 Conclusion: Previous studies have indicated that treat- and SMN genes between patients with SMA type I, type II ment efﬁcacy for motor function is greater in patients andahealthyindividual.Adecreaseinmethylationlevelof receiving treatment close to onset of symptoms or even in the promoter region of OLIG2 gene in SMA type I presymptomatic patientscomparedtopatients receivingthe compared to SMA type II, as well as of 41 exons of the treatment later in the course of disease. This highlights the DYNC1H1 gene in SMA type I compared to a healthy importance of early diagnosis and raises the question of individual was also found. The results observed in this inclusion of SMA in newborn screening programmes. study may elucidate new pathways involved in SMA I.Henriksson:None.L.Alberg:None.A.Kroksmark: progression and may contribute to better understanding of None. L. Wahlgren: None. M. Tulinius: None. the particularities of disease pathogenesis. This work is supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research grant P10.32C 18-315-00258 mol_a. Methylation level of genes on various stages of M.A. Maretina: B. Research Grant (principal investi- differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells, gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell generated from patients with spinal muscular atrophy, asgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;RussianFoundationfor into motoneurons Basic Research. N.A. Tsyganova: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and M. A. Maretina1, N. A. Tsyganova2, S. V. Shtykalova2, pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; A.A.Egorova1,K.R.Valetdinova3,4,5,6,S.M.Zakian3,4,5,6, Russian Foundation for Basic Research. S.V. Shtykalova: V. S. Baranov1,2, A. V. Kiselev1 B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already 1The Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and received);Modest;RussianFoundation for Basic Research. Reproductology named after D.O. Ott, Saint-Petersburg, A.A. Egorova: None. K.R. Valetdinova: None. S.M. Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Zakian: None. V.S. Baranov: None. A.V. Kiselev: None. Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, the Siberian P10.33D Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Mutation Spectrum of the Survival of Motor Neuron 1 Russian Federation, 4Institute of Chemical Biology and in Iranian Population FundamentalMedicine,theSiberianBranchoftheRussian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, M. Taheri, A. Sayad 5StateResearchInstituteofCirculationPathology,Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Novosibirsk, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Russian Federation, 6National Research University Iran, Islamic Republic of Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a lethal disorder characterized by loss of motor neurons, muscle weakness, Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a severe neuromuscular hypotonia and muscle atrophy. SMA is highly heteroge- disorder caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene. SMA is neous with various genes with different heritable patterns subdivided into four clinical groups based on age of onset causing the disease. In the typical form, patients have andachievedmotormilestones.SMN2genecopynumberis defective SMN1 genes. To date, tens of genes have been a key modiﬁer of the disease, though involvement of identiﬁed for Atypical SMA. In this study, 144 families1488 suspected for SMA were included. Patients were ﬁrst numbers and evaluated the clinical performance by ana- examined for typical SMA by MLPA and assessment of lyzing 89 patient samples. STR markers for SMN1. Next, patients who did not have Results: Both methods showed 100% sensitivity and mutations in the SMN1 gene were examined using STR speciﬁcity to detect SMN1 copy numbers0-2or higher and markers for the DNAJB2, IGHMBP2, SIGMAR1 and SMN2 copy numbers 0-3 or higher. In clinical samples, the PLEKHG5 genes. Subsequently, autozygosity mapping obtained SMN1 and SMN2 copy numbers showed 100% followed by sequencing were performed for cases with concordance between the methods. Additionally, we homozygoushaplotypes.Finally,WholeExomesequencing applied the bioinformatic analysis to 2196 de-identiﬁed (WES)wasdonefortheremainingcaseswhodidnotshow patient samples not referred for the indication of SMA. associationwithanyofthestudiedgenes.Thepathogenicity HeterozygousSMN1deletionswereobservedin2.6%ofthe of the newly identiﬁed mutations was examined using samples,whichagreeswithpreviouslyreportedfrequencies. various softwares and ACMG guideline.SMN1 deletions/ Conclusions: We established an accurate and high- mutationswereidentiﬁedin134families.Oftheremaining throughput approach to test for SMN1 and SMN2 copy 10 families, three families showed mutations in DNAJB2, numbers enabling diagnostics of SMA and application of SIGMAR1 and PLEKHG5 genes. In six families tested by novel therapeutic strategies. WES, four families had pathogenic variants in TNNT1, H. Junnila: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- TPM3 and TTN genes respectively. MLPA and assessment niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Valori: A. Employment of STR markers can be helpful in both typical and atypical (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. A. SMA cases. Moreover, linkage analysis and WES are Korppoo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; suggested as effective strategies for identiﬁcation of Blueprint Genetics. L. Koskinen: A. Employment (full or mutations in patients with atypical SMA. part-time);Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.E.Salminen:A. M. Taheri: None. A. Sayad: None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time); P10.34A Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employ- Accurately resolving copy number variation in highly ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. homologous SMN1 and SMN2 genes using next- Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other generation sequencing and rhPCR intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- H. Junnila, M. Valori, A. Korppoo, L. Koskinen, niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, E. Salminen, K. Gall, T. Alastalo, S. Myllykangas, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig- J. Koskenvuo, P. Salmenperä, J. Sistonen niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Blueprint Genetics, Helsinki, Finland Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P. Introduction: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a Salmenperä: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- neuromusculardisordercharacterizedbyprogressivedegen- niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, eration of spinal cord motor neurons. In most cases, the stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig- diseaseiscaused bythe homozygousabsence ofthe SMN1 niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment gene. Copy number of the highly homologous SMN2 gene (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. canalsomodifythediseaseseverity.Toaddresstheclinical importance of accurate SMN1 and SMN2 copy number P10.35B analysis, we developed a custom bioinformatic analysis Accuratesingle-tube quantiﬁcationofSMN1 andSMN2 basedonnext-generationsequencing(NGS)datacombined copy numbers using a rapid and streamlined PCR/CE with a novel RNase H2-dependent PCR (rhPCR) for assay evaluated at two different laboratories conﬁrmation analysis. Materials and Methods: The bioinformatic method uti- M. E. Oliveira1, S. Filipovic-Sadic2, S. Gokul2, lizes sequence reads at four loci differing between the J. Janovsky2, J. Milligan2, G. J. Latham2, R. Santos1 genes. The rhPCR assays target two of the loci with RNA- modiﬁed primers that require activation by RNase H2 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Centro Genética Médica Dr. enzyme improving assay speciﬁcity and sensitivity com- Jacinto Magalhães, Centro Hospitalar Porto, Porto, paredtostandardmethods.Wevalidatedthemethodsusing Portugal, 2Asuragen, Inc., Austin, TX, United States 27 reference samples with known SMN1/SMN2 copyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1489 Introduction: Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an 3Institute for Biomedical Technologies, National Research autosomal recessive neuromuscular disease and a leading Council (CNR-ITB), Segrate (MI), Italy, 4Institute for geneticcauseofinfantmortality.SMAiscommonlycaused Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council by homozygous exon 7 deletions in the survival motor (CNR-ITB),, Segrate (MI), Italy, 5ALS Center AOU neuron 1 gene (SMN1). The severity of SMA is modulated MaggioredellaCarità,NOvara,Italy,6UPO,Vercelli,Italy bythecopynumberoftheparalogousSMN2gene.Here,we report the two-site evaluation of a single-tube assay that The C9ORF72 gene repeat expansion is the most frequent quantiﬁes SMN1 and SMN2 copy number. cause of ALS. Long repeats alleles in ATXN-1, ATXN-2, Materials and Methods: A prototype SMN1/2 single- and NIPA1 genes are associated to ALS susceptibility. tube PCR was developed from AmplideX® PCR/CE SMN1 Tandem Repeat Polymorphisms (TRPs) are good candi- reagents (Asuragen). Amplicons generated from whole dates for missing hereditability in ALS (40%), although blood genomic DNA were resolved by capillary electro- theywereneversystematicallyanalyzedastheyrepresenta phoresis (CE) on a 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Thermo Fisher remarkable challenge to NGS. The aim of this study is to Scientiﬁc). Gene copy numbers were calculated from peak perform a systematic analysis of TRPs in ALS by area ratios that were normalized to a plate calibrator and combining NGS and novel bioinformatics tools. We binned as 0, 1, 2, 3, or ≥4 copies. Two laboratories (one in performed our analysis from whole genome sequencing Portugal and one in the US) evaluated 60 residual clinical data (WGS) of 70 ALS cases. TRPs were evaluated by samples with reference genotypes. means of a software developed within our consortium to Results: Normalized SMN1 and SMN2 copy numbers detect tandem repeat expansion. Validation of expanded demonstrated operator-to-operator and site-to-site agree- lociwasconductedbyRepeatprimerPCRWeidentiﬁedan ment (R2>0.98). Binned copy-number calls for SMN1 ALS patient with a CGG expansion in 5’UTR of spanned0to≥4copiesandwereconcordantwithreference FRA10AC1 gene. To explore the possible role of this results for both laboratories. SMN2 copy numbers ranged CGG expansion in ALS we screened a cohort of 337 ALS from0to≥4copiesandwereconcordantfor59/60(98.3%) and 285 controls and we found 3 expanded patients (0.9%) samples. and no control. We failed to replicated this result in a Conclusions: A simple, high-throughput SMN1/2 PCR/ secondcohortof426ALSpatientsand733controls(1ALS CE assay was successfully evaluated using 60 samples, (0.2%) and 5 controls (0.7%)) Overall, we observed the including 15 SMA and 13 carrier samples. This method CGG expansion in 4/763 (0.5%) ALS patients and 5/1018 offers a simple workﬂow and fast turnaround time (< 4hrs controls (0.5%). FRA10AC1 gene expression was not from sample-to-answer) with potential as an accurate and silenced by the expansion. The software we developed can reliable alternative to existing methods. detect repeat expansions from WGS data, although M.E. Oliveira: None. S. Filipovic-Sadic: A. Employ- FRA10AC1 CGG expansion seems not to be involved in ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. S. ALSpathogenesis.Converselytowhatpreviouslyreported, Gokul: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; large CGG expansion at this locus do not decrease gene Asuragen, Inc. J. Janovsky: A. Employment (full or part- expression time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. J. Milligan: A. L. Corrado: None. L. Genovese: None. E. Mangano: Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc. None. R. Croce: None. A. Di Pierro: None. F. Geraci: G.J. Latham: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- None. R. Bordoni: None. R. D'Aurizio: None. N. Bar- niﬁcant; Asuragen, Inc.. R. Santos: None. izzone:None.F.DeMarchi:None.L.Mazzini:None.G. DeBellis:None.G.Manzini:None.M.Severgnini:None. P10.36C M. Pellegrini: None. S. D'Alfonso: None. Analysis of DNA tandem repeats in ALS from Whole Genome Sequencing: Role of FRA10Ac1 gene repeat P10.37D expansion in ALS Clinicaldiagnosisofspinocerebellarataxias(SCAs)and hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSPs) in Portugal using L.Corrado1,L.Genovese2,E.Mangano3,R.Croce1,A.Di exome sequencing Pierro1, F. Geraci2, R. Bordoni4, R. D'Aurizio2, N. Barizzone1, F. De Marchi5, L. Mazzini5, G. De Bellis3, S. Sousa1,2, P. Silva1,2, A. Brandão1,2, A. Lopes1,2, G. Manzini2,6, M. Severgnini3, M. Pellegrini2, P. Arinto1,2, R. Bastos1,2, S. Morais1,2, S. Barbosa1,2, S. D'Alfonso1 J. Sequeiros1,2,3, I. Alonso1,2 1University of Eastern Piedmont UPO, NOvara, Italy, 1CGPP-IBMC, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2InstituteofInformaticsandTelematicsofCNR,Pisa,Italy, 2i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde,1490 UniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal,3ICBAS-Instituto Switzerland, 3Institut de Génétique et de Biologie de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France Porto, Porto, Portugal Rearrangements of the proximal 16p11.2 BP4-BP5 region SCAs andHSPs arerare genetic neurological diseases with are associated with mirroring anthropometric traits and a prevalence of 12.9/100,000 in Portugal. Clinical symp- neurodevelopmental disorders. To assess the molecular tomsoftendistinguishSCAsfromHSPs;however,complex impact of 16p11.2 dosage and investigate possible sex formscombinetheseandotherneurologicalsymptoms,ina interaction(s), we proﬁled the transcriptomes of brain wide phenotypic diversity (age-at-onset, severity and cortices of wild-type, 16p11.2 deletion and 16p11.2 progression rate). In this study, we provide an estimate of duplicationmaleand female mouse models across embryo- the diagnostic yield of SCAs and HSPs at our laboratory. nic (E11.5), newborn (P0) and adult (P77) stages. Whereas Weperformedwhole-exomesequencing(WES)andapplied we corroborate previous results by identifying expression virtual gene panels on 333 patients with SCAs and HSPs, changes of transcripts associated with primary cilium and andanalysedSNVs,usinganinhousepipeline,andCNVs, metabolism, we also uncovered signiﬁcant perturbation of usingGoldenHelix’sVarSeqsoftware.Wetested161SCA immune-related genes that encode proteins inﬂuencing patients using a WES-based virtual panel (145 genes), neuronal development and synaptic function (P=6.44E- where we achieved a molecular diagnosis for 17 patients 05) in 16p11.2Del/+ mice. This signal is already present in (18 previously described and 13 novel disease-causing embryos and newborns, and becomes especially exacer- variants); in another 72 patients, we reported a VUS, bated in adult females with 6203 differentially expressed according to the ACMG classiﬁcation. In 172 patients with genes compared to 146 in males, suggesting that hormonal HSP (118 genes in the virtual panel), we established a changes could be involved. This massive transcriptome molecular diagnosis in 27 cases (35 described and 8 novel modiﬁcation could be a compensation mechanism of disease-causingvariants),whilein50probandswereported 16p11.2Del/+females,consistentwiththemilderphenotypes a VUS. We obtained a diagnostic yield of 10.6% for SCAs of human female deletion carriers. Unfortunately, the vast and 15.7% for HSPs; VUS reported represented 44.7% of majorityof16p11.2animalmodelshavenotbeenstudiedin SCA and 29.1% of HSP cases. In undiagnosed patients, a sex-speciﬁc manner. We also assessed the transcriptome familystudies,correlationwithphenotype,CNVanalysisin of16p11.2Dup/+mice,andinagreementwiththehypothesis addition to ﬂexible virtual gene panels (e.g., including that aneuploidy of the genes of the rearranged interval is newly discovered genes or using a large neurological moredetrimentalthantheiroverexpression,wefound,atall disordermultigenepanel)mayincreasethediagnosticyield, developmental stages, greater transcriptional alterations in in order to provide a better disease management and 16p11.2Del/+ratherthan16p11.2Dup/+mice.Ourdatareveal improve genetic counselling for affected patients and their time- and sex-speciﬁc transcriptional changes in the brain families. cortex of 16p11.2Del/+ mice, and shed light on possible S. Sousa: None. P. Silva: None. A. Brandão: None. A. intimate connections between the immune and nervous Lopes: None. P. Arinto: None. R. Bastos: None. S. systems and its inﬂuence on neurologic manifestations in Morais: None. S. Barbosa: None. J. Sequeiros: None. I. carriers of 16p11.2 rearrangements. Alonso: None. P. De Nittis: None. G. Giannuzzi: None. E. Porcu: None. L. Dib: None. J. Chrast: None. Y. Herault: None. F.Schütz:None.C.Attanasio:None.A.Reymond:None. P11 Multiple malformation/anomalies syndromes P11.02B Duplication 17q24.3q25.1, inserted on 17p13, P11.01A encompassing SOX9: the impact on the phenotype Sex-speciﬁc transcriptome analysis highlights immune andneuronaldysfunctioninthedevelopingbraincortex E.Matoso1,2,3,P.Louro4,5,6,A.Estevinho1,S.I.Ferreira7, of 16p11.2 deletion mouse models P. Paiva7, J. B. Melo7,3,8, A. Mirante9, U. S. Melo10,11, S. Mundlos10,11, S. B. Sousa2,4, L. Ramos4,6, J. Saraiva4,2, P. De Nittis1, G. Giannuzzi1, E. Porcu1,2, L. Dib2, I. M. Carreira7,8,3 J. Chrast1, Y. Herault3, F. Schütz2, C. Attanasio1, A. Reymond1 1LaboratóriodeCitogenética,ServiçodeGenéticaMédica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Faculdade de Medicina da 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, UniversidadedeCoimbra,Coimbra,Portugal,3CIMAGO–Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1491 Centro de Investigação em Meio Ambiente, Genética e imbalance, providing a better interpretation and correlation Oncobiologia, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Serviço de Genética to the phenotype. Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e E.Matoso:None.P.Louro:None.A.Estevinho:None. Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Clínica de S.I.Ferreira:None.P.Paiva: None.J.B.Melo: None.A. RiscoFamiliar,InstitutoPortuguêsdeOncologiadeLisboa Mirante:None.U.S.Melo:None.S.Mundlos:None.S.B. Francisco Gentil, Lisboa, Portugal, 6Faculty of Health Sousa: None. L. Ramos: None. J. Saraiva: None. I.M. Sciences, Universidade da Beira Interior, Covilhã, Carreira: None. Portugal, 7Laboratório de Citogenética e Genómica, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, P11.03C Coimbra, Portugal, 8CNC.IBILI Consortium, Universidade Understanding microcephaly/macrocephaly de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 9Unidade de mechanisms in the new 19p13.3 microduplication/ Endocrinologia, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e microdeletion syndrome Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 10Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development G. Jouret1, M. Egloff2, O. Tassy3, F. Giuliano4, & Disease, Berlin, Germany, 11Institute for Medical and H. Karmous-Benailly4, C. Coutton5, V. Satre5, Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, F.Devillard5,K.Dieterich5,G.Vieville5,P.Kuentz6,C.Le Berlin, Germany Caignec7,P.Callier8,V.Marquet9,C.Laroche-Raynaud9, E. Bieth10, C. Rooryck-Thambo11, P. Pennamen11, Intrachromosomal insertions are uncommon rearrange- C. Angélini11, J. Lévy12, A. Philippe-Recasens2, ments. The cytogenetic recognition of these structurally S.Lyonnet2,G.Baujat2,M.Rio2,F.Cartault13,S.Berg13, rearrangedchromosomescanbedifﬁculttoascertain.Inlast S. Sophie14, A. Gouronc14, A. SCHALK1, C. Jacquin1, years the application of array-CGH in the investigation of E. Gouy1, E. Landais1, M. Spodenkiewicz1, C. Poirsier1, patients with intellectual disability and congenital malfor- M. Doco-Fenzy1 mations increased substantially the detection of cryptic chromosomal imbalances. However, the rearrangement 1Reims University Hospital, Reims, France, 2Necker underlying the imbalance could be missed, when we only University Hospital, Paris, France, 3IGBMC, Strasbourg, perform molecular techniques. France,4NiceUniversityHospital,Nice,France,5Grenoble We report a 10 year-old girl presenting intellectual dis- University Hospital, Grenoble, France, 6Besançon ability,attentiondeﬁcithyperactivitydisorder,shortstature, University Hospital, Besançon, France, 7Nantes University prenatal microcephaly, aplasia cutis congenita, bulbous Hospital, Nantes, France, 8Dijon University Hospital, biﬁd nose, bilateral congenital trigger thumb, shortening of Dijon, France, 9Limoges University Hospital, Limoges, the fourth metacarpal of the right hand, pectus excavatum, France, 10Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France, long ﬁrst toe, and mild hypertrichosis. 11Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, High resolution cytogenetic analysis revealed a cryptic 12Robert-Debré University Hospital, Paris, France, 13La alteration: 46,XX,add(17)(p13.1). To characterize the Réunion University Hospital, Saint Denis, France, imbalance 180K oligonucleotide array-CGH was per- 14Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, France formed, revealing a 2.4 Mb duplication: arr[hg19] 17q24.3q25.1(68,620,187-71,083,594)x3 encompassing 10 Introduction: A small but growing body of scientiﬁc genes. Molecular cytogenetics showed an intrachromoso- literatureisemergingaboutclinicalﬁndingsinpatientswith mal insertion on 17p. Parents were not available to study. 19p13.3 rearrangements. Most reported individuals have The most relevant gene involved in the imbalance is SOX9 deletions, and only eleven patients with clinical ﬁndings (MIM*608160) and encodes a transcription factor essential attributed to 19p13.3 duplications have been reported. for both sex and skeletal development. Duplications of Interestingly, 19p13.3 microdeletions are described in noncoding elements 5-prime of SOX9 were associated with patients with syndromic intellectual disability and macro- abnormal digit and nail development. Investigations are cephaly, and 19p13.3 microduplications in patients with being addressed, by chromosome conformation capture syndromic intellectual disability and microcephaly. More- (HiC) in patient cell lines in combination with whole- over,patientswith19p13.3microduplicationsharecommon genomesequencing,inordertodoabetterinterpretationof developmental features, suggesting the existence of a new the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the chromosomal microduplication syndrome. rearrangement. Methods: To characterize these new syndromes, we This report emphasis the contribution of high resolution formed a French collaborative study, and included 37 new cytogenetics, molecular cytogenetics and array-CGH to a patients with 19p13.3 rearrangements. We performed phe- better understanding of the rearrangement involved in the notype and genotype analysis, including genotype-1492 phenotype correlations by critical region delineation. We Background: 22q11.2DS is the most frequent CNV, screened this critical region with experimental ﬁndings in affecting ~1/1000 fetuses and ~1/2000–4000 children, murine model by using the data-mining software Manteia, resulting in recognizable but variable ﬁndings across to purpose candidate genes never associated with human multiple organ systems. Patients with atypical features phenotype before. shouldpromptconsiderationofcoexistingdiagnosesdueto Results: We report the largest cohort of patients with the possibility of additional genome‐wide mutations/CNVs 19p13.3rearrangements,anddescribeanew377Kbcritical whichmaybeinherited,aswellas,mutations/CNVsonthe region associated with syndromic intellectual disability and other chromosome 22q11.2alleleresultinginan autosomal micro/macrocephaly. 19p13.3 rearrangements are asso- recessivecondition.Bothoccurrencescompoundsymptoms ciated with speciﬁc recurrent clinical ﬁndings: mild to impacting management and genetic counseling. moderate intellectual disability, pre and post-natal growth Methods: Records on 1422 patients with laboratory delay, micro or macrocephaly, osteoarticular anomalies conﬁrmed 22q11.2DS followed at Children's Hospital of including precocious osteoporosis in children, congenital Philadelphia were reviewed to identify a dual diagnosis, severe hip dysplasia and scoliosis, congenital heart defect, including a subset with atypical features, e.g. craniosynos- genitourinary ﬁndings and immunodeﬁciency. Breakpoint tosis, whose samples underwent NGS of theintact 22q11.2 analysis and supporting murine model allowed us to pur- allele in Leuven/Warsaw. pose candidate genes associated with micro/macrocephaly. Results: 24 patients had a coexisting diagnosis (1.7% of Conclusions:19p13.3rearrangementsareassociatedwith ourcohort)including8patientswithconditionsunrelatedto speciﬁc clinical ﬁndings, including intellectual disability 22q11.2DS (SCID, Trisomy 8 mosaic, CHD7 mutation, andmicro/macrocephaly.Wedelineategenotype-phenotype cystic ﬁbrosis, maternally inherited 17q12 deletion, G6PD correlations and purposedcandidate genes never associated deﬁciency,vonWillebranddisease,1q21.1deletion)and16 with human phenotype before. patients with 22q11.2DS and a CNV/mutation on the G. Jouret: None. M. Egloff: None. O. Tassy: None. F. remaining allele resulting in an autosomal recessive condi- Giuliano: None. H. Karmous-Benailly: None. C. Cout- tion.Thelatter groupincludedmutations/CNVsinGP1BB, ton: None. V. Satre: None. F. Devillard: None. K. Diet- CDC45 (4), LZTR1 (2), SNAP29 (4), and TANGO2 (5) erich: None. G. Vieville: None. P. Kuentz: None. C. Le explaining their atypical features, unfortunately including Caignec: None. P. Callier: None. V. Marquet: None. C. sudden death in a 5-year-old child with post mortem iden- Laroche-Raynaud: None. E. Bieth: None. C. Rooryck- tiﬁcation of TANGO2 Related Disease. Thambo: None. P. Pennamen: None. C. Angélini: None. Conclusions: These ﬁndings support considering addi- J. Lévy: None. A. Philippe-Recasens: None. S. Lyonnet: tional laboratory testing in this population to ensure None.G.Baujat:None.M.Rio:None.F.Cartault:None. appropriate personalized care, as formulating medical S. Berg: None. S. Sophie: None. A. Gouronc: None. A. management decisions hinges on establishing the correct Schalk: None. C. Jacquin: None. E. Gouy: None. E. diagnoses in their entirety, especially given that these Landais: None. M. Spodenkiewicz: None. C. Poirsier: ﬁndings are medically actionable, potentially altering long‐ None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None. term outcome and recurrence risk counseling. D.M.McDonald-McGinn:None.M.Unolt:None.T.B. P11.04D Crowley:None.D.E.McGinn:None.J.Cohen:None.A. 22q11.2 Deletion syndrome and coexisting conditions - Bailey: None. M. Lambert: None. B. Emanuel: None. E. an important prognostic, management, and genetic Zackai: None. B. Nowakowska: None. J. Vermeesch: counseling consideration None. D. M. McDonald-McGinn1,2, M. Unolt3, T. B. Crowley1, P11.05A D. E. McGinn1, J. Cohen1, A. Bailey1, M. Lambert1,2, SNVsandCNVsinﬂuencingphenotypevariabilityinthe B. Emanuel1,2, E. Zackai1,2, B. Nowakowska4, patients with 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome detected from J. Vermeesch5 whole exome sequencing data 1TheChildren'sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA, K. Ziemkiewicz1, M. Smyk1, T. Gambin1, M. Geremek1, United States, 2Perelman School of Medicine at the A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, D. M. McDonald-McGinn2, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United T. B. Crowley2, M. Piotrowicz3, D. Gieruszczak-Białek4, States, 3Ospedale Bambino Gesu and Sapienza University, B. A. Nowakowska1 Rome, Italy, 4Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 5KU Leuven, Philadelphia, Belgium 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1493 Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Department of Genetics, Background: The 47,XYY syndrome is common as being Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital Research Institute, diagnosedamong18per100,000newbornmales.However, Łódź,Poland,4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Children’s knowledge of the long-term health outcomes of this Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland condition is sparse. Aim:Todescribemorbidityinanational47,XYYcohort The 22q11.2DS has an estimated frequency of 1 in 3000 using complete registry data on hospital admissions and live births. There is still very poor understanding of how prescribed medication. heterozygous microdeletion of approximately 50 genes can Setting: A uniform public health care system. lead to such diverse expressivity of the clinical features in Participants: A total of 251 males with 47,XYY patients carrying the same deletions. Two aspects seem to (n=205),46,XY/47,XYY(n=28)orcompatiblekaryotypes haveanimpactonphenotypevariability;coexistenceofthe (n=18) diagnosed during 1965-2014 and a randomly second condition and modiﬁers of typical clinical features. selected age-matched control cohort of 25,100 males from In this project we focused on three of the potential the general population. mechanismsunderlyingtheﬁrstaspect:pathogenicvariants Results: Hospital admission owing to any diagnosis was within the remaining 22q11.2 region, SNVs in genes signiﬁcantly increased among 47,XYY compared to con- outside of the deletion and additional CNVs. trols(HR=1.8,CI:1.6-2.4).Amongatotalof18diagnostic For 85 22q11DS carriers deep phenotype was performed groups the risk of admission was increased in all but three based on the form with over 230 clinical features. Subse- groups. The highest HRs were observed for congenital quently for all patients whole exome sequencing (WES) malformations (HR=6.1, CI: 4.8-7.6); psychiatric diseases wascarriedout.Datawasanalysedusingstandardprotocol, (HR=5.7, CI: 4.5-7.1); endocrine and metabolic disorders additionally two algorithms were implemented to identify (HR=3.2, CI: 2.4-4.4); neurologic diseases (HR=3.0, CI: CNVs in genome (CoNIFER and HMZdelﬁnder). 2.2-4.0);andurogenitalsystemdisorders(HR=3.0,CI:2.4- WES analysis revealed: 9 pathogenic SNVs and 54 3.7). Overall, 47,XYY had an increased risk of receiving potentially pathogenic variants in known disease related medicinal prescriptions compared to controls (HR=1.3, genes correlating with patients’ phenotypes. Moreover we CI:1.1-1.5), and it was signiﬁcantly increased in 11 out of found 149 rare variants of unknown signiﬁcance, including 14 medicinal groups. The highest HRs were observed for 2 in 22q11.2 region. All variants were classiﬁed as dele- medication related to the blood (HR=2.5, CI:1.8-3.5); the terious by at least 3 of 4 applied function prediction scores nervous system (HR=2.2, CI:1.9-2.7); as well as for uro- and located in genes with increased expression in brain, genital system disorders and sex hormones (HR=2.7, CI: nervous system, immune system or heart. CoNIFER algo- 2.0-3.7). rithm identiﬁed 12 rare CNVs and HMZdelﬁnder 14 Conclusions: The 47,XYY syndrome is associated with deletions. an increased morbidity as interpreted from data of hospital Conclusions: The, second hit” – pathogenic/potentially admissionsandmedicinalprescriptions.Whetherthesedata pathogenic SNV or CNV may act as a phenotype modiﬁer, extendtotheapproximately80%of47,XYYsufferingfrom changes patient’s prognosis and should be considered in non-diagnosis remains unknown. genetic counselling. A. Berglund: None. M. Viuff: None. K. Stochholm: Financed by NSC, OPUS NCN2015/17/B/NZ5/ None. C. Gravholt: None. 01357 to BN. K. Ziemkiewicz: None. M. Smyk: None. T. Gambin: P11.08D None. M. Geremek: None. A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: Characterization of a CRISPR-Cas9 cellular model to None. D.M. McDonald-McGinn: None. T.B. Crowley: Alström syndrome None. M. Piotrowicz: None. D. Gieruszczak-Białek: None. B.A. Nowakowska: None. B. Bea-Mascato, E. Neira-Goyanes, D. Valverde P11.06B University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain Morbidity is increased in 47,XYY syndrome: a nationwide registry study Alström syndrome is a rare disease with a prevalence of 1/ 1,000,000 per inhabitant. ALMS1 gene has been implicated A. Berglund, M. Viuff, K. Stochholm, C. Gravholt in this disease, with more than 290 causal mutations, mostly ofthemlocatedinexons8,10and16.Themajorityofthese Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark mutations leads to a change of the reading frame that concludesinaprematurestopcodon,resultinginatruncated protein. The modelling of this disease through KO models1494 becomes in this context an interesting tool to understand the analysisconﬁrmedthemultipleaetiopatologyoftheclinical cellular processes that take place in this disease. We have picture identifying mutations in different causative genes. generatedaKnock-out(KO)modelinHeLacellline.Weuse The likely pathogenetic missense mutations in CAPN10, the CRISPR/Cas9 method with dual system with Homology SLC2A2 and GCKR explained only diabetes mellitus non- Direct Repair (HDR). After isolation of homozygous clones, insulin dependent. The kidney anomaly correlated to we validated ALMS1 expression by qPCR and Sanger CHD1L mutation, candidate gene for congenital anomalies sequencing of the recombinant amplicon comprised between of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). An essential in- Exon 1 and 3. Then we evaluate mitochondrial activity, depth study of WES identiﬁed a new ANKRD11 mutation, proliferation and apoptosis resistance. We obtained a total responsible of KBG syndrome. This is a rare autosomal inhibition in the expression of the ALMS1 gene. We are dominant condition characterized by short stature, neurolo- performing the characterization but we expected apoptosis gical involvement, skeletal anomalies and macrodontia. resistance, cell cycle elongation and inhibition of mitochon- ANKRD11 encodes for a member of family of Ankyrin drial activity like other authors report in analysis of patient´s repeat domain-containing cofactors that are inhibitors of ﬁbroblasts. The generation of cellular models using CRIPR/ ligand-dependent transcriptional activation. Moreover, it is Cas9fortheAlströmsyndromeisconsideredasasimpleand known as a tumor protein p53-interacting protein. easytoimplementtoolthatwouldbroadentheknowledgeof ANKRD11 enhances TP53-dependent transcriptional acti- the molecular basis of this disease. vation promoting its tumor-suppressive effects. Retrospec- B. Bea-Mascato: None. E. Neira-Goyanes: None. D. tively analysis of literature (about hundred cases) Valverde: None. highlightedthepresenceofonlytwocaseswithmalignancy, testicular rhabdoid tumor and acute myeloid leukemia. P11.09A Although we cannot exclude that tumor observed in KBG Beyondtheﬁrstclinicaldiagnosis:anewinterestingcase patients developed coincidentally, the role of ANKRD11 of KBG syndrome and our new case suggest a general cancer surveillance. R. Artuso: None. F. Peluso: None. E. Bosi: None. V. R.Artuso1,F.Peluso2,E. Bosi2,V.Palazzo1,S.Landini2, Palazzo:None.S.Landini:None.D.Formicola:None.D. D. Formicola3, D. Vergani2, L. Tiberi2, L. Giunti1, Vergani: None. L. Tiberi: None. L. Giunti: None. C. C. Cosentino4, L. Pala4, C. Rotella4, S. Giglio1,5 Cosentino: None. L. Pala: None. C. Rotella: None. S. Giglio: None. 1Medical Genetic Unit, Meyer's Children University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, P11.10B Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical Fruits of Genomic Match-making: De Novo Variants in Sciences 'Mario Serio', University of Florence, Florence, PRR12 are Associated with a Spectrum of Eye and Italy., Firenze, Italy, 3Department of Science’s Health, Neurodevelopmental Anomalies Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital,Florence,Italy,Firenze,Italy,4DiabetologyUnit, T. B. Balci1, L. Wang2, S. Lalani3, S. Heide4, B. Keren4, Department of Clinical and Experimental Biomedical C. Mignot4, G. Morley5, J. Walia6, P. Wheeler7, Sciences "Mario Serio", University of Florence, Careggi J. Lemons8, D. Rodriguez Buritica8, E. Riberi9, University Hospital, Florence, Italy., Firenze, Italy, E. Biamino9, K. Schatz10, M. Gunay-Aygun10, 5Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and A. Wiesener11, C. Zweier11, I. Wentzensen12, V. M. Siu1, ExperimentalBiomedicalSciences'MarioSerio',University W. Bi3 of Florence, Florence, Italy., Florence, Italy 1Western University, Schulich School of Medicine and A 48 years old man acceded in emergency unit for Dentistry, London, ON, Canada, 2Baylor Genetics addominal pain and vomit. He presented polyuria, poly- Laboratories, Houston, TX, United States, 3Baylor College dipsia for 2 months and important weight loss. Hematic of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 4GH Pitie- exam showed high glycemia, high value of HB1Ac and Salpetriere, Paris, France, 5Mercyhealth Hospital, negative speciﬁc insulin autoantibodies suspecting diabetic Rockford, IL,United States,6Queen's University, Kingston, ketoacidosis.Theinsulintreatmentimprovedsymptomsand ON, Canada, 7Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children, glicemia. The genetic evaluation revealed a more complex Orlando, FL, United States, 8University of Texas Health phenotype included hyposomia, growth delay, mild intel- SciencesCenter,Houston,TX,UnitedStates,9Universityof lectual disability, monosomy of left kidney, fusion of Turin, Turin, Italy, 10Johns Hopkins University School of cervical vertebrates, brachydactyly, Arnold-Chiari syn- Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 11Friedrich drome and chronic lymphocytic leucemia. The WES Alexander Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg, Erlangen,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1495 Germany, 12GeneDx Clinical Genetics Laboratories, 1Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Gaithersburg, MD, United States Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2Multifactorial Disease and Complex Phenotype Research Rare disease research has made great strides in the last Area, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù,, Rome, Italy, decade; ﬁrst with unbiased genome-wide sequencing 3Radiologia e Bioimaging, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino methods, then with global data-sharing efforts. Genomic Gesù,Rome,Italy,4DipartimentodiEmatologia,Oncologia match-makinghasacceleratedthepathfromcandidategene eMedicina Molecolare,Istituto SuperiorediSanità,Rome, identiﬁcation to establishing causality. Using exome Italy, Rome, Italy, 5Division of Genetics, Department of sequencing, we identiﬁed a de novo frameshift variant in Pediatrics, All Institute of Medical Sciences,, New Delhi, thePRR12 geneina 2-year-old girlwith anophthalmiaand India,6CentroNacionaldeGenéticaMédica,BuenosAires, developmental delay. PRR12 is highly expressed in the Argentina,7DepartmentofClinicalandMolecularGenetics brain and the visual system. It has a high missense andRareDiseaseUnit,UniversityHospitalValld´Hebron, constraint score (Z=3.37) and no loss of function variants Barcelona, Spain, 8Ambulantes Gesundheitszentrum listed in Gnomad (pLI=1.00). De novo truncating variants Humangenetik, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, in PRR12 were recently reported in three individuals with Germany, 9Center for Rare Diseases, Department of developmental delay and iris abnormalities. Through Pediatrics, Polo Salute Donna e Bambino, Fondazione GeneMatcher, we were connected to 11 additional patients Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Catholic University, from around the globe, bringing the total number of Rome, Italy, 10Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich- individuals with de novo variants in PRR12 to 15. There Alexander-Universität (FAU) Erlangen-Nürnberg, werenorecurrentvariants;allbutone,weretruncating;and Erlangen, Germany, 11Institut für Klinische Genetik, nonewerelistedinGnomad.Avarietyofeyeabnormalities Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, were observed in 10/15 individuals; including myopia, 12Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical stellate iris, coloboma, Rieger’s anomaly, microphthalmia, University Hospital, Moroyama-cho, Irima-gun, Saitama, cryptophthalmos and anophthalmia. Developmental delay Japan was noted in 13/15 and microcephaly in 5/15. The overlapping clinical ﬁndings, especially the ophthalmolo- Ayme-Gripp syndrome (AYGRPS) is the eponym of a gical features, support an association between haploinsufﬁ- recognizable condition caused by a restricted spectrum of ciency of PRR12 and a distinct neurodevelopmental dominantly acting missense mutations affecting the basic disorder.Featuresarevariableandfunctionaldataisneeded leucine zipper (bZIP)-containing transcription factor, MAF. to conﬁrm pathogenicity. We plan to use zebraﬁsh and Major clinical features include congenital cataracts, sensor- mouse models to replicate the eye and growth phenotypes ineuralhearingloss,intellectualdisability,seizures,reduced andfurtherinvestigatethepathogenicityofdifferentPRR12 growth, and a distinctive ﬂat facial appearance. Skeletal variants. This cohort once again demonstrates the utility of abnormalities have also been noted in affected individuals; global data sharing efforts in rare disease research. even thought, these features have not been assessed T.B. Balci: None. L. Wang: None. S. Lalani: None. S. systematically due to the small number of subjects. Heide: None. B. Keren: None. C. Mignot: None. G. AYGRPS-causing MAF mutations cluster in the GSK3 Morley: None. J. Walia: None. P. Wheeler: None. J. phosphorylationmotifwithintheN-terminaltransactivation Lemons: None. D. Rodriguez Buritica: None. E. Riberi: domainoftheprotein,andimpairproperphosphorylationof None. E. Biamino: None. K. Schatz: None. M. Gunay- MAF, perturbing its activation and stability. Here, we Aygun: None. A. Wiesener: None. C. Zweier: None. I. characterize clinically and molecularly four additional Wentzensen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- patients. Expanding the series, we provide a more accurate niﬁcant; GeneDx. V.M. Siu: None. W. Bi: None. delineation of the clinical phenotype, particularly focusing on the skeletal features characterizing this disorder. Beside P11.11C midfacial hypoplasia and joints limitations, we report that Skeletal defects and defective osteoclast and osteoblast delayed bone age, radio-ulnar synostosis, carpal/tarsal and function in Aymé-Gripp syndrome long bone defects, and hip dysplasia variably occur in affected subjects. Consistent with this ﬁndings, by func- M. NICETA1, A. Del Fattore2, D. Barbuti3, M. Rossi2, tional characterization of mutations using informative cell E. Stellacci4, N. Gupta5, C. Ruggiero6, E. Tizzano7, models, we provide ﬁrst data documenting defective L.Graul-Neumann8,C.Leoni9,C.Zweier10,P.Fernandez osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation and function. Alvarez7, A. Tzschach11, M. Valenzuela7, S. Barresi1, M. Niceta: None. A. Del Fattore: None. D. Barbuti: B. Dallapiccola1, G. Zampino9, M. Tartaglia1, None. M. Rossi: None. E. Stellacci: None. N. Gupta: G. Nishimura12 None. C. Ruggiero: None. E. Tizzano: None. L. Graul-1496 Neumann: None. C. Leoni: None. C. Zweier: None. P. that its sequence of 2435 bp contains hallmarks of LINE1 Fernandez Alvarez: None. A. Tzschach: None. M. mediated retrotransposition with a 5’ truncation compared Valenzuela: None. S. Barresi: None. B. Dallapiccola: tothecanonicalSVA-Fsequence.Weconﬁrmedourinitial None. G. Zampino: None. M. Tartaglia: None. G. ﬁnding (Redin et al, 2012) that MEI is occurring in BBS. Nishimura: None. Wedescribe4newfamilieswiththesameSVA-Finsertion in BBS1. Thus this insertion is now described in 5 families P11.12D sincetheinitialcasereportedbyTavaresetal(2018).Such A not so rare insertion of a retrotransposon (SVA-F) in ﬁndings highlight the importance of using dedicated one of the major Bardet-Biedl gene (BBS1) bioinformatics pipelines to identify all types of variations. Our PhD student is supported by a FRM grant C. Delvallée1, S. Nicaise1, C. Stoetzel1, V. Geoffroy1, (ECO20170637509). B. Keren2,3, C. Depienne2,3, J. Klar4, N. Dahl4, C.Delvallée:None.S.Nicaise:None.C.Stoetzel:None. J. Deleuze5, A. Piton6, J. Mandel6, J. Muller1,7, V. Geoffroy: None. B. Keren: None. C. Depienne: None. H. Dollfus1,8 J.Klar:None.N.Dahl:None.J.Deleuze:None.A.Piton: None. J. Mandel: None. J. Muller: None. H. 1Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Institut de génétique Dollfus: None. médicale d’Alsace, INSERM U1112, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), P11.14B Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2AP-HP, Adult phenotype of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, F-75013, Paris, France, 3Sorbonne Universités, UPMC D. Carli1, A. Gazzin1, C. Molinatto1, F. Sirchia2, UnivParis06,Inserm,CNRS,UM75,U1127,UMR7225, S. Cardaropoli1, A. Mussa1, G. B. Ferrero1 ICM,F-75013,Paris,France,4DepartmentofImmunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, 1DepartmentofPublicHealthandPediatrics,Universityof UppsalaUniversity,Uppsala,Sweden,5CentreNationalde Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal Child Health Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy biologie François Jacob, CEA, 91000, Evry, France, 6Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Background: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) Cellulaire,CNRSUMR7104,INSERMU964,Universitéde phenotype usually mitigatewith age and data on adulthood Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 7Laboratoires de Diagnostic arescanty.Ourstudyaimsatreportingphenotypeevolution Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, and health issues in adulthood. Strasbourg,France,8Centrederéférencepourlesmaladies Methods: 31 patients (14 males), aged 18-58 years rares ophtalmologiques CARGO, Hôpitaux Universitaires (median 28.45) with BWS were enrolled. de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France Results:14patientshadIC2-hypomethylation,5paternal UPD11, two IC1-hypermethylation, one 11p15.5 micro- Bardet Biedl syndrome is a ciliopathy with typical features duplication, 5 negative molecular tests and 4 were not tes- including retinitis pigmentosa, polydactyly, cognitive ted. Final tall stature was present in 38%. Three patients impairmentandrenalfailure.Mutationsin22genesaccount developednephroblastoma(2,3and10years,respectively); for80%ofthecases.BBS1representsthehighestfractionof one hepatoblastoma (22 years); one acute lymphoblastic patientswithpathogenicvariationsincludingfor17%ofall leukemia (21 years); one adrenal adenoma and testicular BBSpatientsthec.1169T>G,p.M390Rvariant.Amongthe Sertoli cell tumour (22 and 24 years, respectively); and unsolved cases in our cohort, several patients were three benign tumours (hepatic haemangioma, uterine heterozygous carriers of this speciﬁc recurrent mutation myomaandmammaryﬁbroepithelioma).SurgeryforBWS- suggesting a second allele in BBS1. Targeted exome related features was required in 84%. Despite surgical sequencing and mobile element insertion (MEI) detection correctionseveralpatientspresentedmorbidityandsequelae (Mobster)wasappliedto200BBSsamples.Wholegenome ofBWSpediatric issues: pronunciation/swallow difﬁculties sequencing,denovoassemblyandSNParrayanalysiswere (n=8) due to macroglossia, painful scoliosis (n=4) con- performedtocharacterizethegenomiceventsidentiﬁed.We sistent with lateralized overgrowth, recurrent urolithiasis identiﬁed a few large exons deletions in BBS1 gene. (n=4), azoospermia (n=3) likely consequent to cryptorch- Interestingly, 4 families carried the c.1169T>G variation in idism, severe intellectual disability (n=2) likely related to transofahominid-speciﬁcretrotransposoninsertion(SVA- neonatal asphyxia and diabetes mellitus (n=1) due to sub- F) in exon 13 of BBS1. We characterized this insertion in total pancreatectomy for intractable hyperinsulinism. Three thegeneralpopulation(>400samplesscreened),determinedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1497 patients(2males)hadhealthychildren(twophysiologically unrecognized by clinicians,though highlyrelevanttoreach conceived and one through ART). the accurate diagnosis. Conclusions: adult health conditions in BWS are mostly V.Ivashchenko:None.S.Julia:None.A.Lebre:None. consequent to pediatric issues, underlying the preventive O. Patat: None. role of follow-up strategies in childhood. Malignancy rate observed in early adulthood in this small cohort matches P11.16D thatobservedintheﬁrstdecadeoflife,cumulativelyraising Novel patient with Contiguous ABCD1/ DXS1375E tumor rate in BWS to 20% during the observation period. (BCAP31) Deletion Syndrome (CADDS) and review of Further studies are warranted in this direction. the literature D. Carli: None. A. Gazzin: None. C. Molinatto: None. F.Sirchia:None.S.Cardaropoli:None.A.Mussa:None. S. Whalen1, A. Gomart2, C. Mignot3, T. Billette De G.B. Ferrero: None. Villemeur4, A. Gerasimenko3, D. Heron5, J. Siffroi6, P. Gobalakichenane2, M. Lachtar2, D. Mitanchez2, P11.15C S. Chantot-Bastaraud6 Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome: a case report on an atypical case with broad intra-familial variability 1APHP, UF de génétique clinique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau,Centrederéférencemaladiesrares«Anomalies V. Ivashchenko1, S. Julia1, A. Lebre2, O. Patat1 du développement et syndromes malformatifs », Paris, France, 2APHP, Service de néonatologie, Hôpital Armand 1CHU Toulouse Purpan, TOULOUSE, France, 2CHU Trousseau, Paris, France, 3APHP, UF de génétique Reims, Reims, France clinique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 4AP- HP,Servicedeneuropédiatrie,HôpitalArmandTrousseau, Introduction: Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is Sorbonne Université, Inserm U1141, Paris, France, an autosomal-dominant inherited disorder, related to 5APHP, Département de génétique, Groupe Hospitalier mutations in TFAP2A. This gene encodes for the AP2-α Pitié Salpêtrière, Centre de référence maladies rares « protein, which plays a major role in human craniofacial Déﬁciencesintellectuellesdecausesrares»,Paris,France, development. While cardinal features of this syndrome 6APHP, Département de Génétique, UF de Génétique commonly involve branchial skin defects, oculo-facial Chromosomique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, abnormalities, and hearing loss, a broad phenotypic France variabilitycanhamperthediagnosisinsomeatypicalcases. Case Presentation: We report two siblings and their The contiguous ABCD1/DXS1375E (BCAP31) deletion mother, with a familial history of Pierre Robin sequence syndrome (CADDS) was ﬁrst reported in 2002. Up to date without cleft palate, coloboma, pseudo-cleft aspect of the thereareonly6reportedpatients.Thesepatientspresenteda upper lip, nasolacrimal duct stenosis and hearing loss, with similar phenotype with marked neonatal hypotonia, severe a broad intra-familial variability. Focusing on the severe growth failure, failure to thrive, profound developmental syndromic Pierre Robin sequence and ear dysplasia in one delayandliverdysfunctionleadingtoearlydeathintheﬁrst affected child, a gene panel of mandibulofacial dysostosis year.Wepresenta7thpatientwithCADDS,a2monthsold (EFTUD2,POLR1A,POLR1C,POLR1D,andTCOF1)was boy who presented severe antenatal and postnatal growth performed without identifying any mutation. A CGH array retardation, failure to thrive, irritability, mild hypotonia, showed a 22q11.21 microduplication in one of the affected transient liver dysfunction with cholestasis and elevated children, assessed as insufﬁcient to explain the poly- liverenzymes.Healsohadexocrineandpossibleendocrine malformative familial phenotype. After a second clinical pancreatic deﬁciency which has not yet been described. evaluation, a diagnosis of branchio-oculo-facial syndrome Chromosomal microarray showed a 60kb Xq28 including was suggested based on the association of “pseudo-cleft” theﬁrstthreeexonsoftheBCAP31gene,theentireABCD1 defects of the upper lip, coloboma, and nasolacrimal duct geneandpartofthePLXNB3gene.ABCD1loss-of-function stenosis. Speciﬁc Sanger sequencing of TFAP2A in the mutations lead to X linked-Adrenoleucodystrophy, a index case revealed a predicted pathogenic c.532+2T>C neurodegenerative condition with broad clinical variability. variant (NM_003220.2) in a heterozygous state, supporting No cases have been described under the age of 2.7 years. the diagnosis of BOFS. And no liver involvement has been described. BCAP31 Conclusion: This case report highlights the broad varia- loss-of-functionmutationshavebeenidentiﬁedin7patients bility of BOFS phenotypic spectrum. However, it empha- from 3 families, all boys with severe developmental delay, sizes some distinctive clinical features, which can be dystonia, deafness, central hypomyelination, growth retar- dation. No apparent chronic liver dysfunction was1498 described.Fourofthepatientsdiedintheﬁrstyearsoflife, (TNFalpha), which was reduced the eye-size. Then, the either suddenly or during a febrile episode. The phenotype eiger effect was suppressed by the mutant MAP3K7, sug- of CADDS patients seems distinctive from those with gesting that the variant showed dominant negative effect. isolated ABCD1 or BCAP31 loss-of-function. Different We concluded that the patient was caused by the missense hypotheses have been made to explain the severe liver denovovariantofMAP3K7andCSCFwascausedbyloss- phenotype of the deletion, however further studies are of-function of MAP3K7. needed to conclude. T. Kaname: None. K. Saito: None. K. Yanagi: None. S.Whalen:None.A.Gomart:None.C.Mignot:None. M. Takeshita: None. N. Kobayashi: None. T. Tohma: T. Billette De Villemeur: None. A. Gerasimenko: None. None. I. Inoue: None. Y. Matsubara: None. D. Heron: None. J. Siffroi: None. P. Gobalakichenane: None. M. Lachtar: None. D. Mitanchez: None. S. P11.20D Chantot-Bastaraud: None. Deleterious mutations in one third of non-syndromic discontinuous cleft lip and palate patients P11.17A A novel missense variant of MAP3K7 causes B. Demeer1,2,3, N. Revencu2,4, R. Helaers2, C. Gbaguidi5, cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome by dominant S. Dakpe5,3, G. François6, B. Devauchelle5,3, B. Bayet7, negative effect M. Vikkula2 T. Kaname1, K. Saito2, K. Yanagi1, M. Takeshita1, 1Center for Human Genetics, CLAD nord de France, CHU N. Kobayashi1, T. Tohma3, I. Inoue4, Y. Matsubara5 Amiens-Picardie, amiens, France, 2Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique de 1Dept Genome Medicine, NationalCenter for Child Health Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3EA CHIMERE, Université and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 2Invertebrate Genetics Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France, 4Center for Human Laboratory,NationalInstituteofGenetics,Mishima,Japan, Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, University of 3Wanpaku Clinic, Okinawa, Japan, 4Div Human Genetics, Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 5Department of Maxillofacial National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan, 5National Surgery and Stomatology, centre de compétence fentes et Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan malformations faciales (MAFACE), CHU Amiens-Picardie, amiens, France, 6Department of Pediatrics, Cliniques Cardiospondylocarpofacial syndrome (CSCF) is character- universitaires Saint-Luc, University of Louvain, Brussels, ized by growth retardation, dysmorphic facial features, Belgium,7CentreLabiopalatin,DivisionofPlasticSurgery, brachydactyly, vertebral synostosis, cardiac septal defects, Cliniques universitaires Saint Luc, Brussels, Belgium and deafness. Here we report a patient with growth retardation, dys- Cleft of the lip and/or palate (CLP) are among the most morphic facial appearance, vertebral abnormalities and common birth defects, with an approximate incidence of 1/ congenitalheartdefectassociatedwithapathogenicvariant 700 live births and with a wide variability of expression in MAP3K7 identiﬁed by whole exome sequencing (WES) dependingonethnicity,genderandclefttype.Whencleftof and animals model analyses. The patient was a four-year- the palate is associated with a cleft of the lip with old boy. The boy was born at 39 weeks of gestation with preservation of the primary palate, it deﬁnes an atypical apgarindexof3(1min)and6(5min).Afterbirth,theboy phenotype called discontinuous cleft. Although this pheno- wassoonadministratedourhospitalduetoseverecyanosis. type may represent 5% of clefts of the lip and/or palate At4year-of-age,thepatientshowedshortstature(-5S.D.), (CLP), it is rarely speciﬁcally referred to and its developmental delay, dysmorphic facial features with pathophysiology is unknown. To date only few WES macrocephalus, long face, frontal bossing, epicanthal fold studies, mostly applied to familial cases, have been and mid-face hypoplasia, coarctation of aorta and atrial performed to search for rare coding variants in non- septaldefect,scoliosis,vertebralsynostosis,andjointlaxity. syndromicCLPindividuals.Onestudyidentiﬁedmutations Written informed consent was obtained from his parents. in genes mutated in syndromic forms of CLP in 10%. We WES analysis was performed and detected variants were conducted Whole Exome sequencing (WES) on 8 non- conﬁrmed using Sanger sequencing. A novel heterozygous syndromic discontinuous CLP individuals whether familial missense variant, c,574 A>G (p.S192G), in the MAP3K7 or not in order to identify genes and mutations that could gene was found in the patient. The variant was de novo. underlie this phenotype. We discovered loss-of-function We conﬁrmed the effect of the variant using transgenic mutationsin3outofthe8individualsin3genespreviously Drosophila. The MAP3K7 gene with the variant was implicated in CLP, representing almost 40% of this cohort. introduced into Drosophila overexpressed eiger Whole exome sequencing of clinically well-deﬁnedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1499 subgroupsofCLP,suchasdiscontinuouscleft,isarelevant P11.22B approach to study CLP etiopathogenesis. Non-syndromic Adding evidence to the role of NEUROG1 in congenital discontinuous cleft lip and palate seems to have a strong cranialdysinnervationdisorders(CCDDs):acasereport genetic basis. B. Demeer: None. N. Revencu: None. R. Helaers: J. Dupont1, J. Alves1, A. Taylor Tavares2, P. Janeiro3, None. C. Gbaguidi: None. S. Dakpe: None. G. François: A. Sousa1 None. B. Devauchelle: None. B. Bayet: None. M. Vikkula: None. 1ServiçodeGenética,DepartamentodePediatria,Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa P11.21A Norte, Centro Académico de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, A new cloverleaf skull syndrome in a pair of twins Portugal, 2East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, O. Caluseriu, D. Wang, A. E. Reichert, R. Bhargava, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Centro de Referência de F. D. Jacob, T. Laut, C. Young, V. Jain, T. Stryker, Doenças Hereditárias do Metabolismo, Unidade de S. Chandra Doenças Metabólicas, Serviço de Pediatria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Centro Académico University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada de Medicina de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal Cloverleaf skull (Kleeblattschaedel, OMIM 148800) is a Introduction: CCDDs are a heterogeneous group of rare congenital anomaly resulting from complex craniosy- neurodevelopmental phenotypes caused by a primary nostosis. The condition shows clinical and etiologic disturbance of innervation due to deﬁcient, absent, or heterogeneity. The cause of isolated cloverleafskull is misguided cranial nerves. Several phenotypes still await unknown, and this feature is a component of at least 15 etiological elucidation. monogenic disorders which account for majority of all NEUROG1 encodes Ngn1 which is a basic helix-loop- cloverleaf skull syndromes (JM Graham & PA Sanchez- helix transcription factor essential for the formation of the Lara, 2016). A diamniotic, dichorionic pregnancy was trigeminal, vestibule-cochlear and accessory nerves. So far assessed starting at 20 weeks gestation for skull and it hasn’t been associated with a phenotype in OMIM. possiblebrainanomaliesbyultrasoundandMRI.Aninitial Nonetheless, in 2013 Schroder et al (PMID: 23419067) suspicion of encephaloceles in both fetuses was raised reported a patient with mild developmental delay (DD), followed by that of craniosynostosis. Genetic testing was bilateral profound sensorineural deafness due to absent postponed for the postnatal time. The 24-year-old G2P1A1 bilateralVIIInerves,andsevereoromotordysfunction,who mother experienced PPROM at 28 weeks gestation and had a homozygous deletion including NEUROG1. delivery took place by C/S at 32w2d gestation. Both Case description: We describe a 10 year- old boy with newborns, a boy and a girl shared the same phenotype hypotonia, mild DD, bilateral profound sensorineural including typical craniofacial dysostosis associated with hearingloss,andkeratoconjunctivitisduetolackofcorneal cloverleaf skull, and bilateral parietal encephaloceles, reﬂexandincompleteeyeclosure.Onphysicalexamination micromelia, no skeletal anomalies, and unilateral kidney hehadalongexpressionlessface,righteyeleucocoria,and dysplasia in one fetus. Extensive genetic testing including severe oromotor dysfunction.EMGshowedaxonal sensory targeted sequencing (FGFR1, 2, and 3, TWIST1), cranio- polyneuropathy of the lower limbs. Brain-MRI revealed synostosis panel, exome sequencing (WES) and chromoso- bilateral agenesis/severe hypoplasia of the VIII nerve with malmicroarray(CMA)didnotrevealaclearetiology.WES marked atresia of the internal auditory canals and cochlear and CMA showed a 2.4 Mb VUS deletion at chromosome labyrinth malformation. Trio-exome identiﬁed a homo- 18p11.32, seen in gnomAD, shared between the two zygousvariantinNEUROG1(NM_006161.2:c.202G>T,p. affected newborns and the father who has a history of an Glu68*).Thisvariantisclassiﬁedasuncertainaccordingto unclear seizure disorder, mild developmental delay and no ACMG guidelines, but is considered pathogenic applying craniosynostosis. We are raising the possibility of a new the ClinGen SVI Bayesian classiﬁcation framework (pos- geneticsyndromewithcloverleafskullofunknownetiology terior probability 0.997). that requires further investigations to inform appropriate Conclusions: The resemblance between our case and counseling for this young family. Schroder’s is remarkable. This case adds support to estab- O. Caluseriu: None. D. Wang: None. A.E. Reichert: lishing NEUROG1 as a new gene for CCDDs associated None. R. Bhargava: None. F.D. Jacob: None. T. Laut: withaverydistinctivephenotype,andcontributestoabetter None.C.Young:None.V.Jain:None.T.Stryker:None. understanding and classiﬁcation of these disorders. S. Chandra: None.1500 J. Dupont: None. J. Alves: None. A. Taylor Tavares: analysis shows overlapping genes are highly expressed in None. P. Janeiro: None. A. Sousa: None. neurons and astrocytes. Conclusions: We have identiﬁed signiﬁcant overlap of P11.23C pathogenic and VUS CNVs between NDD and CHD sam- Genomic overlap between neurodevelopmental ples. This study also shows evidence of speciﬁc cell types disorders and congenital heart defects that might contribute to the etiology of NDD and CHD. S. Saﬁzadeh Shabestari: None. S. Sopariwala: None. S.SaﬁzadehShabestari1,S.Sopariwala2,A.Ali1,N.K.Al A.Ali:None.N.K.AlJezawi:None.G.Begum:None.B. Jezawi1, G. Begum1, B. Berdiev1, S. W. Scherer3,4,5, Berdiev: None. S.W. Scherer: None. A. Alsheikh-Ali: A. Alsheikh-Ali1, A. AlBanna6, A. Tayoun6, M. Speevak7, None.A.AlBanna:None.A.Tayoun:None.M.Speevak: D. J. Stavropoulos3,8,7, M. Uddin1,3 None. D.J. Stavropoulos: None. M. Uddin: None. 1MohammedBinRashidUniversityofMedicineandHealth P11.24D Sciences, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 2University of 49 novel recessive candidate genes for intellectual Guelph, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The Centre for Applied disability and visual impairment in 350 consanguineous Genomics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, families Canada, 4Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5McLaughlin Centre, S. E. Antonarakis1,2,3, S. A. Paracha4, S. Imtiaz5, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Al Jalila A. Nazir4, Y. M. Waryah6, P. Makrythanasis1,7, Specialty Children’s Hospital, Dubai, United Arab S. Qureshi4, J. Khan4, E. Falconnet1, M. Guipponi2, Emirates, 7Department of Laboratory Medicine and C. Borel1, M. A. Ansari5, E. Frengen8, E. Ranza1,2,9, Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, F. A. Santoni1,10, I. Shah4, K. Gul5,11, J. Ahmed4, Canada, 8Genome Diagnostics, Paediatric Laboratory M. T. Sarwar4, A. M. Waryah6, M. Ansar1 Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Service of Introduction: The phenotypic overlap between neurode- GeneticMedicine,UniversityHospitalsofGeneva,Geneva, velopmental disorders (NDD) and congenital heart disease Switzerland, 3iGE3 Institute of Genetics and Genomics of (CHD) is well documented and in this study, we Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Institute of Basic Medical investigated the genomic overlaps in large clinical cohorts. Sciences, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan, Materials and Methods: We analyzed whole genome 5Department of Genetics, University of Karachi, Karachi, clinical microarray data from10,797NDD and3,174 CHD Pakistan, 6Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, casesfromOntariotoanalyzelargecopynumbervariations Medical Research Center, Liaquat University of Medical (CNVs). Clinical cytogeneticists identiﬁed a consensus set and Health Sciences, Jamshoro, Pakistan, 7Biomedical of variants(pathogenic, variant of uncertain signiﬁcance Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, (VUS)) based on established guidelines. We have con- Greece, 8Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University ducted pathway enrichment and brain single cell tran- Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 9current criptomeanalysistoidentifycelltypesforpleiotropicgenes address, Medigenome, The Swiss Institute of Genomic that are impacted in both NDD and CHD cases. Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 10Department of Results: We have identiﬁed 186 de novo CNVs from Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University NDD and CHD cases. Our analysis on clinically relevant Hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, CNVrevealed573and181pathogenicvariantsinNDDand 11Department of Bio Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, CHD, respectively. Similarly, we have identiﬁed 4753 and Muhammad Ali Jinnah University, Karachi, Pakistan 1361 variants of uncertain signiﬁcance in NDD and CHD, respectively. Genes with at least one exon impacted by Consanguinity, practiced in a substantial fraction of human pathogenic(OR=6.41) and VUS(OR=6.68) deletions populations, reveals numerous rare recessive phenotypes showssigniﬁcant(P<0.001)overlapsbetweentheNDDand because of the extensive regions of homozygosity by CHD cases. Similar signiﬁcant overlap was also observed decent. In Pakistan, the frequency of consanguineous for duplications. “activation of gtpase activity” pathway marriages approaches 70%. To bridge the gap between showed signiﬁcance (P<0.001) for the overlapping genes. the 1800 known and the estimated >9000 recessive gene- For example, CLSTN1 gene was found to be impacted by phenotypes, we have initiated a Swiss-Pakistani project to pathogenic variants for both NDD and CHD. Single cell identify novel recessive candidate genes for two pheno- types: Intellectual Disability (ID) and Visual ImpairmentAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1501 (VI). We have collected samples from 1265 individuals of coding elements. Therefore, in a cohort of cases with 197 ID, and 1809 individual of 236 VI families of ﬁrst suspected genetic diseases who underwent chromosomal cousin marriages with at least two affecteds. Exome microarray analysis, we searched for CNV interposed sequence of one affected and genotyping of the whole between relevant disease genes and their corresponding family (parents, all affected and unaffected siblings) has enhancers. beencompletedin166IDand184VIfamiliestodate.The Methods: Out of a dataset of 1,176 CNV from 682 likely causative gene/variant in known genes was found in patients, we selected CNVs that were: (1) smaller than 1 64% of the VI and 32% in the ID families. Thus, there are Mb, (2) devoid of disease genes, and (3) mapped between more unknown “recessive genes” for ID. In 18% of the VI disease genes and their enhancers. Then, we manually familieswehaveidentiﬁed25novelcandidategenes,andin analyzed these gene-CNV-enhancers groups for con- 27%oftheID families24such candidates (to bepresented cordance between involved genes and corresponding phe- in the conference). International genematching identiﬁed notypes. Finally, we predicted effect of CNV on chromatin additional families in 20% of the candidate genes. Careful folding by the strings-and-binders method. evaluation of the phenotypes is mandatory to assess the Results:235CNV(34%)mappedbetweenadiseasegene possibility of two or more causative genes in certain and one of its enhancers and 26 gene-phenotype relation- families, and to minimize false negative results. Interna- shipswereconsistentaftermanualevaluation.Amongthese tional databases from consanguineous individuals are cases,thebestCNVcandidatewasa50kbdenovodeletion needed to facilitate the assignment of pathogenicity to encompassing a region between sonic hedgehog gene homozygous variants. (SHH) and two of its enhancers, in a patient with limb S.E. Antonarakis: None. S.A. Paracha: None. S. abnormalities, aortic malformation, cardiac arrythmia, and Imtiaz: None. A. Nazir: None. Y.M. Waryah: None. P. facial dysmorphisms. Makrythanasis:None.S.Qureshi:None.J.Khan:None. Conclusion: Systematic analysis of potential positional E.Falconnet:None.M.Guipponi:None.C.Borel:None. effect of CNV has potential for identifying the genetic M.A. Ansari: None. E. Frengen: None. E. Ranza: None. defectsinundiagnosedcasesandinouranalysisitdetected F.A. Santoni: None. I. Shah: None. K. Gul: None. J. a CNV affecting contacts of SHH, an important transcrip- Ahmed:None.M.T.Sarwar:None.A.M.Waryah:None. tion factor involved in development, with its enhancers. M. Ansar: None. M.Pinelli:None.P.Pignataro:None.S.Bianco:None. R. Genesio: None. G. Cappuccio: None. A. Chiariello: P11.25A None.M.Nicodemi:None.L.Nitsch:None.N.Brunetti- A CNV positional effect analysis implicates enhancer- Pierri: None. mediated SHH dysregulation in a patient with multiple congenital anomalies and malformations P11.28D Downsyndrome-iPSCneurogenesisconnectsdifferential M. Pinelli1,2, P. Pignataro3, S. Bianco4, R. Genesio3, methylation to dysregulated gene expression G.Cappuccio1,2,A.Chiariello4,M.Nicodemi4,L.Nitsch3, N. Brunetti-Pierri1,2 L. Laan1, J. Klar1, M. Sobol1, J. Hoeber1, M. Zakaria1, G. Annerén1, A. Falk2, J. Schuster1, N. Dahl1 1TIGEM,Pozzuoli,Italy,2DipartimentodiScienzeMediche Traslazionali, Università degli Studi di Napoli “Federico 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, II”, Naples, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Biotecnologie mediche, Università degli Studi di Napoli Sweden, 2Department of Neurosceince, Karolinska “Federico II”, Naples, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Fisica, Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Università di Napoli Federico II, and INFN Napoli Complesso Universitario di Monte Sant'Angelo, Naples, Introduction: Down syndrome is caused by trisomy 21 Italy (T21) in humans and affects approximately one in 700 live births. Despite major efforts the molecular mechanisms Introduction: Despite application of genome-wide diag- leading to the morphological and functional brain abnorm- nostics, such as chromosomal microarrays and whole alities associated with T21 remain largely unknown. exome sequencing,a signiﬁcantproportion of patients with MaterialandMethods:Toclarifytheroleofdifferential suspected genetic disease continue to lack a deﬁnitive methylation on transcriptional dysregulation and neurode- diagnosis. The underlying genetic defects in a subgroup of velopment in T21, we established an induced pluripotent these cases may be altered expression of disease genes due stem cell (iPSC) derived neural cell model showing a to copy-number variants (CNV) involving regulatory non- transctiptional proﬁle comparable to early-mid gestational1502 period. The DNA methylation pattern was analysed using States, 8Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of IlluminaHumanMethylation450kBeadChipandparalleled Medicine at Mount Sinai. Department of Genetics and by RNA sequencing. Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New Results: We assessed the genome wide methylation pat- York, NY, United States tern in T21 and euploid iPSC neural derivatives and iden- tiﬁed 500 differentially methylated positions (DMPs). Introduction:DPH1variantshavebeenassociatedwithan Approximately half of DMPs (281 of 500) could be anno- ultra-rare and severe neurodevelopmental disorder mainly tated to a total of 202 genes. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis characterized by variable developmental delay, short of these 202 genesrevealed enrichment of neurotransmitter stature, dysmorphic features, and sparse hair. transporters (GO:0006836). Integrated analysis of methy- Material and methods: WES was applied to two trios lation and transcriptome data sets revealed altered expres- with undiagnosed patients. A survey of all the clinical sion in 77 out of the 202 genes in T21 lines. Furthermore, featuresof17DPH1syndromepatientsfrom7familieswas the most profound methylation changes (>9DMPs/gene) performed. The DPH1 enzyme activity of wild-type and of associated with differential expression was observed for a 7 disease-causing mutants was assessed through the diph- cluster of genes (ZNF69 and ZNF700) on chromosome 19 theria toxinADP-ribosylationassay. Ahomology model of encodingzinkﬁngertranscriptionfactors.TheseZNFgenes the human DPH1-DPH2 heterodimer was built, and mole- have yet unknown functions and are highly expressed cular dynamics simulations were performed to study the during normal embryonic brain development. effect of these variants on the catalytic sites, as well as on Conclusion: Our results suggest that differential methy- the interactions between subunits of the heterodimer. lation contributes to transcriptional dysregulation in T21 Results: Two DPH1 novel variants were identiﬁed in 2 neural cells derived from iPSCs. Our study further high- independent families, enriching the clinical delineation of lights a set of ZNF transcription factor genes showing DPH1 syndrome. The enzyme assay demonstrated com- profound differential methylation in T21 neurogenesis. promised functionality for 5 mutations (p.Leu234Pro; p. L. Laan: None. J. Klar: None. M. Sobol: None. J. Ala411Argfs*91; p.Leu164Pro; p.Leu125Pro; p.Tyr112- Hoeber:None.M.Zakaria:None.G.Annerén:None.A. Cys). According to the structural model, p.Leu125Pro may Falk: None. J. Schuster: None. N. Dahl: None. affect dimerization while p.Tyr112Cys, p.Leu164Pro, p. Leu234Pro and p.Pro382Ser may interfere the binding of P11.29A the iron-sulphur cluster necessary for catalysis. DPH1 syndrome. Clinical review and structural and Conclusions: The overall good correlation observed functional analyses of seven disease-causing variants between DPH1 protein activity, structural prediction and identiﬁed so far clinical features indicate that these biochemical and struc- tural tests may be useful tools for assessing the pathogeni- L. Castilla-Vallmanya1, R. Urreizti1, K. Mayer2, cityofDPH1variantsandforhelpingtopredicttheclinical G. Evrony3, E. Said4, N. Cody5, G. Plasencia6, B. Gelb7, severity of future DPH1 cases. D. Grinberg1, U. Brinkmann2, B. Webb8, S. Balcells1 Funding: Associació Síndrome Opitz C, Spain; Spanish MINECO (SAF2016-75948-R, FECYT-PRECIPITA); Cata- 1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, lan Government (2014SGR932); CIBERER (U720); the Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD, MindichInstitute(MCHDI)attheIcahnSchoolofMedicine- CIBERER,Barcelona,Spain,2RochePharmaResearchand Mount Sinai, NY; Genetic Disease Foundation, NY. Early Develpoment. Large Molecule Research, Roche L. Castilla-Vallmanya: None. R. Urreizti: None. K. Innovation Center, Munich, Penzberg, Germany, Mayer:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;Roche. 3Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at G. Evrony: None. E. Said: None. N. Cody: A. Employ- Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 4Section of ment (full or part-time); Modest; Sema4, a Mount Sinai Medical Genetics, Mater dei Hospital. Department of venture. G. Plasencia: A. Employment (full or part-time); anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Malta, Msida, Modest; Lead Molecular Desgin, S.L. B. Gelb: None. D. Malta, 5Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Grinberg: None. U. Brinkmann: A. Employment (full or Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai., New York, NY, part-time); Modest; Roche. B. Webb: None. S. UnitedStates,6LeadMolecularDesign,S.L,SantCugatdel Balcells: None. Vallès, Spain, 7Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Department of Genetics and P11.30B Genomics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Pontocerebellar hypoplasia with Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn rhombencephalosynapsis and microlissencephaly School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United expands the spectrum of PCH type 1BAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1503 M. Vezain1, F. Marguet2, M. Bucourt3, P. Letard3, M. Vezain: None. F. Marguet: None. M. Bucourt: A. Delahaye4, T. Frébourg5, A. Laquerrière2, P. Saugier- None.P.Letard:None.A.Delahaye:None.T.Frébourg: Veber5 None. A. Laquerrière: None. P. Saugier-Veber: None. 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, F 76000, P11.31C NormandyCenterforGenomicandPersonalizedMedicine, MRneuroimagingandEEGﬁndingsin62patientswith Rouen, France, 2Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department of Pathology, F76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and S. Boronat1, E. Vázquez2, Á. Sánchez-Montañez2, Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 3Paris University M. Vicente2, M. del Campo3 Hospital,JeanVerdierHospital, Department ofPathology, F93141, Bondy, France, 4Paris University Hospital, Jean 1Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, Verdier Hospital,Department ofGenetics, F93141,Bondy, 2Hospital de la Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Rady France,5NormandieUniv,UNIROUEN,InsermU1245and Children´s Hospital, San Diego, CA, United States Rouen University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F 76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Introduction:Thefetalalcoholspectrumdisorders(FASD) Medicine, Rouen, France span a group of neurodevelopmental disorders related to maternal alcohol intake during pregnancy. Studies correlat- Rhombencephalosynapsis (RES) is a rare cerebellar mal- ing EEG and neuroimaging with speciﬁc FASD categories formation, developing during embryogenesis, deﬁned by are lacking. complete or partial vermis agenesis with fusion of the Materialandmethods:Classiﬁcationof62patientsinto cerebellar hemispheres. It occurs either alone or in 3 FASD categories, including fetal alcohol syndrome association with other cerebral and/or extracerebral anoma- (FAS), partial FAS (pFAS) and alcohol related neurodeve- lies. Its association with microlissencephaly is exceedingly lopmental disorders (ARND). Prospective studies of MR rare and to date, only a heterozygous de novo missense imaging and EEG. variant in ADGRL2, a gene encoding Adhesion G-Protein- Results:Neuroimaging:Themostfrequentﬁndingswere Coupled Receptor L2, has been identiﬁed. Here, we report corpus callosum abnormalities (42%) and cerebellar vermis two siblings of Roma origin presenting with severe growth hypoplasia (24%). Additional ﬁndings were vascular retardation, fetal akinesia, microlissencephaly and small anomalies, gliosis, prominent perivascular spaces, occipito- cerebellumwithvermianagenesis.Neuropathologyshowed cervical junction and cervical vertebral anomalies, pituitary extreme paucity in pontine transverse ﬁbres, rudimentary hypoplasia,arachnoidcysts,andcavumseptumpellucidum. olivary nuclei, RES and vanishing motoneurons in both Only16%hadnormalneuroimaging.EEG(includingsleep foetuses. Comparative foetus-parent exome sequencing recording in 43%) showed anomalies in 23%, including revealed in both foetuses a homozygous variant in exon 1 slowing of background activity and interictal epileptiform of the EXOSC3 gene encoding a core component of the discharges, focal and/or generalized, and 3 of them had RNA exosome, c.92G>C;p.(Gly31Ala). EXOSC3 variants epilepsy. In one patient, seizures were ﬁrst detected during account for 40% to 75% of patients affected by ponto- the EEG recording and one case had an encephalopathy cerebellar hypoplasia with spinal muscular atrophy with electrical status epilepticus during slow sleep (ESES). (PCH1B). The c.92G>C variant is a founder mutation in Focal interictal discharges in our patients did not imply the the Roma population and has been reported in severe presence of underlying visible focal brain lesions in the PCH1B. PCH1B is characterized by a broad phenotypic neuroimaging studies, such as cortical dysplasia or poly- spectrum, ranging from mild phenotypes with spasticity, microgyria. However, they had nonspeciﬁc brain MR mildtomoderateintellectualdisability,distallypronounced abnormalities, including corpus callosum hypoplasia, ver- muscular atrophy, and cerebellar atrophy, to severe mishypoplasiaorcavumseptumpellucidum.Thelatterwas phenotypes with profound global developmental delay, signiﬁcantlymorefrequentinthegroupwithEEGabnormal progressive microcephaly, and atrophy of the cerebellar ﬁndings (p < 0.01). hemispheres. The typical dragonﬂy pattern of the cerebel- Conclusion: Patients with FASD exhibit frequent and lumobservedinPCH1Bpatientswithﬂattenedhemispheres diverse neuroimaging and EEG ﬁndings. and relative prominence of vermis differs markedly from S. Boronat: None. E. Vázquez: None. Á. Sánchez- RES. This novel foetal presentation expands the spectrum Montañez: None. M. Vicente: None. M. del of PCH1B and highlights the diversity of RES aetiologies. Campo: None.1504 P11.32D Conclusions:Wereportthatdenovomissensemutations Gating-affecting mutations in KCNK4 cause a in KCNK4 cause a recognizable syndrome for which we recognizable neurodevelopmental syndrome propose the acronym FHEIG (facial dysmorphism, hyper- trichosis, epilepsy, intellectual disability/developmental F. C. Radio1, P. Calligari2, V. Caputo3, M. L. Dentici1, delay, and gingival overgrowth). Overall, our ﬁndings N. Falah4, F. High5, F. Pantaleoni1, S. Barresi1, illustrate the pleiotropic effect of dysregulated KCNK4 A. Ciolﬁ1, S. Pizzi1, A. Bruselles6, R. Person7, function and provide support to the hypothesis of a gating S.Richards7,M.T.Cho8,D.J.ClapsSepulveda1,S.Pro1, mechanism based on the lateral fenestrations of K2P R. Battini9, G. Zampino10, M. C. Digilio1, channels. G. Bocchinfuso2, B. Dallapiccola1, L. Stella2, F.C. Radio: None. P. Calligari: None. V. Caputo: C. K. Bauer11, M. Tartaglia1 None. M.L. Dentici: None. N. Falah: None. F. High: None. F. Pantaleoni: None. S. Barresi: None. A. Ciolﬁ: 1Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, None. S. Pizzi: None. A. Bruselles: None. R. Person: 2University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 3Sapienza None. S. Richards: None. M.T. Cho: None. D.J. Claps University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 4Nemours Children’s Sepulveda: None. S. Pro: None. R. Battini: None. G. Hospital, Orlando, FL, United States, 5Mass General Zampino: None. M.C. Digilio: None. G. Bocchinfuso: Hospital for Children, Massachusetts General Hospital, None. B. Dallapiccola: None. L. Stella: None. C.K. Boston, MA, United States, 6Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Bauer: None. M. Tartaglia: None. Rome, Italy, 7GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 8GeneDX, Gaithersburg, Italy, 9Stella Maris, IRCCS, P11.33A Calambrone, Italy, 10Fondazione Policlinico Universitario De novo mutation of CSNK2B encoding beta subunit of A. Gemelli, IRCCS, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, casein kinase 2 causes Filippi syndrome Rome, Italy, 11University Medical Center Hamburg- Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany M. Asif1,2,3, E. Kaygusuz1,2,3,4, F. Brancati5,6, C. Nienberg7, A. Nickelsen8, J. Jose7, J. Hochscherf9, Introduction: Aberrant activation or inhibition of potas- K. Nieﬁnd9, A. A. Noegel2, P. Nürnberg1,10, sium (K+) currents across the plasma membrane of cells M. S. Hussain1,2,3 hasbeencausallylinkedtoalteredvariousfunctionsinboth excitable and non-excitable cells. KCNK4 belongs to the 1Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of mechano-gated ion channels of the TRAAK/TREK sub- Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry I, familyoftwopore-domain(K2P)K+channels.WhileK2P Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, channels are well-known to contribute to the resting Germany, 3Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne membrane potential/cellular excitability, their involvement (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, in pathophysiological processes remains largely 4Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center uncharacterized. Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 5Medical Genetics, Materials and Methods: In the frame of the Undiag- Department of Life, Health and Environmental Science, nosedPatientsProgramattheOspedalePediatricoBambino University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy, 6Istituto Gesù, Rome, the exomes of two unrelated subjects with a Dermopatico dell’Immacolata (IDI) IRCCS, Rome, Italy, molecularly unexplained, clinically superimposable pheno- 7Institute of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, type were scanned to identify the underlying molecular Westphalian Wilhelms-University, Münster, Germany, cause. Patch-clamp analyses, co-expression experiments 87Institute of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, and molecular dynamics simulations were used to func- Westphalian Wilhelms-University, Münster, Germany, tionally characterized the genomic ﬁndings. 9Department of Chemistry, Institute of Biochemistry, Results: Two variants in KCNK4 were identiﬁed as the University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 103Center for only shared events in these two patients and a third was Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of found by using GeneMatcher. Patch-clamp analyses docu- Cologne, Cologne, Germany mented an impressive gain-of-function of the identiﬁed KCNK4 channel mutants. Co-expression experiments pro- Introduction: Filippi syndrome (FS) is a rare genetic vided evidence of the dominant behavior of the disease- condition characterized by short stature, microcephaly, causing mutations. Remarkably, molecular dynamics intellectual disability, syndactyly and distinctive facial simulations consistently indicated that mutations seal the features. A total of 33 patients from 25 families are lateral intramembrane fenestration proposed to negatively documented worldwide. Previously, we reported the ﬁrst control K+ ﬂow. gene (CKAP2L) involved in FS. Here, we ascertain aAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1505 mutation in CSNK2B as a likely cause of FS. CSNK2B using TALENs, where expression of the long isoform of encodes CK2β – thebeta subunitof casein kinase 2, which FLNA was speciﬁcally blocked. plays pivotal role in diverse cellular processes. Results: FLNA expression was detected in the muscular Material and Methods: To identify the causal variant, layer of the small intestine from early embryonic stages. trio whole-exome sequencing was performed. To further Moreover,FLNAmutationsassociatedwithCSBS,blocked exploretheconsequencesofthemutation,pulldownassays, expression of the long isoform of FLNA, but did not affect microscale thermophoresis (MST), immunoﬂuorescence the binding of FLNA to actin ﬁlaments. These mutations andRNA-seqtranscriptomeproﬁlingoflymphoblastoidcell also impaired contractility of human intestinal smooth lines (LCLs) were conducted. muscle cells in vitro. Finally, FLNA mutant ﬁsh were phe- Results: A pathogenic de novo mutation (CSNK2B: notypicallyindistinguishablefromwild-typeﬁsh,exceptfor c.94G>C; p.Asp32His) was identiﬁed in an Italian patient a signiﬁcant reduction in gut length (10%), and diminished diagnosedwith FS. The mutationcaused anup-regulation of intestinal motility. CSNK2B expression at transcript and protein level, which Conclusion: Our results bring new insights into CSBS resulted in impaired cross talk between α and β subunits of pathogenesis, by showing that the intestinal defects asso- CK2. The effects of mutation were also observed in two ciated with this disease, are likely caused by impaired crucial pathways; canonical Wnt signaling (CWS) and DNA smoothmusclecontraction, as a consequence ofthe loss of damageresponse(DDR).InCWS,animpairedinteractionof expression of the long isoform of FLNA. DVL3 with mutant CK2β and up-regulation as well as mis- M.M.Alves:None.D.Halim:None.Y.Zhao:None.S. localizationofβ-catenininmutantLCLswasfound.InDDR, Overkleeft:None.H.vanderLinde:None.A.S.Brooks: γH2AXwassubstantiallyincreasedinmutantLCLs.Finally, None. A.J. Burns: A. Employment (full or part-time); RNA-seq data conﬁrmed differential expression of proteins Modest; Takeda Pharmaceuticals. R.M.W. Hofstra: None. involved in the aforementioned pathways. Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that CSNK2B is a P11.35C novel candidate gene for Fillippi syndrome and the muta- Intragenic de novo frame shift deletion of two exon tion found in our patient causes the disorder by dysregu- conﬁrms a role for FNDC3B in human craniofacial lating CWS and DDR. development and possibly neuro-psychiatric M.Asif:None.E.Kaygusuz:None.F.Brancati:None. development C.Nienberg:None.A.Nickelsen:None.J.Jose:None.J. Hochscherf:None.K.Nieﬁnd:None.A.A.Noegel:None. I. K. Ystrøm1, R. Chistensen1, E. M. Vestergaard1, P. Nürnberg: None. M.S. Hussain: None. M. Sommerlund1, L. Graversen1, M. F. Boxill2, U. B. Jensen1 P11.34B Intestinal elongation and motility require the long 1Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, isoform of FLNA 2Regional Hospital Midt, Viborg, Denmark M.M.Alves,D.Halim,Y.Zhao,S.Overkleeft,H.vander Background: De novo 3q26.31 microdeletions has been Linde, A. S. Brooks, A. J. Burns, R. M. W. Hofstra reported in four cases with dysmorphic facial features. The overlapping deleted region was shown to only contain the Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, FNDC3B gene. The product of this gene, the ﬁbronectin Netherlands domain III-containing protein 3B (also known as factor for adipocyte differentiation-104 (FAD104)) has been identi- Introduction: Filamin A (FLNA) encodes a cytoskeletal ﬁed in mouse models as a positive regulator of adipocytes protein that regulates cell shape by cross-linking actin differentiation butalso asa negativeregulator of osteoblast ﬁlaments. Mutations in FLNA have been associated with a differentiation. Cranial changes have also been described wide spectrum of disorders, and more recently with an for FNDC3B knock-out mice. X–linked form of Congenital Short Bowel Syndrome Methods: Agilent 180K oligo array CGH analysis and (CSBS). These mutations are located between two methio- clinical evaluation including a neurodevelopmental nines present at the N-terminal of the protein, and seem to evaluation. only block expression of the long isoform of FLNA. Results: We report the ﬁrst case of a de novo intragenic MaterialandMethods:TounderstandtheroleofFLNA microdeletion involving two exons of the FNDC3B gene in intestinal development, expression studies at different resultinginanframeshiftdeletion.Thepatientisaboywith human embryonic stages, and several in vitro studies were subtle dysmorphic facial features and behavioral problems performed. A transgenic zebraﬁsh line was also generated1506 within the autism spectrum. The boy is 9 years old and we in the intron four. Considering only the pathogenic muta- present the developmental evaluation at different ages. tions,PTPN11mutationrateinourcohortwasaround16%. Conclusion: CNVs have contributed much to our Conclusions: Since the ﬁrst diagnosis of PTPN11 understanding of disease development and the underlying mutations in a Moroccan Noonan family, considerable mechanism. However, the role of individual genes in dis- efforts have been made to improve the genetic services easedevelopmentcanbedifﬁculttointerpretincaseswhere offered to patients. Although several challenges are still the deletion includes more genes or expands beyond the retarding the progress of NS genetic diagnosis in Morocco, boundaries of a single gene. Such deletions may include the NGS technologies that have recently been installed crucial elements that affects the 3 dimensional structure of seems to provide a promising future. the genome and therefore affects the function of several I. El Bouchikhi: None. I. Samri: None. F. Mouﬁd: genes in the region. This is the ﬁrst case with an intragenic None. L. Bouguenouch: None. K. Belhassan: None. M. exondeletioninFNDC3Bsupportingaroleforthisgenein Iraqui Houssaini: None. S. Atmani: None. K. both craniofacial development and neuro-psychiatric Ouldim: None. development. I.K. Ystrøm: None. R. Chistensen: None. E.M. Ves- P11.37A tergaard: None. M. Sommerlund: None. L. Graversen: Does my expertise still make a difference? A single- None. M.F. Boxill: None. U.B. Jensen: None. clinician’s experience of genomic sequencing in 120 pediatric patients P11.36D Genetic screening of Noonan syndrome in central north F. B. Bengur1, E. Kar1, K. Yararbas2, Y. Alanay3 of Morocco: achievements, challenges & perspectives 1Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University School of I.ElBouchikhi1,I.Samri1,F.Mouﬁd1,L.Bouguenouch1, Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Acibadem Mehmet Ali K. Belhassan1, M. Iraqui Houssaini2, S. Atmani3, Aydinlar University School of Medicine, Department of K. Ouldim1 MedicalGenetics,Istanbul,Turkey, 3AcibademMehmetAli Aydinlar University School of Medicine, Department of 1MedicalGeneticsandOncogeneticsLaboratory,HassanII Pediatrics, Pediatric Genetics Unit, Istanbul, Turkey University Hospital, Fez, Morocco, 2Faculty of Sciences & techniques, Sidi Mohamed ben Abdellah University, Fez, Introduction: Genomic sequencing (WES/WGS) provides Morocco, 3Medico-Surgical Unit of Cardio-Pediatrics diagnosis in 40% of unsolved cases in the pediatric Department, Hassan II University Hospital, Fez, Morocco population. Current clinical approach mandates integration ofphenotypicdatawithvariantanalysis.Thisstudyaimsto Introduction:Noonansyndromeisanautosomaldominant assess the diagnostic yield of NGS ordered by a single disorder with an incidence of 1/1000 - 2500 live births. clinician to a single laboratory. WhiletheveryﬁrstgenetictestinMoroccowascarriedout Materials and Methods: Data from 120 patients were in the nineties, the ﬁrst genetic diagnosis of Noonan retrospectively analyzed. Time interval was September syndrome (NS) was performed seven years ago. Thus, the 2015-January 2019. Tests were performed at Centogene, aim of this presentation is to expose results of molecular Germany. All patients were re-evaluated after test results. screening of Noonan syndrome in the central north of Variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS) were speciﬁcally Morocco, and discuss its challenges and perspectives. re-analyzed with evolving clinical story, current literature Material and methods: Thirty-one patients were and results ofother investigations.Diagnoses conﬁrmed by recruited in the medical genetics laboratory from different NGS (ACMG Class 1 or 2 variants) were coined as “sug- regions of central North of Morocco. After obtaining gestedmoleculardiagnosis”.Thoseestablishedafterclinical informed consents, genomic DNAs were extracted from re-analysis were considered “robust clinical diagnosis”. leucocytes. Then, all samples were screened for PTPN11 Results: Median age was 4.7 (0.1-15.1) years. M/F ratio mutations using PCR and direct sequencing. The obtained was 1.14. Time passed since ﬁrst symptom until a robust sequences were analyzed using NCBI bioinformatics tools. diagnosiswas2.8(0.1-14.3)years.Blendedphenotypewas Results: We have detected ﬁve pathogenic missense presentin8%.Table1summarizesthedata.Diagnosticrate mutations, one synonymous mutation and three novel of trio-based WES was signiﬁcantly higher than proband- intronic duplications. All variants were heterozygous. The only WGS, where both increased after clinical re- pathogenic mutations were clustered on exons three and evaluation. Suggested molecular diagnosis was sig- eight, while most of thenon-codingvariants were localised niﬁcantly higher in trio-based testing. Consanguinity,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1507 Numberofindexpatients Suggestedmolecular Robustgenetic Difference Nodiagnosis(%) diagnosis diagnosis betweenmolecular androbust diagnosis Positive(%) pvalue Positive(%) pvalue Percentage pvalue Testtype 0.008 0.779 0.054 Proband-onlyWES 13 7(54%) 10(77%) 23% 3(23%) Trio-basedWES 59 27(46%) 42(71%) 25% 17(29%) Proband-onlyWGS 41 10(24%) 28(68%) 44% 13(32%) Trio-basedWGS 7 6(86%) 6(86%) 0% 1(14%) Testtype(proband-onlyvstrio- 0.041 0.776 0.055 based) Proband-only 54 17(32%) 38(70%) 39% 16(30%) Trio-based 66 33(50%) 48(73%) 23% 18(27%) Consanguinity 0.647 0.717 0.891 No 89 36(40%) 63(71%) 30% 26(29%) Yes 31 14(45%) 23(74%) 29% 8(26%) Affectedsiblings 0.508 0.856 0.593 No 100 43(43%) 72(72%) 29% 28(28%) Yes 20 7(35%) 14(70%) 35% 6(30%) Dysmorphicfeatures 0.666 0.861 0.524 No 58 23(40%) 42(72%) 33% 16(28%) Yes 62 27(44%) 86(72%) 27% 18(28%) affected siblings and dysmorphic features did not have an (HSA), Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUP), effect on diagnostic rate. Porto, Portugal, 5Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar Conclusions:Ourresultsemphasizetheadditionalimpact Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro (CHTMAD, EPE), Vila Real, ofclinical expertise. Anexperiencedclinicianfamiliar with Portugal, 6Department of Human Genetics, Donders rare disease diagnoses is essential to determine whether a Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud variant is causative, contributory or unrelated. University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands F.B.Bengur:None.E.Kar:None.K.Yararbas:None. Y. Alanay: None. Thisstudyaimedtoidentifytheunderlingmoleculardefect in a family with two male adults showing a similar P11.38B phenotype consisting of distinct facial features, intellectual Flow-cytometric analysis conﬁrms the GPI biosynthesis disability with a complete lack of speech, hypotonia, in deﬁcitinafamilywithanatypicalphenotypeassociated combination with abnormal muscle, skin, urinary, and with a PIGA variant dentalﬁndings.Exome sequencing(ES)wascarriedouton oneofthepatients.Functionalvalidationwasperformedby N. Maia1,2, P. Jorge1,2, M. L. Queirós3,4,2, M. Martins5, ﬂow cytometry determining surface expression of GPI I. Marques1,2, R. Santos1,2, A. de Brouwer6, M. Lima3,4,2 (identiﬁedbyFLAER)andGPIanchoredproteins(GPI-AP) in white and red blood cells. ES identiﬁed a hemizygous 1Unidade de Genética Molecular, Centro de Genética variant in PIGA gene: NM_002641.3: c.232A>G; p. Médica Jacinto de Magalhães (CGMJM), Centro (Lys78Glu). Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed the presence of Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUP, EPE), Porto, the variant in both brothers and established that the mother Portugal, 2Unidade Multidisciplinar de Investigação is a carrier. Flow cytometry results showed that, despite Biomédica (UMIB), Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel normal peripheral blood counts, patient granulocytes/ Salazar (ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, neutrophils and monocytes were partially deﬁcient in cell 3Serviço de Hematologia Clínica, Hospital de Santo surface GPI and at least some GPI-AP (e.g. CD16 in António (HSA), Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto neutrophils and CD14 in monocytes), supporting the (CHUP), Porto, Portugal, 4Laboratório de Citometria, pathogenicity of the PIGA variant. In contrast, red blood ServiçodeHematologiaClínica,HospitaldeSantoAntónio cells had normal levels of GPI-AP (CD55 and CD59). The1508 p.(Lys78Glu) missense mutation results in a partial bp pseudo-exon corresponding to a non-coding region deﬁciency of GPI and GPI-AP affecting the myeloid, but located at the beginning of the long arm of chromosome X nottheerythroidcells.Notably,theaminoacidsubstitution (Xq11.1).Thepseudo-exonwasﬂankedbyacanonicalAG describedhereinleadstodiminishedexpressionofCD14on on its 5’side and contained two putative polyadenylation monocytes as well, representing the ﬁrst monocyte defect signals on its 3’side. Cytogenetic Microarray Analysis described in a germline PIGA case. Funding: UMIB is showed the presence of a 3.8 Mb gain of the Xq11.1q12 supported by National Funds through the FCT - Fundação chromosomal region. PCR ampliﬁcation of junction frag- paraaCiênciaeaTecnologiaintheframeworksoftheUID/ ments and FISH analysis conﬁrmed that the Xq11.1q12 Multi/0215/2016 project. Grants: NM, DEFI-CHUP, EPE duplicated region was inserted in F8 intron 25. PhD 2015 and PJ, research grant 145/2015. Conclusion: Exceptionally, this structural variant char- N. Maia: None. P. Jorge: None. M.L. Queirós: None. acterization was conducted from cDNA analysis. To our M. Martins: None. I. Marques: None. R. Santos: None. knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case of chromosomal rearran- A. de Brouwer: None. M. Lima: None. gement revealed through nanopore sequencing without previous cytogenetic study. This study highlights the use- P11.39C fulness of single molecule long-read sequencing technolo- Severe haemophilia A caused by an unbalanced gies for molecular diagnosis of genetic disorders especially chromosomal rearrangement identiﬁed using nanopore when structural variants are suspected. sequencing N. Chatron: None. C. Schluth-Bolard: None. M. Fré- tigny: None. A. Labalme: None. G. Vilchez: None. S. N. Chatron1,2, C. Schluth-Bolard1,2, M. Frétigny3, Castet: None. C. Négrier: None. D. Sanlaville: None. C. A. Labalme1, G. Vilchez4, S. Castet5, C. Négrier3,6, Vinciguerra: None. Y. Jourdy: None. D. Sanlaville1,2, C. Vinciguerra3,6, Y. Jourdy3,6 P11.40D 1Servicedegénétique,CentredeBiologieetPathologieEst, Modelling Hirschsprung disease with human induced Hospices Civils deLyon,Lyon,France, 2EquipeGENDEV, pluripotent stem cells: a preliminary study CRNL, INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR5282, UCBL1, Lyon, France, 3Service d’hématologie Biologique, Centre de A.Zada1,K.C.MacKenzie1,E.Brosens1,B.M.deGraaf1, Biologie et Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, T. van Gestel1, T. Wai1, P. Sloots2, R. M. H. Wijnen2, France, 4Cellule bioinformatique de la plateforme de M. M. Alves1, R. M. W. Hofstra1 séquençage NGS du CHU de Lyon, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Lyon, France, 5Service de traitement des 1DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusMedicalCenter, hémophiles, Hôpital Universitaire de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, Rotterdam,Netherlands,2DepartmentofPediatricSurgery, France, 6EA 4609 Hémostase et cancer, Université Claude Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France Introduction:Hirschsprungdisease(HSCR)isacongenital Background: No F8 genetic abnormality was detected in neuropathy characterized by the lack of the enteric nervous about 2% of severe haemophilia A patients using conven- system in the distal part of the colon. Mutations in more tional genetic approaches. In these patients, deep intronic than20geneshavebeenidentiﬁed.Onesinglegoodinvitro variation or F8 disrupting genomic rearrangement could be model to determine the functional consequences of the causal. different mutated genes is lacking. In this study we tested Objective: to characterize a Xq28 rearrangement dis- whether induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) could serve rupting F8 in a genetically unresolved severe haemophilia as such a model. A patient. Material and Methods: Functional assays of the EDN3, MaterialsandMethods:alargepanelofcomprehensive EDNRB, and ZEB2 variants identiﬁed, were performed by molecular techniques including long-range PCR, RNA overexpressing the corresponding variant in HEK293 cells. analysis, nanopore sequencing and cytogenetic analysis qRT-PCR and Western Blot were performed to investigate were used. the effect of these mutations on protein expression. In Results: Long-range PCR performed throughout F8 parallel, ﬁve iPSC lines obtained from ﬁbroblasts derived identiﬁed a non-ampliﬁable region in intron 25 indicating fromfourHSCRpatientscarryingthemutationstested,and the presence of a chromosomal rearrangement. F8 mRNA one individual control were differentiated into Enteric analysis including 3’Rapid Ampliﬁcation of cDNA Ends NeuralCrestCells(ENCCs)accordingapreviousdescribed and nanopore sequencing showed the presence of a F8 protocol.ENCCsdifferentiationwasevaluatedusingFACS fusiontranscriptinwhichF8exon26wasreplacedbya742 and immunostaining.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1509 Results: The EDN3 mutant showed lower expression in Results: The patient carried a 2.3 Mb chromosomal comparison to the wild type, while the variants in EDNRB deletion at9q31.2thatexcludesPALM2/AKAP2. Targeted and ZEB2 had the opposite effect. iPSC-derived ENCCs sequencing revealed no other causative mutations or novel were positive for the neuronal marker HNK1. However, rare variants in this proband. In our patient set, no likely patient derived iPSCs yield lower percentage of ENCCs causative mutations were found. than controls. Conclusions: We report a patient with a deletion at Conclusions: The mutations identiﬁed in RET, GFRA1, 9q31.2 yet intact PALM2 and AKAP2 genes. The roles of EDN3,EDNRBandZEB2showedsigniﬁcantdifferenceson PALM2andAKAP2inKallmannsyndromerequirefurther proteinexpression,andseemtoimpairiPSCsdifferentiation investigations. into ENCCs. However, further studies are needed to fully Grants: by the Academy of Finland, Foundation for characterize the effect of these mutations on the iPSC- Pediatric Research, Sigrid-Juselius Foundation, Novo Nor- derived ENCCs to show whether indeed iPSCs are the disk Foundation, Emil Aaltonen Foundation, University of perfect model system for HSCR. Helsinki,HelsinkiUniversityCentralHospital,Päivikkiand A. Zada: None. K.C. MacKenzie: None. E. Brosens: Sakari Sohlberg foundation None. B.M. de Graaf: None. T. van Gestel: None. T. A. Iivonen: None. K. Vaaralahti: None. V. Sidoroff: Wai: None. P. Sloots: None. R.M.H. Wijnen: None. M. None. T. Raivio: None. M. Alves: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: None. P11.42B P11.41A Overgrowth disorders with intellectual disability due to ScreeningforPALM2andAKAP2mutationsinasetof mutations in chromatin regulatory genes congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism patients: a case with a chromosomal deletion at 9q31, PALM2 and P. Lapunzina1, J. A. Tenorio1, P. Arias1, I. Dapía1, AKAP2 chromosomal region G. Gordo1, P. Alarcón2, S. García-Miñaur1, F. Santos- Simarro1, V. Martínez-Glez1, M. Palomares1, M. Solís1, A. Iivonen1, K. Vaaralahti1, V. Sidoroff2, T. Raivio1,3 S. Ramos1, The SOGRI consortium, V. L. Ruíz-Pérez3, J. Nevado1 1Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, Stem Cells and Metabolism Research Program, Helsinki, Finland, 2North 1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), Karelia Central Hospital, Joensuu, Finland, 3New Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico Universidad de Chile, Children’s Hospital, Pediatric Research Center, Helsinki Santiago,Chile,34-InstitutodeInvestigacionesBiomédicas University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland de Madrid (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain Introduction: The genetic cause of congenital hypogona- Introduction: Overgrowth disorders (OGS) encompass an dotropic hypogonadism (cHH) remains unidentiﬁed in half heterogeneous group on conditions in which the main of the patients. PALM2 encodes paralemmin-2, a para- features is an increase of weight, height and head lemmin family plasma membrane protein, and AKAP2 circumference or a combination of all, above +2SD for encodes an A-kinase anchor protein. PALM2 and AKAP2 age, sex and ethnicity. Most OGS has additional features are adjacent on chromosome 9 and can form fusion associated such as intellectual disability. Thus, the aim of transcripts. PALM2 has been implicated in cHH, since a this project was to perform a molecular screening of OGS deleterious PALM2 mutation has been found in one cHH withIDandtounderstandtheunderlyingphysiopathogenic patient. A chromosomal translocation causing monoallelic associated mechanisms. expression of AKAP2 has been found in another patient Material and Methods: Patients were selected retro- withKallmannsyndrome(cHHandanosmia/hyposmia)and spectively from the Spanish Overgrowth registry database bone anomalies. (SOGRI). Molecular analysis included Sanger sequencing, Materials and Methods: Targeted sequencing of MLPAandacustomNGSpanelof211genes(Overgrowth ANOS1, CHD7, FGF8, FGFR1, GNRHR, KISS1R, v2.3). Variantsannotationandprioritizationwas performed PROK2, PROKR2 and TACR3 and subsequent whole- with a custom in-house bioinformatic script. genomelinked-readsequencingwasperformedonapatient Results:AsubgroupofpatientswithOGS+IDcausedby with cHH, anosmia, learning difﬁculties and motoric pro- mutations in chromatin regulation genes was observed: (5) blems. We Sanger-sequenced the coding regions and exon- BRWD3 (X-linked mental retardation), (6)DNMT3A (Tat- intron boundaries of PALM2 and AKAP2 in 22 Finnish ton-Brown-Rahmansyndrome),(2)SETD2(Luscan-Lumish cHH patients who have no mutations in currently known syndrome),(3)EZH2(Weaversyndrome),(99)NSD1(Sotos cHH genes. syndrome).1510 Conclusions: There is a high relationship between interpretation of the variants were made according to patients who present some overgrowth disorders with ACMG guidelines. intellectual disability, with alterations in chromatin reg- Results: Four different pathogenic variants have been ulatory genes. These genes encode enzymes that possess found in ﬁve patients. Three of the four variants were histonemethyltransferaseactivity,andtherefore,arecritical classiﬁed as pathogenic and the missense variant as likely during the processes of human development. A correct pathogenic.AllvariantswerelocatedwithintheWD40and molecular and clinical characterization is essential to carry Bromodomain of the protein, and all was not previously out an adequate advice in patients with overgrowth that reported in the 14 patients with MRX93 already published. associate other clinical characteristics that overlap with Conclusions: MRX93 syndrome (XLID due to BRWD3 several entities. mutations) is a relatively new and uncommon condition Grants: FEDER-ISCIII Grant FIS PI15/01481 Unrest- mainly characterized by ID, overgrowth and facial dys- ricted Sotos syndrome spanish association funds morphism. We report ﬁve patients with novel variants in P. Lapunzina: None. J.A. Tenorio: None. P. Arias: BRWD3 and review all the published cases so far. MRX93 None. I. Dapía: None. G. Gordo: None. P. Alarcón: diagnosis should be suspected in male patients with these None. S. García-Miñaur: None. F. Santos-Simarro: featuresandgenetictestingishighlyrecommendedinorder None.V.Martínez-Glez:None.M.Palomares: None.M. to conﬁrm the diagnosis. Solís: None. S. Ramos: None. V.L. Ruíz-Pérez: None. J. Grants: FEDER-ISCIII Grant FIS PI15/01481 Nevado: None. P.Arias:None.J.A.Tenorio:None.P.Alarcón:None. F. Ramos: None. J. Campistol: None. S. Climent: None. P11.43C S.García-Miñaur:None.I.Dapía:None.A.Hernández: MRX93 syndrome (BRWD3 gene): ﬁve new patients None.J.Nevado:None.M.Solís:None.V.L.Ruíz-Pérez: with novel mutations None. P. Lapunzina: None. P. Arias1, J. A. Tenorio1, P. Alarcón2, F. Ramos3, P11.44D J. Campistol4, S. Climent5, S. García-Miñaur1, I. Dapía1, Interstitial 2q24.2q24.3 microdeletion: description of A. Hernández1, J. Nevado1, M. Solís1, V. L. Ruíz-Pérez6, two new cases and delineation of the critical minimal The SOGRI consortium, P. Lapunzina1 region. A new emerging syndrome? 1Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (INGEMM), E. Tassano, L. Pisciotta, S. Uccella, T. Giacomini, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico Universidad de Chile, M.Mancardi,M.Divizia,M.Lerone,A.Puliti,G.Gimelli, Santiago, Chile, 3University Hospital “Lozano Blesa”, D. Coviello, P. Ronchetto University of Zaragoza School of Medicine, Zaragoza, Spain, 4Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy 5Hospital General de Ontinyent, Valencia, Spain, 6Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de Madrid (CSIC-UAM), Interstitialdeletionsin2q24.2q24.3arerareeventsreported Madrid, Spain in literature and in publicly available databases associated mainlywithdevelopmentaldelayandintellectualdisability. Introduction: Overgrowth syndromes (OGS) comprise a Thebreakpointofthesedeletionsvaries,extendingfrom7.5 heterogeneousgroupofdisorderswhosemaincharacteristic Mb to 2.3 Mb. Although some clinical features seem to be is that either the weight, height, or head circumference are recurrent, these deletions are associated with a clinically above the 97th centile or 2-3 standard deviations (SD) heterogeneous phenotype. This is probably due to the above the mean for age and sex. Additional features are differentdeletionsizeandgenecontent,togeneticvariation usually associated with OGS. Genetic analysis in patients in the remaining allele and to the inﬂuence of the genetic with overlapping clinical features is essential, in order to background of the rest of the genoma. Here we report on distinguish between two or more similar conditions, and to two patients with similar clinical phenotype and interstitial provide appropriate genetic counseling. 2q24.2q24.3 deletions of different size overlapping a 1.7 Material and Methods: Patients were selected from the Mb region. In particular, patient 1 was characterized by “Spanish Overgrowth Registry” (SOGRI). All patients or hypotonia, growth retardation, and psychomotor develop- tutors gave informed consent. Two targeted custom gene mentalandlanguagedelay,dysmorphismsandhearingloss panels were designed (183genes, OGLYVAS V1.0) and with a de novo 3,7 Mb 2q24.2q24.3 deletion. Patient 2 (212genes, Overgrowth v2.3) respectively. After the ﬁlter- presentedwithhypotonia,psychomotorandlanguagedelay, ingoftherelevantvariantsandvalidation,classiﬁcationand stereotypesmovementsandepilepsywithadenovo2,9Mb 2q24.2q24.3 deletion. We identiﬁed the smallest region ofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1511 overlap encompassing eight genes and our attention was Introduction:Interstitialinvertedduplication8passociated particularly drawn to SLC4A10, DPP4, KCNH7. All these with a distal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 8 three genes are associated to neurological features. (invdupdel[8p]) is a complex and rare chromosomal SLC4A10 is highly expressed in the cerebral cortex and rearrangement. Intellectual disability (ID) is constant, and hippocampus, where it regulates the neuronal intracellular anomaliesofthecorpuscallosum(ACC)arepresentin80% pH. Abnormal levels of DPP4 were seen in patients with of (invdupdel[8p]) patients. Almost all reported patients neuropsychiatricdisorders.KCNH7encodesavoltagegated carry the same 8pter deletion, but the size and proximal potassium channels and is widely expressed in human breakpoint of the duplication are variable. Previous studies centralnervoussystem.Inconclusion,haploinsufﬁciencyof suggested a correlation between the size of the duplication these genes may be a good candidate for the main clinical andtheseverityofID.Moreover,Sajanetal.(2013)deﬁned features of this emerging syndrome. a minimal duplicated critical region of 10.7 Mb associated E.Tassano:None.L.Pisciotta:None.S.Uccella:None. with ACC. However, no gene of ACC has yet been clearly T. Giacomini: None. M. Mancardi: None. M. Divizia: identiﬁed in this region. In order to reﬁne genotype- None. M. Lerone: None. A. Puliti: None. G. Gimelli: phenotype correlation in this complex rearrangement, we None. D. Coviello: None. P. Ronchetto: None. report clinical and chromosomal data from 29 new patients with invdupdel[8p]. P11.45A PatientsandMethod:3fetusand26patients(meanage: Inversion-duplication-deletion of chromosome 8p: 9.7 years) were included. CGH/SNP array were performed genotype-phenotype correlation and determination of a for all of them. new minimal duplicated region involved in ACC in 29 Results:Alllivingpatients(n=26/26)haddevelopmental patients delay and ID (n= 5/22 mild and n=17/22 moderate to severe). 16/22 patients had ACC (4 complete agenesis, 7 R. Vibert1, B. Keren2,3, S. Chantot-Bastaraud4, partial agenesis, and 5 dysplasia), associated with other C. Mignot1,3, N. Chatron5, M. Portnoï4, M. Nouguès6, cerebral abnormalities in 11 patients. Mean size of the M. Moutard6, A. Faudet1,3, S. Whalen1, D. Haye1, deletion was 6.9 Mb and duplication was 19.2 Mb. Dis- C. Pebrel-Richard7, C. Missirian8, C. Vincent-Delorme9, cussion - Conclusion: As expected, the severity of ID is O. Boute9, J. Andrieux10, F. Devillard11, C. Coutton11, correlatedwiththesizeoftheduplication.Ourstudyreﬁnes S. Taviaux12, M. Perez13, C. Colson14, D. Sanlaville5, theminimalduplicatedcriticalregionforACCtoa1.7Mb- J. Siffroi4, D. Héron1,3, S. Heide1,3 long region spanning one gene only, which is a new can- didate gene for ACC. 1APHP, Department of Genetics, Armand-Trousseau and R. Vibert: None. B. Keren: None. S. Chantot-Bastar- Pitié Salpêtrière Hospitals, Paris, France, 2APHP, Service aud: None. C. Mignot: None. N. Chatron: None. M. of Developmental Genetics, Department of Genetics, Pitié- Portnoï: None. M. Nouguès: None. M. Moutard: None. Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 3Reference Center for A. Faudet: None. S. Whalen: None. D. Haye: None. C. Intellectual disability of Rare Causes, Paris, France, Pebrel-Richard: None. C. Missirian: None. C. Vincent- 4APHP, Department of Cytogenetics, Armand Trousseau Delorme: None. O. Boute: None. J. Andrieux: None. F. Hospital, Paris, France, 5Service of Genetic, Hospices Devillard: None. C. Coutton: None. S. Taviaux: None. Civils of Lyon, Bron, France, 6APHP, Service of pediatric M.Perez:None.C.Colson:None.D.Sanlaville:None.J. neurology, Armand Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France, Siffroi: None. D. Héron: None. S. Heide: None. 7Service of Cytogenetic, Clermont-Ferrand’s University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 8APHM, Laboratory P11.46B of Genetic, Timone enfants’ Hospital, Marseille, France, KMT2A mutations (Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome): a 9Service of Clinical Genetic, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, new phenotype of corpus callosum agenesis without Lille, France, 10Institute of Medical Genetics, Jeanne de intellectual disability Flandre Hospital, Lille, France, 11Service of Genetic, Grenoble’s University Hospital, Grenoble, France, E. Marchionni1, S. Heide1, C. Depienne2, A. Rastetter2, 12Laboratory of Genetic, Department of medical genetics, C. Nava2, J. Buratti1, M. Spentchian1, M. L. Moutard3, Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France, C. Mignot1, B. Keren1, S. Valence3, D. Héron1 13Department of Medical Genetics, Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France, 14Service of Clinical 1APHP, Département de Génétique, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Genetic, Caen’s University Hospital, Caen, France CRMR Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France, 2ICM, UPMC Inserm UMR S975/CNRS UMR1512 7225,Paris,France,3APHP,HôpitalTrousseau,Servicede 1Centre de Génétique et Centre de référence « Anomalies Neurologie Pédiatrique, Paris, France du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs », Hôpital d’Enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Introduction: KMT2A mutations are responsible for Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique chromosomique Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome (WDSTS), a rare autosomal etmoléculaire,UFInnovationendiagnosticgénomiquedes dominant disorder characterized by dysmorphic features, maladies rares, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, hypertrichosis,shortstature,andintellectualdisability(ID). Dijon, France, 3UMR-Inserm 1231 GAD team, Génétique Corpus callosum anomalies have been described in 16% of desAnomaliesdudéveloppement,UniversitédeBourgogne patients.Wereporthere2unrelatedpatientswithadenovo Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 4Institute of Cancer and KMT2A heterozygous variant presenting with isolated GenomicSciences,UniversityofBirmingham,Birmingham, prenatal agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC), and a United Kingdom, 5West Midlands Regional Genetics normal psychomotor development. Patients: Patient 1: Service and Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham partial ACC was diagnosed prenatally. At 4 years and Women’sandChildren’sHospitalsNHSFoundationTrust, 6monthsofage,hehadnormalpsychomotordevelopment, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Service de génétique whereas attention and praxic disorders were observed, médicale - Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg - Institut especially in ﬁne motor skills. The WPPSI-III at 4 years ½ de Génétique Médicale d'Alsace, Strasbourg, France, showedaheterogenousproﬁle.Inaddition,hehadpostnatal 7Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University weight growth retardation (-2SD) and dysmorphic features. Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 8Department of Medical Genetics, Patient 2: ACC was diagnosed prenatally. At the age of 8 Telemark Hospital Trust, Skien, Norway, 9West Midlands years, he had normal neurodevelopment. WPPSI-IV Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birmingham Women’s and performed at 5 years was in a normal range, with a Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United heterogenous proﬁle. Mild dysmorphic features were Kingdom,10Inserm–UBUMR1231GAD«Génétiquedes observed. Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, Methods: Trio-based Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) France, 11Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique was performed in the 2 male patients and their non- des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon consanguineous and unaffected parents. Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 12Service de Dermatologie, Results: Patient 1: WES analysis detected a novel de CHU de Dijon, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France novo heterozygous missense variant in KMT2A (c.4256G>A; p.Gly1419Asp), predicted as probably Introduction: Kosaki overgrowth syndrome (KOGS), ﬁrst damaging by all prediction tools. Patient 2: WES analysis described in 2015, is a rare overgrowth disorder caused by detected a de novo heterozygous truncating variant in de novo pathogenic variants in the PDGFRB gene. Only 5 KMT2A (c.1539del; p.Ile515Phefs*52). paediatric cases have been reported in the literature. Conclusions: These two observations expand the Material and Methods: We present 3 cases of KOGS WDSTS phenotypic spectrum, since ID may be absent. living in Europe including the ﬁrst adult patient, gathered Thus, this syndrome might be considered in cases of iso- through a collaboration within the ERN ITHACA network. lated corpus callosum anomalies, associated with normal Results:TheFrenchpatient,aged55,hasinthepastbeen development. reported as a typical case of Sphritzen-Goldberg syndrome E. Marchionni: None. S. Heide: None. C. Depienne: (Stoll, Clin Dysmorphol 2012). Analysis of SKI was None. A. Rastetter: None. C. Nava: None. J. Buratti: negative, and WES identiﬁed the recurrent PDGFRB None. M. Spentchian: None. M.L. Moutard: None. C. c.1751C>Gvariant.The Englishpatient,aged6,diagnosed Mignot: None. B. Keren: None. S. Valence: None. D. by NGS panel for syndromic overgrowth (de novo Héron: None. PDGFRB c.1751C>G variant), had tall stature, craniosy- nostosis, facial features, progressive contractures and P11.47C developmental delay. The Norwegian patient, aged 9, Expansion of the phenotype of Kosaki overgrowth diagnosedbyWES(denovoPDGFRBc.1696T>Cvariant) syndrome, and description of the long-term outcome in had tall stature, severe scoliosis, facial features and devel- the oldest case opmental delay. Long-term outcome in the oldest patient revealed an evolving phenotype with persistent tall stature B. Chalot1,2,3, A. Foster4,5, E. Schaeffer6, C. Rustad7, despite severe scoliosis not accessible to surgery (188 cm), K.Tveten8,T.Cole5,C.Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3,J.Woodley9, extremely fragile skin with diffuse erythrosis, dystrophic A. Bruel10,11, R. Keelagher9, C. Philippe10,11, scars due to multiple injuries, nail dystrophy, progressive T. Antoniadi9, P. Vabres12, D. Lim5, L. Faivre1,2,3 camptodactyly, early osteoporosis, basilar artery aneurysm complicated by a stroke, and severe ocular impairment dueAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1513 to complicated surgeries for pterygions. The patient had 12Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies rares et normal intelligence, with no cognitive decline nor cerebral Médecine Personnalisée, CHRU de Montpellier, calciﬁcations. Montpellier, France, 13Unité de Génétique Médicale et Conclusion: Genotype-ﬁrst approach is a powerful Cytogénétique,CHUdeNîmes,Nîmes,France,14Servicede approach to reach the diagnosis of ultra-rare syndromes. Dermatologie, CHU de Nice, Nice, France, 15Département Indeed, the clinical diagnosis was not raised before NGS, deGénétiqueMédicale, CHUdeNice -Hôpital del'Archet due to the lack of knowledge of this entity. II, Nice, France, 16Pôle Enfants, CHU de la Réunion - B. Chalot: None. A. Foster: None. E. Schaeffer: None. Hôpital Félix Guyon, Saint Denis, France, 17Centre C. Rustad: None. K. Tveten: None. T. Cole: None. C. d'Activité Génétique Clinique et Oncogénétique, Centre Thauvin-Robinet: None. J. Woodley: None. A. Bruel: Hospitalier Universitaire d'Amiens, Amiens, France, None. R. Keelagher: None. C. Philippe: None. T. Anto- 18ServicedeDermatologie,CHUdeNancy,Nancy,France, niadi: None. P. Vabres: None. D. Lim: None. L. 19Centre d'Investigation Clinique INSERM 1432, Centre Faivre: None. Hospitalier Universitaire de Dijon, Dijon, France, 20Genetics Department, Hospices Civils de Lyon and P11.49A GENDEV team, Lyon Neuroscience Research Centre, Further delineation of the phenotypic spectrum of INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, Claude Bernard Lyon MCAP in a French cohort of 31 patients 1 University, Lyon, France, 21Service de Dermatologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France A. Garde1,2, L. Guibaud3, A. Goldenberg4, F. Petit5, R. Dard6, J. Mazereeuw-Hautier7, D. Lacombe8, Introduction:MCAPsyndrome(megalencephaly-capillary F. Morice-Picard8, A. Toutain9, S. Arpin9, O. Boccara10, malformation syndrome) is a genetic disorder that results R. Touraine11, P. Blanchet12, C. Coubes12, M. Willems12, from somatic, mosaic, gain of function mutations of the L. Pinson12, P. Khau Van Kien13, C. Chiaverini14, PI3KCA gene, and belongs to the spectrum of PIK3CA- F. Giuliano15, J. Alessandri16, M. Mathieu-Dramart17, related overgrowth spectrum (PROS). A. Bursztejn18, E. Gautier1, M. Yousﬁ1, M. Luu19, Material and Methods: Based on a national collabora- M. Bardou19, A. Sorlin1,2, C. Philippe2, P. Edery20, tion, we described the clinical features of 31 patients with M. Rossi20, V. Carmignac2, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, MCAP syndrome carrying mosaic PIK3CA pathogenic P. Vabres21,2, L. Faivre1,2 variants.Theobjectiveofthisstudywastobetterdeﬁnethe clinical features of patients with MCAP syndrome in con- 1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et nection with imaging features, to improve diagnosis and Syndromes Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD - CHU de management. Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique Results:Themosaicratewasbetween0%and20%inthe des Anomalies du Développement, Université de blood, between 1% and 47% in the skin, and between 4% Bourgogne,Dijon,France,3Serviced'ImageriePédiatrique and 34% in the saliva. Macrocephaly had been observed in et Foetale, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Lyon and Claude 21/28patients(75%)atbirth,andin26/28patients(93%)at Bernard University, Lyon, France, 4Service de Génétique, time of the diagnosis. Hemihypertrophy was noticed in 22 CHU de Rouen et Inserm U1079, Université de Rouen, patients (71%). Intellectual disability was present in 15 Centre Normand de Génomique Médicale et Médecine patients (50%), ranging from mild to severe, 4 patients had Personnalisée, Rouen, France, 5Service de Génétique learning disabilities (12%). Six patients suffered from sei- Clinique, CHU Lille, Lille, France, 6Département de zures(20%).Cerebralmalformationswerereportedin23/26 Génétique, Cytogénétique et Biologie de la Reproduction, patients: ventriculomegaly (65%), megalencephaly (53%), CHI Poissy St Germain-en-Laye, St Germain-en-Laye, cerebellar tonsilla ectopia (35%), polymicrogyria (15%). France, 7Centre de Référence des Maladies Rares de la Correlations between neurogognitive development and Peau, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 8INSERM cerebral malformations were made. All patients had cuta- U1211, Université de Bordeaux, Service de Génétique neous vascular malformation: angioma (53%), cutis mar- Médicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 9Service morata (29%), capillary malformations (26%). Internal de Génétique Clinique, CHRU de Tours, Tours, France, vascular anomalies are reported on 5 patients (16%). Limb 10Department of Dermatology and Reference Center for and distal anomalies were also observed. Genodermatoses and Rare Skin Diseases (MAGEC), Conclusion: This study conﬁrms the large clinical het- Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut erogeneity in MCAP, in particular in the neurocognitive Imagine, Hôpital Universitaire Necker-Enfants Malades, development. This point is of importance for determining Paris, France, 11Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de the outcome measures for future therapeutic trials. Saint-Etienne, Saint-Priest-en-Jarez, France,1514 A. Garde: None. L. Guibaud: None. A. Goldenberg: additional seven who have not been reported in the litera- None. F. Petit: None. R. Dard: None. J. Mazereeuw- ture to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. Hautier: None. D. Lacombe: None. F. Morice-Picard: Improved understanding of the hallmark features, None. A. Toutain: None. S. Arpin: None. O. Boccara: includingthoseleadingtomorbidityandmortality,inMIC- None.R.Touraine:None.P.Blanchet:None.C.Coubes: CAP syndrome will facilitate early diagnosis, inform man- None.M.Willems:None.L.Pinson:None.P.KhauVan agement strategies and provide prognostic information. Kien: None. C. Chiaverini: None. F. Giuliano: None. J. J.L. Zambonin: None. G. Mirzaa: None. M. Alessandri: None. M. Mathieu-Dramart: None. A. Carter: None. Bursztejn:None.E.Gautier:None.M.Yousﬁ:None.M. Luu: None. M. Bardou: None. A. Sorlin: None. C. Phi- P11.51C lippe: None. P. Edery: None. M. Rossi: None. V. Car- DominantnegativeeffectofACTG2mutationsinﬂuence mignac: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. P. Vabres: TGF-beta signaling in MMIHS None. L. Faivre: None. Y. Zhao1,2, J. Burger1,3, Y. Gao2, R. M. W. Hofstra1,4, P11.50B M. M. Alves1 InvestigatingtheClinicalFeaturesLeadingtoMorbidity and Mortality in Microcephaly-Capillary Malformation 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Syndrome Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatric Surgery, The Second Afﬁliated Hospital of Xi׳an J. L. Zambonin1, G. Mirzaa2, M. Carter1 JiaotongUniversity,Xi׳an,Shaanxi,China,3Departmentof Molecular Genetics, Oncode Institute, Erasmus University 1Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontrio, Ottawa, ON, Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Birth Defects Canada,2SeattleChildren'sResearchInstitute,Seattle,WA, Research Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United States United Kingdom Microcephaly-capillary malformation syndrome (MIC- Introduction: Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoper- CAP) is a rare neurocutaneous disorder characterized by istalsis syndrome (MMIHS) is a rare inherited disorder congenital microcephaly, multiple capillary malformations, characterized by bladder hypocontractility, and intestinal hypoplastic distal phalanges, infantile-onset intractable obstruction.Mutationsinﬁvegeneshavebeenidentiﬁedas seizures, profound neurologic impairment and abnormal its cause, but the majority of cases are caused by de novo neuroimaging ﬁndings including a diffusely simpliﬁed heterozygous mutations in the γ-smooth muscle actin gene cortical gyral pattern with increased extra-axial space. It is (ACTG2). ACTG2 encodes for an actin isoform speciﬁcally causedbybiallelicpathogenicvariantsintheSTAMBPgene expressed in the intestinal and urogenital tracts. Previous and has been reported in only 14 individuals worldwide, to studies by us and others, have shown that mutated ACTG2 date.Giventherarity,thefullphenotypicspectrumremains disrupt actin polymerization and result in reduced cellular poorly understood with limited natural history and prog- contractility. However, the mechanisms underlying these nosisinformation,aswellasguidelines onoptimalmedical effects are still unknown. management. Additionally, there is one reported individual Materials and Methods: Wild-type and mutant ACTG2 with a mild phenotype suggesting variable severity, with proteinsfusedtoaGFPandmCherrytagrespectively,were insufﬁcient data to deﬁne genotype-phenotype correlations. stably expressed in U2OS cells and human intestinal Here we present a case series of patients with MIC-CAP smooth muscle cells. Transfected cells were analyzed by obtainedthroughaprospectivewell-designedonlinesurvey immunoﬂuorescence, actin polymerization and cellular oftheirprimarycaregiversandphysicians.Inthisstudy,we contractilityassays.InParallel,ﬁbroblastsderivedfromtwo describethemostfrequentlyreportedfeatures,management MMIHS patients carrying ACTG2 mutations, and three and impact on disease course. We speciﬁcally focused on controls have been used for trans-differentiation assays. hallmark features leading to morbidity and decreased life- Immunoﬂuorescence, qRT-PCR, and a TGF-beta reporter span including seizures, neurologic impairment and assay were performed, to investigate the effect of ACTG2 respiratory insufﬁciency. We report the various therapies mutations on cellular differentiation. usedbyaffectedindividualsandperceivedbeneﬁtsofthese Results: Actin polymerization, and cellular contractility therapies including anti-epileptics medications. Addition- were signiﬁcantly impaired when the mutant ACTG2 pro- ally, we describe the spectrum of severity of other major tein is expressed, alone or in combination with the wild- features in previously reported individuals, including an type. Furthermore, TGF-beta is up-regulated in ﬁbroblasts derived from MMIHS patients when compared to controls.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1515 Conclusion:ACTG2mutationsleadtoadysregulationof D.Lehalle7,S.Nambot7,N.Jean-Marçais7,N.Houcinat7, the TGF-beta pathway, and reduce cellular contractility by S. Moutton1,7, N. Marle8, L. Lambert9, P. Jonveaux10, exerting a dominant negative effect in MMIHS. B. Foliguet11, J. Mazutti11, D. Gaillard12, E. Alanio12, Y. Zhao: None. J. Burger: None. Y. Gao: None. R.M. C. Poirisier13, A. Lebre14, M. Aubert-Lenoir15, F. Arbez- W. Hofstra: None. M.M. Alves: None. Gindre16, S. Odent17, C. Quelin17,18, P. Loget18, M. Fradin17, M. Willems19, N. Bigi20, M. Perez20, P11.52D S. Blesson21, C. Francannet22, A. Beaufrere23, 22q11.2 deletion as a genetic model for multimorbidity S. Patrier24, A. Guerrot25, A. Goldenberg25, N. Laurent26, in young adults C. Philippe1,2, F. Tran Mau-Them1,27, J. Thevenon1,7, L. Faivre1,7, C. Thauvin1,7, A. Vitobello1,7 A. S. Bassett, S. L. Malecki 1Inserm –UBUMR 1231GAD «GénétiquedesAnomalies University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 2Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique des Background: Multimorbidity is increasing in younger maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, adults but is understudied in the general population. France, 3Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) could act as a Strasbourg, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, genetic model of multimorbidity in young to middle-aged 4Service de Fœtopathologie, CHU de Strasbourg, Hôpital adults. de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 5Laboratoire de Methods: Using Anatomic Therapeutic Classiﬁcation cytogénétique constitutionnelle et prénatale, CHU de (ATC) and setting 5 or more concurrent prescription med- Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6Département Médecine icationsasaproxyformultimorbidity,wecompareddataon translationnelle et neurogénétique, Institut de génétique et 264 adults with 22q11.2DS (median age 27.8, range 17.3- de biologie moléculaire et cellulaire, Strasbourg, France, 68.3 years) to that for a community-based general popula- 7Centre de Référence « Anomalies du Développement et tion sample in Canada (n=25,287). We used logistic syndromes malformatifs », Centre de Génétique, FHU- regressiontoexaminepossiblepredictorsofmultimorbidity TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, in 22q11.2DS. 8Laboratoire de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, Results: Multimorbidity in 22q11.2DS in the 25-44 year CHU de Dijon, Dijon,France, 9UFde génétique médicale, agegroup(34.7%)wassigniﬁcantlymoreprevalentthanin Maternité régionale, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, the general population, both for the same age group (2.9%, 10Laboratoire de génétique médicale, CHU de Nancy, prevalenceratio,PR=11.9)andcomparedtothoseaged45- Nancy, France, 11Laboratoire de Biologie de la 64 years (16.4%, PR=2.1). Neuropsychiatric and endocri- Reproduction et du Développement Maternité de Nancy, nological ATC medication classes predominated. Within Nancy, France, 12Service de foetopathologie, CHU de 22q11.2DS, older age and psychotic illness, but not sex, Reims, Reims, France, 13Laboratoire de cytogénétique, major congenital heart disease or intellectual disability, CHU de Reims, Reims, France, 14Service de Génétique et were signiﬁcant predictors of multimorbidity. Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU de Reims, Reims, Conclusion: The results indicate that adults with France, 15Service d’imagerie médicale, CHU de Besançon, 22q11.2DS have a signiﬁcant burden of illness with levels Besançon, France, 16Service de fœtopathologie, CHU de of multimorbidity comparable to those of the general Besançon, Besançon, France, 17Service de génétique population several decades older. In younger adults with clinique, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, 18Service de multimorbidity, certain disease patterns may also help fœtopathologie,CHUdeRennes,Rennes,France, 19Equipe identify genetic disorders in “big data”. Maladies Génétiques de l'Enfant et de l'Adulte, CHU de A.S. Bassett: None. S.L. Malecki: None. Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 20. Service de fœtopathologie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, P11.53A 21Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Transversal cohort analysis with data aggregation of Tours, Tour, France, 22Service de génétique médicale, singleton exome sequencing signiﬁcantly increases the CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, diagnosticyieldforthediagnosisoffetuseswithmultiple 23Service de fœtopathologie, CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, congenital abnormalities Clermont-Ferrand, France, 24Service de fœtopathologie, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 25Service de génétique A. Bruel1,2, M. Lefebvre1, N. Bourgon1, Y. Duffourd1, clinique, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 26Service de M. Assoum1, P. Kuentz1, E. Schaefer3, S. El Chehadeh3, fœtopathologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 27Unité M. Antal4, V. Kremer5, F. Girard-Lemaire5, J. Mandel6, Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique des maladies1516 rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, P11.54B France New recurrent 2q12.2q12.3 microdeletion involving ST6GAL2 gene in a boy with neurological phenotype Exome sequencing (ES) harbors a diagnostic yield in fetuses with multiple congenital abnormalities (MCA) E. Tassano, T. Giacomini, S. Uccella, M. Celle, (25%) higher than any other diagnostic tool in fetal M. Malacarne, G. Gimelli, D. Coviello, P. Ronchetto pathology but lower than in live birth individuals with malformations (30-35%). Most fetuses remaining undiag- Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy nosed deprive couples of obtaining precise genetic counseling and molecular diagnosis in future pregnancies. Recurrent microdeletion and microduplication syndromes This limited yield is explained by fetal wide phenotypic are among the most common causes of human neurodeve- variability and difﬁculties to deﬁne precise phenotypes. lopmental and psychiatric disorders. These reciprocal Here,weaimedtoassessthecontributionofEStodiagnose genomicdisordersoftenresultfromnon-allelichomologous MCA fetuses and also identify new genes. We performed recombination (NAHR) between near-identical segmental singleton ES in 95 MCA fetuses undiagnosed after current duplications.Copynumberchangesmediatedbysegmental investigations. Fetal DNA quantity/quality permitted ES in duplications may be either pathogenic or may exist as only 95/151 fetuses. The strategy combined usual indivi- benign variants in the human population. dual ES analysis and an original cohort analysis based on However, almost all pathogenic CNVs are characterized bioinformatics scores and variant databases independently by a range of phenotypic outcomes (variable expressivity) of fetal phenotype. We selected variants on the following and by unaffected family members who carry the same criteria: truncating with a signiﬁcant probability of loss-of- CNV (incomplete penetrance). Here we report a boy with function intolerance (pLI=0.9-1), reported in denovo-db mild intellectual disability, speech delay, and hypotonia database,reported(likely)pathogenicinClinVARdatabase, presenting a 1.56 Mb interstitial deletion at 2q12.2-12.3 or with probably recessive mode of inheritance. Usual inherited from his healthy father. The microdeletion individual ES identiﬁed pathogenic or likely pathogenic includes three OMIM genes, of which ST6GAL2, in our variants in 21/95 fetuses (22%). The cohort analysis opinion, is the most interesting. This gene encodes a beta- identiﬁed not only these 21 variants but also additional galactoside alpha-2,6-sialyltransferase expressed in brain pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 3/95 fetuses and its transcription could be potentially activated for spe- (4%), increasing the diagnostic yield from 22% to 25%. 9 ciﬁc neuronal functions. In the literature four cases have candidate genes were suspected in 8/95 fetuses (8%) been reported with microdeletions/microduplications com- remaining to be replicated. In conclusion, this original prising ST6GAL2 gene and associated with neurological strategyincreasedthediagnosticyieldinafetalcohortwith diseases. In DECIPHER database seventeen individuals atypical or non-described phenotype and could so be have been identiﬁed with deletions similar to that of our applied to other heterogeneous cohorts with developmental case and neurological disease as intellectual disability, abnormalities. delayed speech, autism. Ten patients inherited the deletion A. Bruel: None. M. Lefebvre: None. N. Bourgon: from an apparently unaffected parent. It is interesting to None.Y.Duffourd:None.M.Assoum:None.P.Kuentz: note that all these microdeletions are very similar in None. E. Schaefer: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. M. extension and are possibly mediated by NAHR. Antal: None. V. Kremer: None. F. Girard-Lemaire: Inconclusion,wedescribeanewrecurrentmicrodeletion None. J. Mandel: None. D. Lehalle: None. S. Nambot: 2q12.2-12.3containingtheST6GAL2gene,whichmaybea None. N. Jean-Marçais: None. N. Houcinat: None. S. signiﬁcant and independent risk factor for neurological Moutton: None. N. Marle: None. L. Lambert: None. P. diseases acting in association with other factors to modify Jonveaux:None.B.Foliguet:None.J.Mazutti:None.D. neurological phenotypes. Gaillard: None. E. Alanio: None. C. Poirisier: None. A. E. Tassano: None. T. Giacomini: None. S. Uccella: Lebre: None. M. Aubert-Lenoir: None. F. Arbez- None. M. Celle: None. M. Malacarne: None. G. Gimelli: Gindre: None. S. Odent: None. C. Quelin: None. P. None. D. Coviello: None. P. Ronchetto: None. Loget: None. M. Fradin: None. M. Willems: None. N. Bigi: None. M. Perez: None. S. Blesson: None. C. Fran- P11.55C cannet: None. A. Beaufrere: None. S. Patrier: None. A. Expanding the LZTR1-RASopathy association: Three Guerrot:None.A.Goldenberg:None.N.Laurent:None. new cases of Noonan Syndrome with LZTR1 mutations C. Philippe: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. J. The- venon: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin: None. A. P. Fernández Alvarez1, I. Valenzuela Palafoll1, F. López Vitobello: None. Grondona1, M. Masas Castro1, L. Iranzo Nuez1,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1517 I. Paramonov1, L. Blasco Perez1, E. García-Arumi1,2, D. Lehalle13, S. M. Amudhavalli14, E. Repnikova15, E. Tizzano1,2 C. Saunders15, I. Thiffault15, I. Thiffault15, I. Saadi16, D. Li17, H. Hakonarson17, Y. Vial1, E. Zackai9, 1Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics. Hospital P. Callier13, S. Drunat1, E. E. Bhoj9 Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Biomedical Network Research Centre on RareDiseases (CIBERER), 1Department ofGenetics,APHP-Robert DEBREUniversity Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain Hospital, Sorbonne Paris-Cité University, and INSERM UMR 1141, PARIS, France, 2Department of Genetics, Sincetheﬁrstpublicationin2014,LZTR1missensegainof PARIS, France, 3Bretonneau University Hospital, Tours, function variants have been associated with Noonan France, 4Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, and Syndrome (NS) in both dominant and recessive pattern, UMR CNRS 6015 INSERM 1083, University Hospital, withthedominantvariantsclusteringonthedifferentKelch Angers, France, 5Department of Genetics, Aalborg motifsoftheprotein.Herewepresent3newindexcasesof University Hospital,, aalborg, Denmark, 6Department of Noonan syndrome with variants in LZTR1. Two of them Pathology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, have novel unreported variants. Case1. A12 year oldboy, Denmark, 7Department of GynObs, Aalborg University with prenatal polyhydramnios, unilateral ptosis, relative Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 8Dr Ersin Arslan Research macrocephaly, short stature (p10), cryptorchidism and and Training Hospital, Department Of Medical Genetics, pulmonaryvalve stenosis. He also presented mild language Gaziantep, Turkey, 9Department of Genetics, Children´s delay. Genetic testing identiﬁed a heterozygous missense Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, variant c.848G>A p.(Arg283Gln) located on the Kelch4 10Genetics Department, Research Unit-Genetics motif previously reported in another NS individual (Umeki Department, Institute of Ophthalmology, Conde de et al. 2018). Case 2. A 42 year old man with dysmorphic Valenciana, Mexico City, Mexico, 11Genetics Department, features of NS, short stature (p3), cryptorchidism, bicuspid Research Unit-Genetics Department, Institute of aortic valve and visual loss. Genetic testing identiﬁed a Ophthalmology, Conde de Valenciana, Mexico City, heterozygousmissensenewvariantc.289C>T(.(Arg97Trp) Mexico, 12Clinical Genetics Department, Coimbra in the Kelch1 motif. The same variant was detected in his Paediatric Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal, 13Children 69 year old mother who shared dysmorphic features and University Hospital, Dijon, France, 14Division of Clinical short stature. Case 3. A 22 year old woman with neonatal Genetics, Children’s Mercy Hospital, University of diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in context of Missouri Kansas City, School of Medicine, Kansas City, multiple angiomas. She also presented short stature (p3), MO, United States, 15Center for Pediatric Genomic pectus carinatum, scoliosis and dysmoprhic facial features Medicine, Department of Pathology and Laboratory resembling Noonan syndrome. She is heterozygous for the Medicine, Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, new variant c.905C>T p.(Ala302Glu) located on the Kelch United States, 16Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, 5 motif. These 3 new cases in patients with clinical University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, MO, diagnosis of NS and variants in LZTR1 further help to United States, 17Center for Applied Genomics, Children´s delineate the phenotype of NS patients, expanding the Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States LZTR1-RASopathy association P. Fernández Alvarez: None. I. Valenzuela Palafoll: The SPECC1L protein plays a role in adherens junctions None. F. López Grondona: None. M. Masas Castro: involved in cell adhesion, actin cytoskeleton organization, None. L. Iranzo Nuez: None. I. Paramonov: None. L. microtubulestabilization,spindleorganizationandcytokin- Blasco Perez: None. E. García-Arumi: None. E. esis.It modulates PI3K-AKTsignalingandcontrols cranial Tizzano: None. neural crest cell delamination during facial morphogenesis. SPECC1L causative variants were ﬁrst identiﬁed in P11.56D individuals with oblique facial clefts. Recently, causative Phenotypic spectrum associated with SPECC1L variants in SPECC1L were reported in a pedigree reported pathogenic variants: new families and critical review of in 1988 as atypical Opitz GBBB syndrome. Six families the nosology of Teebi, Opitz GBBB, and Baraitser- with SPECC1L variants have been reported thus far. We Winter syndromes report here eight further pedigrees with SPECC1L variants, includingathree-generationfamily,andafurtherindividual A. VERLOES1, D. Haye2, A. Toutain3, D. Bonneau4, of a previously published family. We discuss the nosology I. Kibæk Nielsen5, I. Bay Lund6, P. Bogaard7, of Teebi and GBBB, and the syndromes related to S. Leenskjold7, K. Karaer8, K. T. Wild9, K. L. Grand9, SPECC1L variants. Although the phenotype of individuals M.C.Astiazaran10,L.A.Gonzalez-Nieto11,A.Carvalho12, with SPECC1L mutations shows overlap with Opitz1518 syndrome in its craniofacial anomalies, the canonical receiving a positive, weighted score (e.g., the cerebriform laryngeal malformations and male genital anomalies are connective tissue nevus) and each atypical manifestation not observed. Instead, individuals with SPECCL1 variants receiving a negative, weighted score (e.g., congenital, non- have branchial ﬁstulae, omphalocele, diaphragmatic her- CNSovergrowth).ThepresenceofanAKT1mosaicvariant nias, and uterus didelphis. We also point to the clinical wasassignedahighpositivescore.Wepilotedthesecriteria overlap of SPECC1L syndrome with mild Baraitser-Winter on the NIH mosaic overgrowth cohort and adjusted and craniofrontofacialsyndrome:theysharesimilardysmorphic adapted them to achieve agreement on appropriate thresh- features (wide, short nose with a large tip, cleft lip and olds. We suggest that this semi-quantitative, integrated palate, blepharoptosis, retrognathia, and craniosynostosis), clinical-molecular diagnostic approach is generalizable to although intellectual disability, neuronal migration defect, othermosaicdisorders,withitsmostimportantcontribution andmuscularproblemsremainlargelyspeciﬁctoBaraitser- beingtheformalrecognitionthatpatientswithlowervariant Winter syndrome. In conclusion, we suggest that patients burdenshavearelated,butdistinctandmilderdisorderthat with pathogenic variants in SPECC1L should not be mustbedifferentiatedfromtheclassicformofthedisorder. described as “dominant (or type 2) Opitz GBBB syn- J.C. Sapp: None. A. Buser: None. J. Burton-Akright: drome”, and instead should be referred to as “SPECC1L None. L.G. Biesecker: C. Other Research Support (sup- syndrome” as both disorders show distinctive, non over- plies,equipment,receiptofdrugsorotherin-kindsupport); lapping developmental anomalies beyond facial Modest; ArQule, Inc.. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; communalities. Modest; Illumina, Inc.. Other; Modest; Royalties: A.Verloes:None.D.Haye:None.A.Toutain:None.D. Genentech, Inc.. Bonneau: None. I. Kibæk Nielsen: None. I. Bay Lund: None. P. Bogaard: None. S. Leenskjold: None. K. Kar- P11.58B aer: None. K.T. Wild: None. K.L. Grand: None. M.C. Multiple anomalies in an adult case with pentasomy X Astiazaran: None. L.A. Gonzalez-Nieto: None. A. Car- valho:None.D.Lehalle:None.S.M.Amudhavalli:None. D.L.Stoicanescu1,M.L.Cevei2,C.R.Gug1,A.Simedrea1 E. Repnikova: None. C. Saunders: None. I. Thiffault: None.I.Thiffault:None.I.Saadi:None.D.Li:None.H. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Hakonarson: None. Y. Vial: None. E. Zackai: None. P. Romania, 2University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine& Callier: None. S. Drunat: None. E.E. Bhoj: None. Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania P11.57A PentasomyXisaveryrarechromosomaldisorder,theexact Integrated clinical-molecular diagnostic criteria for prevalence is not known. Even rarer are descriptions of mosaic overgrowth syndromes adult cases. We present a 20 years old girl hospitalized for functionalrehabilitation.Shewasbornfromhealthy,young, J. C. Sapp, A. Buser, J. Burton-Akright, L. G. Biesecker unrelated parents. Mother reported severe nausea and vomiting during early pregnancy, birth at term, pelvic NHGRI, Bethesda, MD, United States presentation, Apgar 10. Medical history revealed multiple corrective orthopedic surgeries such as osteotomies and Establishing robust clinical diagnostic criteria for mosaic elongations/tendon transpositions for the skeletal abnorm- disorders is difﬁcult because of variation in the number of alities, operated and recidivate varus equin, bilateral genu mutant cells amongst patients. Using Proteus syndrome as valgum operated and relapsed, atrial septal defect without an example, a patient with a high level of mutant cells is indicationforsurgery,moderatementalretardation,primary easy to diagnose, but one with few mutant cells may be nocturnal enuresis, mixt astigmatism. She was diagnosed impossibletorecognize. Also,sometumorshavetheAKT1 with cerebral palsy, spastic diparesis, periventricular c.49G>A p.(E17K) variant, and this is not Proteus leukomalacia. Clinical and functional evaluation revealed syndrome. Also, some aspects of the phenotype are not normalheight,174cm,overweight,microcephaly,hyperte- unique to Proteus syndrome. We therefore recognize that lorism, epicantus, bilateral corneal leukoma, divergent proper diagnosis must integrate both clinical and molecular strabismus, low-set ears and mandibular prognathism. She aspects. To address this, we have developed an integrated, had many bone and joint anomalies such as clinodactily, clinical-molecular diagnostic system that deﬁnes a robust rightvarusequin,bilateralgenuvalgumwithmarkedlatero- threshold for Proteus syndrome stricto sensu and a broader lateral and antero-posterior instability, congenital right hip category of what we term ‘AKT1-related overgrowth dislocation with femoral head necrosis, congenital left hip spectrum’. Each Proteus syndrome manifestation is subluxation, shortening of the right lower limb by 2 cm, assigned a weighted score with associated manifestations right radialhead subluxation with functional impairmentofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1519 therightelbow,hyperextension oftheleftelbow,moderate osteolysisandotherPROSspectrumsyndromes,supporting motor deﬁcit and muscular hypotonia in both lower limbs, the inclusion of GLA within this spectrum. This research dorso-lumbar sinistro-convex scoliosis, dorsal kyphosis, was supported by the project IP-17 from the call “Todos lumbar lordosis, generalized ligamentous laxity. She was SomosRaros”,andCo-ﬁnancedbyISCIII,FEDERFUNDS able to walk independently with right knee marked FIS PI17/00519. deviation in valgus, typical cerebral palsy gait. Our patient V. Martinez-Glez: None. G. Gordo: None. L. Rodri- was a rare case, an adult with atypical height, multiple guez-Laguna:None.J.Tenorio:None.N.Agra:None.P. musculoskeletal congenital defects associated with eye and Arias: None. F. Santos: None. S. Garcia-Minaur: None. heart anomalies. E. Vallespín: None. R. Martín-Arenas: None. A. del D.L. Stoicanescu: None. M.L. Cevei: None. C.R. Gug: Pozo: None. M. Feito: None. J.C. Lopez-Gutierrez: None. A. Simedrea: None. None. P. Lapunzina: None. P11.59C P11.60D First case of osteolysis in a patient with clinical and Mosaic activating PIK3CA mutations during early molecular diagnosis of CLOVES syndrome embryonic development cause ectopic muscle development and upper limb overgrowth V. Martinez-Glez1, G. Gordo1, L. Rodriguez-Laguna1, J. Tenorio1, N. Agra1, P. Arias1, F. Santos1, S. Garcia- F. Taylan1, S. Frisk1,2, I. Blaszczyk3, I. Nennesmo4, Minaur1, E. Vallespín1, R. Martín-Arenas1, A. del Pozo1, G. Annerén5, E. Stattin5, V. Zachariadis1,6, M. Feito2, J. C. Lopez-Gutierrez3, P. Lapunzina1 A. Lindstrand1,2, B. Tesi1,2, T. Laurell7, A. Nordgren1,2 1INGEMM-CIBERER-IdiPaz-Hospital Universitario La 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Center Paz,Madrid,Spain,2DepartmentofDermatology,Hospital for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 3Vascular Anomalies Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska Center, Plastic Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, University Laboratory, Karolinska University Hospital, Madrid, Spain Stockholm, Sweden, 3Department of Surgical and Perioperative Sciences, Hand and Plastic Surgery, Umeå The PIK3CA Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS) University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 4Department of includes a large number of pathologies showing clinical Pathology, Karolinska University Laboratory, Karolinska overlapduetosharingthesamecausinggene(PIK3CA)and University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Science for Life genetic mechanism (somatic mosaicism). The clinical Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and manifestations in PROS depend on the time and place Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 6Present during the embryonic development in which the mutation address: Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, occurred. One of the most recognizable syndromes within Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 7Department of the PROS spectrum is CLOVES (Congenital Lipomatous Hand Surgery, Södersjukhuset, Stockholm, Sweden Overgrowth, Vascular malformations, Epidermal nevi, Scoliosis/Skeletal/Spinal anomalies), which presents a Activating somatic mutations in the phosphatidylinositol- larger clinical severity associated with a wide distribution 4,5-bisphospate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA) ofaffectedtissuesduetotheappearanceofearlymutations. gene cause PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum Recently, we have described that Generalized Lymphatic (PROS). The timing and location of the PIK3CA mutations Anomaly(GLA)mayalsobecausedbysomatic,activating can explain the phenotypic heterogeneity within PROS. mutationsinPIK3CA.AnintriguingclinicalfeatureinGLA Here, we present a 4-year-old male individual (P1) and an is the presence of osteolysis associated with hyperplastic 18-year-oldfemaleindividual(P2)withaPROSphenotype lymphaticsinbone.Itisnotknownwhybonelossoccursin withisolatedmuscleovergrowthofupperlimbsandectopic GLA but has not been described in isolated lymphatic muscles.P1hadfourectopicmusclesandunilateralisolated malformations or in the rest of the PROS syndromes with muscle overgrowth and P2 had 13 ectopic muscles and morepleiotropicclinicalfeatures.Wepresentapatientwith bilateral symmetric isolated muscle overgrowth of upper a clinical diagnosis of CLOVES, in whom there is also a limbs.SequencinganddigitalPCRonDNAextractedfrom vertebral lytic lesion accompanied by a venous/lymphatic biopsies from hypertrophic ectopic muscles identiﬁed component. The patient shows the variant PIK3CA: mosaic PIK3CA mutations p.His1047Arg (VAF 18%) and c.241G>A;p.Glu81Lys, detected in a mosaic of 8.53% in p.Glu542Lys(VAF 26%) inP1 and P2, respectively.Since the affected tissue and absent in blood and saliva samples. P2 has bilateral ﬁndings, the mutation might have occurred This is the ﬁrst description of phenotypic overlap between before day 15 after fertilization in a cell of the primitive1520 streak in the middle of the embryo. The mutation in P1 observedin15patients(14.9%).Signiﬁcantlyoldermothers mighthaveoccurredafterday21post-fertilizationsincehis (mean age= 31.9 years vs 28.2 years) were found in the muscular overgrowth is unilateral. Observation of super- mUPD, ID group compared with the deletion subtype. numerarymusclesinlocationsintheupperextremitywhere Conclusions: The mean age at diagnosis was late. there should not be muscles implies that the cells with Increase IGF-1 and decrease obesity rate after GH treat- PIK3CA mutations might have differentiated into muscles ment. The risk of mUPD may also increase with maternal instead of tendons or fascia. Our ﬁndings highlight that the age or this suggests that ethnic differences be relevant timing of PIK3CA mutagenesis during embryonic develop- for PWS. menthasanimpactonthephenotypeandPI3Khasarolein L.T.An:None.N.T.H.Dinh:None.L.T.Le:None.M. pluripotency and cell fate in early human development. T.P.Nguyen:None.T.M.Ngo:None.N.D.Ngo:None.A. Grants: The Swedish Childhood Cancer Foundation, the N. Do: None. D.C. Vu: None. H.T. Le: None. H.T. Swedish Cancer Society, the Swedish Research Council, Phan: None. KarolinskaInstitutet,BerthvonKantzow’sfoundation,The Hållsten Research Foundation P11.62B F.Taylan:None.S.Frisk:None.I.Blaszczyk:None.I. A lower BMI and growth hormone use results in Nennesmo: None. G. Annerén: None. E. Stattin: None. decreased mortality in Prader-Willi syndrome V. Zachariadis: None. A. Lindstrand: None. B. Tesi: None. T. Laurell: None. A. Nordgren: None. J.N.Profﬁt1,2,K.Osann1,B.MacManus3,M.G.Butler4, V. E. Kimonis1, J. Heinemann3, D. Stevenson5, P11.61A J. A. Gold6,7,8 Clinicalandgeneticfeaturesofprader-willisyndromein vietnam 1University California Irvine, Orange, CA, United States, 2Perinatal Genetics Clinic, Stanford Medical Center, L. T. An1, N. T. H. Dinh1, L. T. Le1, M. T. P. Nguyen1, Stanford, CA, United States, 3Prader-Willi Syndrome T. M. Ngo1, N. D. Ngo1, A. N. Do1, D. C. Vu1, H. T. Le1, Association(USA),Sarasota,FL,UnitedStates,4University H. T. Phan2 ofKansasMedical Center, KansasCity, KS, United States, 5StanfordUniversity,Stanford,CA,UnitedStates,6Dept.of 1Vietnam National Children's Hospital, Hanoi, Viet Nam, Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomics University 2Hanoi medical university, Hanoi, Viet Nam California Irvine, Orange, CA, United States, 7Dept. of ClinicalGeneticsandGenomics,AddenbrookesCambridge Introduction: Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex UniversityNHSTrust,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom,8Loma genetic disorder that results from the lack of paternally Linda University Childrens Hospital, Loma Linda, CA, expressedinthechromosome15q11-q13region.Thisstudy United States wasperformed todelineatetheclinical andgeneticfeatures of children with PWS. Early mortality has been reported in PWS. Recent studies Methods: The clinical signs were studied. Karyotype, have shown an increase in survival estimates in the last 20 ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization, methylation- speciﬁc years. The hypothesis is that it is due to preventative polymerase chain reaction and subsequent methylation- measures to avoid morbid obesity. The PWS Association speciﬁc multiplex ligation- dependent probe ampliﬁcation (PWSA) USA created a long standing bereavement and were used to describe characteristics of genetic classes of research program to investigate causes of death and collect PWS.Datawerecollectedon101patientswithamolecular data in living individuals with PWS. A familial-response diagnosisofPWSatVietnamNationalChildren’sHospital. questionnaires from the PWSA (USA), tested the hypoth- Results: The mean age at diagnosis was 30.2 months. esis that body mass index (BMI), age of diagnosis, clinical Most patients who showed the characteristics of facial symptoms, and growth hormone treatment differ among dysmorphism. 92.1% had neonatal hypotonia and feeding deceased and living individuals with PWS. Data were difﬁculties,61.4%oftheneonateswerehospitalized,11.8% available on a total of 2,029 individuals with PWS (114 had obesity, 79.6% showed developmental delays and deceased and 1,915 living) from the USA. Categorical and cryptorchidism was 84%. Among 101 patients, 51 patients continuous variables were compared using chi-square and had been treated with growth hormon (GH) and GH treat- two-group t-tests, respectively. For categorical variables, ment resulted in an increase of insulin-like growth factor 1 theeffectofagewaslimitedbystratifyingforage(<20yv. (IGF-1) and a decrease in obesity. Deletion subtype was ≥20y) and birth year (<1994 v. ≥ 1994) and testing with a present in 86 patients (85.1%), 4 patients had a transloca- Mantel-Haenszeltest.Forcontinuousvariables,theeffectof tion,onecaseisanuniquePWSdeletions.mUPD,IDwere age was limited by adjusting for age as a continuousAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1521 variable in logistic regression. Average age at death was inhibitors. Interestingly, CCND2, a major cell cycle reg- 31.6 years. Deceased individualshad lower rates of growth ulatory protein was down-expressed upon functional inhi- hormoneuse(p<0.001)andhigherratesofincreasedweight bition of HSF1. comparedtolivingindividuals.BMIinlivinganddeceased Conclusion:OurresultsidentifyHSF1asanewpotential individuals with PWS were 28.6 (SD=11.9) and 51.7 therapeutic target in PROS. (SD=21.7), respectively (p<0.001). This study highlights L. Duplomb: None. R. Da Costa: None. M. Chevarin: thebeneﬁtsof growth hormone, externalcontrolof weight, None.S.Hadj-Rabia:None.S.Lecler-Mercier:None.C. early diagnosis, and the need for a low threshold for Thauvin-Robinet: None. C. Garrido: None. L. Faivre: bringing affected individuals to medical attention. None. P. Vabres: None. G. Jego: None. J.N. Profﬁt: None. K. Osann: None. B. MacManus: None. M.G. Butler: None. V.E. Kimonis: None. J. Hei- P11.64D nemann: None. D. Stevenson: None. J.A. Gold: None. PUF60 splicing variant in a boy with coloboma, short stature and subtle facial features P11.63C Neutralization of heat shock transcription factor 1 in S. MIZUNO1, M. Izawa2, S. Miyatake3, M. Inaba1, cells from segmental overgrowth syndrome patients K. Kato1, Y. Muramatsu1, H. Taniai1, N. Matsumoto3 blocks abnormal proliferation 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aichi Developmental L. Duplomb1, R. Da Costa1, M. Chevarin1, S. Hadj- Disability Center Hospital, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan, 2Aichi Rabia2, S. Lecler-Mercier3, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, Children’s Health and Medical Center, Obu, Aichi, Japan, C. Garrido1, L. Faivre1, P. Vabres1, G. Jego1 3Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City UniversityGraduateSchoolofMedicine,Yokohama,Japan 1INSERM 1231, University of Burgundy, Dijon, France, 2Department of Dermatology, Necker-Enfants Malades Recent studies have clariﬁed that microdeletion involving Hospital, Paris, France, 3Department of Pathology, PUF60 [Poly(U) Binding Splicing Factor 60] and de novo Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France variantsinPUF60causemultiplecongenitalanomaliesand intellectual disability. We report a boy with a PUF60 PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Syndromes (PROS) are variant and coloboma, congenital heart disease, and short caused by mosaicism mutations in the PIK3CA gene. The stature. He was born uneventfully to healthy unrelated useofspeciﬁcinhibitors totarget PI3KormTORinPROS parents, with around average birth weight and height. He was recently found to lead to disease regression. However, underwent surgical ligation at 7 months for symptomatic the downstream effectors of the PI3K/mTOR pathways patentductusarteriosus.Hehadrecurrentfebrileseizuresin speciﬁcally involved in the pathogenicity of PROS remain infancy. He walked by 17 months and spoke his ﬁrst word unknown. Heat shock transcription factor 1 (HSF1) is the by 15 months. His facial features include a square face, majorstress-responsivetranscriptionfactor.Recentﬁndings webbedneck,broadnasalbridge,longeyelashes,darkthick indicate that AKT phosphorylates and activates HSF1 eyebrows, ﬂat philtrum, thin upper vermilion and dental independently of heat-shock in breast cancer cells. We crowding. His square face and large teeth were similar to aimed to investigate the role of HSF1 in PROS. KBG syndrome. He had a right choroidal coloboma We found elevated phosphorylation and activation of (corrected visual acuity 0.06), short stature (Z-score -2.5) HSF1 in cells from PROS patients, which are directly cor- and borderline head circumference. He goes to junior high related to the presence of activated form of AKT. In line school without special needs. Whole exome sequencing of with its function as a transcription factor, active HSF1 theboyandhisparentsidentiﬁedadenovonovelvariantin localized in the nucleus of cells from PROS but not in PUF60 [NM_078480, c.297+1G>A]. RT-PCR analysis of control donors. Inhibition of PI3K or mTOR activity lymphoblastoid cells from the patient and a control strongly reduced HSF1 activation in patient cells. Messen- identiﬁed an abnormal splicing event involving intron ger RNA expression of 47 genes that are known to be 4 sequences in the patient but not in the control. The regulated by HSF1 were repeatedly down-expressed upon abnormal splicing product underwent nonsense mediated PI3Kinhibition.WealsoobservedthattargetingHSF1with mRNA decay. speciﬁc inhibitors reduced the proliferation of mutant cells Conclusion: This case of a PUF60 pathogenic variant in as efﬁciently as PI3K or mTOR inhibitors. The increased aboywithcoloboma,congenitalheartdisease,shortstature, numberofcellsenteringtheSphaseofthecellcycle,which subtle facial features, and normal intellectual development ischaracteristicofPROS,wascompletelybluntedbyHSF1 suggests that PUF60 variants should be considered in1522 syndromic phenotypes with coloboma with or without reports of PXDN mutations have been associated with intellectual disability. autosomal recessive ASMD in patients with similar phe- S.Mizuno:None.M.Izawa:None.S.Miyatake:None. notypes. It is currently unknown whether the proband’s M. Inaba: None. K. Kato: None. Y. Muramatsu: None. non-ocularphenotypesarelinkedtoPXDN;therefore,more H. Taniai: None. N. Matsumoto: None. similarcasesareneededtoreachacorrelation.Theseresults highlight the strength of WES as a diagnostic tool and the P11.65A diversity of phenotypes caused by PXDN mutations. Novel homozygous nonsense PXDN mutation detected E. Kritioti: None. N. Nicolaou: None. A. Alexandrou: by whole exome sequencing causing anterior segment None. A. Syrimis: None. I. Papaevripidou: None. A. dysgenesis Theodosiou: None. V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou: None. C. Sismani: None. G.A. Tanteles: None. E. Kritioti1,2,3, N. Nicolaou2, A. Alexandrou1, A. Syrimis2,3, I. Papaevripidou1, A. Theodosiou1, P11.66B V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou2,4, C. Sismani1,3, Aclinicalutilitystudyofdiagnosinggeneticdisordersin G. A. Tanteles2 newborns admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus A. C. Deden1,2, L. E. L. M. Vissers3, R. A. C. M. Olde Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, Keizer4, G. W. J. Frederix4, RADICON-NL, 2Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of P. Andriessen5, K. A. Bergman6, R. A. van Lingen7, Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3The Cyprus L. S. de Vries8, K. D. Lichtenbelt9, W. S. Kerstjens- School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Frederikse2, I. P. C. Krapels10, J. S. Klein Wassink- Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Clinical Ruiter2, K. Neveling1, M. Nelen1, S. Castelein1, M. del Genetics Clinic, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, Rosario1, S. van den Heuvel1, C. Gilissen1, E. Kamsteeg1, Nicosia, Cyprus R. Pfundt1, T. Rinne1, H. G. Yntema1, R. J. Sinke2, W. P. de Boode11, W. A. G. Zelst-Stams12 Anterior segment dysgeneses (ASMD - MIM #269400) encompass a spectrum of anterior chamber ocular develop- 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University mental defects affecting the cornea, iris, and lens and are Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of generally associated with a signiﬁcant risk for glaucoma. Genetics,UniversityMedicalCentreGroningen,University Clinical features include iris hypoplasia, corneal opacity, of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Department of posterior embryotoxon, corectopia, polycoria, an abnormal Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, iridocorneal angle, ectopia lentis, and anterior synechiae and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, between the iris and posterior corneal surface. Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Julius Center for Health Sciences We report on a Greek-Cypriot male born to parents who and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, were distantly related. He presented with bilateral iris Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of defects, extensive anterior synechiae, posterior embry- Neonatology, Máxima Medical Center, Veldhoven, otoxon, nystagmus, glaucoma and cataracts. Other non- Netherlands, 6Department of Neonatology, Beatrix ocular abnormalities included bilateral hydronephrosis, Children'sHospital,UniversityMedicalCenterGroningen, vesicoureteric obstruction, bilateral megaureter and bipolar Groningen, Netherlands, 7Department of Neonatology, disorder. Princess Amalia Department of Pediatrics, Isala, Zwolle, Negative investigations included array-CGH, MLPA for Netherlands, 8Department of Neonatology, Wilhelmina PAX6 deletions and Sanger sequencing of PAX6, FOXC1 Children's Hospital, Utrecht University, Utrecht, and PITX2. Trio-based WES was subsequently performed Netherlands, 9Department of Medical Genetics, University on the Illumina NextSeq500 platform using the TruSeq Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, DNAexomelibrarykit.Bioinformaticsanalysiswascarried 10Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University out using an in-house pipeline according to the Genome Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 11Department of Analysis Toolkit Best Practices. Neonatology, Radboud University Medical Center, Homozygosity for a novel nonsense PXDN p.(Gly700*) Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Amalia Children’s variant was identiﬁed in the index case. The variant was Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 12Department of Human conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing as was parental carrier Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud status. Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands In conclusion, a novel, homozygous PXDN variant was identiﬁed with a strong phenotypic correlation. OtherAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1523 Rapid whole exome sequencing (rWES) is feasible, but 1DepartmentofPediatricNeurology,MedicalUniversityof awaitsembedding inroutine clinical care inmosthospitals. Silesia,, Katowice, Poland, 2Clinical Genetics Services, We hypothesized that routine rWES will profoundly VCUHealth,Richmond,VA,UnitedStates,3Departmentof increase genetic diagnoses for critically ill newborns, MedicalGenetics,MedicalUniversityofWarsaw,,Warsaw, leading to improved patient care. Therefore we performed Poland, 4Postgraduate School of Molecular Medicine, aclinical utility study assessingthevalue ofgenetic testing Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, in routine neonatal clinical practice. In a multi-centre 5Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, prospective study set-up, 60 critically ill newborns with a Wroclaw, Poland, 6Department of Diagnostic Imaging, presumed genetic disorder received rWES, parallel to MedicalUniversityofSilesia,,Katowice,Poland,7Pediatric routinegenetictesting.Toobtaininsightintotheprevalence Department of Radiology, VCU Health, Richmond, VA, of genetic testing in the ﬁrst 30 days of life, historical data United States from all 1423 patients admitted to the NICU in the Radboudumc (October 2013 to October 2015) served as a Schilbach-Rott/Blepharofacioskeletal Syndrome (SR/ control period.Prospectively, a conclusive molecular diag- BRSS) (OMIM #164220) is an autosomal dominant nosis was obtained in 19 of 60 patients (31.7%), with a condition characterized by blepharophimosis, cleft palate, median time-to-diagnosis of 14 days (IQR 11-21). In dysmorphic facies, and hypospadias in males. In many comparison, genetic testing was performed in 149 patients patients hypotelorism and mild skeletal anomalies in the (10.5%) in the control period, leading to a conclusive handsorfeethavebeenreported.NocausativegeneofSR/ molecular diagnosis within 30 days of life in 13 of them BRSS has been found to date. We present the clinical (8.7%). The median time-to-diagnosis was 14 days (IQR characteristicsoftwoboyswithseveredevelopmentaldelay 12-15). Importantly, from our control period, we noticed and dysmorphic features suggestive of SR/BRSS. In both, that in a further 136 patients (9.6%) genetic test reports blepharophimosis, cleft orhigh-arched palate,hypospadias, outlasted the ﬁrst 30 days of life, but increased the scoliosis, and arachnodactyly with clinodactyly were diagnostic yield to 32.2%. This suggests that more NICU observed.Additionallymicrocephaly,archedeyebrow,high patients may beneﬁt from rWES than currently tested. Our narrownasalbridge,longhangingcolumella,micrognathia, datashowthattheintroductionofrWESforallcriticallyill hypoplastic earlobes, hypermobile joints have been noted. newborns with a presumed genetic disorder increases The same novel de novo mutation, HNRNPH1 c.616C>T diagnostic yield earlier in life than conventional (p.Arg206Trp), was found in both patients using whole diagnostic tests. exome sequencing. To date, mutations in the highly A.C. Deden: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. R.A.C.M. conserved autosomal HNRNPH1 gene have not been Olde Keizer: None. G.W.J. Frederix: None. P. Andries- associated with human disease. HNRNPH1 belongs to the sen:None.K.A.Bergman:None.R.A.vanLingen:None. group of nuclear ribonucleoproteins involved in regulation L.S. de Vries: None. K.D. Lichtenbelt: None. W.S. ofpre-mRNAssplicing.Interestingly,theidenticalrecurrent Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. I.P.C. Krapels: None. J.S. mutation affecting the small domain encoding nuclear Klein Wassink-Ruiter: None. K. Neveling: None. M. localizationsignalinthehighlyparalogousHNRNPH2gene Nelen: None. S. Castelein: None. M. del Rosario: None. has been previously associated with X-linked, syndromic, S. van den Heuvel: None. C. Gilissen: None. E. Kam- Bain type mental retardation [MRXSB, OMIM #300986]. steeg: None. R. Pfundt: None. T. Rinne: None. H.G. MRXSBhasbeenidentiﬁedinfemaleswithdevelopmental Yntema: None. R.J. Sinke: None. W.P. de Boode: None. delay, intellectual disability, autism, hypotonia, and sei- W.A.G. Zelst-Stams: None. zures. Only in single cases hypotelorism, small palpebral ﬁssures, or elongated ﬁngers were observed. Although P11.67C defective function of HNRNPH2 and HNRNPH1 proteins Is Schilbach-Rott/Blepharofacioskeletal Syndrome havesimilarclinical consequences inregardstointellectual caused by a mutation in HNRNPH1? - a report on a 2 disability, mutations in HNRNPH1 gene may represent a cases distinct syndromeperhapsrelated oridentical toSchilbach- Rott/Blepharofacioskeletal Syndrome. Grant Numbers: J. Pilch1, S. L. Reichert2, A. A. Koppolu3,4, A. Walczak3, KNW-1-036/K/7/K; 2013/11/B/NZ7/04944; V. A. Murcia Pienkowski3,4, A. Biernacka3,4, R. Li2, J. Pilch: None. S.L. Reichert: None. A.A. Koppolu: P. Skiba5, J. Machnik-Broncel6, R. L. Lewandowski2, None. A. Walczak: None. V.A. Murcia Pienkowski: P. Gasperowicz3, J. Kosińska3, M. Rydzanicz3, None. A. Biernacka: None. R. Li: None. P. Skiba: None. G. Vorona7, E. Emich-Widera1, R. Płoski3 J.Machnik-Broncel:None.R.L.Lewandowski:None.P. Gasperowicz: None. J. Kosińska: None. M. Rydzanicz:1524 None. G. Vorona: None. E. Emich-Widera: None. R. D. Halperin: None. R. Kadir: None. Y. Perez: None. Płoski: None. M.Drabkin:None.Y.Yogev:None.O.Wormser:None. E.Berman:None.E.Eremenko:None.B.Rotblat:None. P11.68D Z.Shorer:None.L.Gradstein:None.I.Shelef:None.R. SEC31A mutation affects ER homeostasis, causing Birk: None. U. Abdu: None. H. Flusser: None. O.S. neurological syndrome Birk: None. D. Halperin1, R. Kadir1, Y. Perez1, M. Drabkin1, P11.70B Y. Yogev1, O. Wormser1, E. Berman1, E. Eremenko1, SMCHD1 mutation spectrum for facioscapulohumeral B.Rotblat1,Z.Shorer2,L.Gradstein2,I.Shelef2,R.Birk3, musculardystrophytype2(FSHD2)andBosmaarhinia U. Abdu1, H. Flusser2, O. S. Birk1,2 microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS) reveals disease- speciﬁc localization of variants in the ATPase domain 1Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, R. J. L. F. Lemmers1, N. van der Stoep1, P. J. van der 3Ariel University, Ariel, Israel Vliet1, S. A. Moore2, A. Topf3, K. Johnson3, D. San Leon Granado1, T. Evangelista3, V. Straub3, C. Scotton4, Introduction: Consanguineous kindred presented with an A. Ferlini4, N. Voermans5, B. van Engelen5, S. Sacconi6, autosomal recessive syndrome of intra-uterine growth R. Tawil7, M. Lamers1, S. M. van der Maarel1 retardation, marked developmental delay, spastic quadri- plegia with profound contractures, pseudobulbar palsy, 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, epilepsy, dysmorphism, neurosensory deafness and optic 2University of Iowa, Iowa city, IA, United States, nerve atrophy with no eye ﬁxation. Affected individuals 3University of Newcastle, Newcastle, United Kingdom, died by the age of four. Brain MRI demonstrated 4UniversityofFerrara,Ferrara,Italy,5RadboudUniversity microcephaly, semilobar holoprosencephally and agenesis Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Nice University of corpus callosum. We aimed at elucidating the molecular Hospital, Nice, France, 7University of Rochester Medical basis of this disease. Center, Rochester, NY, United States Methods: Genome-wide linkage analysis combined with whole exome sequencing were performed to identify Introduction:VariantsinthechromatinmodiﬁerStructural disease-causing variants. Functional consequences were Maintenance Of Chromosomes Flexible Hinge Domain- investigated in fruit ﬂies null mutant for the Drosophila ContainingProtein1(SMCHD1)havebeenassociatedwith SEC31A orthologue. SEC31A knockout SH-SY5Y and the myopathy FSHD2 and with the unrelated nasal HEK293T cell-lines were generated using CRISPR/Cas9 developmental syndrome BAMS. FSHD2 is a digenic and studied through qRT-PCR, immunoblotting and viabi- hereditary disease with heterozygous variants anywhere in lity assays. SMCHD1causing toxic derepression of DUX4, a gene that Results:Throughgeneticstudies,weidentiﬁedadisease- is embedded in the D4Z4 repeat on chromosome 4 variant associatedhomozygousnonsensemutationinSEC31A.We 4A. BAMS also requires missense variants in SMCHD1, demonstrate that SEC31A is ubiquitously expressed, and but speciﬁcally in the ATPase domain. Irrespective of the that the mutation triggers nonsense mediated decay of its phenotypic outcome, both FSHD2 and BAMS associated transcript, comprising a practical null mutation. Similar to SMCHD1variantsresultinquantiﬁablehypomethylationof the human disease phenotype, knockdown SEC31A ﬂies the D4Z4 locus. We identiﬁed numerous new pathogenic had defective brains and early lethality. Moreover, in line FSHD2variantsandnon-pathogenicvariantsandcompared with SEC31A encoding one of the two coating layers these to BAMS associated variants. M&M: Genetic and comprising the COP-II complex, trafﬁcking newly synthe- methylation studies of D4Z4 and SMCHD1 in 91 new sizedproteinsfromtheendoplasmicreticulumtotheGolgi, FSHD2 families. Examination of the position and mutation CRISPR/Cas9-mediated SEC31A null mutant cells demon- type for SMCHD1 variants in 180 (89 from previous strated reduced viability through upregulation of ER-stress publications) FSHD2 families, 41 BAMS patients and 57 pathways. control individuals. Generation of a 3D model for the Conclusions: We demonstrate that a severe neurological SMCHD1 ATPase-domain in which we modeled all syndrome is caused by a null mutation in SEC31A, redu- missense variants in FSHD2 and BAMS. cing cell viability through enhanced ER-stress response, in Results:TheFSHD2mutationspectrumshowsmissense, line with SEC31A’s role in the COP-II complex. Funding: nonsense, indels and splice site variants covering the entire LegacyHeritageBio-MedicalProgramoftheIsraelScience SMCHD1 locus, but missense variants are speciﬁcally Foundation (grants no. 1814/13 and 1798/16) enriched in the ATPase domain. Non-pathogenic missenseAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1525 variants were almost absent from the ATPase domain. Methods: We performed whole exome sequencing in a FSHD2andBAMSvariantsoccupydifferentsitesinthe3D patient exhibiting a syndromic developmental delay and in model of the ATPase domain. her unaffected parents and report the phenotypic features. Conclusions:ThelocalizationwithintheATPase-domain Results:Ourpatientwasborntoconsanguineousparents mightunderliethephenotypicoutcomeofmissensevariants at 28 weeks of gestation. During pregnancy follow-up, left in the ATPase-domain of SMCHD1. Funded by NIH and cleft lip and alveolus, polyhydramnios and intrauterine Prinses Beatrix Spierfonds. growth restriction were noticed. Postnatal examination R.J.L.F.Lemmers:None.N.vanderStoep:None.P.J. revealed prominent forehead, hypertelorism, ears abnorm- van der Vliet: None. S.A. Moore: None. A. Topf: None. alities, cataracts, kyphosis, renal hypoplasia, as well as K. Johnson: None. D. San Leon Granado: None. T. complexventricularseptaldefectsandaorticbicuspidvalve Evangelista: None. V. Straub: None. C. Scotton: None. on cardiac ultrasound and thin corpus callosum and dilated A. Ferlini: None. N. Voermans: None. B. van Engelen: ventricles on brain MRI at the age of 12 months. She pre- None. S. Sacconi: None. R. Tawil: None. M. Lamers: sented early and severe feeding difﬁculties, severe growth None. S.M. van der Maarel: None. restriction,globaldevelopmentaldelay,andmultiplesevere infections requiring hospitalizations. She carried a novel P11.71C c.1177C>T, p.(Gln393*) (NM_019108) SMG9 homo- SMG9 deﬁciency syndrome: conﬁrmation and further zygous variant while her unaffected parents were both phenotypic characterization heterozygous. Conclusions:Weconﬁrmthatbi-allelictruncatingSMG9 F.Lecoquierre1,A.Bonnevalle1,A.Guerrot1,A.Chadie2, variants cause a severe brain and heart malformation syn- C.Gayet3,C.DumantForest3,M.RenauxPetel4,J.Leca4, drome including ventricular septal defects, brain abnorm- T. Hazelzet3, M. Brasseur-Daudruy5, F. Louillet3, alities, facial dysmorphic features, and severe growth and M. Muraine6, S. Coutant1, O. Quenez1, A. Boland7, developmentaldelay(4/4)withorwithoutophthalmological J. Deleuze7, T. Frebourg1, A. Goldenberg1, P. Saugier- abnormalities (3/4), severe feeding difﬁculties (2/3), and Veber1, G. Nicolas1 life-threatening infections (2/4). F. Lecoquierre: None. A. Bonnevalle: None. A. Guer- 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen rot:None.A.Chadie:None.C.Gayet:None.C.Dumant UniversityHospital,DepartmentofGeneticsandReference Forest: None. M. Renaux Petel: None. J. Leca: None. T. Center for Developmental Disorders, F 76000, Normandy Hazelzet: None. M. Brasseur-Daudruy: None. F. Louil- Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, let: None. M. Muraine: None. S. Coutant: None. O. France, 2Department of Neonatal Pediatrics and Intensive Quenez: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze: None. T. Care -Neuropediatrics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, Frebourg: None. A. Goldenberg: None. P. Saugier- France, 3Department of Pediatrics, Rouen University Veber: None. G. Nicolas: None. Hospital, 76000, Rouen, France, 4Department of Pediatric Surgery,RouenUniversityHospital,76000,Rouen,France, P11.72D 5Department of Radiology, Rouen University Hospital, The complete loss of function of the SMS gene is 76000, Rouen, France, 6Department of Ophthalmology, responsible for an antenatal onset and a lethal form of Rouen University Hospital, 76000, Rouen, France, 7Centre Snyder-Robinson Syndrome National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), InstitutdeBiologieFrançoisJacob,CEA,UniversitéParis- L. Larcher1,2, J. Norris3, S. Whalen1,4, E. Lejeune1,2, Saclay, Evry, France J. Buratti1,2, C. Mignot1,2,4, C. Garel1,4, C. Schwartz3, B. Keren1,2 Introduction: SMG9 deﬁciency syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive condition originally described in three 1AssistancePubliquedesHôpitauxdeParis,Paris,France, patients from two families with homozygous truncating 2Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Greenwood SMG9 variants. Affected individuals presented with a Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 4Hôpital severe syndromic developmental disorder, and a mouse Armand Trousseau, Paris, France model revealed the embryonic lethality of bi-allelic Smg9 deﬁciency, in a context of major brain, eye and cardiovas- Introduction: Snyder-Robinson syndrome (SRS) is an X- cular malformations. To our knowledge, no additional linkedsyndromicintellectualdisabilityconditionwithpost- patient has been described since this report. natal expression caused by variants in the Spermine Synthase gene (SMS). The syndrome is characterized by facial dysmorphism, thin habitus, hypotonia and a1526 nonspeciﬁc movement disorder. Until now, only missense columella, resembling KS patients. ArrayCGH identiﬁed a variants with a functionally characterized partial loss of 40.76-Mb pathogenic duplication at 1p13.3q21.2 pericen- function(LoF)havebeendescribed.Herewereporttheﬁrst tromeric region and a 4.69-Mb duplication of unclear complete LoF variant in a male patient with a congenital clinical signiﬁcance at 10q22.2q22.3, both with proﬁles formofSRS.PatientandMethods:Thepatienthadmultiple suggesting mosaicism. Subsequent karyotype and FISH malformationswithantenatalonsetanddiedat4monthsof analyses revealed a supernumerary ring chromosome in age after staying in the intensive care unit. His phenotype 40% of the cells that co-hybridizes with probes for both included IUGR, cysts of the vermis, facial dysmorphism, chromosome 1 and 10 duplicated regions. hypotonia with no eye contact, complex cardiac, gut and Discussion: sSMC derived from chromosome 1 can kidney malformations. His DNA and that of his parents present a variable phenotype, ranging from normality to were sent to our genetics laboratory to perform whole- severeintellectualdisability.However,theregion1p12to exome-sequencing.Functionalstudieshavebeenperformed 1q12 appears to be non-dosage dependant and the size of tovalidateavariantfoundbyWES:westernblotanalysisto the sSMC seems to correlate with the severity of quantitatively determine the protein level of SMS and the phenotype. The resemblance with KS was interest- UPLC - MS/MS to qualitatively determine the enzyme ingly reported 20 years ago in a patient presenting an activity. interstitial duplication of the short arm of chromosome 1, Results: Genomic analysis revealed a de novo hemi- in a locus with signiﬁcant overlap with ours. In conclu- zygous frameshift in SMS, c.906_909delAATG; p. sion, we illustrate a distinctive phenotype of a rare chro- M303Kfs3, classiﬁed as pathogenic according to the mosome abnormality, while emphasizing the importance ACMG criteria. Functional in vitro assays showed a com- of resorting to complementary classical cytogenetic plete absence of functional SMS protein. studies. Conclusion:Takentogether,ourﬁndingsconﬁrmthatthe R.Silveira-Santos:None.J.Dupont:None.J.R.Alves: mechanism of pathogenicity in SRS is a LoF in SMS and None. A. Sousa: None. A.B. Sousa: None. thatcompleteLoFleadstoafarmoreseverephenotypethan partial LoF due to missense variants. P11.74B L. Larcher: None. J. Norris: None. S. Whalen: None. Tetrasomy 21 pter→q21.3 due to an extra +dic(21;21) E.Lejeune:None.J.Buratti:None.C.Mignot:None.C. in a severe psychomotor retarded female without Down Garel: None. C. Schwartz: None. B. Keren: None. syndrome phenotype P11.73A T. Takano1,2, K. Nakabayashi3, H. Ota2, Y. Arai2, Rare case of a complex small supernumerary r(1;10) H. Kamura3, K. Hata3 chromosome mosaicism associated with a Kabuki-like phenotype 1Tokyo Kasei University, Tokyo, Japan, 2Tokyo Metropolitan Tobu Medical Center for Children with R. Silveira-Santos, J. Dupont, J. R. Alves, A. Sousa, Developmental Disabilities, Tokyo, Japan, 3National A. B. Sousa Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan Serviço de Genética Médica, Departamento de Pediatria, Hospital de Santa Maria, CHULN, CAML, Lisboa, Introduction: Complete or partial tetrasomy 21 without Portugal mosaicismhasbeenreportedinonlyrarecases.Wereporta Japanese female patient with tetrasomy 21 due to an extra Introduction: Complex small supernumerary marker chromosome derived from chromosome 21. chromosomes (sSMC) originate from more than one Materials and Methods: Chromosome, ﬂuorescence chromosomeandcancausevariablephenotypes.Wereport in situ hybridization (FISH) and whole genomesequencing the ﬁrst case of mosaic ring-shaped sSMC derived from (WGS) analyses for the patient, and SNP array-based gen- chromosomes 1 and 10 in a child with dysmorphisms otyping for the trio were carried out. reminiscent of Kabuki Syndrome (KS). KS is a genetically Results: The patient had severe psychomotor retardation heterogeneous autosomal dominant condition characterized withoutDownsyndrome(DS)phenotype;sheshowedshort byintellectualdisability(ID),multiplecongenitalanomalies stature, microcephaly, round face and some dysmorphic and a recognizable facial gestalt. Case presentation: The 3- features. At eight years old, she could not speak any year-old girl showed moderate ID, aggressive behaviour meaningful words nor walk. The developmental quotients anddysmorphisms,includinghypertelorism,longpalpebral scorewasbelow20.Thechromosomeanalysesdetectedan ﬁssures, eyebrows with sparse lateral third, and short extradicentricchromosome21,andrevealedherkaryotypeAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1527 tobe47,XX,+dic(21;21).FISHresultswereconsistentwith of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 14Columbia the karyotype. Allelic ratios of heterozygous SNPs indi- Univ., New York, NY, United States, 15Ann & Robert H. catedthematernaloriginoftheextrachromosome21.Copy Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United number and structural variant analyses using WGS data States, 16Univ. de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, indicated that the distal breakpoint of the dicentric chro- France, 17CHU Lyon, Lyon, France, 18Univ. Medical mosome 21 is located within 21q21, and that the extra Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 19Saint Louis Univ. Sch. chromosome 21 doesn’t simply consist of inverted dupli- of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United States, 20Virginia cations of pter→q21.3region but contain multiple partial Commonwealth Univ., Richmond, VA, United States, deletions, duplications, and inversions within it. 21Univ. of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Conclusions: The patient’ lack of DS phenotype turned 22Humangenetik, Charité Campus Virchow, Berlin, out to be due to the normal copy number of DS critical Germany, 23Inst. of Human Genetics, FAU Erlangen- region (21q22.2-22.3). We will present the genomic orga- Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 24Inst. of Human Genetics, nization of the tetrasomic region being further assessed by Univ. Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, FISH and WGS data, and discuss possible molecular Germany, 25Driscoll Children’s Hospital, Corpus Christi, mechanisms that lead to the complex genomic rearrange- TX, United States, 26State Univ. of Bahia, Bahia, Brazil, ments in the patient. 27Univ. of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Lowell, AR, T. Takano: None. K. Nakabayashi: None. H. Ota: United States, 28Mercy Kids Genetics, Saint Louis, MO, None.Y.Arai: None.H.Kamura:None.K.Hata:None. United States, 29Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 30Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, P11.75C WA, United States, 31London Health Sciences Centre, Delineating the clinical spectrum due to heterozygous London, ON, Canada, 32Center for Medical Genetics, Keio TRAF7 missense mutations: A series of 38 cases Univ. Sch. of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 33Emory Univ. Sch. of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, 34Duke Univ., J. Amiel1,2,3, K. Mishra4, L. Castilla5, K. K. Selmer6, Durham, NC, United States, 35VCGS, Murdoch Children's T.Barak4,S.Yang7,B.Blanco-Sánchez1,2,M.Reijnders8, Research Inst., Univ. of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, G. Houge9, H. Cox10, H. Kingston11, J. Clayton-Smith12, 36Univ. of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, J. W. Innis13, W. Chung14, V. Sanders15, A. Vitobello16, 37Univ. of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, United States C. Thauvin16, G. Lesca17, M. Kerstjens-Frederikse18, K.Christensen19,R.Gannaway20,A.Lehman21,L.Graul- TRAF7 belongs to the Tumor necrosis factor receptor- Neumann22, C. Zweier23, D. Lessel24, B. Lozic24, associatedfactor(TRAF) family,involvedinabroad range R. Peretz25, J. Meira26, B. Schaefer27, E. M. Beaver28, ofbiologicalfunctions andrecentlyidentiﬁedbyWESin7 L. C. Briere29, D. L. Earl30, V. M. Siu31, K. Kosaki32, patients associating developmental delay, congenital mal- M. Gambello33, D. Karlowicz34, T. Y. Tan35, S. White35, formations and dysmorphic features with de novo missense A. Slavotinek36, D. Barbouth37, V. Pingault1,2,3, mutations. A.Munnich2,3,S.Balcells5,V.Cormier-Daire2,3,M.Cho7, Wegatheredaseriesof38patients(afamilywith3cases D. Grinberg5, S. Lyonnet1,2,3, M. Gunel4, R. Urreizti5, and 35 sporadic cases) by WES, direct sequencing and C. T. Gordon1,2 GeneMatcherwithheterozygousmissensemutationswithin the WD40 repeats, 8 being recurrent. Facial features are 1INSERM UMR 1163, Inst. Imagine, Paris, France, 2Paris distinctiveandwillbedescribed.Manyareshort(12)witha Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité Univ., Paris, France, shortneck(20),pectuscarinatum(14)andanomaliesofthe 3HôpitalNecker,AP-HP,Paris,France,4Dept.ofGenetics, extremitieswithcamptodactyly(8),ulnaorradialdeviation Yale Sch. of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, of ﬁngers (10) and overriding toes (9). Ribs and vertebrae 5Dept. de Genètica, Facultad de Biologia, Univ. de anomaliesareeachdescribedin5and16cases.Conductive Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6Dept. Of Research and and/or sensorineural hearing loss is frequent (20). Con- Development, Neuroclinic, Oslo Univ. Hospital, Oslo, genital cardiac defects are also frequent with persistent Norway, 7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, ductus arteriosus(21) andatrial septaldefects(9) being the 8RadboudUMC,Nijmegen,Netherlands,9HaukelandUniv. most frequent. Worth noting are kidney abnormalities (10), Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 10Birmingham Women’s and genitaliaanomalies(4),umbilicaland/oringuinalhernia(8), Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United dental anomalies (9), sparse hair (5) and lymphedema of Kingdom, 11Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, lowerlimbs(3).Mostpatientspresentedfeedingdifﬁculties Manchester, United Kingdom, 12Manchester Univ. NHS andmotor delay withindependent walking between 18and FoundationTrust,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,13Dept.of 24 months of age. They developed mild to moderate Human Genetics, Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, Univ.1528 intellectual deﬁciency with speech delay, frequent nasal speech and usually preserved social interactions. TRAPPC11 is a component of the TRAPP complex A different repertoire of somatic missense mutations involved in intracellular vesicle trafﬁcking. TRAPPC11 withintheWD40domainsofTRAF7hasbeenidentiﬁedin mutations were reported in only 20 patients with various meningioma. The clustering of germline and somatic mis- phenotypes from limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) sense mutations suggests a gain of function or a dominant phenotype to congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG), negative effect. characterized by frequent proximal muscle weakness with J.Amiel:None.K.Mishra:None.L.Castilla:None.K. elevated creatine kinase (CK), associated with global K. Selmer: None. T. Barak: None. S. Yang: None. B. developmental delay, and movement disorders. Using trio Blanco-Sánchez: None. M. Reijnders: None. G. Houge: whole exome sequencing (WES), we identiﬁed two new None. H. Cox: None. H. Kingston: None. J. Clayton- patients with intellectual disability (ID) carrying biallelic Smith: None. J.W. Innis: None. W. Chung: None. V. variantsinTRAPPC11.Patient1:Pregnancywasmarkedby Sanders: None. A. Vitobello: None. C. Thauvin: None. agenesisofcorpuscallosum(ACC)andintrauterinegrowth G. Lesca: None. M. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. K. retardation (IUGR). At 4 years old, he presented neurode- Christensen: None. R. Gannaway: None. A. Lehman: velopemental delay, progressive microcephaly (-4SD) and None. L. Graul-Neumann: None. C. Zweier: None. D. small stature (-2.5SD). Immune screening showed hypo- Lessel:None.B.Lozic:None.R.Peretz:None.J.Meira: gammaglobulinemia, causing multiple infections. CK level None. B. Schaefer: None. E.M. Beaver: None. L.C. was normal. Postnatal brain MRI showed global cerebral Briere: None. D.L. Earl: None. V.M. Siu: None. K. atrophy and thin corpus callosum. He carried compound Kosaki:None.M.Gambello:None.D.Karlowicz:None. heterozygoussplicingvariantsc.965+5G>T/c.1287+5G>A T.Y.Tan:None.S.White:None.A.Slavotinek:None.D. in TRAPPC11 inherited from both parents. Patient 2: Barbouth: None. V. Pingault: None. A. Munnich: None. Pregnancy was marked by IUGR. He had epilepsy with S. Balcells: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. M. Cho: onset at 5 months of age. At 30 months old, he presented None. D. Grinberg: None. S. Lyonnet: None. M. Gunel: with hypotonia, neurodevelopemental delay, and progres- None. R. Urreizti: None. C.T. Gordon: None. sive microcephaly (-5SD). He had mildly elevated CK without myopathy. Brain MRI showed thin corpus P11.76D callosum. He carried homozygous variants c.1287+5>A Biallelic variants in TRAPPC11 cause syndromic in TRAPPC11, both inherited from his father, due to intellectual disability uniparental isodisomy (UPD) of chromosome 4. We conﬁrm the extended phenotype related to TRAPPC11 A. Lunati1, S. Heide1,2, S. Vuillaumier3, G. Leverger4, variants, including syndromic ID. Hypogammaglobuline- I. Desguerre5, M. Moutard6, M. Spentchian1, mia was not reported as related to this gene so far. N. Hadouiri7, V. Darmency8, Q. Thomas7, Moreover, this report demonstrates the importance to F. Lecoquierre7, A. Vitobello7, C. Philippe7, L. Faivre9, explore UPD in case of homozygous variants inherited C. Thauvin-Robinet7,9, D. Heron1,2 from a single parent. A. Lunati: None. S. Heide: None. S. Vuillaumier: 1APHP, Département de Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier None. G. Leverger: None. I. Desguerre: None. M. Pitié Salpêtrière et GHUEP Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Moutard: None. M. Spentchian: None. N. Hadouiri: Paris, France, 2Centre de Référence Déﬁciences None. V. Darmency: None. Q. Thomas: None. F. Leco- Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France, 3APHP, quierre:None.A.Vitobello:None.C.Philippe:None.L. Service de Biochimie et génétique, Hôpital Bichat-Claude Faivre: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. D. Bernard, Paris, France, 4APHP, Service hématologie- Heron: None. oncologie-pédiatrique, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France, 5APHP,Département de Neurologie, Hôpital P11.77A NeckerEnfantsMalades,Paris,France,6APHP,Servicede First mutation in TSHZ1 in a family with Rasmussen Neuropédiatrie,HôpitalArmand-Trousseau,Paris,France, syndrome 7Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon B. Hanker, J. Eckhold, I. Hüning, Y. Hellenbroich, Bourgogne,Dijon,France,8Servicedeneurophysiologieet F. Kaiser pédiatrie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 9Centre de Référencemaladiesrares«AnomaliesduDéveloppementet Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany syndromes malformatifs », Centre de Génétique, FHU- TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, FranceAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1529 In 1979, Rasmussen reported of a family with congenital disease and recurrent sinus and ear infections, a constella- bilateral vertical talus, bilateral external auditory canal tion of symptoms strongly reminiscent of ciliopathies. atresia and increased interocular distance. After Rasmussen Consistent with this phenotype, we show that the mutation syndromewasmentionedin2002fortheﬁrsttime,Feenstra which affects Pro358 have a dramatic effect on ciliation. et al. reported of families with deletion or mutations in MaterialandMethods:Ciliafromnasalbrushingofthe TSHZ1 causing congenital aural atresia (CAA), in 2011. index cases were analyzed by TEM. The dynamics of MT Here, we describe for the ﬁrst time a family with vertical growth and ciliation were analyzed in cultured cells over- talus (VT) and mutation only affecting TSHZ1. expressing FLAG-tagged wild-type or mutant TUBB4B. We report on a family with an eleven year old boy, who Results: Cilia from nasal brushing of the index case was born at term after uneventful pregnancy. The boy had revealed ultrastructural abnormalities with rare axonemes CAA andVT.He hadmild intellectual disabilityandfacial and disorganized basal bodies. Inspection of the β-tubulin features including epicanthus, hypertelorism and broad atomic structure revealed that the Pro358 residue is located nasal root. The mother of non-consanguineous parents had in a binding domain necessary for the dynamics of micro- learning difﬁculties as well as CAA and VT. The grand- tubules.Functionalanalysisinculturedcellsoverexpressing father had CAA like several members of the family of the FLAG-tagged wild-type or mutant TUBB4B showed that mother, too. In addition, the daughter of one cousin had the mutant TUBB4B have a drastic impact on microtubule CAA and VT. growthwithnolatticeaswellasonciliogenesiswithabsent In suspicion of Rasmussen syndrome a targeted sequen- cilia in the vast majority of cells. cinganalysisofTSHZ1identiﬁedaheterozygousframeshift Conclusion: This study shows that TUBB4B mutations mutation c.718delA;p.Arg240Glyfs*10 in the index patient can cause a sensorineural disease or a multisystemic cilio- and his mother resulting in a premature stop of translation. pathy, depending on the localization of the alteration. Systematic review of the literature showed that affected S. Mechaussier: None. J. Rozet: None. M. Descartes: persons of two families with mutations in TSHZ1 show None. I. Perrault: None. CAA but VT has not been described in these patients. Therefore,weshowfortheﬁrsttimethecombinationofVT P11.79C and CAA due to mutation in TSHZ1. Further delineation of O2HE syndrome due to Therefore, our ﬁndings support the hypothesis that het- UNC45Abiallelicvariantsandlaunchingoftheinitiative erozygousmutationsinTSHZ1causeRasmussensyndrome adopt a gene for UNC45A with incomplete penetrance and variable clinical expressivity. C. Racine1,2, J. Baptista3,4, L. Hawkes5, C. Thauvin- B. Hanker: None. J. Eckhold: None. I. Hüning: None. Robinet1,2, A. Vitobello2, P. Callier2, Y. Duffourd2, Y. Hellenbroich: None. F. Kaiser: None. C. Philippe2, B. De Vries6, A. Verloes7, J. Hugot8, D. Bremond-Gignac9, F. Huet10, C. Bensignor10, P11.78B R. Maudinas10, A. Fabre11, C. Esteve11, S. Ellard3,4, Mutations in TUBB4B can cause a cliopathy A. Rodrigues12, E. Blair5, L. Faivre1,2 S. Mechaussier1, J. Rozet1, M. Descartes2, I. Perrault1 1Genetics Center, FHU TRANSLAD, Dijon Bourgogne University Hospital, Dijon, France, 2INSERM, LNC 1INSERM UMR_1163 - Imagine Institute, Paris, France, UMR1231 team GAD, University of Burgundy and 2University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 3Department of Molecular United States Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4University of Exeter College of Introduction: Recently, we reported heterozygous muta- Medicine and Health, Exeter, United Kingdom, 5Oxford tionsaffectingArg391intheβ-tubulin4Bisotype-encoding Centre forGenomicMedicine, OxfordUniversity Hospitals gene (TUBB4B) dampening the dynamics of growing NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, microtubules (MT) in a distinctive neurosensorineural 6DepartmentofHumanGenetics,RadboudMedicalCenter, disorder (early-onset and severe retinal dystrophy and Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Genetics department, Robert sensorineural hearing loss). Despite abnormal MT Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 8Pediatric dynamics, patient ﬁbroblasts and cells overexpressing the Gastroenterology and Nutrition department, Robert Debré mutant proteins displayed apparently normal ciliation and Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 9Pediatric Ophthalmology trafﬁcking. Here, we report the identiﬁcation of a novel department, Robert Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, TUBB4B mutation in a sporadic case displaying blindness, 10Pediatric department, Dijon Bourgogne University sensorineural hearing loss, short stature, chronic kidney Hospital, Dijon, France, 11Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM,1530 MMG, Marseille, France, 12Oxford Children's Hospital, S.Maitz4,V.Leuzzi5,G.Parenti1,3,M.Scala6,M.Donati7, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, R. Guerrini7, C. Pantaleoni8, S. D'Arrigo8, M. Zollino9, Oxford, United Kingdom V.Capra6,A.Selicorni10,N.Brunetti-Pierri1,3,S.Banﬁ1,2, TUDP, V. Nigro1,2, G. Casari1,11 Introduction:Only4patientswithUNC45A-related osteo- oto-hepato-entericsyndrome(O2HE)havebeenreportedin 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, 2018, and no further replication has been published. The Naples, Italy, Pozzuoli, Italy, 2Department of Precision four core clinical features include congenital diarrhea, Medicine, University of Campania – “Luigi Vanvitelli”, cholestasis, bone fragility, deafness, associated to learning Naples, Italy, 3Department of Translational Medicine, disability. Section of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, Material and Methods: We report two novel cases of 4San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 5Department of O2HE diagnosed by trio WES, enlarging the clinical Human Neuroscience, SapienzaUniversityofRome, Rome, spectrum by the presence of malformations. Italy, 6Neurosurgery service, Giannina Gaslini Institute, Results: In patient 1 (20 years), severe congenital diar- Genoa, Italy, 7Meyer Children Hospital, Florence, Italy, rhea due to microvilli atrophy was diagnosed at week 1, 8Neurological Institute Besta, Milan, Italy, 9Cattolica requiring long-term hospitalization with exclusive enteral University, Rome, Italy, 10Department of Pediatrics. ASST- nutrition. Diarrhea became intermittent until age 10 and Lariana. Sant'Anna Hospital, Como, Italy, 11Vita-Salute then stopped. Chronic pruritus caused by congenital cho- San Raffaele University and Neurogenomics Unit, Division lestasis was diagnosed in childhood. He was blind due to of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc right anophthalmia, Peters anomaly with left pyramidal Institute, Milan, Italy cataract, had severe sensorineural deafness, severe intel- lectual disability with behavioral disorder, had 2 fractures We present the experience of the ﬁrst 30 months of the after minimal injury. Trio WES revealed a paternally Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases Program (TUDP), a pilot inherited UNC45A c.1407delinsGCA variant and a mater- program devoted to unsolvable pediatric patients with nally inherited c.2467G>C variant; and a de novo PBRM1 complex syndromes. Pediatric patients with genetic com- VUS (c.1301G>A). In patient 2 (3 weeks), cleft palate and plex disorders who went undiagnosed through array-CGH, severe diarrhea was diagnosed at day 1, with ﬂattening of biochemical and speciﬁc genetic tests, are discussed and brush border, requiring total parenteral nutrition. No cho- prioritized in clinical plenary meetings. Patients may be lestasis was diagnosed, and testing of the audition is plan- recruitedalsobywebformathttp://www.telethon.it/cosa-fa ned. Rapid trio exome revealed a maternally inherited cciamo/malattie-senza-diagnosi. Human Phenotype Ontol- c.721C>T;p.(Arg241*) UNC45A variant and paternally ogyisusedforphenotypedescription.Selectedpatientsand inherited c.2182G>A variant. parents (mostly as trios or quartet) are studied by high Conclusion: Further cases will be needed in order to coverage(150x)WES.FromJune2016toDecember2018, better describe the phenotypic spectrum of UNC45A, and twelve national pediatric centers have presented 503 particularly the level of the neurocognitive phenotype, and undiagnosed families. Fifty-two have been considered the associated congenital malformation spectrum. There- low-priority since outside inclusion criteria (i.e. severity, fore, we decided to adopt this gene, to compile the clinical pediatric age, complexity). Of the 451 enrolled families, consequences of novel variants. 196 have completed the entire diagnostic NGS workﬂow C.Racine: None. J.Baptista:None.L. Hawkes: None. andﬁnalresulthasbeenprovided.In71families(36%)we C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. A. Vitobello: None. P. Cal- detected causative variants in known genes, mostly lier: None. Y. Duffourd: None. C. Philippe: None. B. De extending the phenotype appearance. Forty-six (65%) are Vries: None. A. Verloes: None. J. Hugot: None. D. Bre- de novo mutations, while 16 are autosomal recessive, 8 X- mond-Gignac:None.F.Huet:None.C.Bensignor:None. linked and one autosomal dominant with variable expres- R.Maudinas:None.A.Fabre:None.C.Esteve:None.S. sion. In 67 trios (34%), we identiﬁed a strong candidate Ellard: None. A. Rodrigues: None. E. Blair: None. L. gene, while the pathogenic role of speciﬁc genetic variants Faivre: None. is under investigation. In 58 trios (30%) no putative causative or candidate variant was identiﬁed. A fraction of P11.80D families shares different mutations in the same genes, such The ﬁrst 30 months of experience of the Telethon as DDXD3 and ASXL3 (in three families) and EEF1A2, Undiagnosed Diseases Programs GRIN1, IRF2BPL, RARS2 and SMAD4 (in two families). SelectedWES-negativecases arebeingstudiedbyWGSor A. Torella1,2, M. Pinelli1,3, R. Castello1, F. Musacchia1, bylinkedreadWESusing10xtechnology.TelethonGrant: M. Mutarelli1, G. Cappuccio1,3, D. Carrella1, G. Vitiello3, GSP15001Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1531 A. Torella: None. M. Pinelli: None. R. Castello: None. geneticdata,weproposeVPS26Casanoveldiseasegenein F.Musacchia:None.M.Mutarelli:None.G.Cappuccio: humans.ConsistentwithwidespreadexpressionofVPS26C None. D. Carrella: None. G. Vitiello: None. S. Maitz: andwiththefundamentalbiologicalfunctionoftheencoded None. V. Leuzzi: None. G. Parenti: None. M. Scala: protein, its bi-allelic inactivation causes a wide range of None. M. Donati: None. R. Guerrini: None. C. Panta- symptoms involving multiple organs. leoni: None. S. D'Arrigo: None. M. Zollino: None. V. C.Beetz: A.Employment (fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant; Capra: None. A. Selicorni: None. N. Brunetti-Pierri: Centogene AG. A. Kdissa: A. Employment (full or part- None. S. Banﬁ: None. V. Nigro: None. G. Casari: None. time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. V. Karageorgou: A. Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. P11.81A N. Ameziane: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- A homozygous VPS26C nonsense variant is associated niﬁcant;CentogeneAG.P.Bauer:A.Employment(fullor with a novel syndromic phenotype part-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG.J.Suleiman:None. V.R. Sutton: None. A.W. El-Hattab: None. C. Beetz1, A. Kdissa1, V. Karageorgou1, N. Ameziane1, P. Bauer1, J. Suleiman2,3, V. R. Sutton4, A. W. El- P11.82B Hattab5,6,7 Diagnostic microdeletion/microduplication detection by exome sequencing enabling copy number variation 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Tawam Hospital, Al analysis Ain, United Arab Emirates, 3United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 4Baylor College G. Christopoulou1, A. Oikonomaki1, S. Samara1, of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5KidsHeart L.Florentin2,F.Sachinidi2,S.Vitas3,P.Constantoulakis1 Medical Center, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 6KidsHeart Medical Center, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 1Genotypos Science Labs, Athens, Greece, 2AlfaLab, 7KidsHeart Medical Center, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates Athens, Greece, 3DNA Analysis, Athens, Greece Introduction: Novel fully penetrant monogenic disorders Introduction: We present two cases where copy number are presumably very rare. Initial non-availability of variation (CNV) analysis by exome sequencing revealed a unrelated patients is therefore likely. To still enable the microdeletionandamicroduplication,respectively,explain- molecular classiﬁcation of such cases, several types of ing the under-investigation phenotypes. information need to be considered. MaterialsandMethods:A31y.o.pregnantwomanwith Materials and Methods: Two reportedly related indivi- mild symptoms of Waardenburg Syndrome (WS) and a 35 duals with a distinct syndromic phenotype were investi- y.o.womanwithabsenceoftheuterusweretested.Clinical gated. Following negative chromosomal microarray and exome sequencing was performed using Sophia Genetics’ exome sequencing in the proband, patients were subjected Clinical Exome Solution v2, which includes 4,493 genes. to whole genome sequencing. The variants from the duo Following preparations according to the manufacturer’s were analysed in a comparative manner, and used to esti- protocol, DNA libraries were sequenced on an Illumina mate the degree of relatedness. NextSeq-500 genetic analyzer. Data processing, variant Results: The major clinical ﬁndings in both patients calling and CNV analysis were conducted by SOPHiA overlapped; they included neurodevelopmental deﬁcit, DDM® bioinformatics pipelines. skeletalabnormalitiesanddistinctivefacialfeatures.Variant Results: The analyses revealed a PAX3 gene deletion, ﬁltering demonstrated a single unique shared homozygous conﬁrming WS in the ﬁrst patient and a duplication, high impact variant, c.178G>T (p.Glu60*), in VPS26C. includingatleastSCARF2,SERPIND1,SNAP29andCRKL Variation databases do not list individuals with bi-allelic genes, consistent with Mayer-Rokitanski-Kuster-Hauser truncating variants in this gene, which codes for a protein syndrome, in the second patient. Both CNVs were ascer- involved in membrane protein recycling. Detailed geneal- tained and their exact size determined (≈725kb and ogy analysis suggested close relationship for the patients’ ≈1.05Mb respectively) by arrCGH. fathers, but very distant relationship for the mothers. An Discussion: Until recently, exome sequencing rose the overall low degree of relatedness of the two patients, as diagnostic yield of genomic investigations by revealing conﬁrmedbycomparativeanalysisofthegenomes,implies SNV/INDEL disease-causing variants. The design and a low likelihood for the genotype-phenotype association to analysis pipelines of the exome sequencing we implement be a chance observation. empowers CNV detection as well. We believe that in the Conclusion: Based on the genealogical information, near future, technology and bioinformatics advancements clinical ﬁndings, and comprehensive consideration of the may permit CNV analysis as effectively as with well-1532 established approaches thus, facilitating more efﬁcient mutation in NBAS in a critically sick newborn with a genetic diagnosis and healthcare management. complex immunologic phenotype G. Christopoulou: None. A. Oikonomaki: None. S. Samara:None.L.Florentin:None.F.Sachinidi:None.S. G. M. A. Forzano1, G. Mancano2, A. La Barbera1, Vitas: None. P. Constantoulakis: None. A. Pagliazzi1, F. Peluso1, F. Di Giovanni1, G. Contrò1, R. Artuso2, A. Provenzano1, S. Ricci3, M. Moroni4, P11.83C P. Fiorini4, D. Serranti5, S. Giglio6 Exploring WAGR syndrome: genotype-phenotype associations in the 11p13 region 1Medical Genetics Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's University G. Buglyó, S. Biró, K. Szakszon, J. Mátyus, G. Méhes, Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Immunology Unit, Meyer G. Vargha, É. Oláh, B. Nagy Children's University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 4Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Meyer Children's University Hospital, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary Florence, Italy, 5Hepatology Unit, Meyer Children's University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 6Medical Genetics Introduction: WAGR syndrome (Wilms’ tumor, aniridia, Unit, University of Florence, Meyer Children's University genitourinary malformations and impaired mental develop- Hospital, Florence, Italy ment) is associated with deletions of chromosomal region 11p13. Recently, some evidence accumulated on micro- Wereportanewbornwithamultisystemicdiseaseseverely deletionswithin11p13withvaryingclinicalmanifestations. affectingimmuneandgastrointestinalsystemsandskin.He We report two such cases, and tentatively outline possible was admitted to Neonatal Intensive Care Unit because of genotype-phenotype associations in the region. growth failure, recurrent infections with sepsis and Patients and Methods: Our ﬁrst case featured normal dehydration, hypogammaglobulinemia, absence of B lym- intellectual ability, pseudohermaphroditism, acute lympho- phocytes, reduced NK cells, ichthyosis, hepatosplenome- blastic leukemia, Wilms tumor, glomerulonephritis and galyandfacialdysmorphism(proptosis,thinlips,looseskin cerebellar angioblastoma. The second patient had complex and reduced subcutaneous fat). At a ﬁrst glance, clinical genitourinary malformations, global developmental delay presentation made us think about a syndromic immuno- and mental deﬁcit. RT-PCR was used to detect gene copy dysregulation; we performed whole exome sequencing numbers in the 11p13 region in both cases. FISH and a (WES) which identiﬁed a biallelic variant in NBAS. dPCR-based analysis were performed in case 2. Neuroblastoma ampliﬁed sequence (NBAS) gene encodes Results: In patient 1, a heterozygous deletion was found a protein highly expressed in connective tissue, eye, brain affecting the whole WT1 gene but neither one of the and spinal cord, and it is involved in nonsense-mediated ﬂankinggenes.Inpatient2,amicrodeletionwasseeninthe mRNA decay. Mutations in NBAS cause disregulation of 11p13 region affecting only WT1 and EIF3M. In this case, genes involved in instruction of inﬂammatory response. we also detected a deletion at 22q13. Biallelic mutations in this gene have been associated with Conclusions: While WAGR syndrome is generally con- phenotypic spectrum that ranges from isolated acute liver sideredasasingleclinicalentitycausedbyarelativelylarge failure in infancy to a multisystemic condition including deletion,theseeminglyhighfrequencyofmicrodeletionsin short stature, optic nerve atrophy and Pelger-Huet (PH) the area (as seen in our cases and various anecdotal reports anomaly of granulocytes (SOPH). Moreover, biallelic intheliterature)suggeststhatitmayrepresentaspectrumof variants were reported recently in two unrelated patients clinical features, the observed phenotype depending on with characteristic facial appearance, PH anomaly and which genes happen to be deleted. WT1 seems to be severe hypogammaglobulinemia with frequent infections. responsible for genitourinary tumors and malformations, Clinical exome sequencing uncovers monogenic disorders whileincasesfeaturingaPAX6orBDNFdeletion,wemay in a signiﬁcant number of infants in NICU when suspected observeaniridiaorobesity,respectively.GenesPRRG4and to have genetic disorders, signiﬁcantly inﬂuencing the SLC1A2arelikelycandidatesforcausingintellectualdeﬁcit medicalcare.Performingexomesequencingasﬁrst-linetest when deleted. canachieved overthree times diagnosis rate, with less than G.Buglyó:None.S.Biró:None.K.Szakszon:None.J. one-third of the cost, compared with traditional tiered Mátyus: None. G. Méhes: None. G. Vargha: None. É. testing strategy of single gene or gene panels. Oláh: None. B. Nagy: None. G.M.A. Forzano: None. G. Mancano: None. A. La Barbera: None. A. Pagliazzi: None. F. Peluso: None. F. P11.84D Di Giovanni: None. G. Contrò: None. R. Artuso: None. Whole exome sequencing reveals a homozygousAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1533 A.Provenzano: None.S.Ricci:None.M.Moroni:None. P11.86B P. Fiorini: None. D. Serranti: None. S. Giglio: None. Whole exome sequencing reveals novel mutations in a cohort of undiagnosed patients with multiple P11.85A malformation syndromes Family trio analysis in rare syndromes - Clinical experience and outcome E. Kritioti1,2,3, N. Nicolaou2, A. Alexandrou1, I. Papaevripidou1, A. Theodosiou1, V. Christophidou- K. Lagerstedt-Robinson, B. Anderlid, A. Nordgren, Anastasiadou2,4, G. A. Tanteles2, C. Sismani1,3 G. Grigelioniene, M. Kvarnung, P. Gustavsson, E. Tham, D. Nilsson, M. Johansson Soller, M. Nordenskjöld, 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus A. Lindstrand, H. Malmgren Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3The Cyprus Karolinska Institutet and Department of Clinical Genetics, School of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Karolinska Univ Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Clinical Genetics Clinic, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, Whole exome (WES) or whole genome (WGS) sequencing Nicosia, Cyprus intriosisbecomingacommonmoleculardiagnostictoolfor analysis of rare genetic disorders. Multiple malformation syndromes (MMS) represent a At Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, heterogeneous group of genetic disorders associated with clinical trio analysis has increased tenfold from 2012 - developmental anomalies in two or more systems. Using 2018. In total, trio analysis has been ﬁnalized for 503 wholeexomesequencing(WES)ourongoingstudyaimsto patients with undiagnosed, suspected rare genetic condi- molecularly characterise a cohort of undiagnosed Cypriot tions.Datawasanalyzedforsequencevariantsinthecoding MMS patients. Recruitment criteria included: normal part or splice regions of the OMIM genes that were con- karyotype and array-CGH analyses and negative results sistent with Mendelian inheritance. In general CGH-array forfragile-Xsyndromeandtargetedgenetesting.Thestudy and FRAXA analyses had been performed on the patients also aims to develop an in-house population-speciﬁc allele prior to trio analysis. frequency database. Of the 503 cases, the molecular diagnosis rate was 33%. Family-based WES was performed in 21 families (67 De novo heterozygote sequence variants were the most individuals) comprising 26 MMS patients, using Illumina’s prevalent causes of genetic disorder, 55%. Sequence var- TruSeq DNA exome library preparation kit and the Next- iants consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance were Seq500. Bioinformatics analysis was carried out using an detected in 32% and X-linked recessive inheritance in 8% in-house pipeline according to the Genome Analysis of the cases. In eight cases, an autosomal dominant inher- Toolkit Best Practices. Possible pathogenic mutations were itedsequencevariantwasidentiﬁed-explainedbyaknown conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing followed by segregation dominant trait or variable expressivity. Most patients were analysis. referredregardingintellectualdisabilityand/orasyndromic NGSanalysisrevealed11potentiallypathogenicvariants, phenotype. The different detected genetic diagnoses are including 9 novel and 2 known variants, achieving an rare,andformostcasesthegeneticoutcomecouldnothave overall detection rate of 42% (11/26 patients). Flagged been predicted. variants were found in PCNT, SPR, PXDN, COL27A1, In conclusion, trio analysis in families with an unknown UBE3A, KAT6A, KDM6A, POMGNT1 and PIEZO2, caus- rare disorder has proven to be a valuable tool to obtain a ingmicrocephalicosteodysplasticprimordialdwarﬁsmtype genetic diagnosis. The identiﬁcation of the genetic aberra- II, sepiapterin reductase deﬁciency, anterior segment dys- tion in these patients is crucial for estimation of recurrence genesis of the eye, Steel syndrome, Angelman syndrome, risk. Itisalso apre-requisitefor carriertesting, prenatal- or intellectual disability, Kabuki syndrome-2, muscle-eye- preimplantation diagnostics. brain disease and distal arthrogryposis, respectively. K. Lagerstedt-Robinson: None. B. Anderlid: None. A. Inconclusion, thisstudy hasidentiﬁed9novel mutations Nordgren:None.G.Grigelioniene:None.M.Kvarnung: inknowngenesandhasexpandedthephenotypicspectrum None. P. Gustavsson: None. E. Tham: None. D. Nilsson: associatedwiththesegenes.Thisstudyalsoreportstheﬁrst None. M. Johansson Soller: None. M. Nordenskjöld: COL27A1 mutation in the Caucasian population. The None. A. Lindstrand: None. H. Malmgren: None. detection rate of 42% indicates that WES is a reliable and cost-effective tool for identifying the molecular basis of MMS. Further functional studies are ongoing.1534 E. Kritioti: None. N. Nicolaou: None. A. Alexandrou: D. Ayyildiz Emecen: None. E. Isık: None. M. Kose: None. I. Papaevripidou: None. A. Theodosiou: None. V. None. T. Atik: None. F. Ozkinay: None. Christophidou-Anastasiadou: None. G.A. Tanteles: None. C. Sismani: None. P11.88D BAZ1B is a candidate gene responsible for P11.87C hypothyroidism in Williams syndrome The utility of reverse phenotyping using whole-exome sequencing in an undiagnosed infant with neurological L. Allegri1, F. Baldan1, C. Mio1, M. De Felice2, symptoms E. Amendola2, A. Franzoni3, D. Fabbro3, G. Damante1 D. Ayyildiz Emecen, E. Isık, M. KOSE, T. Atik, 1University of Udine, Udine, Italy, 2University of Naples F. Ozkinay Federico II, Naples, Italy, 3Academic Hospital “Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Integrata di Udine”, Udine, Italy Subdivision of Pediatric Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Williams syndrome (WS) is a rare neurodevelopmental Turkey disorder affecting 1/7500 live births resulting from a hemizygous deletion of 28 genes on chromosome Aim: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) is being used 7q11.23. This condition is characterized by mild to increasingly to diagnose rare complex diseases. The moderateintellectualdisabilityorlearningproblems,unique purpose of this study is to determine the contribution of personality characteristics, distinctive facial features, and reverse phenotyping in diagnosing diseases with blended heart and cardiovascular problems. Moreover, WS subjects phenotypes. frequently suffer ofseveral endocrine abnormalities includ- Method: A 22-month-old girl was referred to our clinic ing hypothyroidism, idiopathic hypercalcemia, early pub- with developmental delay, hypotonia, convulsion and erty, impaired glucose tolerance. Full hypothyroidism vomiting.Shewastheﬁrstchildofconsanguineousparents. occurs in about 10% of WS subjects; however, subclinical On physical examination she had growth retardation, hypothyroidism occurs in about 30% of patients. Several hypotonia and dysmorphic facial features. Her laboratory data indicate that the hypothyroidism is due to thyroid tests were normal. A brain MRI revealed a white matter morphologydefects:thyroidhypoplasiahasbeenfoundina hypomyelination. largefractionofWSpatientssufferingoffullorsubclinical Result: A speciﬁc diagnosis could not be established via hypothyroidism. Several genes involved in thyroid dysgen- clinical features and laboratory tests, however WES esis have been identiﬁed; however, none of them is in the revealed homozygous mutations in three different genes. 7q11.23 region. Thus, the hypothyroidism molecular bases The variant c.3412_3418del (p.Val1138Metfs*25) in in WS are not known. By a microarray approach we CNTNAP1 gene has been classiﬁed as likely pathogenic, analyzed the expression levels of 7q11.23 region genes in c.1090G>A (p.Val364Met) variant in DPYS gene classiﬁed embryomiceandselectedthoseexpressedalsointhyroidor as a variant of uncertain signiﬁcance (VOUS), and involved in its development. Among them, BAZ1B, a c.2480G>A (p.Arg827Gln), in ATP7B gene classiﬁed as a member of bromodomain protein family, appeared particu- VOUS in accordance with ACMG 2015 criteria. The par- larlyrelevant.Silencing,byRNAinterference,BAZ1Bina entswerefoundtobeheterozygousforthesamemutations. normalthyroidcellline(Nthy-ori-3.1)andintwoanaplastic Disscussion: Following WES results, clinical compat- thyroid cancer derived cell line (SW1736 and 8505C), we ibility was investigated. Developmental delay and hypo- observedasigniﬁcantcellviabilityreduction(about50%in myelination in the patient were suggestive of Congenital both cell lines), demonstrating the importance of BAZ1B Hypomiyelinating Neuropathy caused by CNTNAP1 muta- for thyroid cell proliferation. These results demonstrate the tions. Persistent vomiting is a symptom of Dihy- relevance of BAZ1B loss in thyroid cells proliferation, dropriminidase deﬁciency caused by DPYS mutations. A suggesting a correlation between its deletion and thyroid decreasedlevelofceruloplasmininthepatientisconsidered hypoplasia in WS. as the ﬁrst sign of Wilson's disease caused by ATP7B L. Allegri: None. F. Baldan: None. C. Mio: None. M. mutations. DeFelice:None.E.Amendola:None.A.Franzoni:None. Conclusion: Reverse phenotyping using WES shortens D. Fabbro: None. G. Damante: None. the diagnostic process, identiﬁes the additional diseases in patients with blended phenotypes and improves the quality P11.89A of genetic counseling. A new phenotype associated to an unreported ZFPM2 variant: call for additional casesAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1535 A. JUVEN1,2, C. Thauvin-Robinet2, A. Garde1, A. Bruel2, subtypes in the absence of recurrent chromosomal J. Thevenon3, A. Vitobello2, F. Tran-Mau Them1, aberrations S. Falcon-Eicher4, C. Philippe2, L. Faivre1, A. S. Denommé-Pichon1,2 T. Nasedkina1, L. Ghukasyan1, G. Krasnov1, L. Baidun2, S. Ibragimova3 1Centre de génétique de Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Equipe Génétique des Anomalies du Développement (GAD), 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian UMR1231 Inserm/uB, Dijon, France, 3Unité de génétique Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, clinique, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 4Centre 2Russian Children's Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian HospitalierUniversitairedeDijon,Hôpitald'enfant,Dijon, Federation, 3Scientiﬁc Research Institute of Hematology France and Blood Transfusion, Tashkent, Uzbekistan Introduction: ZFPM2 is a gene coding for a zinc ﬁnger Introduction: Recurrent cytogenetic aberrations leading to protein. It is a transcription factor involved in lung, the formation of fusion genes are found in more than 40% diaphragm and cardiac development regulating the GATA of pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML), while in familyproteins.Threedistinctphenotypicentitiesrelatedto approximately 20% of the patients their blast cells display ZFPM2havebeendescribed:disordersofsexdevelopment, cytogenetically normal karyotype (NK-AML). The aim of non-syndromic diaphragmatic hernia and congenital the work was to investigate mutational proﬁle of AML cardiopathies. patientswithoutknownchromosomaltranslocationsregard- Material and Methods: We report on a patient present- ing to immunophenotype data and clinical features. ing with major facial features associated with a poly- PatientsandMethods:The34patientsfromUzbekistan malformative syndrome and a novel truncating ZFPM2 with AML without known recurrent chromosomal aberra- variant. tions were investigated (18 boys and 16 girls, mean age Results: This 31-year-old patient presented at birth with 10.6years).Thecodingregionsof26genesinvolvedinthe diaphragmatic anterior eventration, pulmonary stenosis and pathogenesis of AML were captured with SeqCap EZ right ventricular hypertrophy. He also had growth deﬁ- Target Enrichment System (NimbleGen, Roche) and ciency, micropenis, cryptorchidism and a shawl scrotum. sequenced using Illumina’s MiniSeq platform. The muta- He had a coarse face, hypertelorism, anteverted nares, a tions were veriﬁed using Sanger sequencing. long philtrum, macrostomia, gingival hyperplasia and teeth Results:Mostpatients(20from34)hadoneormorenon- agenesis. He was in a school for special needs, but intel- synonymous mutations. One patient with M4 variant had lectual deﬁciency was ruled out. He developed a dilatation biallelic CEBPA mutation, two patients had previously oftheascendingaortainadulthood.Multipleinvestigations undescribed ETV6 mutations. Also, known somatic muta- were normal. Exome sequencing revealed a frameshift tions were revealed in the following genes: NPM1 (8.8%), insertion in ZFPM2 (c.621delA; p.Ala208Leufs*5), not JAK2(5.9%),IDH1(5.9%),NRAS(8.8%).Inaddition,rare inherited from the father (mother not available). germline variants with minor allele frequency less than 1% Conclusion:Thepatientpresentsapeculiarassociationof were found in CUX1, FLT3, TET2, PTPN11 and NUP98 malformations that belong to the ZFPM2 spectrum, but genes, that may indicate their role in genetic susceptibility usually in a non-syndromic context. Such observations are to pediatric leukemia. needed in order to be able to describe a novel ZFPM2 Conclusion: The data may contribute to understanding associated phenotype. themechanismsofleukemogenesisinpediatricAMLinthe A.Juven:None.C.Thauvin-Robinet:None.A.Garde: absenceofknownfusiongenes.Theworkwassupportedby None. A. Bruel: None. J. Thevenon: None. A. Vitobello: the Russian Science Foundation (grant # 18−15-00398). None. F. Tran-Mau Them: None. S. Falcon-Eicher: T. Nasedkina: None. L. Ghukasyan: None. G. Kras- None. C. Philippe: None. L. Faivre: None. A.S. nov: None. L. Baidun: None. S. Ibragimova: None. Denommé-Pichon: None. P12.002C Integrative analysis of miRNA and mRNA paired P12 expression proﬁling of androgen-dependent and Cancer genetics -independent prostate cancer cells treated with anticancer imidazoacridinone C-1311 P12.001B Mutationalproﬁlingofpediatricacutemyeloidleukemia M. Niemira1, A. Bielska1, M. Kwasniewski2, A. Kretowski1,3, A. Skwarska41536 1ClinicalResearchCentre,MedicalUniversityofBialystok, 1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Bialystok, Poland, 2Centre of Bioinformatics and Data Salamanca, Spain, 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department Analysis, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, Poland, 3Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer Internal Medicine, Medical University of Bialystok, (IBMCC), University-CIC, Salamanca, Spain Bialystok, Poland, 4Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom Introduction: Breast and prostate cancers depend on steroid hormones (oestrogens, androgens) to stimulate their Introduction: Prostate cancer remains one of the most growth. This makes hormonal pathways prime targets to common cancer in the male population. Imidazoacridinone treat these kinds of cancer. Counter-intuitively, it has been C-1311(Symadex™)isanewinhibitoroftopoisomeraseII shown that the androgen receptor (AR) is expressed in and receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3 that has been tested in approximately 80% of breast cancer patients and over 30% phase II studies against metastatic breast cancer. Here, we of triple-negative breast cancer patients. Thus, we aim to assessed the effect of C-1311 on the miRNA and mRNA study the effects of androgen receptor-inhibitor enzaluta- integrated proﬁles of prostate cancer cells with different mide on breast cell lines expression of androgen receptor (AR). Material and methods: HCC-1937, HCC-1569, MCF- Materials and Methods: Prostate cancer cells were 7, Hs578T, HBL100, BT-549, MDA-MB231, AU-565, exposed to C-1311 for 24h. The miRNA and mRNA MDA-MB-415, BT-474 (breast cancer cell lines) and expression proﬁles (adj. p < 0.05 and log fold change > 1) VCAP (androgen receptor-positive prostate cancer cell weregeneratedfromtotalRNA usingnCounterNanostring lineusedasapositivecontrol),wereusedtoextractRNA platformandRNA-sequsingIlluminaHiSeq4000platform, and proteins. Expression of AR and variant 7 (AR-V7) respectively. MiRNA-mRNA expression pairing and path- was conﬁrmed by RT-PCR, droplet digital PCR and ways analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway simple western analyses. MTT viability assays with Analysis software. enzalutamide (50, 75 μM) were performed. Results: Paired genomic analysis identiﬁed a total of 33 Results: The PCR and simple western results are shown miRNA-mRNA pairs in LNCaP (AR+) and 65 miRNA- in the table below. MTT assays show growth inhibition at mRNApairsinDU-145(AR-)cells.SelectedmiRNAsand enzalutamide concentrations of over 50uM in BT-474, mRNAs associated with tumor formation and progression, MDA-MB-231, Hs578T, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-415. cell cycle or apoptosis (includingmiR-542, miR-138, miR- 590, miR-125, miR-34, BIRC5, CDKN1A, CDC25A, CellLines ERPR HER2 TP53 ARAR- Simple MTT KNTC1) were validated by qPCR. Paired miRNA-mRNA V7 WesternAR response proﬁles revealed activation of diverse signaling pathways depending on AR status. In LNCaP (AR+) cells major HCC- − − − − − − − NA 1937 changeswerefoundforgenesinvolvedincellcyclecontrol, HCC- − − + −M + − − NA p53 signaling and DNA damage response, whereas path- 1569 ways enriched for DU-145 (AR-) cells were involved in MCF-7 + + − +/−WT+ − + + cancer-related inﬂammation and cellular metabolism. Hs-578T − − − +M + + + + Conclusions: Our study identiﬁed C-1311 induced HBL-100 − − − ++ + + − NA miRNAcandidateswhichmaybeeffectivetargetsforfuture BT-549 − − − ++M + + + NA prostate cancer therapy. Founded by the National Science MDA- − − − ++M + − + + Centre, Grant No 2013/09/D/NZ7/04185. MB-231 M.Niemira:None.A.Bielska:None.M.Kwasniewski: AU-565 − − + +WT − − + NA None. A. Kretowski: None. A. Skwarska: None. MDA- + − − + + + + + MB-415 P12.003D BT-474 + + + + + + + + Study of androgen-receptor pathway in breast cancer cell lines: a new potential target Conclusions: Androgen inhibitors could be a potential M. Ovejero-Sánchez1,2,3, P. Vázquez-Cárdenas1,2,3, therapeutic target for androgen receptor-positive breast M. Martínez-Soto2, S. Vallejo-Fuente2,3, C. Gutiérrez- cancers. Cerrajero1,2,3, J. Perez-Losada1,3, R. González- This Project was funded by PI16/01920. Sarmiento1,2,3 M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None. P. Vázquez-Cárdenas: None.M.Martínez-Soto:None.S.Vallejo-Fuente:None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1537 C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero: None. J. Perez-Losada: None. P12.005B R. González-Sarmiento: None. An ALK inhibitor, AZD3463 improves the anticancer effects of rapamycin in breast cancer cells P12.004A Mosaic APC mutations in patients with mild polyposis N. P. Ozates Ay, F. Sogutlu, C. Gunduz, C. Biray Avci phenotypes Ege University, Izmir, Turkey D. Terlouw1, M. Suerink1, C. Tops1, A. Langers2, F. J. Hes3, S. ten Broeke4, L. Dams1, T. van Wezel5, Introduction: Breast cancer is the most common type of H. Morreau5, M. Nielsen1 neoplasia in women and rapamycin analogues are frequently used in current treatment protocols. The 1Department of Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, limitations of the use of rapamycin in therapy include Netherlands, 2Department of Gastroenterology, LUMC, the activation of the PI3K signaling pathway by other Leiden, Netherlands, 3Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, signaling pathways and reactivation via feedback regula- Brussel, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, tion. AZD3463 is an anticancer agent used as a potential UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Department of ALK/IGF1R inhibitor and it has been determined that Pathology, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands ALKinhibitorsinducePI3K/AKT/mTOR-mediatedapop- tosis and autophagy. In this study we investigated the Introduction: Mosaic mutations in the APC gene have invitroeffectoftherapamycin-AZD3463combinationon been identiﬁed as a common cause (25%) for polyposis in breast cancer by providing lateral inhibition of PI3K patientswith>20adenomasandnogermlinemutation.The signaling pathway. frequency remains unknown in patients with milder MaterialMethods:Cytotoxic,apoptotic,autophagicand phenotypes. cytostatic effects ofrapamycin,AZD3463andcombination Materials and Methods: The APC gene was sequenced onMCF7celllinewereassessedbytheWST1,AnnexinV in DNA isolated from 4 adenomas in a cohort of polyposis and JC-1, Tb/GFP TR-FRET LC3B Expression, Cycletest patients (n=120) using Next Generation Sequencing. assays in a dose‐and time‐dependent manner. Expression Patients were considered mosaic if an identical mutation level alterations of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway related genes wasidentiﬁedinalllesions.Detectionrateswerecompared in treated MCF7 cells were evaluated by quantitative Real- between subgroups according to the number of adenomas. time PCR (qRT-PCR), compared to control cells. Clinical characteristics were compared between those with Result: The effects of AZD, rapamycin and combination and those without a mosaic mutation. on cell viability, apoptosis, autophagy, cell cycle and gene Results: The mosaicism detection rate was 18% in the expression levels in MCF7 cell line are summarized in the wholecohort(22/120),0%inpatientswith<10adenomas table. (0/18), 9% in those with 10-20 adenomas (3/34) and 12% in patients over age 70 (2/17). Some patients were found AZD3463 Rapamycin Combination Comment to have an identical variant in only a subset of adenomas (n=21) and were called hybrid cases. Mean age of diag- IC50Values 7(7625nndM) 1(702.0nd3)nM ARaZpDa--0.3nM Awassyonbesrgerisvteicdeinffethcet nosis was comparable in hybrid and non-mosaic cases 28.85nM combination. (72nd) (both62years)andlowerinpuremosaiccases(50years). AnnexinV (+)3.6 (+)1.2 (+)7.4 Itwasdetermined Number of adenomas was also comparable between Assay(Fold thatapoptosis hybrid and non-mosaic cases (n=22 versus n=18) and changerelativeto increasedin acontrol) combination higher in mosaic cases (n=38) accordingto separate Conclusions: Our results indicate that mosaic APC applications. mutations also play a role in patients with less than 20 JC-1Assay(% (+)0.04 (+)5.5 (+)48.2 Combination adenomas and/or older age at presentation. Further expan- changeof application mitochondrial increased sion of the cohort is needed to validate our results and to membrane mitochondrial elucidate the cause and clinical signiﬁcance of hybrid potential) membrane potential. mosaic mutation patterns. Dutch Cancer Society CellCycleAssay G/G (+) G/G-(+) G/G-(+)2 Rapamycin, 0 1 0 1 0 1 project 11292 (Foldchangeof 2.4S- 2.8S-1.12 S-1.2G2/M- AZD3463,and checkpoint 1.05G/ G/M- (-)1.8 combinationhave D. Terlouw: None. M. Suerink: None. C. Tops: None. arrest) M-(-)22.7 (-)24.7 beenfoundto A. Langers: None. F.J. Hes: None. S. ten Broeke: None. effectivelyinduce G0/G1arrest. L.Dams:None.T.vanWezel:None.H.Morreau:None. M. Nielsen: None.1538 Autophagy (+)3.84 (+)3.31 (+)4.17 Combination TPDSdiagnostic.GiventhevariablePPVupontumortypes, Assay(Fold applicationinterms changeof ofautophagic only results of the 28 families with at least BAP1 IHC for autophagosome effectsismore two independent tumors are presented in the table below: accumulation) effectivethan individualdoses. GeneExpression WASL(-) WASL(-) WASL(-) Itwasdetermined Analysis(PI3K/ 5,7 4,5RHOA 12,5RHOA thatthe Numberoftumors Numberof Numberof BAP1genetictest AKT/mTOR RHOA (-)0,9FOS (-)4,2FOS combination withBAP1loss testedtumors families results pathway (+)5,4 (+)2,0 (-)4.2 applicationwas relatedgenes) FOS(+) moreeffectivethan 1 2to7 7 6wildtype 0,19 theothergroups. 1class3 variant(VUS) 2 2 9 8class5variants Conclusion: In this study, we suggest that the combina- (deleterious) tion of rapamycin-AZD3463 can increase the efﬁcacy of 1wildtype treatment by overcoming factors limiting the use of rapa- Morethan2 3to21 12 9class5variants mycininthetreatmentbysimultaneousinhibitionofALK/ (deleterious) 3class3 IGF1R pathway. variants(VUS) N.P. Ozates Ay: None. F. Sogutlu: None. C. Gunduz: None. C. Biray Avci: None. Inconclusion,weproposethatthepresenceoftwolesions P12.006C with BAP1 expression loss in a family (same or different BAP1 loss of protein expression: an analysis for BAP1 patients) be considered as a Pathogenic Moderate criterion germline Variants of Unknown Signiﬁcation (VUS) to classify BAP1 variants under ACMG criteria. interpretation O. Cabaret: None.C. Caillot: None.T. Fenouil: None. N.Souﬁr:None.B.Bressac-dePaillerets:None.A.dela O. Cabaret1, C. Caillot2, T. Fenouil3, N. Souﬁr4, Fouchardière: None. B. Bressac - de Paillerets1,5, A. de la Fouchardière2 P12.007D 1DépartementdeBiologieetPathologieMédicales,Gustave Insights in genetic mechanisms of aggressiveness of Roussy, Villejuif, France, 2Département de Biopathologie, Basal Cell Carcinoma Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 3Laboratoire d'AnatomiePathologiqueEst,GroupementHospitalierEst- S. I. Nikolaev1, A. Yurchenko1, L. Flatz2, M. Ighil3, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 4Inserm U976, N. Basset-Seguin3 Université Paris 7, Paris, France, 5Inserm U1186, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France 1Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 2Kantonsspital St. Gallen, Department of Dermatology, St. Gallen, The BRCA1‐associated protein‐1 (BAP1) tumor- Switzerland, 3Saint Louis Hospital, Paris, France predisposition syndrome (BAP1-TPDS) is a hereditary cancer syndrome with increased risk to develop a variety Vismodegibisasmoinhibitorapprovedforthetreatmentof of cancers including four core tumors types, uveal and advanced basal cell carcinoma (BCC) with activated cutaneous melanomas, mesotheliomas and renal clear cell Hedgehog pathway. Most patients show clinical beneﬁt carcinomas (Walpole et al. 2017). Worldwide, 40 different from the drug but a small subset shows intrinsic resistance missensevariantswereidentiﬁed,butonly9wereclassiﬁed (IR) and progresses on treatment. We report for the ﬁrst as likely pathogenic upon modiﬁed ACMG criteria (higher time molecular mechanisms of IR in 4 aggressive BCC weight for phenotypical evidence for rare tumors). BAP1 cases. Using whole exome sequencing, analysis of copy genebeingatumorsuppressor,geneticinactivationleadsto number aberrations and transcriptional proﬁling we were lossofnuclearexpressionbyimmunohistochemistry(IHC). able touncover themajordeterminants ofIR inthestudied Thefrequencyofinactivationbytwosomaticgeneticevents samples. Our results show that these BCCs harbor either varies upon tumor types; therefore, the speciﬁcity of BAP1 molecular signature earlier reported in BCCs with acquired loss of staining to indicate a germline BAP1 mutation resistance to vismodegib, such as p.W535L SMO mutation (positive predictive value, PPV) varies also. and ampliﬁcation of GLI2; or bear molecular signature Inthepresentstudy,weperformed217BAP1IHC(145of compatible with squamous cell carcinoma evolution (muta- them in cutaneous melanocytic tumors) in 118 members of tionsandfocalcopynumberalterationsofMYC,LGR4and 102 families, analyzed in parallel for BAP1 germline muta- TCF7L1). In line with the detected driver events at DNA tions to address the interest of BAP1 IHC to the BAP1- level upregulation of target genes of either Hh or WNTAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1539 pathway was conﬁrmed with RNA sequencing. Addition- arr (11q14.1q14.2(81417643-86071005), 17q25.1q25.3 ally we report that all the BCC IR cases overexpress (73593574-77382564))x2hmz. No chromosomal abbera- TRAG3, SNORA42 and microRNA711, markers of poor tions were found only in two pTa samples. Genomic prognosisandresistancetotreatmentwhichwerepreviously imbalances – losses were mostly found for arr 6p21.32 identiﬁed in other types of cancer. (32453988-32538289)x0 and arr 9p21.3(20351075- S.I. Nikolaev: None. A. Yurchenko: None. L. Flatz: 22755025)x0. CNVs gains were identiﬁed in almost all None. M. Ighil: None. N. Basset-Seguin: None. chromosomes, but the most frequent were in chromosome (9)(q21.11q21.13), (9)(q31.2q31.3), (20)(q11.21q13.33) P12.008A and (20)(p13p11.1) mainly in pT1 and pT2 tumours. Molecular signature for improvement of clinical UnexpectedlyinpT3andpT4tumoursamplesonlygainsin prognosis accuracy in superﬁcial bladder carcinoma chromosomes:1p, 11q, 17p and 17q were detected. Acknowledgements: Contract DM13/4, 2017 NSF, -60/ O. S. Antonova1, B. S. Mladenov2, S. Rangelov3, 03.05.2018, Bulgaria, MANU-BAS. B. B. Rukova1, Z. A. Hammoudeh1, D. V. Nesheva1, O.S. Antonova: None. B.S. Mladenov: None. S. Ran- D. Serbezov1, R. G. Staneva1,4, M. B. Ganev1, gelov: None. B.B. Rukova: None. Z.A. Hammoudeh: S. Karachanak-Yankova1,5, V. G. Spasova1, None. D.V. Nesheva: None. D. Serbezov: None. R.G. S. P. Hadjidekova1,4, L. Balabanski1,6, R. Vazharova6,7, Staneva: None. M.B. Ganev: None. S. Karachanak- C. Slavov3, D. Toncheva1,6 Yankova:None.V.G.Spasova:None.S.P.Hadjidekova: None. L. Balabanski: None. R. Vazharova: None. C. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University- Slavov: None. D. Toncheva: None. Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,2DepartmentofUrology,UMBALSM "N. I. Pirogov", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Department of Urology, P12.009B University Hospital "Tsaritsa Yoanna", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Cytogenetic abnormalities in B-precursor acute 4Women’s Health Hospital “Nadhezda”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, lymphoblastic leukemia from a tertiary care centre in 5Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Soﬁa India University“St.KlimentOhridski”,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,6GARH “Malinov”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 7Department of Biology, D. Shetty1, H. Jain1, V. Mistri1, H. Jain2, B. Bagal2, Medical Genetics and Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, A. Bonda3, S. Punatar3, A. Gokarn3, L. Nayak3, Soﬁa University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria M. Prasad2, G. Narula2, M. Sengar2, N. Khattry3, S. Banavali2, P. Tembhare4, P. Subramanian4 Background: The aim of our study is to identify the correlation between molecular changes in uroepithelial 1Department of Cancer Cytogenetics, Advanced Centre for tumors and tumor stage, grade and progression, as well as Treatment, Research & Education in Cancer (ACTREC), to evaluate potential prognostic markers. Navi Mumbai, India, 2Department of Medical Oncology, Materials and Methods:Tumour samples from 65 Bul- Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, India, garianpatients,stagedpTa,pT1,pT2,pT2a,pT2b,pT3and 3Department of Medical Oncology, Advanced Centre for pT4 were collected. Four genes (AP1S1, FIGF, HDAC11, Treatment, Research & Education in Cancer (ACTREC), CDK9)thatshowedsigniﬁcantdifferencebetweeninvasive Navi Mumbai, India, 4Department of Hemato-pathology, and non-invasive bladder carcinoma in a previous pool Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research & Education in analyseswereselectedforindividualvalidationbyRT-PCR Cancer (ACTREC), Navi Mumbai, India analysis (Qiagen). CNVs of 30 uroepithelial neoplastic samples (CytoChip Oligo aCGH, 4x44K and Inﬁnium Introduction: B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia OncoArray-500K BeadChip, Illumina) were performed. (BCP-ALL) is a neoplastic disease characterized by clonal Data was analyzed by BluefuseMulti software and expansion of leukemic cells and cytogenetics is an Karyostudio. important diagnostic parameter in its classiﬁcation. Results and discussion: The gene expression analysis Material and Methods: Retrospective study was carried revealed4-12foldchangedifferenceintheexpressionlevel outin2270patients(Adult-759;Pediatric-1511)diagnosed between pT2 and pTa and pT1 tumors. The highest up- as BCP-ALL (January 2016 to December 2018). Fluores- regulation was shown for AP1S1 gene, involved in protein cence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) was performed using trafﬁckingbyclathrin-coatedvesicles.FiveLOHvariantsin commercial probes for LSI BCR/ABL1; MLL; ETV6/ two pT2 samples were determined: arr 6p12.1p11.1 RUNX1; TCF3/PBX1 and centromeric probes for chromo- (55721511-58767335)x2hmz, arr (7q21.3(94372640- somes 4, 10 and 17 for ploidy status. A pilot study was 97676259), 7q22.1q22.2(99552168-104336782))x2hmz, conductedforPh-likeALL(FISHwasperformedforABL1,1540 ABL2, PDGFRβ, CSF1R and CRLF2 rearrangements) on genetic testing of a large panel of breast cancer susceptibility 219 cases (June 2018 to December 2018). genes by MPS on a blood sample. The c.4688G>A, p. Results: Cytogenetic abnormality was detected in 51% (Trp1563*)BRCA2mutationwasdetectedin23%ofsequence cases (1162/2270) [Adult: 60% (454/759); Pediatric: 47% reads (>500X depth coverage) suggesting mosaic condition. (708/1511)]. Incidence of t(9;22); BCR-ABL1, t(1;19); Mosaicratewasconﬁrmedinothertissuesasbladdercellsand TCF3-PBX1andMLLtranslocationswas31%,4%and3% salivary sample. Higher rate was found in capillary bulb. The in adult B-ALL while 6%, 7% and 3% in pediatric B-ALL analysis of the non-cancerous breast tissue is in progress. respectively. Translocation (12; 21): ETV6/RUNX1 was Finally, this case suggests that, although rare, this event found in 13% pediatric cases. Trisomy 4, 10, 17 were should be taken into account in the evaluation of high-risk detected either as a sole or in combination with each other families and it is probably underestimate. Two reasons in31%(462/1511)pediatriccasesand22%(165/759)adult should increase the number of cases reported: large cases. Chromosomal counting revealed hyperdiploidy and screeningperformedbyhighlyaccurateMPSandenhanced hypodiploidy in 25% and 5% pediatric cases; 12% and 6% BRCA testing (outside of the fulﬁlled high-risk selection in adult cases which was correlated with ﬂow cytometry criteria) because of targeted therapies. DNA index. Of 219, 4 cases (1.8%) showed rearrangement V. Cusin: None. N. Basset: None. E. Guillerm: None. in CRLF2 (1 Pediatric case with Down syndrome) and M. Eyries: None. T. Lisner: None. R. Nicolle: None. G. CSF1R (Adult-1; Pediatric-2). Follow-up studies were L'Helgoualc'h: None. F. Coulet: None. performed. Conclusions: Various cytogenetic subtypes have sig- P12.011D niﬁcant impact on risk stratiﬁcation and hence remain The BRCA1 intronic c.5407-25T>A variant: effect on strong independent indicators of disease outcome. splicing and association with breast and ovarian cancer D. Shetty: None. H. Jain: None. V. Mistri: None. H. Jain:None.B.Bagal:None.A.Bonda:None.S.Punatar: H. Høberg-Vetti1,2,3, E. Ognedal1,2, A. Buisson4, None. A. Gokarn: None. L. Nayak: None. M. Prasad: T. Vamre5, S. Ariansen5, G. Houge2,3, T. Fiskerstrand2,3, None. G. Narula: None. M. Sengar: None. N. Khattry: B. I. Haukanes2, C. Bjorvatn1,3,6, P. M. Knappskog2,3 None. S. Banavali: None. P. Tembhare: None. P. Subramanian: None. 1Western Norway Familial Cancer Center, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2Department of P12.010C Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Constitutional mosaicism of BRCA2 gene mutation Norway, 3Department of Clinical Science, University of detected by massive parallel sequencing in a case of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 4Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, early onset breast cancer France, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 6Department of Research and V. Cusin1,2, N. Basset1, E. Guillerm1, M. Eyries1, Development, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, T. Lisner1, R. Nicolle1, G. L'Helgoualc'h2, F. Coulet1 Norway 1Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Privé Introduction: The increasing genetic testing for hereditary d'Antony, Antony, France breastandovariancancerleadstodetectionofraresequence variantsofunknownclinicalsigniﬁcanceintheBRCA1and Pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are BRCA2 genes. Correct interpretation of these variants is responsible for over 50% of genetic susceptibility to breast challenging, butimportantfor correct clinical management. andovariancancer.Nowadays,thescreeningofthosegenesis Theaimofthisstudywastodeterminethepathogenicityof commonly performed with expanded panel genes using the intronic BRCA1 c.5407-25T>A variant found in massive parallel sequencing (MPS). This technology is more Norwegian and French families. sensitive and improves the capacity for detection of mosaic Results:TheBRCA1c.5407-25T>Avariantwasdetected events. Very few cases of de novo mutations have been in 17 families with suspected hereditary breast and ovarian described in BRCA genes with only one constitutional cancer (meanManchester score 16.1).Thisisa rare variant mosaicism of BRCA1 mutation demonstrated by Friedman with a reported frequency of 0.00001579 in non-Finnish and coll. Here, we report the ﬁrst case of constitutional EuropeanpopulationinthegnomADdatabase.Itwasfound mosaicism of BRCA2 mutation in a 46 years old woman in 1/370 anonymous Norwegian blood donors and 0/784 referredtogeneticcounsellingforbifocallobularbreastcancer. patientsincludedinanin-housediagnosticexomedatabase. Two sisters developed breast cancer at 74 and 58 years old. NGS-based RNA sequencing of BRCA1 in blood revealed Anycancerwasn’tdiagnosedinuppergeneration.Weperform that thevariantleads toskippingofexon22andframeshiftAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1541 predicting the truncated BRCA1 protein p.(Gly1803Glnf- glycosylase genes as modiﬁers of cancer susceptibility for sTer11). This exon skipping was conﬁrmed by PCR and BRCA1/2 mutation carriers. Grants: J.M.B. is supported by Sanger sequencing of the BRCA1 mRNA booth in blood, grant FPU15/01978 from the Spanish Ministry of Educa- breast and in ovarian tissue. However, sequencing of two tion, Culture and Sport. c.5407-25T>A carriers heterozygous for a transcribed SNP J.M. Baquero: None. C. Benítez-Buelga: None. V. (c.4837A>G), showed that a low amount of correctly Fernández:None.M.Urioste:None.J.García-Giménez: spliced transcript including exon 22 is generated from the None. A. Osorio: None. J. Benítez: None. c.5407-25T>A allele. Western blot analysis of transiently expressedBRCA1proteinsinHeLacellsshowedareduced P12.013B amount of the mutant p.Gly1803GlnfsTer11 compared to Impact of germline BRCA mutation identiﬁcation on wild-type protein. subsequent breast cancer stage, therapy and survival - Conclusion: Our results indicate that BRCA1 c.5407- implications for routine screening 25T>A is a likely pathogenicsplice variant associated with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer. S. Lieberman1, T. Hadar2, P. Mor1, G. Amit2,3, H.Høberg-Vetti:None.E.Ognedal:None.A.Buisson: E. Tahover4, O. Rosengarten4, M. Carmon2, O. Olsha2, None. T. Vamre: None. S. Ariansen: None. G. Houge: R. Abu-Dalo2, R. Michaelson-Cohen1,3, E. Golomb5, None. T. Fiskerstrand: None. B.I. Haukanes: None. C. R. Rabinovitch6, E. Levy-Lahad1,3 Bjorvatn: None. P.M. Knappskog: None. 1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, P12.012A Jerusalem, Israel, 2Breast Surgery Unit, General Surgery Functional studies of SNPs in glycosylase genes as Department, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, modiﬁersofcancerriskinBRCA1andBRCA2mutation Israel, 3Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew University, carriers Jerusalem, Israel, 4Oncology Department, Shaare Zedek MedicalCenter,Jerusalem,Israel,5PathologyDepartment; J. M. Baquero1, C. Benítez-Buelga2, V. Fernández1, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, M. Urioste1,3, J. García-Giménez4,3, A. Osorio1,3, Jerusalem, Israel, 6Department of Radiation Oncology; J. Benítez1,3 University of Colorado Comprehensive Cancer Center, Aurora, CO, United States 1SpanishNationalCancerResearchCentre,Madrid,Spain, 2KarolinskaInstitutet,Solna,Sweden,3SpanishNetworkon Background: Screening healthy Ashkenazi Jews for Rare Diseases, Madrid, Spain, 4Universitat de Valencia, germline BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations (gBRCA) is not stan- Valencia, Spain dard policy, despite high (2.5%) carrier rates. Most carriers are identiﬁed only after breast cancer diagnosis. Introduction: In a previous association study, we found Aim: to determine if pre-symptomatic knowledge of three SNPs in different DNA glycosylase genes (OGG1, carrier status affects breast cancer stage and management. NEIL2,andUNG)thatmodifybreastorovariancancerrisk Methods: Record review of gBRCA carriers (excluding in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. women with risk-reduction mastectomy), diagnosed with Materials and Methods: We have used a series of 300 breast cancer between 1/2005-4/2016. We compared out- familial breast and ovarian cancer patients to try to gain comes between carriers whose gBRCA was identiﬁed pre- molecularinsightsintohowthesevariantsexerttheircancer breast cancer (PRE-C-D) vs. post-breast cancer (POST-C- risk modiﬁer effect. In this series, we have measured gly- D) diagnosis. cosylase expression and activity and different genome Results: 105 women with breast cancer had gBRCA: 42 instabilityandoxidativestresshallmarkstoexploretherole (40%) PRE-C-D and 63 (60%) POST-C-D. Mean age at of these SNPs. diagnosis (50.4y) and BRCA1:BRCA2 distribution Results:ThestudiedSNPsareassociatedwithexpression (64%:36%) were similar in both groups. PRE-C-D carriers changes in their respective glycosylases. We have also were signiﬁcantly more likely to have suggestive family found associations of the SNPs with DNA damage levels, history (93% vs. 63%), prior breast cancer screening (78% telomere length or oxidative stress levels, speciﬁcally for vs 64%) and diagnosis by imaging (78% vs 25%) rather the group of mutations carriers where the different SNPs than clinical symptoms (19% vs 73%) (p<0.001, all com- respectively exert their cancer risk modiﬁer effect. parisons). PRE-C-D carriers had lower stage at diagnosis Conclusions:Ourﬁndingshelptoexplaintheassociation (p<0.001), with no differences in tumor grade, hormonal of these SNPs with cancer risk in BRCA1/2 mutation car- receptororHer2status.PRE-C-Dcarrierswerelesslikelyto riers, highlighting the importance of genetic changes in receive chemotherapy (34% vs. 94%), and more likely to1542 elect bilateral mastectomies (66% vs 17%) (p≤.001 all two women were heterozygote for pathogenic mutation in comparisons). In multivariate analysis, PRE-C-D gBRCA the RAD51C and RAD51D genes, respectively. identiﬁcation predicted for early stage (0-I) breast cancer Conclusion: The overall occurrence of possibly patho- diagnosis (OR=18.4, p<0.001). Initial analysis indicates genic mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes, better overall survival (HR=0.16, p=0.087) excluding the ones detected in the highly penetrant BRCA1 Conclusions: Presymptomatic identiﬁcation of gBRCA and BRCA2 genes, is 4.8%. Thus, these genes seem to status is signiﬁcantly associated with earlier stage breast enable the identiﬁcation of more clinical cases which may cancer diagnosis, less extensive treatment, and possibly be beneﬁted by closer monitoring. improvement in overall survival. This supports routine M. Chatzidaki: None. Y.L. Loukas: None. G. Thodi: gBRCAtestingintheAshkenaziJewishpopulation.Funded A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Neoscreen by the BCRF LTD. O. Triantaﬁlli: A. Employment (full or part-time); S. Lieberman: None. T. Hadar: None. P. Mor: None. Modest;NeoscreenLTD.C.A.Sarri:A.Employment(full G. Amit: None. E. Tahover: None. O. Rosengarten: or part-time); Modest; Neoscreen LTD. E. Molou: A. None.M.Carmon:None.O.Olsha: None.R.Abu-Dalo: Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Neoscreen LTD. None.R.Michaelson-Cohen:None.E.Golomb:None.R. Y. Dotsikas: None. Rabinovitch: None. E. Levy-Lahad: None. P12.015D P12.014C Detection of variants of pathogenic and uncertain Estimation of mutation frequency in new breast cancer signiﬁcance in an Irish population using multi-gene susceptibility genes in a Greek patients’ cohort panels for breast cancer risk M.Chatzidaki1,Y.L.Loukas1,G.Thodi2,O.Triantaﬁlli2, U. M. McVeigh1, T. P. McVeigh2, N. Miller1, C. A. Sarri2, E. Molou2, Y. Dotsikas1 D. W. Morris3, M. J. Kerin1 1Department of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian 1Discipline of Surgery, Lambe Institute for Translational University of Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 2Neoscreen Research, NUI, Galway, Ireland, 2Cancer Genetics Unit, LTD, Athens, Greece TheRoyalMarsdenNHSFoundationTrust,London,United Kingdom, 3Discipline of Biochemistry, NUI, Galway, Introduction: Many other than BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes Ireland havebeenimplicatedinbreastcancerpredispositionduring thelastdecadeenablingtheidentiﬁcationofmorewomenat Breast cancer (BC) is the second most common cancer higher risk for breast cancer compared to the general worldwide. Twin studies estimate that >30% BCs are the population and develop surveillance protocols tailored to result of hereditary factors. While hugely informative, their needs in the near future. pathogenicvariantsinBRCA1andBRCA2explainonly16- Purpose: The purpose of the current study was to esti- 22% of hereditary BCs. Several high- and moderate-risk mate the prevalence of pathogenic mutations in the “new” genes, and >100 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) breast cancer susceptibility genes in a Greek patients’ have been identiﬁed which explain 33% of hereditary BCs. cohort. Approximately 50% of the hereditary risk of BC is Patients and Methods: 104 women who developed unknown. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a cost- breast cancer under theage of55 years oldwith orwithout effective method of investigating numerous genes in one family history and women free of cancer but with two or assay. There are an abundance of clinical multi-gene panel more affected ﬁrst degree relatives constitute our patients’ tests aimed at assessing the inherited risk of BC ± ovarian cohort. DNA was extracted with Nucleospin tissue kit and cancer. This study aimed to investigate germline variants libraries were prepared using the TruSight® Cancer genes included on breast ± ovarian cancer risk panels in an Sequencing Panel, which includes 40 breast cancer sus- Irish population. DNA from 90 BCs and 77 controls were ceptibilitygenes,followingthemanufacturer’sinstructions. sequenced for variants in 83 genes from clinical breast ± Massive parallel sequencing was conducted on Miseq ovarian cancer risk panels. Variant calling was performed platform (Illumina). following GATK best practices, and prioritised as loss-of- Results: Two cases carrying missense mutations of function(LOF) and missense variants; further grading was unknownclinicalsigniﬁcance wereidentiﬁedinMLH1and performed using ﬁve in silico prediction tools. Excluding PALB2 genes, respectively. One case harbors the CHEK2 common/benign variants, 56 variants were identiﬁed in 37 c.1100delC mutation, which confers three- to ﬁve-fold genes.36.5%and39.2%ofcasesandcontrolscarried≥one increased risk compared to the general population, while variant. Nine variants were classiﬁed as pathogenic/likelyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1543 pathogenic; three occurred in ATM, BRCA1, and CHEK2. showed100% ofHER2+, 100% ofPR- andthesame 50% Eight novel variants were identiﬁed, including a frameshift of ER+ and ER- (p=0.006, p=0.018, p=0.04). variant in NF1. Six variants were identiﬁed in the Lynch Conclusion:Outofeightgeneticvariantsanalysedinour syndrome genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS1. These study, four were identiﬁed to associate with BC, namely results highlight the need for caution when considering the within genes FGFR2, MAP3K1, LSP1 and CASP8. use of multi-gene testing in the clinic given the challenges Z. Dankova: None. K. Zelinová: None. M. Jagelková: of accurately predicting variant pathogenicity. None. M. Grendár: None. P. Kasajová: None. M. Kal- U.M.McVeigh:None.T.P.McVeigh:None.N.Miller: man: None. Z. Lasabová: None. P. Žúbor: None. None. D.W. Morris: None. M.J. Kerin: None. P12.018C P12.017B Analysis of a CHEK2 variant in a family with an ATM Geneticmodelsofbreastcancerbasedoneightcommon mutation and multiple breast cancer cases genetic variants M.Barzily-Rokni1,R.Michaelson-Cohen1,S.Lieberman1, Z. Dankova1, K. Zelinová1, M. Jagelková1, M. Grendár2, S. Casadei2, O. Weiss1, O. Freireich1, S. Zuckerman1, P. Kasajová3, M. Kalman4, Z. Lasabová1, P. Žúbor3 M. Sebbagh1, M. C. King2, R. Beeri1, E. Levy-Lahad1,3 1BiomedicalCenterMartin-DivisionofOncology,Martin, 1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Slovakia, 2Biomedical Center Martin - Bioinformatic Unit, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Departments of Martin, Slovakia, 3Clinic of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Medicine and Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Martin University Hospital, Martin, Slovakia, 4Department Seattle, WA, United States, 3Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew of Pathology,Martin University Hospital,Martin,Slovakia University, Jeruslaem, Israel Introduction: This study analyses eight SNPs of low We present analysis of a CHEK2 variant found in a family penetrant genes to detect possible importance in breast of Moroccan Jewish origin with multiple breast cancer cancer (BC) risk. cases.Of11sisters,5werediagnosedwithbreastcancerin Materials and Methods: The study consists of 317 their 60’s; one had both papillary thyroid cancer (age 67) women: 171 with breast cancer (57.06±11.60 years) and and pancreatic cancer (age 76). Their mother had breast 146 without previous history of any malignancy (50.24 cancer (age 70). Panel testing in four sisters revealed two ±10.69 years). Major breast cancer histological type was germlinevariants:aknownpathogenicmutationinATM-p. DIC(76.0%),followedbyLIC(7.8%).Wegenotypedeight Q1970X; and a variant in CHEK2 classiﬁed as being of genetic variants (rs4415084 FGF10, rs2981582 FGFR2, uncertain signiﬁcance - c.592+3A>T. (rs587782849, gno- rs889312 MAP3K1, rs3817198 LSP1, rs3803662 TOX3/ mAD allele frequency= 0.000032). This variant has been TNRC9, rs2293554 CASP8, rs13387042 and rs13281615 reported once to alter CHEK2 splicing (Kraus C et al, Int J CASC21) by High Resolution Melting method and vali- Cancer, 2017). 8 sisters were tested. Of the 5 with breast dated by Sanger sequencing. cancer,3(ages60-66)carriedofbothvariantsandtwo(ages Results: General, dominant and multiplicative genetic 61,67)carriedonlytheCHEK2variant.Thesisteraffected models conﬁrmed signiﬁcant association with BC in the with thyroid and pancreatic cancer carried only the ATM case of FGFR2 (C/T) and MAP3K1 (A/C´) polymorphisms mutation, as did 2 unaffected sisters (ages 53, 67). CHEK2 (in all cases p≤0.03). Odd ratios for general model: c.592+3A>T was found in 2/234 (0.8%) Sephardi breast CT=1.771, TT=1.953, AC´=1.760, C´C´=2.894. Odd cancer patients (also of Moroccan origin), and was also ratios for dominant model: CT+TT=1.822 and AC´+ observedinanunaffectedwomanofBalkanorigin(age36). C´C´=1.868andoddratiosofmultiplicativegeneticmodels cDNA analysis revealed two alternate transcripts, one T=1.517 (95%CI=1.083-2.131), C´=1.676 (p≤0.04). lacking exon 4, and one lacking exons 4-5 (both out-of- Logistic regression of interaction revealed the lowest OR frame, conﬁrming the previous report). Semi-quantitative forthecombinationoforiginalhomozygotegenotypes(AA PCRindicated50%reductionofthewild-typetranscript.In +CC+TT) of MAP3K1, FGFR2 and LSP1 genotypes summary, CHEK2 c.592+3 A>T is a rare splicing variant, (OR=0.024, 95%CI 0.001-0.306, p=0.011), indicating which should be reclassiﬁed as mild pathogenic. In this lower risk for those without risk alleles. family, the presence of two pathogenic variants in The risk allele genotype (CC) of LSP1 (T/C) gene poly- moderate-risk breast cancer genes may explain the high morphism showed solely ER-positivity (100%), hetero- load of late-onset breast cancer. zygotes with one risk allele (TC) were also mostly ER+ M.Barzily-Rokni:None.R.Michaelson-Cohen:None. (90.6%). The risk genotype (GG) of CASP8 polymorphism S. Lieberman: None. S. Casadei: None. O. Weiss: None.1544 O. Freireich: None. S. Zuckerman: None. M. Sebbagh: biomarkers in order to achieve efﬁcient TRAIL targeted None. M.C. King: None. R. Beeri: None. E. Levy- therapy. Lahad: None. E. Roupou: None. M. Michelli: None. I. Chatzian- dreou: None. N.V. Michalopoulos: None. P. Kar- P12.019D athanasis: None. A.A. Saetta: None. Deregulation of TRAIL apoptotic pathway mRNA expression in breast tumours P12.020A Identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant network markers for breast E. Roupou1, M. Michelli1, I. Chatziandreou1, cancer in Middle Eastern women using integrated N. V. Michalopoulos2, P. Karathanasis3, A. A. Saetta1 transcriptomic and network analysis 11st Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, O. Al-Harazi1,2, I. H. Kaya1,3, A. El Allali2, N. Kaya4, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Ath, D. Colak1 Athens, Greece, 2Department of Surgery Attikon Hospital, SchoolofMedicine,UniversityofAthensN.K.U.A.,Athens, 1Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scientiﬁc Greece, Athens, Greece, 31st Department of Propaedeutic Computing, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Surgery Hippokrateion Hospital, School of Medicine, Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2College of Computer and University of Athens N.K.U.A., Athens, Greece, Athens, Information Sciences, Computer Science Department, King Greece Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Introduction: TRAIL apoptotic pathway constitutes a 4Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital promising therapeutic target for cancer patients, due to and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia high selectivity and low toxicity of TRAIL agents when administered in monotherapy/combination therapies. The Introduction: Breast cancer is a major health problem in aim of our study was to search for possible predictive the world and it is the most common cause of cancer death biomarkers for patient stratiﬁcation to ensure maximum among women. The integration of gene expression proﬁles treatment efﬁcacy of TRAIL targeted therapy. and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network provides a Materials and Methods: 88 breast cancer tissues were better understanding of the molecular architecture of examined for relative mRNA expression of TRAIL and its diseases. Recently, many researchers have invested efforts receptors (DR4, DR5, DcR1, DcR2), using RT-PCR/ΔΔCt for identifying subnetwork biomarkers for cancer. It has method.ForstatisticalanalysisSPSSv22packagewasused. been shown that these subnetwork biomarkers are more Deathreceptor(DR4,DR5)proteinlevelswereanalyzedby robust and reliable than single biomarker genes that are Western blot in a subset of cases. selected based on the gene expression data only. Results: Elevated mRNA levels were observed in 11%, Materials and Methods: We performed an integrated 19.3%, 23.9%, 11.6% and 12% of the cases for TRAIL, network analysis of gene expression data with the PPI to DR4, DR5, DcR1 and DcR2 genes respectively. Reduced identify signiﬁcant subnetwork biomarkers. In addition, we mRNA levels were detected in 64.6%, 38.6%, 31.8%, used the k-nearest neighbor (KNN) algorithm to deﬁne the 45.3%and42.2%ofthecasesforTRAIL,DR4,DR5,DcR1, classiﬁer.Wevalidatedtheclassiﬁcationperformanceonan and DcR2 genes respectively. TRAIL expression was cor- independent gene expression dataset of breast cancer sam- related with molecular subtype (p=0,011), DR4 with N ples. Moreover, we performed survival analyses using dif- category(p=0,029)andtumorgrade(p=0,015),DcR1with ferent transcriptomic datasets that consisted of over tumor grade (p=0,001) and ER/PR expression (p=0,051). 3,000 samples. All receptors correlated with the prognostic stage (DR4 Results: We have identiﬁed four subnetwork biomarkers p=0,005, DR5 p=0,029, DcR1 and DcR2 p=0,006). The that signiﬁcantly distinguished breast cancer patients from receptors’ mRNA levels presented linear correlations and healthy controls. The identiﬁed classiﬁer achieved 97% the strongest was found between DR4/DR5 (R=0,634, predictive accuracy between tumor and normal samples. p<0,001). Moreover, the survival analysis demonstrated that high Conclusions: A signiﬁcant deregulation of TRAIL expressionofourbiomarkersisassociatedwithpoordisease pathway components mRNA expression in breast cancer outcome. was observed in the present study. Multiple simultaneous Conclusions: Our results suggest that the network ana- expression patterns of TRAIL receptors emerged, under- lysis coupled with genomic data may provide a robust scoring the importance of patient selection using predictive methodologytoidentifykeybiologicalprogramsassociated withbreastcancerprogressionandinvasionandmayleadtoAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1545 improved diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic options. None. S. Rowley: None. L. Devereux: None. A. Lee: Funding:ThisstudyisfundedbyKFSHRCResearchGrant None. N. Grewal: None. P. James: None. (2110006 to DC). O. Al-Harazi: None. I.H. Kaya: None. A. El Allali: P12.022C None. N. Kaya: None. D. Colak: None. Genomic mapping of Crete via BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation analysis P12.021B Integration of tumour sequencing and case-control P. Apostolou1, F. Fostira1, C. Kourousis2, A. Vagena1, analyses is a powerful tool for identiﬁcation of cancer A. Delimitsou1, M. Papamentzelopoulou1, predisposition genes V. Georgoulias3, D. Mavroudis3, K. Kalpakis3, N. Androulakis4, I. Drositis4, D. Yannoukakos1, I. Campbell, N. Li, B. Lim, S. McInerny, M. Zethoven, E. Saloustros5, I. Konstantopoulou1 D. Cheasley, S. Rowley, L. Devereux, A. Lee, N. Grewal, P. James 1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2General Clinic "IASO", Chania, Crete, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia Greece, 3Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion-Crete, Greece, 4General Background: The genetic causes of a large proportion of Hospital of Heraklion "Venizelio-Pananio", Heraklion- breast cancer families is unknown and while our targeted Crete, Greece, 5Department of Oncology, University sequencing of over 12,000 index cases and controls has Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece identiﬁed numerous strong candidates, individually muta- tions in these genes are rare. Our work highlights the fact Introduction: Germline BRCA1/2 loss-of-function variants that in isolation, case-control studies will remain substan- arelinkedtoincreasedbreastandovariancancerrisk.Upto tiallyunderpoweredtoestablishaclearrolefornovelbreast date, more than 5000distinct BRCA1/2pathogenic variants cancer predisposition genes and orthogonal validation have been reported, while their frequency and distribution approaches will be required. Genomic analysis of tumours varies between populations and ethnicities. In the Greek from carriers of germline variants in candidate genes can population, founder effects have been described, mainly provide powerful additional evidence for involvement of a involving BRCA1 loss-of-function variants. However, gene in cancer predisposition through identiﬁcation of certain geographical regions were underrepresented in “second hit” somatic inactivation events and characteristic previous studies. We therefore aimed to deﬁne and “mutational signatures”. molecularly characterize the BRCA1/2 mutational spectrum Results: We applied this approach to assess the role of in Crete, the largest Greek island with unique demographic RAD51C in breast cancer predisposition. Full exon and cultural characteristics. sequencingofRAD51Cinacase/controlanalysis identiﬁed MaterialsandMethods:PatientsofCretandescent,with a signiﬁcant excess of loss of function variants in cases breast or/and ovarian cancer fulﬁlling NCCN guidelines compared with controls (0.36% versus 0.04%; OR=8.67, were selected for genetic testing by NGS or Sanger 95% CI =1.89 to 80.52, P=9.87x10-04). In addition, the sequencing, followed by MLPA. Haplotype analysis was association was highly signiﬁcant among cases with ER subsequently performed to investigate potential founder negative (P=1.57x10-05) or triple-negative cancer effects of recurrent alleles. (P=7.33x10-06), but not in ER positive cases. Tumour Results: In total 291 patients (273 females, 18 males) sequencingfromcarriersconﬁrmedbi-allelicinactivationin were included. Forty-eight patients (16.5%) carried 21 dif- all the triple-negative cases and this was associated with ferent pathogenic variants in BRCA1 (45.8%; 22/48) and high levels of large-scale genomic alterations and a muta- BRCA2 (54.2%; 26/48). The deleterious variants c.6842- tional signature 3, both indicative of homologous recom- 2675_7008-5558del and c.7806-2A>T in BRCA2 and bination repair deﬁciency. c.5492delinBRCA1wererecurrentandconstituted50%of Conclusions: This study provides compelling evidence all identiﬁed pathogenic variants. Haplotype analysis con- that germline loss of function variants in RAD51C are ﬁrmedafoundereffectforallthreevariantswithaparticular associated with triple-negative breast cancer and demon- origin for each of them. Subsequent analyses indicate that strates the substantial power of tumour sequencing to theseareCretanfounders,sincetheyhavenotbeendetected advance the discover new cancer genes. in patients originating from other regions of Greece. I. Campbell: None. N. Li: None. B. Lim: None. S. Conclusions: The BRCA1/2 mutational spectrum of the McInerny: None. M. Zethoven: None. D. Cheasley: Cretan population shows particular geographical distribu- tion, inﬂuenced by strong founder effects. These ﬁndings1546 may facilitate a population-based genetic screening for P12.024A identiﬁcation of unaffected mutation carriers and primary Exome sequencing identiﬁed potential causative cancer prevention. candidate genes for serrated polyposis syndrome P. Apostolou: None. F. Fostira: None. C. Kourousis: None. A. Vagena: None. A. Delimitsou: None. M. S. Peters1, C. Trueck1, C. Perne1,2, R. Adam1,3, Papamentzelopoulou: None. V. Georgoulias: None. D. J. Altmueller4,5, H. Thiele4, I. Spier1,2, S. Aretz1,2 Mavroudis: None. K. Kalpakis: None. N. Androulakis: None. I. Drositis: None. D. Yannoukakos: None. E. Sal- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, oustros: None. I. Konstantopoulou: None. Germany, 2Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Center for P12.023D Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical Putative non-coding regulatory driver discovery using Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Cologne unmatched tumor-normal samples Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University of N. M. R. Lykoskouﬁs, H. Ongen, E. T. Dermitzakis Cologne, Cologne, Germany UniversityofGeneva,MedicalSchool,Geneva,Switzerland Serrated polyposis syndrome (SPS) is a poorly deﬁned colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome characterized by We had previously developed a methodology using allele multiple and/or large serrated lesions throughout the colon. speciﬁc expression (ASE) as a proxy to discovering Genes Todate,onlyfewmolecularsignatureshavebeendescribed withAllelicDysregulation(GADs)impactedbynon-coding and the etiology of the syndrome has not been identiﬁed in somatic mutations, which requires matched healthy-tumour the vast majority of patients. samples. Here, we describe a methodology to discover To uncover causative variants, the exomes of 49 SPS GADs using unmatched samples to compare tumor and patients have been sequenced (Illumina HiSeq) using leu- reference RNAseq ASE (e,g. GTEx). Somatic mutations kocyte DNA. For data analysis, the GATK- and the under selectionfor tumorigenesis andfalling innon-coding Varbank2-software were used. The germline variants were regulatoryregionsofagenetendtoaffecttranscriptioninan ﬁltered for rare (biallelic: MAF≤1%, monoallelic: ≤0.1% allelic fashion that is observed as altered allelic imbalance according to gnomAD and an in-house-database) loss of between normal and tumor samples. Moreover, we also function (LoF) variants. The pLi-score and reactome path- expect this gene to have altered gene expression for way analysis were used for further prioritization. selection to occur. Hence, to detect non-coding regulatory Biallelic LoF variants were found in 3 genes none of drivers in tumorigenesis, discriminating genes under which being recurrently mutated. All in all, 548 genes selectionorunderaneQTLeffect,wedevisedthreecriteria harbored heterozygous LoF variants. 25 genes were recur- to discover true driver genes. To test our method, we used rentlymutated.31/551geneswereextremelyLoFintolerant colorectal cancer data from the SYSCOL project treating indicated by pLi-score ≥ 0.9. 10/551 genes are involved in tumor and healthy samples as unmatched. We discov- DNA repair, 12 in cell cycle checkpoint control, and one ered702 genes passing all ﬁltering criteria. Of them, 197 geneinprogrammedcelldeath.Mostinterestingly,different overlapped with the 373 GADs previously discovered with variantsintwopatientswerefoundinonegenefunctioning matchedsamples.Next,weusedSYSCOLtumorandGTEx inthecanonicalwntsignallingpathway,asdoesRNF43,in samples as control from colon sigmoid and colon which pathogenic variants have been shown to be causal transverse, discovering 612 and 689 GADs, respectively. for SPS. Ofthese,480genesoverlappedamong allthreeunmatched Exome sequencing identiﬁes potentially causative germ- analyses passing all criteria with 152 overlapping with the line variants underlying the susceptibility to SPS. The cur- previously discovered GADs indicating that our methodol- rent work-up consists of screening of additional SPS ogy can detect regulatory drivers. Many of these have patientsfor the most interesting genes, and the inclusion of alreadybeenimplicatedinvariouscancers.Currentworkis missense variants as well as CNVs. Additionally, a rare validating our approach using prostate adenocarcinoma variant analysis and burden tests will be conducted. samples and other cancers and exploring the understudied S. Peters: None. C. Trueck: None. C. Perne: None. R. non-coding regulatory drivers. Adam: None. J. Altmueller: None. H. Thiele: None. I. N.M.R. Lykoskouﬁs: None. H. Ongen: None. E.T. Spier: None. S. Aretz: None. Dermitzakis: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1547 P12.025B E. Jarhelle1, H. F. R. Stensland1, G. Å. M. Hansen1, The prognostic landscape of alternative transcript S. Skarsfjord1, C. Jonsrud1, M. Ingebrigtsen1, isoforms across human cancers N. Strømsvik1, M. Van Ghelue1,2 K. M. Vincent1, S. D. Findlay2, L. Postovit3 1University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway 1University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, Introduction: Patients with hereditary breast and ovarian United States, 3University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, cancer (HBOC) are diagnostically tested for pathogenic Canada variants (PVs) in BRCA1 and BRCA2. However, in most HBOC families no PVs are detected. Currently, several Introduction: Through alternative start site usage and additional genes were shown to be involved in increasing alternative splicing, individual genes commonly produce the cancer risk in HBOC patients. Accordingly, we multiple mRNA isoforms that can code for proteins with investigatedaNorwegianHBOCcohortinordertoidentify similar, distinct, or even opposing functions. Most cancer genetic risk factors for cancer in these patients. expression studies evaluate expression at a gene-level, not Material and Methods: Hundred and one HBOC accounting for the impact of multiple transcript isoforms patientsnegative for pathogenic variants inBRCA1/BRCA2 arising from the same genetic locus. were screened for PVs in 94 genes using next-generation Materials and Methods: Herein, we used clinical and sequencing. We used Illumina TruSight rapid capture RNA-sequencingdatafrom5642tumoursfrom14different technologytopreparetheIlluminaTruSightCancertargeted cancers from The Cancer Genome Atlas to investigate sequencing libraries, which were sequenced using an Illu- associations between gene expression, atboth the gene and mina MiSeq System. The sequencing data were analyzed isoform levels, and patient outcomes using Cox regression using Illumina MiSeq Reporter, and detected variants were models. In addition, we used SNP and methylation data to annotated and ﬁltered in Cartagenia Bench Lab NGS soft- analyzehowcoordinatedgeneticandepigeneticeventsmay ware using different criteria. The detected variants were regulate these alternative isoform decisions through appli- scrutinized for their pathogenicity using Alamut Visual cation of the sQTLseekeR algorithm and a methylation (Interactive Biosoftware). correlation analysis. Results: Nine different deleterious germline PV/likely Results:Wehavefoundthatmanygeneshavealternative pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in seven genes in 12 isoforms that associate with survival in opposite directions, patients: three in ATM, and one in CHEK2, ERCC5, unveiling a new molecular level with strong associations FANCM, RAD51C, TP53 and WRN. Six of the 12 patients with patient outcomes. Isoform-level data, when compared were carriers of a variant of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUSs) to gene-level data, revealed an additional 6605 genes with in other genes. Several different VUSs were identiﬁed isoforms signiﬁcantly associated with survival in the 14 requiring further characterization. different cancers studied (|meta Z score| Q<0.001). Addi- Conclusion: In order to improve the clinical follow-up, tionally, we have identiﬁed potential genetic (SNP) and more knowledge is needed regarding the diversity of epigenetic (methylation) mechanisms for these alternative genetic risk factors possibly involved in cancer develop- isoform decisions. ment. Currently, for carriers of PV/LPV in many of these Conclusions: We have shown that approaching gene genes, there are no clinical management programs in expression as an isoform-level phenomenon provides a Norway. moresensitiveapproachtoidentifyingsignaturesassociated E. Jarhelle: None. H.F.R. Stensland: None. G.Å.M. withpatientoutcomes.Moreover,thegeneticandepigenetic Hansen: None. S. Skarsfjord: None. C. Jonsrud: None. regulationoftheseeventsrevealsspeciﬁcmolecularbiology M. Ingebrigtsen: None. N. Strømsvik: None. M. Van that may contribute to individual differences in disease Ghelue: None. outcome, and should be further explored. K.M. Vincent: None. S.D. Findlay: None. L. P12.027D Postovit: None. Molecular characterization of tumour DNA from patients with non-small cell lung cancer P12.026C Identifyingsequencevariantscontributingtohereditary S. Kyriakou1, A. Eliades1, C. Loizides1, K. Tsangaras1, breast/ovarian cancer in patients with no identiﬁed A. Achilleos1, E. Kypri1, I. Drejeriene2,3, BRCA1 or BRCA2 variants J. Kasnauskiene2, M. Ioannides1, G. Koumbaris1, P. C. Patsalis11548 1NIPD Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Klaipeda University referral of patients with advanced cancer to Cancer Hospital, Klaipeda, Lithuania, 3Vilnius University, Vilnius, Genetics Services Lithuania C. Moss, S. Ward, E. Cojocaru, W. Xu, J. Hanwell, Introduction: Cancer is often characterized as an evolu- M. van Zyl, L. O'Leary, J. de Bono, U. Banerji, S. Kaye, tionary process driven by sequential acquisition of somatic A. Minchom, A. George, J. Lopez, T. McVeigh mutationsandclonalselection.Therefore,genomicanalysis of cancer cells has greatly enhanced our ability to identify The Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom genetic alterations associated with various cancer types. Taking this in mind, cancer diagnosis and treatment is Molecular aberrations in cancer may represent therapeutic undergoing a fundamental shift from a histopathologically targets, and, if arising from the germline, impact further deﬁned tumour treated with chemotherapy towards mole- cancer risk management in patients and their blood cular characterisation of the tumour and use of targeted relatives. Annually, 600-700 patients are referred for therapies. The challenge of clinical centres is to meet the consideration of experimental drug trials in the Drug needs for molecular testing using reliable methods and Development Unit (DDU) in our institution. A proportion processestoensurethepatientreceivesaccurateresultsina of patients may merit germline genetic testing because of timely manner. This study is focusing on the identiﬁcation suspicious personal/family history or ﬁndings of tumour- of actionable mutations in non-small cell lung cancer based testing. We aimed to assess the impact of different (NSCLC)patientsthatcouldinformtheclinicianinregards multi-disciplinary interventions on family history taking in to diagnosis, prognosis and therapy decision. and referral rates from DDU to Cancer Genetics Materials and Methods: Formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn- Unit (CGU). embedded (FFPE) tumour DNA from 57 patients diag- Methods: nosed with NSCLC were subjected to NIPD Genetics pro- Over 42 months, three interventions were undertaken at prietary targeted capture enrichment technology followed different intervals; byNGS.Sequencingdatawerevalidatedbyanindependent laboratory using Ion Torrent platform and Ampliseq colon 1. Embedding a genetics provider in DDU review clinic and lung cancer panel from Thermoﬁsher. 2. “Trafﬁc light” system ﬂagging cancers with heritable Results: The most frequent mutations were identiﬁed in component TP53 (46.81%), KRAS (14.89%), EGFR (10.64%) and 3. Virtual multi-disciplinary meeting (MDM). PIK3CA(10.64%).ResultswerevalidatedwithIonTorrent- NGS for 26 patients for which there was adequate DNA Comparativeanalysesbetweenintervalswereundertaken, material from the same tissue sections with a 97.3% con- including referral rates to CGU, investigations and patient cordance between the two methods. outcomes. Family history-taking in a sample of 20 patients Conclusion: These results highlight the clinical utility of managed in each interval was assessed by retrospective our assay as a companion diagnostics tool that can inform chart review. cancer diagnosis, prognosis and guide therapy. Results: Frequency of family history taking, and referral S. Kyriakou: None. A.Eliades: A. Employment (full or to CGU, increased with each intervention, particularly, the part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. C. Loizides: A. virtual MDM (40%-v- 85%). Referral rates increased over Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. thestudyperiod,from0.1referral/week(5/year,0.36%total K. Tsangaras: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- referrals) to 1.2/week (projected 63/year (3.81%). Forty- niﬁcant;NIPDGenetics.A.Achilleos:A.Employment(full four (52%) patients referred required germline testing, in or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. E. Kypri: A. three of whom variants were identiﬁed. Non-attendance Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. rates were low (6, 7%). I. Drejeriene: None. J. Kasnauskiene: None. M. Ioan- Conclusion: Patients in the DDU are unique, with long nides:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPD cancer histories and short estimated life expectancy. Mul- Genetics. G. Koumbaris: A. Employment (full or part- tidisciplinary working between CGU and DDU facilitates time); Signiﬁcant; NIPD Genetics. P.C. Patsalis: A. germline testing of those patients that may otherwise miss Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NIPDGenetics. the opportunity. C.Moss:None.S.Ward:None.E.Cojocaru:None.W. P12.028A Xu: None. J. Hanwell: None. M. van Zyl: None. L. Interventions in a Specialist Drug Development Unit to O'Leary: None. J. de Bono: None. U. Banerji: None. S. improve family history documentation and onward Kaye: None. A. Minchom: None. A. George: None. J. Lopez: None. T. McVeigh: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1549 P12.029B 1Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Alterations of DNA Damage Response Pathway in University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Institute of Lithuanian Patients with Castration-Resistant Prostate Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, Cancer University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary R.Sabaliauskaite1,I.Trockaja1,A.Sestokaite1,2,A.Ulys1, CD24 is a small molecular weight cell-surface protein and F. Jankevicius1,3, S. Jarmalaite1,2 an independent marker for poor prognosis in the different type of cancers. Determination of CD24 expression in 1National Cancer Institute, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Institute of plasma, exosomes and ovarian tissue samples of serous Biosciences, Life Sciences Center, Vilniu University, ovarian cancer patients was our aim. Vilnius,Lithuania,3FacultyofMedicine,VilniusUniversity, Ovariantissueandbloodsamplesfrom21casesofserous Vilnius, Lithuania ovarian cancer and eight healthy controls were collected. After RNA isolation, the cDNA was synthesized, and then Introduction:Prostatecancer(PCa)isaheterogeneousand quantitativereal-timePCRwasperformedusingbeta-globin dynamic disease, which usually progresses to castration as a housekeeping gene for the normalization of the data. resistant PCa (CRPC) - the highly lethal form. Recent data Protein-protein and miRNA network analysis were per- suggest that CRPC may carry the germline or sporadic formed using Biogrid and miRTargetLink databases. mutationsin DNA damage response(DDR) pathway genes Signiﬁcant difference in the expression of CD24 in and this cancer is commonly identiﬁed in families with a ovarian tissue between controls and patients (0.1595 high predisposition to the breast and ovarian cancer. Next ±0.3213 vs. 44.97±68.06 p=0.0068) was observed, while generation sequencing based-studies can uncover the CD24 expression was detected in exosomes in 38.1% of complex genomic landscape of CRPC and identify novel patients, mainly with FIGO III, and in plasma 9.5% of targets for efﬁcient anticancer therapies. The aim of our cases. Correlation in the expression of CD24 and FIGO study was the assessment of DDR pathway alterations in stages was determined between controls and patients. Our Lithuanian cohort of CRPC cases using qPCR and NGS network analysis shows LYN, SELP, FGR, and NPM1 targeted gene panel. proteins are interacting with CD24. Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from leu- Our research work demonstrated higher expression of kocytesof143CRPCpatientsthatenrolledthestudyduring CD24 in ovarian cancer patients’ tissue samples, and there 2016-2018. Dominant germline gene mutations in periph- was an association with FIGO classiﬁcation. However, eral blood leukocytes were analyzed by custom made CD24 expression was detected only in some cell-free TaqMan assays and by NGS using custom made panel. plasma and exosome samples. Results: DNA mutation in at least one of the ﬁve DDR B. Soltesz: None. J. Lukács: None. E. Szilágyi: None. genes was detected in 23 of 143 (16%) CRPC cases: in É.Márton:None.M.SzilágyiBónizs:None.A.Penyige: BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, NBN and ATM were detected 2 None. R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None. (1,4%), 3 (2,1%), 12 (8,4%), 1 (0,7%) and 5 (3,5%), respectively. The most predominant mutation of the DDR P12.031D pathway was the CHEK2 c.470T>C mutation. CDH1 pathogenic variants in patients who do not fulﬁll Conclusions: Germline or sporadic mutations of DDR testing criteria are not necessarily incidental ﬁndings pathway genes were detected in 16% of CRPC cases showing signiﬁcant involvement of this molecular pathway K. Strojnik1, M. Krajc1, M. Banjac1, V. Stegel2, P. Skerl2, in progression of PCa to the most aggressive form of the V. Setrajcic Dragos2, G. Klancar2, S. Novakovic2, disease.Inthefuture,speciﬁctreatmentregimensshouldbe A. Blatnik1 considered for this subgroup of CRPC cases. R. Sabaliauskaite: None. I. Trockaja: None. A. Sesto- 1Cancer Genetic Clinic, Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, kaite: None. A. Ulys: None. F. Jankevicius: None. S. Slovenia, 2Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute Jarmalaite: None. of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia P12.030C Introduction:Multigenepaneltestingmayidentifycarriers Expression of CD24 in plasma, exosome and ovarian of pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants (PV/LPV) in the tissue samples of serous ovarian cancer patients CDH1 gene without a personal and/or family history of diffuse gastric and/or lobular breast cancer. Clinical B. Soltesz1, J. Lukács2, E. Szilágyi1, É. Márton1, interpretation of such cases can be difﬁcult. M. Szilágyi Bónizs1, A. Penyige1, R. Póka2, B. Nagy11550 Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of all in the Latino population and, based on clinical data identiﬁed cases of germline PV/LPV in CDH1 since the provided to laboratories, an association with this variant introduction of the Illumina’s TruSight Cancer sequencing andPDACinthispopulationispostulated.Wepresentfour panel at our Institute. pedigreeswithLatinoancestryandtheCDKN2Ac.146T>C Results: Multigene panel testing was performed in 2448 variant. The pedigrees are consistent with a hereditary cases of suspected hereditary cancer predisposition. Het- PDAC and melanoma syndrome. In two families, the erozygous PV/LPV in the CDH1 gene were identiﬁed in 8 mutation was documented in probands with a personal and unrelated probands. 4/8 cases fulﬁlled the International family history of PDAC. The third proband has a personal GastricCancerLinkageConsortium(IGCLC)2015criteria, historyofmelanomaandfourﬁrst-degree relatives andtwo one only after revision of the gastric tumor specimen. The second-degree relatives with PDAC. The fourth proband is remaining 4/8 cases failed to fulﬁll IGCLC criteria. In two unaffectedwithasecond-degreerelativewithPDAC.These ofthese,therewasaveriﬁedfamilyhistoryofmucinousand clinical histories will assist with deﬁning the pathogenicity mixed-cell gastric cancers unavailable for revision. In the of this variant. It is documented that surveillance is more two other cases, the probands were screened for hereditary successful at detecting PDAC at a resectable stage in breast-ovarian cancer with a panel which included CDH1. CDKN2A mutation carriers and thus accurate classiﬁcation Of these, there was limited data regarding family historyin of likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants plays an one case, and an unveriﬁable family history of second- important role in determining appropriate surveillance in degree relatives with gastric cancer in the other. In our mutation carriers. cohort, we identiﬁed 22 carriers of variants of uncertain S. Ryan: None. L. Mohler: None. signiﬁcance(VUS)inCHD1,mostwithalowlikelihoodof pathogenicity. P12.033B Conclusions: Testing for CDH1 variants in patients who A large intergenic deletion upstream of CDKN2A donotfulﬁlltheIGCLC criteria resultedinasmallnumber predisposes melanoma of identiﬁed PV/LPV carriers. Due to incomplete family histories, these cannot be regarded as true incidental ﬁnd- P. A. Johansson1, V. Nathan1, M. Howlie1, J. Symmons1, ings. The VUS detection rate was low. H. Hamilton1, M. H. Law1, E. A. Holland2,3, J. Palmer1, K. Strojnik: None. M. Krajc: None. M. Banjac: None. G. J. Mann2,3, N. K. Hayward1, A. L. Pritchard1,4 V. Stegel: None. P. Skerl: None. V. Setrajcic Dragos: None. G. Klancar: None. S. Novakovic: None. A. 1QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Blatnik: None. Australia, 2Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, Australia, 3The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, P12.032A 4Genetics and Immunology, An Lòchran, University of the Evidence for the association of the c.146T>C variant in Highlands and Island, Inverness, United Kingdom CDKN2A with hereditary pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomaandmelanomasyndromeintheLatino Introduction: Mutations in the CDKN2A gene that affect population function of the p16INK4a transcript are the most common cause of familial melanoma. With the advent of next- S. Ryan, L. Mohler generationsequencingafewmoresusceptibilitygeneshave been identiﬁed over the last decade. Yet, approximately UniversityofNewMexico,Albuquerque,NM,UnitedStates 50% of familial melanoma cases have no known attributed genetic cause, despite suggested autosomal dominant GermlinemutationsintheCDKN2Agenecauseahereditary inheritance of disease. pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and melanoma Materials and Method: Whole genome (WGS) or syndrome. The presence of a CDKN2A pathogenic variant exome(WES)sequencingwasperformedonDNAsamples has a signiﬁcant impact in determining appropriate screen- from 529 individuals in 267 high-risk families with cuta- ings in carriers. Thus, accurate variant interpretation for neous or uveal melanoma. CDKN2A gene alterations is of utmost importance. There Results:WGSidentiﬁeda234kbdeletionapproximately areconﬂictingreportsofpathogenicityforaspeciﬁcvariant 200 kb upstream of the CDKN2A gene in 20/23 affected (c.146T>C)inthisgene.Thisvariant hasbeen classiﬁedas individualsfromalargecutaneousmelanomafamily.Inthe a non-actionable variant of uncertain signiﬁcance by four neighbouring gene DMRTA1, we identiﬁed a haplotype- laboratories while one laboratory has classiﬁed it as likely linked rare (gnomAD variant allele frequency = 8 x 10-5) pathogenic and thus clinically actionable. Of interest, this coding variant. Screening of melanoma families worldwide variantispresentintheExACdatabaseatahighfrequency identiﬁed a further eight families harbouring this deletion.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1551 Genetic ancestry analysis in combination with detailed guidelines. In addition, as the resistance mutation p. examination of records revealed a shared ancestor for three Cys797Ser can not be evaluated by this method further of these families, though likely all originated from a com- testing is needed in this regard. mon founder. Functional assessment of how this deletion A.A. Saetta: None. I. Giannopoulou: None. M. modiﬁes risk of cutaneous melanoma is on-going. Michelli: None. A. Zougros: None. E. Roupou: None. I. Conclusions: The deletion upstream of CDKN2A is the Chatziandreou: None. most common mutation to have been found in cutaneous melanoma families. This ﬁnding is of further signiﬁcance P12.035D duetothedistanceofthedeletionfromCDKN2Aandthatit Screening for germline CHEK2 mutations in Spanish would not be detected using traditional exome screening. families with hereditary cancer suspicion P.A. Johansson: None. V. Nathan: None. M. Howlie: None. J. Symmons: None. H. Hamilton: None. M.H. J. del Valle1,2,3, G. Vargas—Parra1,2,3, P. Rofes1,2,3, Law: None. E.A. Holland: None. J. Palmer: None. G.J. M. Gausachs1,2, A. Stradella1,2,4, E. Montes1,2,3, Mann: None. N.K. Hayward: None. A.L. E. Darder5, L. Feliubadaló1,2,3, J. Brunet1,5,6, Pritchard: None. C. Lázaro1,2,3 P12.034C 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of EGFR mutation testing in cf-DNA from NSCLC Oncology, IDIBELL., L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, patients using Cobas® EGFR mutation test v2 2Program in Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental TherapyinOncology(Oncobell),IDIBELL,L'Hospitaletde A. A. Saetta, I. Giannopoulou, M. Michelli, A. Zougros, Llobregat, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en E. Roupou, I. Chatziandreou Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, Spain, 4Medical Oncology Department, Catalan Institute of Oncology, 1stDepartmentofPathology,SchoolofMedicine,National IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 5Hereditary and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBGI, Girona, Spain, 6Medical Sciences Department, School of Introduction:EGFRmutationanalysisincirculatingcell-free Medicine, University of Girona, Girona, Spain tumorDNA(cf-DNA)fromplasmaconstitutesalessinvasive alternative method in cases without adequate tumor material Introduction: CHEK2 pathogenic variants have been formolecularanalysisandformonitoringdiseaseprogression. associated with increased risk of different types of cancer, Materials and Methods: 275 blood samples from mainly breast cancer. The aim of this work was to study NSCLC patients (73 with matched parafﬁn-embedded CHEK2mutationsinhereditarycancerpatientsfromSpain. tumor tissues) were examined for EGFR mutations. Circu- Inaﬁrststep,weanalyzedthethreemostprevalentCHEK2 lating cell- free tumor DNA (cf-DNA) isolation from mutations in a hereditary breast and ovarian cancer cohort plasma and detection of EGFR mutations was performed (HBOC). Next, we extended the analysis to the entire gene using Cobas® EGFR mutation test v2. to a larger hereditary cancer cohort. Results:EGFRmutationsincf-DNAwerefoundin22% Patients and Methods: Testing for recurrent CHEK2 of the samples. The most common EGFR mutations were mutations was performed by MLPA and CSCE in 432 exon 19 deletions (65%), followed by exon 21 point patients from a retrospective HBOC cohort, negative for mutations (30%). The presence of mutations in primary BRCA mutations. Targeted NGS was used to screen for NSCLC reached 12% whereas the rate of mutations was CHEK2 point mutations and large rearrangements in a 33% for NSCLC patients during follow up. A resistance prospective cohort consisting in 1926 patients with heredi- mutation,p.Thr790Metwasdisplayedin27%ofthemutant tary cancer suspicion. cases. The analysis of 73 plasma cf-DNA samples versus Results: In total we found 16 different mutations in 24 matched tumor DNA showed 82% concordance with 62% index cases (~1%); only one recurrent mutation, sensitivity,100%speciﬁcity,100%PPV,75%NPV,forthe c.1100delC, was found in one case. Seventeen of these detection of EGFR mutations. patients(71%)hadbreastcancerwhiletheremainingseven Conclusions: We observed a very high Positive Pre- were affected by other cancers (kidney, colorectal, ovarian, dictive Value of cf-DNA testing using Cobas® EGFR pancreatic and testicular cancers). Two of them were car- mutation test v2 indicating that EGFR mutations could be riers of biallelic mutations, showing a severe phenotype. reported with certainty, whereas for patients with an EGFR Conclusions: Most of the CHEK2 identiﬁed mutations mutation-negativecfDNAtest,abiopsyshouldbeobtained are not the common european recurrent mutations and are inordertoascertainanaccurateresult,accordingtocurrent present in patients outside the classical HBOC syndrome.1552 Further multicentric studies are needed to truly assess the ﬁndings corellate with published results, but clinical utility role of this gene in the pathogenesis of the different her- of these ﬁndings has to be evaluated. editary cancer syndromes as well as to establish the asso- Supported by project LF OU SGS17/LF/2017-2018 ciated risks and clinical management of the patients and I. Urbanovska: None. Z. Senkova: None. B. Skugar- their relatives. evska: None. R. Lipina: None. T. Geryk: None. J. J.delValle:None.G.Vargas—Parra:None.P.Rofes: Simova: None. J. Zmolikova: None. M. Uvirova: None. None. M. Gausachs: None. A. Stradella: None. E. Mon- J. Dvorackova: None. tes: None. E. Darder: None. L. Feliubadaló: None. J. Brunet: None. C. Lázaro: None. P12.037B Homozygosity for the CHEK2 p.Gly167Arg variant P12.036A results in a unique cancer syndrome with multiple Chromosomal changes in chordomas - pilot study complex chromosomal translocations in peripheral blood karyotype I. Urbanovska1,2, Z. Senkova2, B. Skugarevska2, R. Lipina3, T. Geryk4, J. Simova1, J. Zmolikova1, T. Paperna1, N. Sharon-Shwartzman1, A. Kurolap1,2, M. Uvirova1,2, J. Dvorackova1,2 Y. Goldberg3, N. Moustafa1, Y. Carasso4, M. Feinstein- Linial3, A. Mory1, G. Reznick-Levi1, C. Gonzaga- 1CGB Laboratory Inc., Ostrava - Vitkovice, Czech Jauregui5, A. R. Shuldiner5, L. Basel-Salmon3,6,7,8, Republic, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Y. Ofran4,2, E. E. Half9,2, H. Baris Feldman1,2 Ostrava, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 4The Fingerland department of 1The Genetics Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Pathology, Faculty Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec Haifa, Israel, 2The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Kralove, Czech Republic Medicine,Technion–IsraelInstituteofTechnology,Haifa, Israel,3RaphaelRecanatiGeneticsInstitute,RabinMedical Introduction:Chordomasareveryrareandslowlygrowing Center - Beilinson Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel, malignant bone tumors originating from remnants of the 4Department of Haematology and Bone Marrow notochord. Although the morphology and immunological Transplantation, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, proﬁle of the chordoma cells are well described the Israel,5RegeneronGeneticsCenter,Tarrytown,NY,United molecular and genetic mechanisms responsible for the States, 6Pediatric Genetics Clinic, Schneider Children's chordomas development have not been sufﬁciently Medical Center of Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel, 7Sackler elucidated yet. Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Avib, Israel, Material and Methods: Total 45 FFPE chordoma sam- 8Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Rabin Medical ples from 20 patients from 2004-2017 were included in the Center, Petach Tikva, Israel, 9Department of project. DNA isolation and Whole Genome Ampliﬁcation Gastroenterology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, (WGA) using RepliG (QIAGEN) and Picoplex (Rubicon Israel Genomics) were performed (in every sample). Determina- tion of chromosomal changes was performed using micro- Introduction: Chromosomal instability is a well- array technology (Sure Print G3 Unrestricted CGH established cancer characteristic, which is rarely observed (8x60K), Agilent) and massive parallel sequencing (Ver- in healthy tissues. Mutations in DNA repair genes disrupt iSeq, lllumina). propercellmaintenance,causingstructuralorcopy-number Results: DNA samples were of low quality and con- aberrations that lead to cancer susceptibility. Here we centration. Even after RepliG WGA, hybridization on chip describe two reportedly unrelated patients that presented was not successful. After Picoplex WGA, chromosomal with unique cancer syndromes and an abnormal karyotype changesweresuccessfullydeterminedusingtheVeriSeqkit in peripheral blood lymphocytes, caused by homozygosity in only 26 samples (from 17 patients). Recurrently found for the p.Gly167Arg mutation in CHEK2. changes were 1p loss, 1q gain, chromosome 7 gain, chro- Materials and Methods: Patient 1 was genetically mosome 14 and 18 losses. The found changes were con- diagnosed by the TruSight One (TSO) panel and whole- ﬁrmed using FISH. The resulting proﬁles did not change exome sequencing (WES); Patient 2 was diagnosed by during the patients` disease progress. FoundationOne® Heme genomic analysis. Candidate Conclusions: Our pilot study revealed that microarray is variant conﬁrmation and segregation analyses were done inappropriatemethodforstudyingchromosomalchangesin with Sanger sequencing. Karyotype analysis was per- FFPE chordoma samples. The chromosomal changes were formed on peripheral blood, bone marrow and other detected in 85% of patients tested by VeriSeq kit. Our available tissues.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1553 Results: Patient 1 presented with multi-organ tumor- evaluated for their ability to reproduce cancer phenotypes ogenesis, while Patient 2 had early-onset acute myeloid such as cell migration, proliferation and apoptosis. For 21 leukemia. Both patients were found homozygous for the genes with increased expression due to hypermutated CHEK2 c.499G>A; p.Gly167Arg variant. Karyotype ana- CRDs, we setup a transfection assay to overexpress the lysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed 30-60% genes and evaluate the phenotypic changes. For 14 genes multiple different chromosomal translocations. This kar- with observed decreased expression, a microRNA inter- yotype was not observed in other tested tissues, including ferenceapproachwasdesignedtoexpressartiﬁcialmiRNAs bone marrow, nor inanothercancer patientwith a different with high target cleavage. homozygous missense mutation in CHEK2 (p.Ser428Phe). Challenges and limitations of this approach are the low Conclusions: CHEK2 is a tumor suppressor gene, percentage of B-cells in blood and subject to donor- encoding the serine-threonine kinase CHK2. Our ﬁndings dependent variability (3-15% of total PBMCs), and the supporttheroleofCHK2inDNA-repair,ashighlightedby difﬁculty of B-cell transfection and culture. the multiple chromosomal translocations observed in lym- The identiﬁcation of changes in transformed B-cells phocytesfrombothpatients.Wesuggestthathomozygosity towards a cancer-like phenotype due to the expression for p.Gly167Arg impairs the correction of DNA breaks, changes of candidate genes will provide a functional vali- leadingtoincreasedsusceptibilitytomultipletumorigenesis dation for the computational approach used to identify or early-onset disease. hypermutated CRDs and it will potentially identify new T. Paperna: None. N. Sharon-Shwartzman: None. A. genes driving tumorigenesis in CLL. Experiments are in Kurolap: None. Y. Goldberg: None. N. Moustafa: None. process and ﬁrst results will be presented. Y. Carasso: None. M. Feinstein-Linial: None. A. Mory: A.Réal:None.H.Ongen:None.N.Lykoskouﬁs:None. None. G. Reznick-Levi: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. C.Borel: None.G.PugaYung: None.J. Seebach: None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron E. Dermitzakis: None. PharmaceuticalsInc.A.R.Shuldiner:A.Employment(full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc.. P12.039D L. Basel-Salmon: None. Y. Ofran: None. E.E. Half: Identiﬁcation of novel chronic lymphocytic leukemia None. H. Baris Feldman: None. subtypes using pathway mutation scores and consensus clustering P12.038C Functional validation and characterization of non- P. Taus1, K. Plevová1,2, N. Darzentas1,3, K. Pál1, Š. coding regulatory drivers in Chronic Lymphocytic Pospíšilová1,2 Leukemia 1Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk A.Réal1,2,H.Ongen1,N.Lykoskouﬁs1,C.Borel1,G.Puga University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Internal Yung1,2, J. Seebach2,1, E. Dermitzakis1,3,4 Medicine–HematologyandOncology,UniversityHospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Czech Republic, 3Department of Internal Medicine II Hospitals Geneva (HUG), Geneva, Switzerland, 3iGE3 -Hematology and Oncology of the University Medical Institute of Genetics and Genomics, Geneva, Switzerland, Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany 4Health 2030 Genome Center, Geneva, Switzerland Introduction: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the The role of coding mutations in cancer development has most common adult leukemia with variable clinical course beenextensivelystudied.However,theidentiﬁcationofthe underlain by striking genetic heterogeneity. CLL features a non-codingregulatoryregionsandthegenesmediatingtheir handful of putative driver genes and, more interestingly, a effects, remains poorly understood. In a previous study largenumberofnon-recurrentlymutatedgeneswithelusive (BioRxiv 174219), we identiﬁed 16 local modules of clinical implications. The aim of this study was to unravel coordinated non‐coding regulatory elements of the genome theprognosticimpactofpathwaysomaticmutationpatterns (cis regulatory domains or CRDs, FDR 5%) that accumu- in CLL. lated an excess of somatic mutations in 150 patients with MaterialsandMethods:Wefocusedonacohortof316 chroniclymphocyticleukemia(CLL),acanceraffectingB- CLL patients deﬁned by mutated IGHV with somatic cells. Of those regions, 15 were associated to 44 genes, mutation data gathered by International Cancer Genome candidates drivers of tumorigenesis. Consortium.Inthiscohortwecollected4739genesaffected In this work, we present the development of an in vitro by nonsynonymous point and/or frameshift mutations. We cancer-like model in which transformed B-cells are performed gene set enrichment analysis to identify affected1554 biological pathways, applied set theory to reduce redun- currentlyunderanalysis.GWASanalysisusingHaildidnot dancy in enriched gene sets, calculated pathway mutation reveal polymorphisms associated with the response to scoresforeachpatientandperformedconsensusclustering. therapy. Based on the results of the expression analysis of Finally, we evaluated the difference in time to therapy 17 microRNAs with differential expression in two groups (TTT) between identiﬁed CLL clusters. were selected (p <0.05). The greatest difference in Results: We identiﬁed eight clusters differing in TTT expression is shown for hsa-miR-4286. Analysis of the (p<0.0001); seven of these were characterized by distinct functional role of microRNA revealed 40 pathways affected biological processes: namely, cell adhesion (21/23 enrichedwithgenesregulatedby17microRNAs.Themost mutatedcasesinthecluster),membranedepolarization(27/ important pathway is Pathways in cancer (hsa05200, p = 32), synapse organization (18/22), glycosylation (19/25), 9.5 * 10-14). The pathways Chronic myeloid leukemia Rhoproteinsignaltransduction(27/37),oxytocinsignalling (hsa05220, p = 0.00018), and Acute Myeloid Leukemia and/or renin secretion (26/40), and transport through ABC (hsa05221; p = 0.04) are also enriched. Deeper data transporters (11/20; patients with the earliest need for analysis will help to ﬁnd the possible predictors of the therapy). response to therapy, as well as allow us to study the Conclusion: Among CLL patients with mutated IGHV mechanisms of disease progression, and microRNAs may we identiﬁed distinct subgroups with non-recurrently be prognostic markers of a response to targeted CML mutated genes involved in a limited number of biological therapy. pathways. Our ﬁndings have far-reaching implications for E.P.Adilgereeva:None.S.A.Smirnikhina:None.A.V. CLL diagnostics. Supported by AZV-MZCR 16-34272A, Lavrov: None. A.G. Nikitin: None. E.Y. Chelysheva: 16-29447A, CEITEC2020 LQ1601, MZCR-RVO None. O.A. Shukhov: None. A.G. Turkina: None. S.I. 65269705, MUNI/A/1105/2018. Kutsev: None. P.Taus:None.K.Plevová:None.N.Darzentas:None. K. Pál: None. Š. Pospíšilová: None. P12.042C Noninvasive detection of cancer speciﬁc genomic P12.041B changes in patients with colorectal cancer The results of the search for markers of the TKI efﬁciency in patients with newly diagnosed CML using G.Minarik1,2,S.Hermannova1,B.Vanova3,M.Hyblova2, molecular genetic methods M. Kucharik2, L. Plank3 E. P. Adilgereeva1, S. A. Smirnikhina1, A. V. Lavrov1,2, 1Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Natural A. G. Nikitin3, E. Y. Chelysheva4, O. A. Shukhov4, Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Medirex Inc., Bratislava, A. G. Turkina4, S. I. Kutsev1,2 Slovakia, 3Comenius University in Bratislava Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Martin, Slovakia 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian National Research Medical Introduction: Genomic analysis of circulating DNA University Named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow, Russian extracted from plasma of cancer patients has shown Federation, 3Research Institute for Pulmonology, Moscow, potential to be used as noninvasive biomarker usable in Russian Federation, 4National Research Center for detection of cancer speciﬁc genomic changes. Aim of the Hematology, Moscow, Russian Federation study was to test the applicability of combined approach based on parallel detection of CNVs and SNVs as Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative noninvasively obtained biomarkers in cohort of patients diseasecharacterizedbypathogenicactivityofthechimeric with colorectal cancer (CRC). tyrosine-kinase BCR/ABL which stimulates uncontrolled Material and Methods: Circulating DNA of patients cell proliferation. Primary resistance to the targeted with clinical diagnosis of CRC extracted from plasma col- tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKI) is registered in up to 20% lected before and after surgical removal of primary tumor of patients. The aim of the work is to search for possible were analyzed using low coverage whole genome scan for markers of the efﬁcacy of TKI therapy. We sequenced 60 detection of CNVs on whole genome level and high cov- exomes of patients with CML with different response to erage targeted resequencing of CRC speciﬁc gene panel. treatment on the platform NextSeq™ 550, Illumina. The For CNVs and SNVs speciﬁc data analysis homemade and microRNA expression proﬁle (n = 6 with the optimal commercially available bioinformatic tools were used. response,n=6withfailureoftherapy)wasexaminedusing Results: Cancer speciﬁc genomic changes resulting in Nanostring technology and nCountermiRNA Expression decrease of CNVs signal detected over the whole genome Assay.Onanaverage,wefound280000variants,whichare were present in 42% and decrease of allelic ratio of cancerAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1555 speciﬁcSNVsin 30%of CRCpatients after primary tumor wildtype allele was detected in P1, while present in both surgery.Ifbothtypesofgenomicchangeswereanalyzedin parents with 50% intensity indicating a heterozygous state. combination the detection rate raised to 50%. Most fre- The effect of an SINE-VNTR-Alu-insertion in intron 7 quentlymutatedgenesshowinghypothesizedSNVsspeciﬁc upon splicing was tested in P2. In cDNA+P, the insertion signal decrease were TP53, APC, PIK3CA, BRAF and r.803_804insAATGTGCCATGTGAACCACCCCGTCTG KRAS. AAAAGTGAGGAGCCCCTCTGCCCGGCAGCCGCCC Conclusions: In half of patients cancer speciﬁc genomic CGTCTGGGAG p.Tyr268* was present in absence of the changes represented by CNVs and SNVs shown hypothe- wildtype. In cDNA-P, the ampliﬁcation failed, indicating sized decrease after tumor removal. Such results could be that both mutated transcripts were subjected to NMD. potentially used in development of portfolio of non- For P3 with the homozygous variant c.736_741delins invasively utilizable biomarkers usable in disease monitor- TGTGTGTGAAG p.Pro246Cysfs*3, no cDNA was avail- ing. Acknowledgements: This project was supported by able. However, MLPA-analysis including a probe hybri- Slovak Research and Development Agency under the code dizing to this region showed a complete dropout indicating APVV-14-0273. a homozygous state of the variant in exon 7, for which no G. Minarik: None. S. Hermannova: None. B. Vanova: homologous pseudogene regions exist. None. M. Hyblova: None. M. Kucharik: None. L. Conclusion: We conﬁrmed the presence of homozygous Plank: None. pathogenic PMS2 variants in three CMMRD-patients using cDNA-analysis or MLPA. P12.043D M.Morak:None.M.Locher:None.N.Rahner:None. CMMRD-diagnostics and veriﬁcation of homozygous V. Steinke-Lange: None. A. Laner: None. U. Koehler: variants in PMS2 None. T. Haeussler: None. T. Massdorf: None. E. Hol- inski-Feder: None. M. Morak1,2, M. Locher2, N. Rahner3, V. Steinke- Lange2,1, A. Laner2, U. Koehler2, T. Haeussler2, P12.044A T. Massdorf2, E. Holinski-Feder2,1 Seven European colorectal cancer predisposing SNPs are associated with CRC and its prognosis in Turkish 1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IVI, Campus population Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, Germany, 2MGZ Medical Genetics Center, Munich, O. Cumaogullari1,2, S. Charyyeva2, E. Abaci2, Z. Bilici2,3, Germany, 3Medical Faculty, Institute of Human Genetics, H. Ozakinci4, O. Ilk5, A. Kuzu6, H. Ozdag2 Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany 1Faculty of Medicine, Eastern Mediterranean University, Background: Constitutional Mismatch Repair Deﬁciency Famagusta, Cyprus, 2Biotechnology Institute, Ankara (CMMRD) is a hereditary cancer predisposition for University, Ankara, Turkey, 3Department of Molecular hematological, brain, and other tumors starting from Biology and Genetics, GYTE, Gebze Technical University, childhood caused by biallelic variants in MLH1, MSH2, Kocaeli, Turkey, 4Department of Medical Pathology, MSH6, PMS2. Faculty of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, Patients and Methods: Weexamined three patients (P1, Ankara, Turkey, 5Department of Statistics, Faculty of P2, P3) with clinical indication of CMMRD carrying Science,MiddleEastTechnicalUniversity,Ankara,Turkey, homozygous PMS2 variants, whose pathogenicity and Ankara, Turkey, 6Department of General Surgery, Faculty biallelicstateshouldbe veriﬁed,asPMS2-analysis iserror- of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, Ankara, prone due to the presence of multiple pseudogenes. Turkey RNA was isolated from blood-lymphocytes cultured for short-terminabsence/presenceofpuromycin(cDNA-P/+P) Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the to investigate transcripts with active/inhibited nonsense- leading causes of cancer-related death in developed mediatedmRNAdecay(NMD).FromcDNA,thecomplete countries. Owing to difﬁculty of the low allele frequency PMS2 transcript was ampliﬁed and sequenced for variants variations detection genetic association proﬁle of CRC has or isoforms. not been entirely identiﬁed. To show that signiﬁcance of Results: A homozyogous exon 12 duplication was these variations may change according to population we detected in P1. cDNA-analysis for her and her parents selected16SNPsfromGWASs(Genome-wideAssociation showed, that the duplicated exon was inserted in the tran- Study) conducted in European CRC population to analyze script (r.2007_2174dup p.Lys670_Ala725dup). No them in Turkish population.1556 Materialand Methods: Validation of 16EuropeanSNP patients with detailed clinical data. We also identiﬁed the was performed using kompetitive allele spesiﬁc PCR on signiﬁcantly altered pathways in CRC. 1019 sporadic CRC cases and 948 controls. SNPs were Results: The results have demonstrated that high excluded if their minor allele frequency was <5%, if the p- expression of our gene signature is signiﬁcantly associated value of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium test was <10-6, or if with poor disease outcome. The pathway analysis revealed the linkage disequilibrium r2>0.8. Multiple logistic regres- alterations in various cancer-related pathways essential for sionwasusedforadditive,dominant,andrecessivemodels. CRC transformation; hence validating our gene signature’s Odds ratios were adjusted for gender and the ﬁrst principal diagnostic and prognostic potential using patients’ biologi- component for population stratiﬁcation (genomic control cal ﬂuids rather than invasive procedures. inﬂation factor λ=0.903). Further analysis is covered to Conclusions: Results suggest that integrated genomic classify the patients by their status of metastasis, cancer analysis may provide a reliable approach to identify key type, stage, grade, and tumor location. biological programs associated with CRC and lead to Results and Conclusions: rs6983267, rs10795668, improved diagnosis and therapeutic options. Funding: This rs3802842, rs4444235 and rs4939827 were found to be study is funded by the KFSHRC Research Grant (2110006 associatedwithTurkishCRCpatients(p<0.05).Ourresults to DC). showed that these 5 SNPs were also associated with I.H. Kaya: None.O. Al-Harazi: None. N.Kaya: None. pathological stage of the disease. Whereas, rs6691170, D. Colak: None. rs1321311, rs3802842, showed signiﬁcant association with pathologicalgrade.Inaddition,rs1321311increasestherisk P12.046C of mucinous cancer 3,2 times. Our results showed the The frequency of MLH1 and MSH2 germline mutations importance of population speciﬁc studies to validate the in colorectal cancer patients met the revised Bethesda results of GWASs. This study is supported by TUBITAK Guidelines grant 112S634, Ankara University 14L0415003 O. Cumaogullari: None. S. Charyyeva: None. E. L. Lyubchenko1, A. Semyanikhina1, N. Pospekhova1, Abaci: None. Z. Bilici: None. H. Ozakinci: None. O. Ilk: D. Golovina1, A. Rasulov2 None. A. Kuzu: None. H. Ozdag: None. 1N.N. Blokhin National Medical Research Institute of P12.045B oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.A. Lopatkin A blood-based gene expression signature for diagnosis ResearchInstituteofUrologyandInterventionalRadiology, and prognosis of colorectal cancer using integrated Moscow, Russian Federation genomic and network analyses Introduction: Lynch syndrome (LS) is one of the most I. H. Kaya1, O. Al-Harazi2, N. Kaya2, D. Colak2 commonhereditarycancersyndromesthatcanbeidentiﬁed in 3%-5% of all colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. To 1AlFaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Faisal identify individuals with high risk of LS the Amsterdam Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi criteria (AC) and the Bethesda Guidelines (BG) have been Arabia proposed. This study aimed to analyze the frequency of MLH1 and MSH2 germline mutations in CRC patients met Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most the revised BG. common cancer and second leading cause of cancer- Materials and Methods: One hundred and seventeen associated death worldwide. Diagnosing CRC patients patientsfulﬁllingtherevisedBGwereinitiallyscreenedfor reliably at an early and curable stage is of utmost LS by Sanger sequencing of the coding regions and splice importance to reduce the risk of mortality. sites of the MLH1 and MSH2 genes. MSI-diagnostics and Materials and Methods: We identiﬁed a blood-based BRAF-genotyping were performed in 95 of 117 tumour gene signature by performing an integrated genomic ana- samples. Clinical, anamnestic and morphological char- lysis of whole-genome gene expression and copy number acteristics were recorded. The accuracy of the AC was alteration of Saudi CRC patients. The identiﬁed gene sig- evaluated. nature was then validated using independent datasets of Results: We identiﬁed 29 patients with germline muta- gene expression proﬁling of CRC patients. In addition, we tions in the MLH1 and MSH2 genes (17 and 12 patients, validated the gene signature’s classiﬁcation performance respectively). The detected variants were found throughout and the prognostic potential using TCGA (microarray and the coding part of the genes. Nine MLH1-mutations have RNAseq) datasets with samples from over 800 CRC been described for the ﬁrst time. The highest accuracy wasAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1557 shown for the ACI (85%). High-level MSI and no BRAF- M. Ravnik-Glavač: None. E. Krajnc: None. S. mutation were found in all analyzed LS-tumours. Hrašovec: None. D. Glavač: None. Conclusions: The results of our study prove that MSI approachprovidesasensitivityof100%foridentifyingLS- P12.048A patients. The ACII missed as many as 31% of LS-cases. Variant detection using transcriptome analyses in Being quite stringent the ACI showed a high rate of spe- hereditary colorectal cancer ciﬁcity but failed to recognize 41% of LS-patients. L. Lyubchenko: None. A. Semyanikhina: None. N. F. Eiengård1,2, A. Rohlin1,2, E. Mårtensson1, Pospekhova: None. D. Golovina: None. A. Rasulov: U. Lundstam3, S. Gebre-Medhin4,5, T. Zagoras1,2, None. M. Nordling1,2 P12.047D 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of K-ras mutations and MGMT methylation in CRC and Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of correlation with survival and therapy Gothenburg,Gothenburg,Sweden,2DepartmentofClinical Pathology and Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, M. Ravnik-Glavač, E. Krajnc, S. Hrašovec, D. Glavač Gothenburg,Sweden,3DepartmentofSurgery,Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Sahlgrenska University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Medicine, Ljubljana, University Hospital/Östra, Gothenburg, Sweden, 4Division Slovenia of Clinical Genetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 5Department of Clinical Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most Genetics, Ofﬁce for Medical Services, Division of frequentcancersinhumans.Thediseaseoccurssporadically Laboratory Medicine, Lund, Sweden in most of the cases (75%-80%) as a result of the accumulation of both mutations and epigenetic modiﬁca- Introduction: High-penetrant pathogenic variants in estab- tions of several genes. Approximately 20-50% of primary lished genes associated with colorectal cancer (CRC) colorectaltumorscontainK-rasmutationsanditwasshown explain the disease in approximately 5-6% of cases. that MGMT methylation may play a role preceding the However, a genetic component is suspected to contribute development of CRC. to CRC in approximately 20%-30% of all cases. Tran- Materials and Methods: Two hundred and forty-nine scriptome analysis reveals established pathogenic variants fresh colorectal tumor samples and corresponding normal as well as alternative mechanisms affecting transcription in tissue were collected during surgical colectomy together candidate genes. with clinical and pathological data. Patients were followed Material and Methods: Transcriptome analyses, (Illu- up for ten years. Direct sequencing was used for detection mina paired-end read sequencing (2 x 150 bp)), were per- of k-ras mutations and methylation-speciﬁc PCR was per- formed on 50 patients without any causative variant formed to assess the methylation status of MGMT. detected with commonly used techniques. In parallel the Results: K-ras mutations were detected in 83/249 (33%) patientswereanalyzedonacomprehensivepanelincluding and hyper-methylated promoter of MGMT in 220/249 high-penetrantsusceptibilitygenesandcandidategenes(50 (88%) tumors. Survival distribution of patients with and kb upstream and downstream UTR regions, intronic and without K-ras mutation was signiﬁcantly different exonic regions). The patients in the study were referred to (p=0,01). Patients with metastasis and hyper-methylated the Cancer Genetic Counselling Clinic at Sahlgrenska MGMT promoter in their primary CRCs had signiﬁcantly University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. worse survival distribution than patients without hyper- Results: Analysis of alternative splicing, identiﬁcation methylation (p=0,05), while in non-metastatic cancers this andquantiﬁcationoftranscripts,classiﬁcationofSNVsand was not the case. Response to radiation therapy was sig- CNVs were performed and ﬁndings were thoroughly eval- niﬁcantlybetterintumorswithmethylatedMGMTpromoter uated concerning pathogenicity. Expression level compar- (P< 0,001). isons were executed both pairwise and against positive Conclusion: No signiﬁcant correlation was observed controls with known causative variants. The ﬁndings between K-ras mutations and MGMT methylation. MGMT include identiﬁcation of previously unreported variants and promotermethylationmightbeagooddiagnosticmarkerin putative causative variants in patients with previously normal-appearing mucosa, both for early detection of and unexplained hereditary CRC. risk assessment in colon cancer, as well as may predict a Conclusion: The combination of high-throughput NGS- better response to radiation therapy, as we have shown in techniques on genome and transcriptome level identiﬁes a this study.1558 broader set of pathogenic variants in patients with heredi- contribution to metastasis are probably accounted for via tary CRC, which is crucial for follow up of patients. their effects on c-Myc. ThestudywassupportedbygrantsfromtheSwedishstate L.Thean:None.H.Li:None.M.Lo:None.M.Wong: under the agreement between the Swedish government and None. C. Tang: None. K. Tan: None. P. Cheah: None. the county councils, the ALF-agreement (ALFGBG- 725011) and the Swedish Cancer Society (grant no. P12.050C 18 0357). Ovarian clear cell carcinoma in Cowden Syndrome F. Eiengård: None. A. Rohlin: None. E. Mårtensson: None. U. Lundstam: None. S. Gebre-Medhin: None. T. K. Yauy1, M. Imbert-Bouteille1, V. Bubien2, C. Lindet- Zagoras: None. M. Nordling: None. Bourgeois3, G. Rathat4, H. Perrochia5, G. MacGrogan6, D. Bessis7, J. Tinat8, S. Baert-Desurmont9, M. Blanluet9, P12.049B P. Vande Perre10, K. Baudry1, P. Pujol1, C. Corsini1 Exploring the role of CCAT1 and CCAT2 long non- coding RNA in colorectal carcinoma metastasis 1Département de génétique médicale chru Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 2unité d’oncogénétique, L. Thean1, H. Li1, M. Lo1, M. Wong1, C. Tang1, K. Tan1, institutBergonié, INSERM U1218,université de Bordeaux, P. Cheah1,2,3 Bordeaux,France,3départementd’oncologiemédicale,chu Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4service de gynécologie- 1Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, obstétrique, chu Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5service 2National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, d’anatomopathologie, chu Montpellier, Montpellier, 3Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore France, 6unité d'anatomie pathologique, institut Bergonié, INSERM U1218, Bordeaux, France, 7service de Introduction: Dysregulation of long non-coding RNAs dermatologie, chu Montpellier, Montpellier, France, (lncRNAs) has been recently implicated in cancers. Up- 8service d’oncogénétique, hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, regulation of two lncRNAs, CCAT1 and CCAT2 has been France, 9service d’oncogénétique, hôpital Charles Nicolle, separately associated with more aggressive colorectal Rouen, France, 10service de génétique médicale, chu de cancer (CRC) and worse prognosis. The ﬁrst GWAS- Toulouse, Toulouse, France identiﬁed SNP linked to CRC risk, rs6983267, maps to CCAT2, and isreported toelevatethe expression ofc-Myc, Purpose: Cowden Syndrome (CS) is an autosomal situated about 300 kb away. Nevertheless, these two dominant disease related to PTEN germline mutations. CS lncRNAs have never been studied together with their is characterized by macrocephaly, mucocutaneous lesions oncotarget c-Myc. and an increased risk of breast and thyroid cancer. Rare Material and Methods: In this study, we measured the ovarian cancer cases (mostly embryonic tumours) asso- expression of CCAT1, CCAT2 and c-Myc in 150 matched ciated to PTEN have been described in the literature and mucosa-tumor samples of early stage microsatellite-stable there are no current CS guidelines available for ovarian Chinese CRC patients with deﬁnitive metastasis status by cancer risk management. real-timeRT-PCR.Theexpressionproﬁleisthencorrelated Clinical Presentation: We report the case of a woman to the SNP genotype and the clinical data. diagnosedwithovarianclearcellcarcinoma(OCCC)atage Results:Expressionofc-Mycinthetumorissigniﬁcantly 28. The patient dysplayed macrocephaly, trichilemmomas, up-regulated in metastasis-positive CRC patients (T-test, oral papillomatosis and acral keratosis. A thyroid follicular p=0.0229)andsigniﬁcantlycorrelatedtotimetometastasis neoplasia was diagnosed synchronously. A family history by Cox regression analysis [Hazard Ratio = 1.47 (1.10, of cancers within the PTEN-related tumor spectrum was 1.97),p=0.0107].Upregulationofc-Mycexpressionisalso identiﬁed. PTEN sequencing revealed that she carried a signiﬁcantly associated with the risk genotype (GG) of germline inherited pathogenic variant c.388C>T, p. rs6983267. The expression of c-Myc is signiﬁcantly (Arg130*) (NM_000314). A somatic MMR immunohis- (p<0.0001) correlated to that of CCAT1 and CCAT2 tochemistry analysis showed a normal expression and (R2=0.23 and R2=0.18 respectively) in the tumors. How- BRCA1/2-germline sequencing revealed no mutation. An ever, the expression of CCAT1 and CCAT2 is not sig- ovarian cell immunohistochemistry analysis reported total niﬁcantly correlated to metastasis status, time to metastasis loss of PTEN expression, which strongly suggested the or the SNP genotypes. PTEN role in the oncogenesis of this cancer. Hence, a total Conclusions: Expression of c-Myc in the tumors is pre- thyroid resection was performed instead of thyroid lobect- dictiveofmetastasis.TheexpressionofCCAT1andCCAT2 omy and bilateral mastectomy was discussed. Co- does not add to the predictive value suggesting that their occurrence of this germline mutation in PTEN in thisAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1559 patient,earlydevelopmentOCCCatage28andtotallossof Conclusions: Rare, heterozygous variants in OCA genes PTEN expression in the tumor support the involvement of TYR, OCA2, SLC45A2 and TYRP1 occur in some familial PTEN in the cancerogenesis of her ovarian cancer. CMcases.Cosegregationanalysisshowedsimilarresultsto Conclusion:Wedescribeanewovariancancercasewith the medium penetrance MITF p.E318K variant, and the an atypical histological type, clear cell carcinoma, in CS. known functional consequence of these albinism gene var- This observation might be a ﬁrst clue to expand PTEN- iants on pigmentation pathways indicates these OCA genes related tumor spectrum with OCCC. The CS diagnosis may increase CM susceptibility in some families. changed her management. V.Nathan:None.P.A.Johansson:None.J.M.Palmer: K.Yauy:None.M.Imbert-Bouteille:None.V.Bubien: None.M.Howlie:None.H.R.Hamilton:None.K.Wadt: None. C. Lindet-Bourgeois: None. G. Rathat: None. H. None. G. Jönsson: None. K.M. Brooks: None. A.L. Perrochia:None.G.MacGrogan:None.D.Bessis:None. Pritchard: None. N.K. Hayward: None. J.Tinat:None.S.Baert-Desurmont:None.M.Blanluet: None.P.VandePerre:None.K.Baudry:None.P.Pujol: P12.052A None. C. Corsini: None. Evaluation of tamoxifen efﬁcacy andCYP2D6- genotyping in women with hormone receptor-positive P12.051D breast cancer Germline variants in oculocutaneous albinism genes in familial cutaneous melanoma T. A. Shendrikova1, L. N. Lubchenko1, S. M. Portnoy2, M.G.Filippova1,A.V.Savinkova1,A.V.Semyanikhina1, V.Nathan1,P.A.Johansson1,J.M.Palmer1,M.Howlie1, A. M. Danishevich1, N. I. Pospekhova1, D. A. Golovina1 H. R. Hamilton1, K. Wadt2, G. Jönsson3, K. M. Brooks1, A. L. Pritchard1,4, N. K. Hayward1 1N.N. Blokhin National Medical Research Center of Oncology, Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, 1QIMR Berghofer, Herston, Australia, 2Rigshospitalet, Moscow,RussianFederation,2Сlinicofplasticsurgeryand Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Lund University, Lund, Sweden, cosmetology Frau Clinik, Moscow, Russian Federation 4University of Highlands and Islands, Inverness, Scotland, United Kingdom Introduction: Tamoxifen is one of the most frequent prescribed drugs to treat patient with estrogen receptor Introduction: Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a group positive breast cancer (BC). In vivo Tamoxifen is of autosomal recessive genetic diseases, resulting in biotransformed by the CYP2D6 enzyme into endoxifen. pigmentation defects of the eyes, hair and skin. OCA is The aim of the study was to evaluate the effectiveness of caused by compound heterozygous or homozygous germ- therapy with Tamoxifen in patients with luminal A and B line variants in one of four genes: TYR, OCA2, TYRP1 and primary operable BC by CYP2D6-genotyping. SLC45A2. Due to a lack of melanin production, OCA Materials and Methods: One hundred and eleven patients have a heightened sensitivity to ultra-violet women with IA-IIB stage-BC receiving tamoxifen were radiation, predisposing them to skin cancers, including enrolledinthestudy.Real-timePCRfordetectionofallelic cutaneous melanoma (CM). variants CYP2D6*3 (c.2549delA), CYP2D6*4 Methods: Approximately 5-12% of CM is considered (c.1846G>A) and CYP2D6*6 (.1707) was performed. familial. We sought to investigate the unexplained predis- Relapse-free survival (RFS) was estimated depending on position in families negative for the known susceptibility the CYP2D6-genotype. genes using next generation sequencing of affected indivi- Results:Werevealed78patients(70,2%)withwild-type duals. Variants of interest were conﬁrmed and cosegrega- alleles of the CYP2D6 gene (extensive metabolizers(EM)), tion was assessed by Sanger sequencing. 26 women (23,4%) - intensive metabolizers (IM) and 7 Results: Several heterozygous germline variants in TYR, patients (6,3%) – poor metabolizers (PM). The average OCA2, TYRP1 and SLC45A2 were present in our familial durationofTamoxifen-therapywas2,7years.Weobserved CMcohort.Ofnote,arevariantsclassiﬁedaspathogenicin differencesinRFSinpatientstreatedonlyTamoxifeninthe association with OCA that were either present in multiple adjuvant period. RFS in women with EM-phenotype was familiesorfullycosegregatedwithCM.TheTYRp.T373K betterthaninIM,PM-patients(2,6%(2/78)vs18,2%(6/33) variant was present in 3 unrelated CM families. In OCA2, (p=0.02)). We found no differences in RFS in patients weobservedp.V443Iinthreefamiliesandp.N489Dintwo receiving polychemotherapy in combination with hormone families. We also identiﬁed a novel likely pathogenic therapy (p>0.05). SLC45A2frameshiftvariantfullyco-segregatinginafamily Conclusion: Patients with estrogen receptor positive of 4 CM cases. primary operable BC and reduced CYP2D6-activity1560 characterize by worse RFS. CYP2D6-genotyping is one of Conclusion: Our data revealed higher expression of the instruments to predict the effectiveness of Tamoxifen- mRNA-TSHR in blood of TCs and TCb compared to TCr therapy. group and further analysis revealed signiﬁcant correlation T.A.Shendrikova:None.L.N.Lubchenko:None.S.M. between mRNA-TSHR and sTg and US/WBS ﬁndings. Portnoy: None. M.G. Filippova: None. A.V. Savinkova: Further studies with absolute quantiﬁcation are needed for None. A.V. Semyanikhina: None. A.M. Danishevich: understanding the real meaning of mRNA-TSHR as bio- None. N.I. Pospekhova: None. D.A. Golovina: None. marker in DTC. T. Makazlieva: None. O. Vaskova: None. T. Tripu- P12.053B noski: None. S. Risteski: None. H. Jovanovic: None. Z. Correlation of mRNA-TSHR expression with clinical Jakovski: None. A. Eftimov: None. parameters in thyroid carcinoma patients P12.054C T. Makazlieva1,O. Vaskova1,T. Tripunoski1,S. Risteski2, Comparison of genomic proﬁles in patients with H. Jovanovic2, Z. Jakovski2, A. Eftimov3 primary and recurrent diffuse brain gliomas revealed acquisition of biologically relevant genomic aberrations 1Institut of pathophysiology and nuclear medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Institut for D. Vesela1, L. Lizcova1, K. Svobodova1, H. Lhotska1, forensic medicine, criminology and medical deontology, H.Cechova2,Z.Krejcik2,S.Ransdorfova2,L.Pavlistova1, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, S. Izakova1, F. Kramar3, P. Hrabal3, K. Michalova1, 3Laboratory of molecular pathology, Institut of pathology, Z. Zemanova1 Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of 1Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Medical Introduction: Differentiated thyroid carcinomas (DTC) Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, General preserve expression of thyroid stimulating hormone recep- University Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles tor (TSHR). University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Aim:Objectiveinourstudywastoevaluateexpressionof Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech mRNA-TSHR in patients with DTC and then to correlate Republic, 3Department of Neurosurgery, Central Military the expression with clinical features: thyroglobulin (sTg) Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, value, initial staging, whole body scan (WBS), neck ultra- Prague, Czech Republic sound (US) and received dose of radioiodine. Material and Methods: Forty patients were subdivided Diffuse gliomas represent heterogeneous group of brain in groups according response to treatment: patients with tumors with highly variable biological behavior.Despite of incomplete structural response (TCs), incomplete bio- radicalsurgicalresectionandintensivetherapy,recurrences chemical response (TCb) and excellent responders (TCr). with new genetic properties frequently appear. We TotalRNAwasisolatedfromperipheralbloodandusedfor compared genomic proﬁles of 11 paired primary and two-step reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt recurrent gliomas to identify aberrations related to tumor PCR)withappropriateprimers.Relativequantiﬁcationwith recurrence and/or progression. the 2-ΔΔCt method was applied. Thyroglobulin was eval- Tumor samples obtained during routine surgery were uated with immunohistochemical analysis. Initial stage analyzed with SNP array (Illumina), I-FISH (Abbott, according TNM staging system was recorded. Statistical MetaSystems), MLPA (MRC-Holland) to assess copy analysis was performed with Spearman Rank Order number variations and IDH1 mutations and with MS- Correlation. MLPA to investigate methylation of MGMT and MLH3 Results: Patients from TCs group expressed mRNA- promoters. TSHR by a 5.37-fold higher level than TCr patients, TCb In both primary and recurrent lesions, we observed expressed TSHR by an 8.88-fold higher level than TCr genomic changes typical for gliomas: loss of chromosome patients. Signiﬁcant negative correlation was detected 10, gains on chromosome 7, losses on 9p and 13q, 17p between sTg and ΔCt (Ct -Ct ) value (R=-0,475; LOH and/or IDH1 mutations. In 7/11 recurrences, the TSHR GAPDH p<0,05) and between WBS/US ﬁndings and ΔCt (R= genetic proﬁle showed additional chromosomal imbalances -0,321; p<0,05). Correlation between initial stage and ΔCt comparedtoprimarytumor.In4/11pairs,theproﬁleswere revealed non-signiﬁcant negative correlation and non- divergent, i.e. the recurrences included additional changes signiﬁcant positive correlation between received dose of but missed some of the original ones. Losses of chromo- radioiodine and ΔCt. somal regions 6p21.33, 6q27, 9q21.13, 11p11.2 and hypermethylation of MGMT and/or MLH3 were repeatedlyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1561 detected in recurrences. The progression to a higher grade implementation of this innovative app in the SWTRGS of glioma occurred in 5/11 patients. population of 3.4 million people regarding: We suppose that recurrence of brain gliomas may be driven by proliferation of cells with additional genomic ● Patient experience and acceptability and improved imbalancestothosedetectedinprimariesorbyoneormore access to assessment for cancer patients and their subclones presented within the primary tumor besides the relatives major tumorclone. Ourresultsindicatethatrecurrencesare ● Development and implementation of novel and stream- often genetically and/or epigenetically different from pri- lined clinical pathways for assessment, access to SPED mary lesions, therefore the patients with recurrent tumors interventions and genetic testing may beneﬁt from different treatment approaches. ● Data privacy and regulatory considerations Supported by RVO-VFN64165 and GACR-P302/12/ ● Data storage and integration with clinical systems and G157. access to research D. Vesela: None. L. Lizcova: None. K. Svobodova: None.H.Lhotska:None.H.Cechova:None.Z. Krejcik: Our app demonstrates the power of digital innovation to None. S. Ransdorfova: None. L. Pavlistova: None. S. improve clinical pathways for patients with inherited sus- Izakova: None. F. Kramar: None. P. Hrabal: None. K. ceptibility to cancer. Michalova: None. Z. Zemanova: None. W.L.Skinner:None.B.Coad:None.A.Marsh:None. J.McBride:None.K.Kohut:None.H.Hanson:None.K. P12.055D Snape: None. Family History Questionnaire System (FHQS): An innovative patient facing online software application P12.056A streamlining assessment of genetic susceptibility to Exome sequencing identiﬁes germline variants in DIS3 cancer in familial multiple myeloma W. L. Skinner1,2, B. Coad1,2, A. Marsh1,2, J. McBride3, M. Pertesi1,2, M. Vallée1, X. Wei3, M. V. Revuelta4, K. Kohut1,2, H. Hanson1,2, K. Snape1,2 P. Galia5,6, D. Demangel5,6, J. Oliver1,7, M. Foll1, S. Chen3, E. Perrial8, Intergroupe Francophone du 1South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London, Myelome (IFM), IMMEnSE Consortium, B. Nilsson2, United Kingdom, 2St George's University Hospitals NHS R.J.Klein9,S.M.Lipkin4,J.D.McKay1,C.Dumontet5,6,8 FoundationTrust,London,UnitedKingdom,3McBrideCQ, London, United Kingdom 1Genetic Cancer Susceptibility, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 2Department of Screening, Prevention and Early Detection (SPED) in Laboratory Medicine, Division of Hematology and cancer management is cost effective and clinically prefer- Transfusion medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, able to other therapeutic interventions. SPED activities 3Biological Statistics and Computational Biology, Cornell decrease the likelihood of an individual developing cancer, University, Ithaca, NY, United States, 4Medicine, Weill andenableanincreasednumberofcancerstobedetectedat Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, United States, a curable stage. Identifying those who have an increased 5ProﬁlExpert, Lyon, France, 6Hospices Civils de Lyon, geneticsusceptibilitytodevelopingcancerenablestargeting Lyon, France, 7Instituto de Ciencias Básicas y Medicina of SPED interventions at those at highest risk and is the Experimental, Instituto Universitario Hospital Italiano, most clinically efﬁcient and cost effective way of Buenos Aires, Argentina, 8INSERM 1052, CNRS 5286, implementing SPED interventions. However, current meth- CRCL, Lyon, France, 9Department of Genetics and ods of identifying genetically “at risk” individuals through Genomic Sciences and Icahn Institute for Genomics and familyhistoryassessmentareinequitable,non-standardised, Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount resource heavy and time consuming. The Cancer Genetics Sinai, New York, NY, United States Unit of the South West Thames Regional Genetics Service (SWTRGS) at St George’s Hospital (SGH) has developed Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable plasma cell the Family History Questionnaire System (FHQS). This is malignancy. While the mutational landscape of sporadic an online patient-facing cancer family history assessment MM has been extensively investigated, the genetic basis of software application to enable competent, standardised familial MM remains largely unknown. cancer family history assessment which is more efﬁcient, Weused exome andtargetedsequencinginfamilieswith cost effective, scalable and equitable than current methods. several cases of MM/MGUS to identify rare germline var- Wewillpresentdatafromtheinitialpilotphaseandclinical iants implicated in MM susceptibility.1562 We observed putative loss-of-function (two splicing resistance and tumor recurrence. Outcomes of most (c.1755+1G>T, c.1883+1G>C) and one stop-loss genomic studies have important limitations due to the (c.2875T>C, p.*959Glnext*14)) germline variants in presence of different cell types within these cancers. Our DIS3, a frequently somatically mutated gene in MM, in 4 study aimed at investigating intra- and intertumor hetero- out of 154 families (2.6%). We demonstrated that the geneitybytargetedsequencingofsortedcancersubpopula- c.1755+1G>T allele undergoes Nonsense-Mediated Decay tions.Archivalmaterialfrom38EACs,classiﬁedaccording (NMD), resulting in a marked reduction in DIS3 gene to Lauren, was processed using a high-throughput cell expression levels, while the p.*959Glnext*14 variant sorting technology. Stromal and tumor cell populations reduces DIS3 protein levels, consistent with loss-of- were sorted by immunolabelling for vimentin/pan-cytoker- function variants. In an independent series of 781 spora- atinandDNAcontent.Targetedsequencingwasperformed dic MM patients and 3534 controls from the MMRF for 63 cancer-related genes. 31 out of 38 EAC carried at CoMMpassStudywedemonstratedthatrare,putativelikely leastonesomaticmutation,notpresentinthecorresponding deleterious variants in DIS3 were enriched among MM sorted stromal cells. In 25/38 (65.7 %) of cases mutations patients compared to controls (OR= 1.92 95%CI:1.25 to were detected in TP53 and in 5/38 (13.2%) of cases in 2.96,p=0.001).TranscriptomeanalysisofMM tumorcells CDKN2A. Mutations in other genes occurred at lower suggested that, in comparison to non-carriers, carriers of frequency, including HNF1A (2/38 cases), not previously germline DIS3 likely deleterious variants showed dysregu- associated with EAC. Most of the mutations were also lation of RNA processing pathways, consistent with dis- identiﬁed in unsorted cells, however with a lower allele ruption of DIS3 function. frequency, whereas in one case the mutation was com- Our observations are consistent with a role for DIS3 in pletely missed. Interestingly, in some EAC cases, we genetic susceptibility to MM/MGUS and reinforce its role isolated different keratin-positive cell populations based on in myelomagenesis. DNAcontent(hyperdiploidandpseudodiploidclones)with Funding: French National Cancer Institute (INCA); different mutational loads, conﬁrming the high intra-tumor Fondation Française pour la Recherche contre le Myélome heterogeneity of these cancers. In conclusion, selective etles Gammapathies(FFMRG); NCI R01 NCI CA167824; sorting allowed us to identify somatic mutations not generous donation from Matthew Bell; Ofﬁce of Research identiﬁable in the unsorted cells and to isolate different Infrastructure NIH S10OD018522. cancer subpopulations, representative of different cancer M. Pertesi: None. M. Vallée: None. X. Wei: None. M. subclones. Future studies will reveal the role of these V. Revuelta: None. P. Galia: None. D. Demangel: None. subpopulations with respect to therapeutic response. FI is J. Oliver: None. M. Foll: None. S. Chen: None. E. Per- supported an ONCOPENTA fellowship. rial: None. B. Nilsson: None. R.J. Klein: None. S.M. F. Isidori: None. I. Bozzarelli: None. M. Lugaresi: Lipkin: None. J.D. McKay: None. C. Dumontet: None. None. D. Malvi: None. H. Söderström: None. J. Räsänen: None. C. Bolognesi: A. Employment (full or P12.057B part-time); Signiﬁcant; Menarini Silicon Biosystems. C. High-throughput sorting of tumor cell populations Forcato: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; reveals the composite mutational landscape of Menarini Silicon Biosystems. A. D'Errico: None. R. oesophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) Fiocca: None. M. Seri: None. K. Krishnadath: None. E. Bonora: None. S. Mattioli: None. F. Isidori1, I. Bozzarelli1, M. Lugaresi1, D. Malvi1, H. Söderström2, J. Räsänen2, C. Bolognesi3, C. Forcato3, P12.058C A. D'Errico1, R. Fiocca4, M. Seri1, K. Krishnadath5, Germline loss-of-function variants in the BARD1 gene E. Bonora1, S. Mattioli1, EACSGE Esophageal are associated with early-onset familial breast cancer Adenocarcinoma Study Group Europe but not ovarian cancer 1UniversityofBologna,Bologna,Italy,2HelsinkiUniversity N. Weber-Lassalle1, J. Borde1, K. Weber-Lassalle1, Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Menarini Silicon J. Horváth2, D. Niederacher3, N. Arnold4, S. Kaulfuß5, Biosystems, Bologna, Italy, 4University of Genoa, Genova, C. Ernst1, V. G. Paul2, E. Honisch3, K. Klaschik1, Italy, 5Center of experimental and molecular medicine, A. E. Volk6, C. Kubisch6, S. Rapp7, N. Lichey2, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands J.Altmüller8,9,L.Lepkes1,E.Pohl-Rescigno1,H.Thiele8, P. Nürnberg8,9,10, M. Larsen1, L. Richters1, K. Rhiem1, Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is characterized by a B. Wappenschmidt1, C. Engel11,12, A. Meindl13, high genetic heterogeneity, which accounts for therapeutic R. K. Schmutzler1, E. Hahnen1, J. Hauke1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1563 1CenterforHereditaryBreastandOvarianCancer,Center BARD1 missense variants were signiﬁcantly more prevalent for Integrated Oncology (CIO), University of Cologne, inBCindexpatientscomparedwithcontrols(OR=2.15;95% Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, CI=1.26-3.67; P=0.00723). Neither LoF variants nor Cologne, Germany, 2Institute for Human Genetics, predicted damaging rare missense variants in BARD1 were University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany, identiﬁed in 451 familial index patients with OC. Dueto the 3Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University signiﬁcant association of germline LoF variants in BARD1 Hospital Duesseldorf, Heinrich-Heine University with early-onset BC, we suggest that intensiﬁed surveillance Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany, 4Institute of Clinical programs should be considered for women carrying patho- Molecular Biology, Department of Gynaecology and genic BARD1 gene variants. Obstetrics, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, N. Weber-Lassalle: None. J. Borde: None. K. Weber- Campus Kiel, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Lassalle:None.J.Horváth:None.D.Niederacher:None. Germany,5InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityMedical N. Arnold: None. S. Kaulfuß: None. C. Ernst: None. V. Center, Georg August University, Goettingen, Germany, G.Paul:None.E.Honisch:None.K.Klaschik:None.A. 6Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center E. Volk: None. C. Kubisch: None. S. Rapp: None. N. Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 7Preventive Lichey: None. J. Altmüller: None. L. Lepkes: None. E. Cardiology and Preventive Medicine, Center for Pohl-Rescigno: None. H. Thiele: None. P. Nürnberg: Cardiology, University Medical Center of the Johannes None. M. Larsen: None. L. Richters: None. K. Rhiem: Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 8Cologne None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. C. Engel: None. A. Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Meindl: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. E. Hahnen: Germany, 9Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne None. J. Hauke: None. (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 10Cologne ExcellenceCluster onCellularStressResponses P12.059D in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Evaluating the frequencies of EGFR, ALK/EML4, and Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 11Institute for Medical ROS1 alterations in lung cancer: A single-center Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of experience Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 12LIFE- Leipzig Research Centre for Civilization Diseases, University of Leipzig, B. Durak Aras1, O. Cilingir1, S. Isik1, S. Arslan1, Leipzig, Germany, 13Department of Gynaecology and E. Dundar2, G. Ak3, M. A. Temena1, E. Erzurumluoglu1, Obstetrics, University of Munich, Campus Großhadern, G. Gunden1, S. Artan1 Munich, Germany 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, TheroleofBARD1inbreastcancer(BC)andovariancancer Department of Medical Genetics, Eskısehır, Turkey, (OC) predisposition remains elusive, as published case- 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, control investigations have revealed controversial results. Department of Pathology, Eskısehır, Turkey, 3Eskisehir We aimed to assess the role of deleterious BARD1 germline Osmangazi University, FacultyofMedicine, Department of variantsinBC/OCpredisposition.Atotalof4,469BRCA1/2- Pulmonary Diseases, Eskısehır, Turkey negative female index patients with BC, 451 BRCA1/2- negative index patients with OC, and 2,767 geographically- MutationsinEGFRandrearrangementsofALKandROS-1 matched female controls were screened for loss-of-function affecting Ras/Raf/MAPK signal transduction pathway (LoF) mutations and potentially damaging rare missense provides prognostic importance since treatment strategies variants in BARD1. All patients met the inclusion criteria of with a variety of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in lung cancer the German Consortium for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian have been developed. Based on latest targetable drug Cancer for germline testingandreported at least one relative therapies regarding these three genes, this study aimed at with BC or OC. Additional control datasets (ExAC, determiningthemutationfrequenciesofthembetween2015 FLOSSIES) were included for the calculation of odds ratios and 2019. For EGFR mutations, tissue samples from 967 (ORs). We identiﬁed LoF variants in 23 of 4,469 BC index patients were analyzed by pyro-sequencing and Real-Time patients (0.51%) and in 36 of 37,265 controls (0.10%), PCR while ALK rearrangements of 780 samples and ROS1 resulting in an OR of 5.35 (95% conﬁdence interval [CI] of 437 samples were examined by FISH. However, 104 of =3.17-9.04; P<0.00001). BARD1-mutated BC indexpatients 780 tissue samples could not be analyzed by FISH and showed a signiﬁcantly younger mean age at ﬁrst diagnosis detailed results are given in Table. In total, 17,27% of (42.3 years, range: 24-60 years) compared with the overall 967 samples showed mutation-positive proﬁle for EGFR study sample (48.6 years, range: 17-92 years; P=0.00347). and3,85%of676samplesweredeterminedasALK-positive Overall,rareandpredicteddamaging(SIFT,MutationTaster) while0,6%of333wereROS1-positive.Inaddition,T790M1564 GeneName EGFR(n=967) ALK/EML4(n=676) ROS1(n=333) Mutations Positive(17,27%) Negative Positive Negative Positive Negative 3,85% (n=26) E19 L858R G719X L861Q S768I T790M 82,73% ALK 5’delALK ALK ALK-/ 96,15% 0,6% 99,4% (n=800) +/EML4+ + +/EML4- EML4+ (n=650) (n=2) (n=331) Number(n)& 4,75% 3,41% 3,21% 2,38% 2,38% 1,14% n=16 n=5 n=4 n=1 Frequencyin% mutation known to induce secondary resistance was calculated as 6,5% of total EGFR mutations. Five of 26 Material and Methods: We have sequenced 94 cancer- ALK-positivepatientsshow5’deletionwhilefourof26was associated genes in 344 (331 BC, 10 OC and 3 BC/OC) determinedasEML4-negative andthetwootherswerealso patients using Illumina TruSight Cancer kit on a MiSeq detected as having EGFR mutation L816Q. Moreover, platform. ALK-negativeandEML4-positiverearrangementwasdeter- Results: As expected, the highest prevalence of patho- minedinacase.Toconclude,bothALKandEML4positive genicvariantswasfoundinBRCA1(26patients,7.6%)and casesshouldbeassuredlyexaminedtogetherwithrespectto BRCA2 (32 patients, 9.3%) genes. CHEK2 and FANCM EGFR mutations like in our two cases because they are were the next most frequently mutated genes (5/344, 1.5% togetherknowntocausedecreaseinefﬁcacyofEGFR-TKIs each). Four different truncating FANCM variants in adenocarcinomas. [c.1972C>T, p.(Arg658Ter), c.2953delG, p.(Glu958fs), c.5048_5022del, p.(Lys1683fs) and c.5791C>T, p. Table. Mutation frequency distributions over tissue (Arg1931Ter)]wereidentiﬁedinthreeBC,oneOCandone samples. BC/OC patient. Interestingly, four (80%) of the FANCM B.DurakAras:None.O.Cilingir:None.S.Isik:None. carriers had co-inherited pathogenic variant in BRCA2 S. Arslan: None. E. Dundar: None. G. Ak: None. M.A. (n=2), BRCA1 (n=1) and FANCE (n=1) genes. These Temena: None. E. Erzurumluoglu: None. G. Gunden: ﬁndings suggest that the penetrance of FANCM pathogenic None. S. Artan: None. variants depends on the co-inheritance of pathogenic var- iants in other cancer genes. The two FANCM/BRCA2 car- P12.062C riers had ER+ BC, while FANCM/FANCE and only- Multigene panel testing in breast/ovarian cancer FANCM BC carriers had TN BC, suggesting that the pre- patients reveals high prevalence of FANCM truncating sence of BRCA2 mutations modiﬁes the BC ER expression variantsandsuggestsanoligogenicdiseasecourseinthe in FANCM carriers. carriers Conclusion: Our study supports the ﬁnding of FANCM as a novel BC/OC susceptibility gene, and further suggests M. Jakimovska1, K. Kubelka-Sabit2, M. Karagjozov2, an oligogenic disease course in FANCM mutation carriers. E. Lazarova3, S. Smichkoska3, D. Plaseska-Karanﬁlska1 M. Jakimovska: None. K. Kubelka-Sabit: None. M. Karagjozov: None. E. Lazarova: None. S. Smichkoska: 1RCGEB “Georgi D. Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of None. D. Plaseska-Karanﬁlska: None. Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republicof, 2ClinicalHospital Acibadem Sistina, P12.063D Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, Intermediate risk variant in brca1 expands the clinical 3University Clinic of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Medical spectrum of fanconi anemia and sheds new light on Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, variant classiﬁcation criteria Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of K. Keupp1, S. Hampp2, A. Huebbel1, S. Kostezka2, Introduction: Recently, FANCM gene emerged as a novel M. Maringa1, K. Rhiem1, A. Waha1, B. Wappenschmidt1, moderate-risk gene for breast and ovarian cancer (BC/OC). R. Pujol3, J. Surrallés3, R. K. Schmutzler1, SeveralstudieshaveshownthatFANCMtruncatingvariants L. Wiesmueller2, E. Hahnen1 areparticularlyassociatedwithER-andtriplenegative(TN) BC. However, additional high, moderate and low-risk 1CenterforHereditaryBreastandOvarianCancer,Center cancer genes in FANCM carriers have not been well for Integrated Oncology (CIO), University of Cologne, studied. Here, we present the clinical and genetic data of Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, BC/OC patients carrying truncating FANCM variants. Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Obstetrics andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1565 Gynecology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany, 3Department cells following a germline selection model. As a tyrosine ofGenetics and Biomedical Research Institute, Hospitalde receptor kinase (RTK) family member, FGFR3 is involved Sant Pau; Department of Genetics and Microbiology, in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation and UniversitatAutònomadeBarcelona;CenterforBiomedical apoptosis.Therefore,severephenotypesareassociatedwith Network Research on Rare Diseases, Barcelona, Spain aberrant receptor signaling caused by these mutations, whichhavealsobeendetectedinnumeroushumancancers. Heterozygous BRCA1 mutations confer high life-time risks Materials and Methods: We are currently screening de for breast and ovarian cancer, whereas biallelic BRCA1 novo mutations in the FGFR3 occurring at increased levels mutations lead either to embryonic lethality or Fanconi (>10-5) in human sperm with duplex sequencing. In this anemia (FA), a severe congenital syndrome mainly study,wearetestingthefunctionalchangesassociatedwith characterized by bone marrow failure, developmental the discovered mutations in a structure-function-analysis. abnormalities and solid tumors. By multigene panel Speciﬁcally, we are determining potentially altered signal- analysis, we identiﬁed two compound heterozygous patho- ing of different mutated FGFR3 in comparison to the wild- genic BRCA1 mutations, p.(Cys61Gly) and p. type receptor at three different levels: 1) Analysis of tyr- (Arg1699Gln), in a female index with breast cancer at the osine phosphorylation in the kinase region of the receptor age of 30 years. The p.Cys61Gly mutation confers high via phospho-speciﬁc Western blotting; 2) Measuring the cancerrisk,whilethehypomorphicp.Arg1699Glnmutation dynamicsofreceptorstoichiometryonthecellsurfaceusing is associated with an intermediate cancer risk. A cytodiag- single molecule microscopy (TOCCSL); 3) Evaluation of nostic test for FA was negative in patient`s PBLs. Clinical intracellular calcium kinetics by ratiometric analysis of investigations revealed mild FA-like features, i.e. low Fura-2 loaded cells. height(150cm),mildmicrocephaly(52cmcircumference), Conclusions: In this study we are functionally char- café au lait macules, and severe chemotherapy-induced acterizing newly described rare mutations arising in the hematotoxicity. Functional analyses of the hypomorphic p. male germline using highly quantitative biophysical meth- Arg1699Gln mutation revealed impaired BRCA1 function- ods. This study will provide new insights in the processes ality in DNA repair and replication forks stabilization. underlying increased signaling of mutated RTKs coupled However, the residual activity of the hypomorphic p. with aberrant signaling in mutant cells. Arg1699GlnallelelikelypreventsthesevereFAphenotype. Project funded by the Doctoral College "NanoCell" Our data expand the clinical spectrum associated with (W1250). biallelic BRCA1 mutations. Furthermore, these data may I. Hartl: None. Y. Striedner: None. R. Salazar: None. haveimplicationsforBRCA1variantclassiﬁcationusingthe A. Yasari: None. I. Tiemann-Boege: None. co-occurrencemodelwhichisbasedontheassumptionthat pathogenic biallelic BRCA1 mutations are lethal or cause P12.065B severe FA. Molecularcharacterisationof various fusiontranscripts K.Keupp:None.S. Hampp: None. A.Huebbel:None. in different histologic types of cancers S.Kostezka:None.M.Maringa:None.K.Rhiem:None. A. Waha: None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. R. Pujol: T. Vaněček1, N. Ptáková1,2, P. Martínek1, V. Hájková1, None. J. Surrallés: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. L. P. Steiner1 Wiesmueller: None. E. Hahnen: None. 1Molecular Genetics Department, Biopticka Laborator s.r. P12.064A o., Pilsen, Czech Republic, 2Second Faculty of Medicine, Functional analysis of driver mutations in the FGFR3 Prague, Czech Republic expanding with paternal age Targeted next-generation sequencing is gradually being I. Hartl, Y. Striedner, R. Salazar, A. Yasari, I. Tiemann- used in routine molecular pathology. Detection of gene Boege fusions is useful for prognostics, and differential and predictivediagnostics. Herewereviewtheresults offusion Institute of Biophysics, JKU, Linz, Austria detection analyses in clinical routine samples including someretrospectivestudiescollectedoveratwo-yearperiod. Introduction: Certain point mutations in the FGFR3 gene We present overall statistics and evaluate the suitability of havea veryhigh mutation frequencyinspermcomparedto the NGS approach compared to traditional methods and the genome average that increases with age. Studies discuss the beneﬁts and limitations of the analyses. Several proposed this effect to be linked with single nucleotide Fusion Plex panels were employed focused on fusions substitutionscausingtheexpansion ofspermatogonial stem found in solid tumors, sarcomas, lymphomas, and thyroid1566 and lung cancer. The kits use anchored multiplex PCR, an (the 2 identiﬁed variants result in decreased function) and assay that targets only one partner of the fusion pair and (ii) the other a cell-cycle regulated E3-ubiquitin ligase- are allowstodetectunknownfusionpartners.Of2505analyzed currently being tested for their effects on protein function. samples, 348 were positive for some fusion transcript, 133 We are further expanding the WES on an additional series of those were unique fusion gene pairs, and out of that 58 of 18 families to conﬁrm the recurrence of altered genes in were novel. Of the remaining 1771 samples were negative, familial HL and to look for somatic-second hit locally 386sampleswerenotanalyzable,mostlyduetoinsufﬁcient eliminating the wild-type allele, according to the classical quality of input RNA. Novel fusion transcripts were paradigm for tumor-suppressor gene. conﬁrmedeitherbyFISHbreak-apartorfusionFISHprobe (NishaLimayeandHélèneA.Poirel:Equalcontribution) or custom designed RT-PCR. The NGS method proved to E. Khoury: None. M. Veiga da Cunha: None. A. be very efﬁcient in detecting a large variety of fusion Mendola:None.S.Choquet:None.J.Landman-Parker: transcripts, the only notable limitation is the quality of None. C. Besson: None. N. Limaye: None. H.A. source material. Poirel: None. T. Vaněček: None. N. Ptáková: None. P. Martínek: None. V. Hájková: None. P. Steiner: None. P12.067D Temozolomide and AZD3463 have synergistic P12.066C anticancereffectonT98Gglioblastomamultiformecells Genetic predisposition of familial Hdgkin lymphoma B. Goker Bagca, N. Ozates Ay, A. Asik, C. Gunduz, E. Khoury1, M. Veiga da Cunha1, A. Mendola1, C. Biray Avci S. Choquet2,3, J. Landman-Parker4, C. Besson5,6, N. Limaye1, H. A. POIREL7 Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey 1deDuveInstitute,UCLouvain,Brussels,Belgium,2Service d’Hématologie, CHU La Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France, Glioblastomamultiforme(GBM)comprisesmostmalignant 3French registry of familial lymphoid neoplasms, Paris, phenotype of central nervous system tumors which are France, 4Service d'Hématologie et d'Oncologie deﬁned as grade IV. Temozolomide is an alkylating agent Pédiatrique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, which is used for GBM treatment. Although temozolomide 5Unité d'Hémato-Oncologie, Centre Hospitalier de has a remarkable effect, the high application dose reveals Versailles, Le Chesnay, France, 6Centre for Research in the necessity of combination with other agents in the EpidemiologyandPopulationHealth(CESP)INSERMUnit treatment of GBM. AZD3463 is a novel ALK tyrosine 1018,Villejuif,France,7BelgianCancerRegistry,Brussels, kinase receptor inhibitor which is over-expressed in GBM. Belgium The aim of this study was to investigate whether the inhibition of ALK positively affects the activity of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a B-cell lymphoproliferative temozolomide in GBM. Temozolomide and AZD3463 neoplasms that affects 2.7 individuals per 100,000/yr. Risk were dissolved in DMSO. T98G GBM cell line obtained factors include EBV infection, especially in the context of fromATCCwasculturedviaEMEM.Thecytotoxiceffects acquiredorinnateimmunodeﬁciency.Despiteevidencethat of temozolomide, AZD3463 and their combination were geneticpredispositionplaysanimportantroleinasubsetof determined in time and dose dependent manner by using HL, there is a dearth of functionally validated disease- WST8 (Biointersect) assay. IC50 values and the combina- causative genes. We aim to identify germline genetic tion index (CI) were calculated by CalcuSyn (Biosoft). “drivers” of HL by applying Whole Exome Sequencing Effectsoftheagentsonapoptosisandcellcyclestatuswere (WES)torare,familialHLsamples,followedbyfunctional determined by BD accuri C6 ﬂow cytometry and Annexin validation of prioritized candidate genes with rare, poten- V (BD Biosciences) and Cycletest plus DNA (BD tially pathogenic variants that co-segregate with disease Biosciences) assays, respectively. IC50 values of temozo- within families. lomide and AZD3463 were determined as 1.54mM and Apilot studyon20 affected individuals from10families 529nM on 48th hours, respectively. CI value was found identiﬁedbetween24and96suchalteredgenesperfamily, 0.45 and the combination was evaluated as synergistic 23 of which were identiﬁed in more than one. Intriguingly, (ED75 value: 1.4mM temozolomide, 1.4μM AZD3463). they include several proteins that regulate mitosis and Temozolomide, AZD3463 and the combination induced mitotic checkpoints, suggesting this may be an important apoptosis 2.76, 1.17, and 3.31 folds, respectively. Temo- pathway in disease. Variants in the top two of these can- zolomide,AZD3463andthecombinationarrestedcellcycle didate genes -(i) one involved in the ﬁrst step of glycolysis G1/S at different ratios. Our results suggested thatAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1567 AZD3463 combination may be an alternative approach to P12.069B dose reduction of TMZ for GBM cells. ETV1oncogenefusedtonovelgenepartnerPTPRZ1in B. Goker Bagca: None. N. Ozates Ay: None. A. Asik: a case of pilocytic astrocytoma None. C. Gunduz: None. C. Biray Avci: None. A. Matjašič1, D. Kolenc2 P12.068A Combination of AZD3463 and salinomycin can induce 1Laboratory of Molecular genetics, Institute of Pathology, apoptosis and cell cycle arrest on glioblastoma Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, multiform cells Slovenia, 2Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia A. Asik, N. Ozates Ay, B. Goker Bagca, C. Kayabasi, B.OzmenYelken,R.Gasimli,S.YilmazSusluer,C.Biray Gliomas are highly aggressive brain tumours, exhibiting Avci, C. Gunduz extreme genetic and clinical heterogeneity. It is these variabilities that represent a great challenge in their Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of diagnosis and treatment, and are major causes of high Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey mortality. Development and advances of high-throughput sequencing techniques identiﬁed several new single- Introduction:Glioblastomamultiforme(GBM)isthemost nucleotide variants and gene rearrangements. Characteriza- commonmalignantandaggressivebraintumorwithlimited tion of gene fusions and how they affect cellular processes efﬁcient treatment options. AZD3463 is a potent ALK/ ingliomaoncogenesiswillhelpusextendourknowledgeof IGF1R inhibitor designed to overcome the acquired tumour biology and contribute to more personalized and resistance to crizotinib, while Salinomycin, an ionophore targeted treatment of the disease. antibiotic, has been identiﬁed as a novel alternative to Routine NGS analysis of the FFPE tissue sample of traditional anticancer drugs and a potential Wnt/β-catenin pilocytic astrocytoma in a 7-year old boy revealed a fusion pathwayinhibitor.Inthisstudy,weaimedtoinvestigatethe between the ETV1 oncogene and the PTPRZ1 gene. To the combinational effects of AZD3463 and salinomycin on bestofourknowledge,thereisnomentionofthePTPRZ1- T98G GBM cell line. ETV1 (PE) fusion in glioma or any other type of cancer to Materials and Methods: The cytotoxicity of AZD3463 date.InordertovalidatethePE-fusion,weusedPE-fusion- andsalinomycinonT98GcellsweredeterminedwithWST- speciﬁc primers for RT-PCR and subsequent Sanger 8 assay. The effects of the combination of AZD3463 and sequencing. salinomycinonapoptosisandcellcycleweredeterminedby Both ETV1 and PTPRZ1 genes are thought to act as AnnexinV-FITCApoptosisDetectionKitandBDCycletest oncogenes. ETV1 is a member of ETS family of transcrip- Plus DNA Reagent Kit, respectively. tion factors, known tumour-promoting factors of Ewing Results: IC doses of AZD3463 and salinomycin were sarcoma and prostate tumours. PTPRZ1 is considered as a 50 found as 529 nM and 7.3 μM for 48h, respectively. Com- tumourgrowth-promotingoncogeneinglioma.In8-15%of binationdosesofAZD3463andsalinomycinwerefoundas glioma, PTPRZ1 is fused to the MET oncogene - a ZM- 3.3 μM and 333 nM with 0.673 combination index, fusion, which is associated with poorer prognosis but also respectively. While IC doses of AZD3463 and salino- representsapositivepredictivebiomarkerfortreatmentwith 50 mycin induced apoptosis 1.2 and 1.4-fold, as the combi- kinase inhibitors. Regarding all, PTPRZ1-ETV1 fusion nation dose induced apoptosis 3.2-fold, compared to presents a novel possible target for glioma treatment; control. While IC dose of salinomycin did not affect, however, functional studies are needed to determine the 50 AZD3463 and the combination dose arrested the cell cycle impact of the fusion in pathogenesis of glioma. at G1 phase. A. Matjašič: None. D. Kolenc: None. Conclusions: We suggest that the combination of AZD3463 and salinomycin via concurrently regulating P12.070C signal pathways ALK and Wnt, may be a novel alternative FOCAD is associated with survival in IDH-mutant approach in the treatment of GBM. astrocyticgliomas,localizestocentrosomes,andimpacts A. Asik: None. N. Ozates Ay: None. B. Goker Bagca: microtubules None. C. Kayabasi: None. B. Ozmen Yelken: None. R. Gasimli: None. S. Yilmaz Susluer: None. C. Biray Avci: F. Brand1, A. Förster1, A. Kosfeld1, M. Bucher1, None. C. Gunduz: None. C.Thomé2,M.S.Raab3,M.Westphal4,T.Pietsch5,A.von Deimling6,7, G. Reifenberger8,9, P. Claus10, B. Hentschel11, M. Weller12, R. G. Weber11568 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical that FOCAD loss is associated with decreased overall School, Hannover, Germany, 2Neurology Clinic and survival in subsets of glioma patients, a prognostic effect National Center for Tumor Diseases, Clinical Cooperation thatmaybelinkedtoourﬁndingsthatfocadhesinphysically Unit Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center interactswithtubulinfamilymembers,impactsmicrotubule (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Internal assembly and mitotic progression. Medicine V, Hematology, Oncology and Rheumatology, F. Brand: None. A. Förster: None. A. Kosfeld: None. University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, M. Bucher: None. C. Thomé: None. M.S. Raab: None. 4Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center M. Westphal: None. T. Pietsch: None. A. von Deimling: Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 5Department of None. G. Reifenberger: None. P. Claus: None. B. Hent- Neuropathology,UniversityofBonnMedicalSchool,Bonn, schel: None. M. Weller: None. R.G. Weber: None. Germany, 6Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, P12.071D Germany, 7Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, Study of SEZ6L molecular alterations in solid tumors German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), A. Martel-Martel1,2,3, C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero1,4,5, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Department of Neuropathology, S. Vallejo-Fuente2,5, A. Casado-García5, S. Almaraz- Heinrich-Heine-University,Düsseldorf,Germany,9German Postigo2,5, E. Sánchez Tapia2,1,5, T. Martín-Gómez1,3, CancerConsortium(DKTK),PartnerSiteEssen/Düsseldorf M.GomesFerreira1,6,M.Sancho-deSalas7,R.González- andGermanCancerResearchCenter(DKFZ),Heidelberg, Sarmiento1,2,5 Germany, 10Department of Neuroanatomy and Cell Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 1Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca 11Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 2Unidad de Medicina Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, Molecular. Departamento de Medicina. Universidad de 12Department of Neurology, University Hospital and Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Servicio de Oncología University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Médica. Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Unidad de Medicina Molecular. Departamento de Insearchofnovelgenesassociatedwithgliomatumorigen- Medicina.UniversidaddeSalamanca,Salamanca,España, esis, we have previously shown that KIAA1797/FOCAD is Salamanca, Spain, 5Instituto de Biología Molecular y frequently deleted in gliomas and that the encoded Celular del Cáncer (IBMCC), Universidad de Salamanca- focadhesin functions as a tumor suppressor impacting CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, 6Servicio de Ginecología y proliferation and migration of glioma cells in vitro and Obstetricia. Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, in vivo. Here, we examine an association of FOCAD loss Salamanca, Spain, 7Servicio de Anatomía Patológica. with overall survival of glioma patients, and address the Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain molecularmechanismsthatgovernthesuppressiveeffectof focadhesin on glioma tumorigenesis. We found FOCAD Introduction:TheSEZ6Lgenehasbeenrecentlydescribed loss to be associated with profoundly inferior outcome in tobealteredinlungtumors.Wesetouttotestifthisistrue patients with isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)-mutant WHO for other types of tumors as well. grade II to IV astrocytic gliomas. Multivariable analysis of Materials and Methods: We studied SEZ6L by quanti- WHO grade II to IV astrocytic gliomas conﬁrmed FOCAD tative Polymerase-Chain Reaction (qPCR) on tumor- lossasanindependentprognosticfactorforoverallsurvival. derived DNA samples. In total, we studied: 55 female and Subsequently, using a yeast two-hybrid screen and pull- 18 male breast tumors, 30 grade II-III and 30 grade I down assays, we identiﬁed tubulin beta-6 and other endometrial tumors 38 ovarian tumors. members of the tubulin family as novel focadhesin- Results:WeidentiﬁedSEZ6Lampliﬁcationsin1(1.7%) interacting partners. We demonstrate that tubulins and of female breast cancers, 3 (16.7%) of male breast cancers, focadhesin co-localize at the centrosome, and that focadhe- 1(3.0%)ofgradeII-IIIand2(6.6%)ofgradeIendometrial sin is enriched in proximity to centrioles. Focadhesin also cancers and 3(7.9%) ofovarian cancers. Wefound SEZ6L localizes to microtubules via its interaction partner SLAIN heterozygous deletions in 23 (39.7 %) of female breast motif family member 2, and reduces microtubule growth cancers, 4 (22.2%) of male breast cancers, 10 (33.3%) of velocity,possiblyexplainingwhyfocadhesindecreasescell grade II-III and 3 (10.0%) of grade I endometrial cancers migration. During the cell cycle, focadhesin levels peak and 19 (50.0%) of ovarian cancers We described SEZ6L prior to mitosis and inﬂuence time-dependent mitotic homozygous deletions in 22 (37.9%) of female breast progression, providing a possible explanation for cancers, 6 (33.33%) of male breast cancers, 5 (16.6%) of focadhesin-dependent cell growth reduction. We concludeAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1569 grade II-III and 5 (16.6%) of grade I endometrial cancers BRCA1variantsthatwerepreviouslyundetectedduetoless and 4 (10.5%) of ovarian cancers. comprehensive and sensitive methods were found. Five Conclusions: Though SEZ6L had, until now, only been pathogenicvariantsarenovel,threeofwhichoccuringenes shown to be altered in lung cancer, we show that a great yet unrelated to hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer percentage of gynecological tumors present alterations, (FANCG, FH and HRAS). In our cohort we discovered a thus,potentiallylinking SEZ6Lwith thesetypesoftumors. remarkably high frequency of truncating variants in This work was supported by a grant from Instituto de FANCM (2.1%), which has recently been suggested as a Salud Carlos III (Ministry of Economy and Competitive- susceptibility gene for hereditary breast cancer. Two ness) (ISC IIII-FEDER: PI16/01920) patients of our cohort carried two different pathogenic A. Martel-Martel: None. C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero: variants each and 10 other patients in whom a pathogenic None.S.Vallejo-Fuente:None.A.Casado-García:None. variant was conﬁrmed also harbored a variant of unknown S. Almaraz-Postigo: None. E. Sánchez Tapia: None. T. signiﬁcance in a breast and ovarian cancer Martín-Gómez: None. M. Gomes Ferreira: None. M. susceptibility gene. Sancho-de Salas: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. Conclusions: With our screening strategy, we were able to identify pathogenic variants predisposing for tumor for- P12.073B mationin12.3%ofBRCA1/2-negativebreastand/orovarian The identiﬁcation of pathogenic variants in BRCA1/2 cancer patients. negative, high risk, hereditary breast and/or ovarian Grant: Claudia von Schilling Stiftung to B.S. and D.S. cancer patients J.L. van Luttikhuizen: None. S. Schubert: None. B. Auber: None. G. Schmidt: None. W. Hofmann: None. J. J. L. van Luttikhuizen1, S. Schubert1, B. Auber1, Penkert: None. C.F. Davenport: None. U. Hille-Betz: G.Schmidt1,W.Hofmann1,J.Penkert1,C.F.Davenport2, None. L. Wendeburg: None. J. Bublitz: None. M. Tau- U. Hille-Betz3, L. Wendeburg1, J. Bublitz1, M. Tauscher1, scher: None.K.Hackmann:None.E. Schröck: None.C. K. Hackmann4,5,6,7, E. Schröck4,6,7, C. Scholz1, Scholz: None. H. Wallaschek: None. B. Schlegelberger: H. Wallaschek1, B. Schlegelberger1, T. Illig1, None. T. Illig: None. D. Steinemann: None. D. Steinemann1 P12.074C 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical Prevalence of genetic susceptibility for breast and School, Hannover, Germany, 2Research Core Unit ovarian cancer in a non-cancer related study Genomics,HannoverMedicalSchool,Hannover,Germany, population: secondary germline ﬁndings from a Swiss 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hannover single center cohort MedicalSchool,Hannover,Germany,4InstituteforClinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus, TU D. Kraemer1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, K. Steindl1, Dresden,Dresden,Germany,5GermanCancerConsortium P. Boonsawat1, M. Zweier1, K. J. Dedes2, P. Joset1, (DKTK), Dresden, Germany, 6German Cancer Research D. Fink2, A. Rauch1 Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 7National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) Partner Site Dresden, Dresden, 1Institute of Medical Genetics (IMG), University of Zurich, Germany 8952 Schlieren-Zürich, Switzerland, 2Department of Gynecology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zürich, Introduction: In the majority of hereditary breast and /or Switzerland ovarian cancer (HBOC) patients the genetic predisposition is unknown. Currently extensive research focusses on the Objective: For the ﬁrst time, in a retrospective non-cancer identiﬁcation of pathogenic variants causative for the related cohort of a single Swiss genetic center, we development of the disease. systematically assessed the prevalence of secondary ﬁnd- MaterialsandMethods:NGS-basedmultiplegenepanel ings in 19 susceptibility genes for hereditary breast and resequencing in combination with a high resolution CGH- ovarian cancer (HBOC). arraywasusedtoidentifygenetic riskfactors forHBOCin Design:Atotalofn=400non-cancerrelatedindividuals 237 high risk patients who were previously tested negative undergoing whole-exome sequencing were included after for pathogenic BRCA1/2 variants. quality assessment(meanageof 43years).The majorityof Results: We identiﬁed 32 pathogenic variants in 14 dif- the cohort were Caucasian (n = 336, 84.0%), for n = 170 ferent genes (ATM, BLM, BRCA1, CDH1, CHEK2, individuals (42.5%) of which an autochthonous Swiss FANCG, FANCM, FH, HRAS, PALB2, PMS2, PTEN, descentwasassumed.Eachrarevariant(MAF≤0.65%)was RAD51CandNBN)in30patients(12.7%).Twopathogenic manually evaluated according to the ACMG-AMP1570 standards including "hypomorphic" as additional distinct proband,whosefatherhadbreastcancer(BRCA2+PTEN); pathogenicity class. 3)early-onsetbreastcancerandrenalcancerwithlungcysts Results: Overall, 526 rare secondary variants were in 2 siblings (BRCA1 + FLCN); 4) bilateral breast cancer, encounteredwiththeBRCA1/2genesaccountingfor27.2% pheochromocytoma, and medullary thyroid cancer (BRCA1 of the total variant yield. If stratiﬁed for variant patho- + RET). Overall, in 5 patients we actively searched for a genicity, for BRCA1/2, three pathogenic variants were second PV whereas the diagnosis was incidental in one foundinthreefemalesofItalianancestry(carrierfrequency case. Our data indicate that the phenotypes of patients with of0.8%).Inthe17non-BRCAgenes,ﬁvecarriersof(likely) Multiple Genetic Tumor Syndromes (MGTS) can be the pathogenic variants (1.3%) were identiﬁed with two Swiss sumofthedifferentsyndromesordrivenbyoneofthetwo individualsharboringtheCHEK2Arg160Glyvariantbeing genesortheymightrepresentamultiplicativeeffect.MGTS known as recurrent among Caucasians. Hence, the overall should be actively searched in all patients with complex/ carrier rate of a (likely) pathogenic variant summed up to atypical phenotypes or a suggestive family history, that 2.0%. Additionally, seven various hypomorphic alleles cannot solely be explained by defects in a single CPG. were detected in 22 individuals (5.4%). F. Brugnoletti: None. E. Lucci-Cordisco: None. A. Conclusion: Herein, we provide ﬁrst evidence for a high Vaisfeld: None. A. Panﬁli: None. S. Amenta: None. R. prevalence of HBOC-related cancer susceptibility in the Pietrobono: None. M. Pomponi: None. M. Genuardi: heterogeneous Swiss general population and relevant sub- None. populations, particularly in individuals of Italian descent. These pioneer data may further substantiate considerations P12.076A about population-based HBOC screenings. This study was Exome sequencing in familial cancer patients; yield, funded by a von Sick CardioOnco grant. advantages and disadvantages of implementation in the D. Kraemer: None. S. Azzarello-Burri: None. K. clinical practice Steindl:None.P.Boonsawat:None.M.Zweier:None.K. J. Dedes: None. P. Joset: None. D. Fink: None. A. S. Moghadasi1, M. Collee2, M. Cooks1, C. Tops1, Rauch: None. A. Wagner2, M. Nielsen1, A. van den Ouweland2, C. J. VAN ASPEREN1 P12.075D Multiple genetic tumor syndromes: when to suspect 1Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Clinical them? Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, F. Brugnoletti1, E. Lucci-Cordisco1,2, A. Vaisfeld1,3, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands A. Panﬁli1, S. Amenta1, R. Pietrobono1,2, M. Pomponi2, M. Genuardi1,2 Introduction: For many patients from families with strong suspicionforhereditarycancernopathogenicvariantcanbe 1Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Fondazione Policlinico found using single gene or small gene panel sequencing Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Roma, Italy, 3Fondazione methods. Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy The aim of this study is to evaluate the yield of exome sequencinginpatientsinwhomstandarddiagnosticsdidnot The use of multigene panels allowed the identiﬁcation of lead to a molecular diagnosis. Furthermore, we discuss carriers of pathogenic variants (PVs) in 2 or more cancer advantages and disadvantages of implementation of exome predisposing genes (CPGs). The condition has been named sequencing in clinical practice. Multiple Inherited Neoplasia Alleles Syndrome (MINAS): Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing was per- here we present 6 new cases and discuss the implications. formed in 130 patients with a strong suspicion for heredi- The NF1 gene was involved in two cases, associated with tarycancerwhohadtestednegativeinpreviousgenetictests RET and MSH2 PVs, respectively. Both patients presented for germline variants. A panel of 209 genes proven to be clinical NF1 in addition to positive family history (known causal for cancer or associated with cancer was analyzed. familial RET PV) and personal and family history of early- Results: We identiﬁed 10 pathogenic variants in 130 onset colon cancer, respectively. The latter patient also patients (7.7%) which are (partially) causative of the phe- developed three independent soft tissue sarcomas, that are notypesin thefamilies. These tenpathogenic variants were uncommon in both NF1 and Lynch syndrome. The other found in ATM (3 times), LZTR1, PALB2, PMS2 (2 times), casesinvolvedBRCA1and/orBRCA2:1)early-onsetbreast MUTYH, SUFU, TGFBR1. Additionally, 22 pathogenic/ cancer, ovarian cancer (BRCA1 + BRCA2); 2) macroce- deleteriousvariantswereidentiﬁedwhichdidnotmatchthe phaly, skin lesions, colon cancer, pancreatic cancer in the family’s cancer phenotype. Furthermore, we selected someAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1571 variants with high prior probability of pathogenicity based Introduction: Germline mutations in the exonuclease on the function of the gene, in silico data and frequency of domains of polymerases POLE and POLD1, which affect the variant in control cohorts for further research. their proofreading capabilities, predispose to adenomatous Conclusions: Our study shows that exome sequencing, polyps, colorectal cancer, endometrial tumors and other also after standard tests, is valuable in identifying the cau- extracolonic malignancies. Tumors and polyps with exonu- sative pathogenic variants. However, given the associated clease domain mutations exhibit an increased mutation rate costs and workload for clinical molecular geneticistsat this (hypermutation) and a speciﬁc associated mutational moment,itshouldonlybeofferedtospeciﬁcfamilieswhen signature. We aim at deﬁning the tumor spectrum of the targeted analysis of the most relevant genes is negative. syndrome, assess the prevalence of POLE/D1 pathogenic S. Moghadasi: None. M. Collee: None. M. Cooks: mutations in hereditary cancer, and evaluate the challenge None. C. Tops: None. A. Wagner: None. M. Nielsen: of variant classiﬁcation for these genes. None. A. van den Ouweland: None. C.J. Van Materials and Methods: We studied a total of 1,525 asperen: None. unrelated probands referred for genetic counseling: a pro- spective cohort of 1,021 hereditary cancer patients sub- P12.077B jected to a multi-gene hereditary cancer panel, which Germline mutations in POLE and POLD1 associated includedthewholesequenceofPOLEandPOLD1;and504 with hereditary cancer patients without mutations in known cancer-predisposing genes, selected according to their phenotypic character- P. Mur1,2,3, S. García Mulero4, J. del Valle1,2,3, A. Vidal5, istics, where POLE/D1 exonuclease domains were directly M. Pineda1,2,3, G. Cinnirella1,6, E. Martín-Ramos7, sequenced. Co-segregation analyses, case-control allele A. López-Doriga4,8, S. Belhadj1,2, P. M. Muñoz-Torres1,2, frequencies, yeast-based assays and tumor mutational ana- M. Navarro1,2,3, J. Balmaña9, J. Brunet10,2,3, lyses (mutation burden and mutational signatures) were V. Moreno4,8,11, J. Piulats12,3, X. Matías-Guiu5, R. Sanz- performed for variant interpretation. Pamplona4,8, R. Aligué7, G. Capellá1,2,3, C. Lázaro1,2,3, Results: We identiﬁed 8 missense variants within the L. Valle1,2,3 exonuclease domain, 4 loss-of-function and 5 missense predicted deleterious variants outside the exonuclease 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of domain; all of them with population allelic frequencies Oncology(IDIBELL),HospitaletdeLlobregat(Barcelona), <1%. Pending interpretation of the clinical impact of loss- Spain, 2Program in Molecular Mechanisms and of-function and non-exonuclease domain mutations, our Experimental Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, results, implemented in the ACMG/AMP guidelines for Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain, 3Centro de variant classiﬁcation, allowed us classify 2 variants as Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), pathogenic, 2 as benign, and 4 as variants of unknown Madrid, Spain, 4Unit of Biomarkers and Susceptibility, signiﬁcance. CancerPreventionandControlProgram,CatalanInstitute Conclusions: Our study reveals relevant challenges for of Oncology (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat the classiﬁcation of POLE/POLD1 variants, which need to (Barcelona), Spain, 5Department of Pathology, Bellvitge be considered for routine genetic diagnostics. University Hospital (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat P. Mur: None. S. García Mulero: None. J. del Valle: (Barcelona), Spain, 6PhD Program in Translational None. A. Vidal: None. M. Pineda: None. G. Cinnirella: Biomedicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, None. E. Martín-Ramos: None. A. López-Doriga: None. 7Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, S. Belhadj: None. P. M. Muñoz-Torres: None. M. University of Barcelona (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain, Navarro: None. J. Balmaña: None. J. Brunet: None. V. 8Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Moreno: None. J. Piulats: None. X. Matías-Guiu: None. Epidemiologia y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, R. Sanz-Pamplona: None. R. Aligué: None. G. Capellá: Spain, 9Medical Oncology Department, Vall d'Hebron None. C. Lázaro: None. L. Valle: None. University Hospital, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain, 10Hereditary Cancer Program, P12.079D Catalan Institute of Oncology (IDIBGi), Girona, Spain, HTRA4 could be involved in early-onset breast and 11Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, ovarian cancer UniversityofBarcelona,Barcelona,Spain,12Departmentof Medical Oncology, Catalan Institute of Oncology S.Almaraz-Postigo1,2,N.Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3,E.M.Sánchez (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat (Barcelona), Spain Tapia1,2,3, T. Martín-Gómez3,4, A. Pascual-Rodríguez3, M. Sancho-de Salas5, E. Bueno-Martínez1, J. L. García1,2,3, R. González-Sarmiento1,2,31572 1Department of Medicine, Molecular Medicine Unit, Department, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, 6997801 Tel University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of Aviv, Israel, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3The Wellcome Trust/CRUK Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, Rd, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK, Cambridge, United 3Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Kingdom, 4Department of Genetics, University of Salamanca, Spain, 4Medical Oncology Service, University Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge, CB2 3EH, UK, Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 5Pathological Cambridge, United Kingdom Anatomy Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain The complex immunological synapse between T lympho- cytes and cancer cells contains checkpoint proteins that Introduction: Early-onset breast cancer shows clinical and modulate the signal transmitted to T lymphocytes. Not all molecular differences when compared with other types of patients respond to the checkpoint inhibitors treatment, breast cancer and, as such, could be considered a breast especially in glioblastoma multiformae (GBM). The cancersubtype.Ouraimwastoﬁndgeneregionsthatwere expression of checkpoint genes is variable and prone to altered in early-onset breast cancer and, within those the regulation of yet unrevealed mechanisms. Our study is regions, study candidate genes. aimed at evaluating the transcriptional and post- Materials and Methods: Early-onset breast cancer transcriptional regulation of checkpoint mRNAs. We samples were studied by comparative genomic hybridiza- analysed the expression of mRNAs from 617 adult GBM tion (CGH) arrays and candidate gene was studied by samplesfromtheTCGA,aswellasfrom4celllinesbyRT- quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) in 22 early- PCR. Of 22 mRNAs suggested in the literature to be onset breast and 15 ovarian cancer samples. Also, we ana- expressed on the 'cancer side' of the immunological lysed the same candidate gene by qPCR in nine breast synapse, only a small fraction seem to be expressed in cancer cell lines: HCC1569, MDAMB415, MDAMB231, GBM,usingapre-deﬁnedexpressioncutoff,someofwhich Bt474, Bt549, MCF7, AU565, HBL100 and SUM149. were not mentioned in GBM literature so far. The Results: The CGH arrays showed deletion of 8p11.22 in expression of several genes is upregulated, eg.PD-L2, 22% of samples. However, HTRA4 (a gene located in this compared with normal tissue data, and seem to be co- locus) qPCR studies showed abnormal ampliﬁcation in expressed together. Other genes are signiﬁcantly down- 81.8% of breast cancer samples and in 80% of the ovarian regulated or not expressed at all eg.CD80, suggesting the cancer ones. Moreover, this gene was ampliﬁed in three of possible reason for many failures of checkpoint inhibitors the nine cell lines studied and deleted in other ﬁve cases. immunotherapyinGBM.Ourresultsmaysuggestthatmost Conclusions: Our results show for the ﬁrst time that of the genes involved in the formation of immunological HTRA4, a gene involved in trophoblast implantation and synapsearesigniﬁcantlydown-regulatedornotexpressedat deregulated in eclampsia, could also be involved in early- all in GBM, providing the potential explanation for many onset breast and ovarian cancer. failures of checkpoint inhibitors immunotherapy in GBM. This project was funded by FIS-FEDER: PI16/01920. Studying the crosstalk between checkpoint genes and their S. Almaraz-Postigo: None. N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. E. regulation might be crucial for improving immunotherapy. M. Sánchez Tapia: None. T. Martín-Gómez: None. A. Revealing novel interconnections may aid in the develop- Pascual-Rodríguez:None.M.Sancho-deSalas:None.E. ment of new diagnostic tools, outcome predictors, immu- Bueno-Martínez:None.J.L.García:None.R.González- notherapeutic drugs or combinations. Sarmiento: None. P. Dobosz: None. P.A. Stempor: None. D. Roga- chevsky: None. R. Shai: None. P12.080A Studying the Immunological synapse in GBM - The P12.081B expressionofcheckpointgenesandtranscriptionfactors Incidental ﬁndings in oncogenetics: results and impact involved in immunological synapse formation in GBM on patients in adults S. Nambot1, V. Goussot2, J. Albuisson2, V. Derangère2, P. Dobosz1,2, P. A. Stempor3,4, D. Rogachevsky1,2, R. Boidot3, C. Sawka1, A. Baurand1, G. Bertolone1, R. Shai1,2 M. Robert1, E. Cosset1, C. Coutant4, C. Loustalot3, C. Thauvin1,F. Ghiringhelli3, A. Lançon3, C. Populaire5, 1Cancer Research Centre, Oncology Department, Sheba A. Damette5, M. Collonge Rame5, N. Meunier-Beillard1, Medical Centre Hospital, Tel Hashomer, 52621 Ramat C. Lejeune1, L. Faivre1 Gan,Israel,TelAviv,Israel,2TelAvivUniversity,OncologyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1573 1Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Dijon, France, 2Centre 1Institute of Pathology, Military Medical Academy, Georges-FrançoisLeclerc,Dijon,France,3CentreGeorges Beograd, Serbia, 2Clinic of Hematology, Military Medical FrançoisLeclerc,Dijon,France,4CentreGeorgesFrançois Academy, Beograd, Serbia Leclerc,, Dijon, France, 5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Besançon, France Introduction: Polycitemia vera (PV) is a chronic myelo- proliferativeneoplasmcharacterizedbyincreasedredblood Introduction:Withnextgenerationsequencing,physicians cellc. The most frequent genetic abnormality is the somatic are confronted to more complex and uncertain data, mutation of Janus kinase 2 gene (JAK2 V617F) and it includingincidentalﬁndings(IF).Severalrecommendations occurs in more than 90% of patients with PV.The aim of about the return of IF have been published. Some thisstudywastoinvestigatethefrequencyofJAK2V617F professionalsocietiesencouragedtheuseofpanelstoavoid gene mutation in patients with PV and to compare results IF detection. Little is known about the impact of such withpresenceofcytogeneticabnormalitiesandendogenous results on the patients in the context of diagnostic panel erythroid colony (EEC) formation. testing in oncogenetics. Materials and Methods: Peripheral blood and bone Material and Methods: From June 2014 to July 2018, marrowsamplesof65patientswithPVwereanalyzed.The 2500 patients with an indication of search for genetic pre- diagnosis of PV was established according to the bone dispositiontocancerbeneﬁtedfroma25to47cancergenes marrowcriteriaoftheWorldHealthOrganization.Mutation panel. A semi-structured questionnaire was proposed to of JAK2 V617F was determined by allele speciﬁc pcr patients in which an IF was detected at distance of the analysis.FordetectionofEECformationweusedassaysof results to assess the understanding of the result, the change human clonogenic heamatopoietic progenitor cells with inmedical care, thecommunication ofIF tothe family, the agar-leukocyte conditioned medium without recombinant psychological impact at time of diagnosis and at distance. human erythropoietin. Cytogenetic analysis was done This interview was conducted by phone by a physician/ according to standard procedures. genetic counsellor. Results: Mutation of JAK2 V617F was found in the Results:TwelveadultpatientshadthereturnofanIFina samples of the peripheral blood in 61/65 (93.8%) PV cancer predisposition gene (RAD51C, PMS2, SDHC, RET, patients. Cytogenetic abnormalities, trisomy 9 and del BRCA2,CHEK2,CDKN2A,CDH1,SUFU).Todate,phone (20q), was detected in 2/65 (3 %) patients. EEC formation interviews have been conducted for 7 patients. Most of was obtained in the sample of bone marrow in 59/65 themhadbeensurprisedbytheresult,butnotanxious.They (9O,8%)PVpatients.In57/65(87,7%)patientswedetected allbegantherecommendedfollow-upanddidnotregretthe presenceofEECformationandmutationofJAK2V617Fat procedure. Transmission of the information to their off- the same time. spring was systematic but more difﬁcult to siblings or Conclusions: Presence of JAK2 V617F mutation and second-degree relatives. EEC are essential characteristics of PV. Considering these Conclusion: IF will be inherent to the development of results, we concluded that the EEC formation observed in newtechnologies.Itisimportanttoincreaseourknowledge PVcouldbepartiallyduetotheJAK2-dependentactivation on the impact of such results in different contexts. signaling pathway. S. Nambot: None. V. Goussot: None. J. Albuisson: M. Strnad: None. B. Todorić Živanović: None. O. None. V. Derangère: None. R. Boidot: None. C. Sawka: Tarabar: None. M. Elez: None. D. Stamatović: None. None. A. Baurand: None. G. Bertolone: None. M. Robert: None. E. Cosset: None. C. Coutant: None. C. P12.083D Loustalot: None. C. Thauvin: None. F. Ghiringhelli: Laryngeal metastasis and relapse development None.A.Lançon:None.C.Populaire:None.A.Damette: predicted by a (epi)genomic signature None. M. Collonge Rame: None. N. Meunier-Beillard: None. C. Lejeune: None. L. Faivre: None. I. M. Carreira1,2, I. P. Ribeiro1,2, F. Caramelo3, M. Ribeiro1, J. Miguéis4, F. Marques2,5, J. B. Melo1,2 P12.082C JAK2 V617F mutation, cytogenetic abnormalities and 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of endogenous erythroid colony formation in patients with Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, polycythaemia vera 2iCBR-CIMAGO - Center of Investigation on Environment Genetics and Oncobiology - Faculty of Medicine, M.Strnad1,B.TodorićŽivanović1,O.Tarabar2,M.Elez2, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Laboratory of D. Stamatović2 Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, iCBR- Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal,1574 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck 1Cukurova University, Medical Faculty, Adana, Turkey, Surgery, Coimbra Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, 2Eastern Mediterranean Agricultural Research Institute, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Department of Dentistry, Adana, Turkey Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal Introduction: Laryngeal cancer accounts for about 25%of headandneckcancersandisusuallyseeninmenofmiddle Introduction:Thesurvivaloflaryngealcancerpatientsand or older age. More than 90% of laryngeal cancers are the target therapies available remain poor. So, the squamous-cellcancers.Oneofthemostcommonfeaturesof identiﬁcationofearlydiagnosticandprognosticbiomarkers solidtumorsandoneofthemajorenvironmentalstressesis and the development of molecular models to distinguish hypoxia. The reduction of the oxygen concentration below patients that will recur and/or develop metastasis after the physiological level, promotes maintenance and self- treatment as well as to beneﬁt with target therapies is of renewal of the human embryonic stem cells, and reduces utmost importance to decrease mortality, improve survival spontaneous differentiation in vitro. Similarities between rates and quality of life. This study aimed to develop a stemcellandcancercellssuggestthatbothgroupsmayuse model of recurrence and metastasis prediction using a common pathways in the regulation of gene expression. In genomicandepigeneticcharacterizationoflaryngealcancer this study, we aimed to determine the expression levels of samples. hypoxia-inducedfactorsHIF-1αandHIF-2αandembryonic Material and Methods: The genomic and epigenetic stem cell genes SOX2, OCT4, NANOG and ESRRA in characterization of21tumorsamplesfromlaryngealcancer laryngeal cancer patients. patients was performed using array comparative genomic Material and Methods: Twenty six patients with squa- hybridization technique, Agilent 4x180K and methylation- mous cell laryngeal carcinoma were included in this study. speciﬁc multiplex ligation dependent probe ampliﬁcation Real Time PCR was performed to compare the expression technique. The most common ampliﬁcation and deletion levelsofhypoxiainduciblefactorsandembryonicstemcell chromosomalregionsandtherespectivealteredgenes were genes in tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues. identiﬁed. A genomic and epigenetic signature that distin- Results:ItwasdeterminedthattheexpressionofHIF-1α, guishes between patients with metastasis/recurrence from OCT4 and NANOG genes were increased signiﬁcantly in those without, was determined using a logistic regression tumortissuescomparedtoadjacentnormaltissues.HIF-2α, classiﬁer with balanced training and test sets. SOX2 and ESRRA gene expressions did not show sig- Results: Several chromosomal regions and genes were niﬁcant differences between tumor and adjacent normal observed with copy number alterations and methylation. tissues. The developed predictive genomic and epigenetic model Conclusion: Our results show that there may be a rela- comprises the 3p chromosomal region and WT1, VHL and tionshipbetweentheclinopathologicfeaturesofthedisease THBS1 genes, highlighting a molecular signature with and hypoxia inducible factors and embryonic stem cell clinical applicability. genes in the pathophysiology of the laryngeal cancer. Conclusion: This model for recurrence and metastasis N.S. Ilgaz: None. D. Alptekin: None. O. Surmelioglu: development may help in a more practical and individua- None. M.B. Yilmaz: None. L. Ozpak: None. H. Oksuz: lizedlaryngealcancerpatientmanagement,contributingtoa None. N. Keser: None. H.U. Luleyap: None. more targeted drug design and, ultimately, improving patients' quality of life. P12.087D I.M.Carreira:None.I.P.Ribeiro:None.F.Caramelo: Comprehensive Detection of Germline and Somatic None. M. Ribeiro: None. J. Miguéis: None. F. Marques: Structural Mutation in Cancer Genomes by Bionano None. J.B. Melo: None. Genomics Optical Mapping P12.084A A. Pang, J. Lee, K. Hong, T. Anantharaman, E. T. Lam, Investigationtheexpressionofhypoxiainduciblefactors Y. Delpu, S. Bocklandt, S. Marin, A. R. Hastie, andembryonicstemcellgenesinpatientswithlaryngeal M. Borodkin carcinoma Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States N.S.Ilgaz1,D.Alptekin1,O.Surmelioglu1,M.B.Yilmaz1, L. Ozpak1, H. Oksuz1, N. Keser2, H. U. Luleyap1 Introduction: The ability to identify structural variants (SVs) is crucial in cancer genetics. Karyotype and cytogenetics are manually intensive. Microarrays and sequencing cannot detect calls in segmental duplicationsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1575 and repeats, and miss balanced variants and low-frequency LFS have signiﬁcantly increased risks of cancer; 41% by mutations. age 18 and approaching 100% by 70. Materials and Methods: We describe the Bionano To date, in the UK the only national surveillance Genomics’s Saphyr platform to identify SVs in cancer recommendationforLFSisforbreastMRI.However,there genomes. DNA >100 kbp is extracted, labelled at speciﬁc isincreasingevidenceformorecomprehensivesurveillance, motifs, and linearized through NanoChannel arrays. Mole- including whole body MRI (WB-MRI) with increased cule images are digitized and de novo assembled, creating cancer detection and survival. chromosomal-arm scale genome maps. Cancer mutations International recommendations were published by Kratz >500 bp are detected by aligning the molecules or the et al. (2017). However, these have not yet translated into genome maps to the public reference. NHS practice. Results: Over the past 12 months, the power of Biona- The UK CGG therefore convened a National Consensus no’s cancer workﬂow has been demonstrated on nearly 50 Group meeting on 6th July 2018 to agree a consistent various cancers, including leukemia, breast, ovarian, pros- national approach to surveillance. tate, pancreatic, among others. While the number of SVs A pre-meeting survey was sent to 24 Regional Genetics variesamongsamples,wetypicallyobserve>5500callsper centres (UK and Ireland). The survey results and the genome. Among leukemia samples, we captured the BCR- recommendations made by the International Group were ABL1 translocation as well as deletions impacting tumor discussedindepthatthemeetingby43ClinicalGeneticists, suppressor genes such as PTPN14 and ESRRG. We Genetic Counsellors, Oncologists, Radiologists and Patient resolved the structure of large duplications (790 kbp) dis- representatives. rupting BRCA1 in early-onset breast cancers, found the Prior to the Consensus meeting, less than 50% of centres ampliﬁcation of MYC in lung cancers. agreed with the International recommendations, with only Conclusions: In conclusion, with one platform, Saphyr 25% of centres agreeing with annual WB-MRI. However, can discover a broad range of traditionally refractory but thegrouprecognisedthatduetotherarityofLFS,thereisa relevant SVs, and improves our understanding of cancer. limitedevidencebasetosupportscreeningintermsofearly A. Pang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; detection and cancer mortality. On the day, consensus was Bionano Genomics. J. Lee: A. Employment (full or part- reached to follow the international recommendations, with time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. K. Hong: A. theexceptionofgastrointestinalsurveillance.Asurveillance Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano protocol for children and adults with LFS and best practice Genomics. T. Anantharaman: A. Employment (full or guidelines for WB-MRI in the UK were established. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. E.T. Lam: A. The survey results, recommendations and the clinical Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano implementation will be presented. Genomics. Y. Delpu: A. Employment (full or part-time); H. Hanson: None. Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. S. Bocklandt: None. S. Marin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; P12.089B Bionano Genomics. A.R. Hastie: A. Employment (full or GeneticmodelingofLi-FraumenisyndromeinXenopus part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. M. Borodkin: tropicalis A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. D. Dimitrakopoulou, T. Naert, D. Tulkens, K. Vleminckx P12.088A Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium Development of Cancer Surveillance Guidelines for TP53 carriers: Recommendations from the UK Cancer Introduction: CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome editing Genetics Group Consensus Meeting generates unique opportunities in human disease modeling. It is now possible to create functional gene knockouts in a H. Hanson, UK Cancer Genetics Group, LFS number of model organisms. Xenopus tropicalis is an Surveillance Consensus Day attendees aquaticorganismfavorableformodelinghumandiseasedue to its diploid genome,, high progeny numbers and fast St Georges Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Tooting, embryonic external development. Li-Fraumeni Syndrome United Kingdom (LFS) is a disorder, that predisposes for several malig- nancies like sarcomas and lymphomas. Our aim is to Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare inherited condition examine whether a tp53 mutant X.tropicalis line could caused by pathogenic variants in TP53. Individuals with mimic LFS linked afﬂictions.1576 MaterialsandMethods:Atp53mutantX.tropicalisline work-up by describing two case reports - one patient with wasgeneratedbyinjectingtp53sgRNAprecomplexedwith prior malignancies and a healthy carrier with a common Cas9 protein. Injected embryos were raised until sexual benign ﬁnding. So far, 25 adults and 9 children have been maturity and tp53 heterozygous and homozygous mutant included in SWEP53 and 24 adults have performed their progenies were raised. Animals were closely monitored for baseline MRI. In seven of the 24 adults (29%), imaging external signs of disease. Animals that were lethargic or ﬁndings needingfurtherwork-up wereidentiﬁedonwhole- exhibiteddecreasedbodyweightorenlargedabdomenwere body MRI at baseline. In Europe, there are surveillance euthanized and histologically processed. programs within studies such as SIGNIFY (UK) and Results:Homozygoustp53mutantanimalsshowedrapid LIFSCREEN (France), but the SWEP53 is the ﬁrst morbidity compared to their heterozygous counterparts. In structured surveillance program including radiological and 75% (n=8) of tp53-/- animals, disturbed architecture of the clinical routines for TP53 mutation carriers in the spleen was determined by CD3 and PCNA immunohisto- Scandinavian setting. logical analysis, implying the presence of hematologic M. Omran: None. L. Blomqvist: E. Ownership Interest malignancies. Furthermore, ﬂow cytometric analysis of (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); blood in one out of six non-moribund mutants showed Signiﬁcant; Collective Minds Radiology AB. Y. Brand- enrichment of CD3/CD8-positive cells, indicative of T-cell berg: None. N. Pal: None. P. Kogner: None. A. Kinhult leukemia. Besides hematological malignancies, animals Ståhlbom: None. E. Tham: None. S. Bajalica demonstrated liposarcoma and high grade undifferentiated Lagercrantz: None. spindle and round cell sarcoma. Conclusions: Our tp53 mutant line recapitulates several P12.091D LFS-p53 related malignancies. Our model could offer a Long non coding RNA UCA1 as noninvasive tumour platform for identiﬁcation of modiﬁer genes and provide a marker for bladder cancer sensitized background for screening for novel cancer drivers. E. M. Borkowska1, M. Traczyk-Borszynska1, P. Kutwin2, D. Dimitrakopoulou: None. T. Naert: None. D. Tulk- P. Kutwin3, T. Konecki2, Z. Jablonowski2, M. Borowiec1 ens: None. K. Vleminckx: None. 1Medical University of Lódź Department of Clinical P12.090C Genetics, Łódź, Poland, 2Medical University of Lódź I Whole-body MRI for cancer screening in patients with Clinic of Urology, Łódź, Poland, 3Medical University of germline TP53 pathogenic variants - a presentation of Lódź, Łódź, Poland the Swedish surveillance program including two case reports Introduction: Bladder cancer (BC) is one of the most commoncancersoftheurinarytract.Despiteimprovements M. Omran1, L. Blomqvist1, Y. Brandberg1, N. Pal1, inclinicaltreatmentmorethan50%ofpatientsarerelapsed P. Kogner1, A. Kinhult Ståhlbom2, E. Tham1, S. Bajalica withinthenextﬁveyears.Thereforewearestilllookingfor Lagercrantz1 the most sensitive and speciﬁc marker that would enable quick and precise diagnosis and monitoring of the disease. 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Karolinska LongnoncodingRNAUCA1(lncRNA)playsaspecialrole University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden in the regulation of tumor cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Current guidelines in Sweden regarding individuals with a Methods: The presence of the UCA1 was conﬁrmed by pathogenic or likely pathogenic germline TP53 variant thereal-timeqPCR(quantitativepolymerasechainreaction) recommend patients to take part of the national Swedish method in 172 samples (tissue and serum) from patients P53 Study (SWEP53). All known adult eligible carriers, diagnosed with BC. Analysis of relative gene expression regardless of age, are offered to take part in a surveillance levels was performed using the formula 2-dCt with dCt=Ct program, offering yearly whole-body, breast, brain MRIs (target gene)-Ct (control). The tata box binding protein and breast ultrasound. A special surveillance program for (TBP) was used as a hausekeeping gene. individuals <18 years old with a 50% risk of being a Results: Statistical analyzes were performed using U mutation carrier or with a veriﬁed TP53 variation, includes Mann-Whitney test and ANOVA Kruskal-Wallis test to ultrasoundoftheabdomenandurinecorticosteroidproﬁles. determine the correlation between clinical and histopatho- Further clinically motivated examinations are performed logical parameters and primary or recurrent tumor. We when needed. In a submitted publication, we present the found that the lncRNA UCA1 was signiﬁcantly higher in surveillance program within the SWEP53 including further both tissue and serum samples of BC patients than inAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1577 control group and in primary BC than in recurrent tumor. constitution.Wearenowapplyingrandomforestmodelsto The increased expression was also associated with high investigate complex interactions between SNPs that could grade and progression. In conclusion, our results indicated explain the observed variability in patient survival. Under- that lncRNAUCA1 could be useful diagnostic and prog- standingthemechanismsunderlyingindividualriskofpoor nostic marker for BC, however further studies with larger prognosis may help discovering new tools to improve sur- cohorts are necessary to evaluate it. One of the limitations vival of lung cancer patients. of our research is low number of tissue samples from D. Maspero: None. G. Pintarelli: None. S. Noci: None. control group. A. Pettinicchio: None. M. Incarbone: None. D. Tosi: E.M. Borkowska: None. M. Traczyk-Borszynska: None. L. Santambrogio: None. T.A. Dragani: None. F. None. P. Kutwin: None. P. Kutwin: None. T. Konecki: Colombo: None. None. Z. Jablonowski: None. M. Borowiec: None. P12.094C P12.092A Preliminaryresultsfromaprospectivestudyofgermline Genome-wide survival analysis of surgically-treated alterations in early onset lung cancer patients lung adenocarcinoma patients (EOLUNG study) D. Maspero1, G. Pintarelli1, S. Noci1, A. Pettinicchio1, M. Gausachs1,2, M. Jove3, J. Bosch-Barrera4, M. Incarbone2, D. Tosi3, L. Santambrogio3, E. Carcereny5, A. Teulé1, A. Izquierdo6, M. Navarro1, T. A. Dragani1, F. Colombo1 R. Palmero3, N. Vilariño3, J. Rufﬁnelli3, E. Sais4, T. Moran5, A. Estival5, C. Fina4, S. González1,2, 1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, J. Brunet1,4,6, G. Capellá1,2,7, C. Lázaro1,2,7, E. Nadal3 Italy, 2Ospedale San Giuseppe - Multimedica, Milan, Italy, 3Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Policlinico, Milan, Italy Oncology, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Program in Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental Background: Lung cancer patients with the same patho- Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, Hospitalet de logical stage and same treatments often show different Llobregat, Spain, 3Medical Oncology Department, Catalan survival patterns for unknown reasons. We hypothesized Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, that these differences are due to individual germline Spain, 4Medical Sciences Department, School of Medicine, polymorphisms modulating still unknown genetic mechan- Hospital Universitari Doctor Trueta, University of Girona, isms affecting cancer growth and metastasis. Girona, Spain, 5Department ofMedicalOncology, Catalan Methods: To test the role of genetic constitution in Institute of Oncology Badalona, Hospital Germans Trias i individual risk of poor prognosis, we carried out an overall Pujol, Badalona, Spain, 6Hereditary Cancer Program, survival genome-wide association study in 584 surgically- Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBGI, Girona, Spain, treated lung adenocarcinoma patients, genotyping >2-mil- 7Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer lion single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). For (CIBERONC), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain 232samples,wehadalsoavailabletranscriptomedatafrom thenon-involvedlungtissue,thatweusedtotestexpression Introduction: Non-small lung cancer (NSCLC) is a rare quantitative locus (eQTL) activity of SNPs associated with disease among young adults. Germline DNA mutations survival. have not been systematically studied in this population. Results: From the analysis of 1,415,218 SNPs passing Next generation sequencing (NGS) could be useful to quality control steps, we found four SNPs (rs75767414, determine the proportion of young patients with NSCLC rs11074720, rs147882561, and rs79851088) associated harboring germline mutations. with overall survival at nominal P < 1.0 x 10-6. A multi- Patients and Methods: This multicentre prospective variable Cox’s model including all the four associated study aims to assess whether NSCLC patients aged <51 SNPs, together with clinical covariates, including patholo- years at diagnosis harbor germline mutations using a cus- gical stage, showed that each of the four SNPs acts as an tom NGS panel (I2HCP) developed in our center. This independent risk factor for overall survival. None of panel covers 136 genes related with hereditary cancer. The the candidate SNPs acted as a cis-eQTL, whereas three enrolment begun on June 2018 and a total of 43 patients SNPs modulated expression of target genes in trans (P < have been recruited. 1.0 x 10−4). Results:Here,wepresentaninitialanalysisbasedonthe Conclusion: Overall survival of surgically-treated lung ﬁrst 26 recruited patients. First, a restricted analysis focus- cancer patients is modulated by individual genetic ing on 26 genes involved in germline NSCLC yielded a1578 total of 40 variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS) and 2 Flavonoids (FL) are potent antioxidants, free radical putative pathogenic mutations (PPat) in BLM and NBN. scavengers, metal chelators, and lipid peroxidation inhibi- Next, an analysis of the whole 136-gene panel was per- tors exhibiting several beneﬁcial biological activities [1]. formed and 5 additional PPat mutations were detected in The ﬂavonoid chrysin is a ﬂavone found in honey and FANCA, MUTYH, NTHL1, RIT1 and SBDS. In total, 7 propolis, and actively investigated for its potential biologi- putative PPat mutations were identiﬁed in 6 patients (23% cal effects against Parkinson’s disease and the proliferation of patients from this initial cohort of 26 NSCLC patients). of cancer cells, as well as on the regulation of multiple cell All variants are still being evaluated at clinical level. The signaling pathways [2]. Research on the pivotal role of ﬁnal results will be presented at the Congress. stable Cu(II)-complexes (CuCo) with physiological sub- Conclusions: Based on these preliminary results, the strates such as FL, in cell physiology as catalytic cofactors I2HCP gene panel is useful to identify young patients with in the redox chemistry of mitochondrial respiration, iron NSCLCharboringcancerhereditarypredisposition.Further absorption, free radical scavenging, and elastin cross- validation in a larger cohort of NSCLC young adults is linking have provided new insights in the ﬁeld of copper warranted. homeostasis and in particular into the understanding of Grant Contract: Spanish Lung Cancer Group grant. intracellular trafﬁcking and distribution of copper at M. Gausachs: None. M. Jove: D. Speakers Bureau/ molecular levels [3]. In this work two novel hybrid Cu Honoraria(speakersbureau,symposia,andexpertwitness); (II)-chrysin complexes were synthesized, isolated and Modest; Boehringer. J. Bosch-Barrera: None. E. Car- physico-chemically characterized through single crystal X- cereny: None. A. Teulé: None. A. Izquierdo: None. M. ray diffraction, FT-IR, UV-Vis, ﬂuorescence, TGA, and Navarro:None.R.Palmero:None.N.Vilariño:None.J. ESI-MS measurements. Genotoxicity estimated by the Rufﬁnelli: None. E. Sais: None. T. Moran: None. A. frequency of Sister Chromatid Exchanges (SCEs), cytosta- Estival: None. C. Fina: None. S. González: None. J. ticity based on the Proliferating Rate Indices (PRIs) and Brunet: None. G. Capellá: None. C. Lázaro: None. E. cytotoxicity based on the Mitotic Indices (MIs) at human Nadal: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- peripherallymphocytecultures,wereallsigniﬁcantlyhigher borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants bothinthecaseofFLandCuCo.Irinotecan(CPT)wasalso already received); Modest; Roche. C. Other Research utilizedasstandardgenotoxicagentandthecombinationof Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in- FLorCuCo plus CPTprovidedamechanismbywhichthe kind support); Modest; Pﬁzer. D. Speakers Bureau/Honor- rate of genetic damage can be induced. The novel hybrid aria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); materials exhibit enhanced solubility and bioavailability, Modest; BMS, MSD, Roche, Astra Zeneca, Boerhringer and increased anti-cancer activity compared with free Ingelheim, Takeda, Lilly, Pﬁzer. chrysin and probably gives rise to fruitful bioapplications and perspectives. P12.095D D. Chronopoulos: None. E. Halevas: None. A. Hatzi- Induced genotoxicity produced by ﬂavonoids and novel dimitriou: None. A. Pantazaki: None. G. Litsardakis: Cu(II)-ﬂavonoid complexes in human lymphocytes None. M. Sagnou: None. M. Pelecanou: None. T. Lialiaris: None. D. Chronopoulos1, E. Halevas2, A. Hatzidimitriou3, A. Pantazaki4, G. Litsardakis5, M. Sagnou2, P12.096A M. Pelecanou2, T. Lialiaris1 Pitfalls in Lynch syndrome genetic testing: a case of a polymorphic variant in primer-annealing sequence 1Lab. of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Dimokrition leading to the wildtype allele dropout in MLH1 gene UniversityofThrace,Alexandroupolis,Greece,2Instituteof Biosciences & Applications, National Centre for Scientiﬁc E. Damaso1, R. Ferrer-Avargues1, A. Castillejo1, Research “Demokritos”, Athens, Greece, 3Laboratory of M. Castillejo1, A. Sánchez-Heras1, C. Guillén-Ponce2, Inorganic Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Aristotle J. Soto1 University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 4Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, 1Elche University Hospital / FISABIO, Elche, Spain, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 2Ramon y Cajal Hospital, Madrid, Spain 5Laboratory of Materials for Electrotechnics, Department of Electrical Engineering, Aristotle University of PCR-based screening techniques, like Sanger sequencing Thessaloniki Genetics, Thessaloniki, Greece and NGS are considered gold standard methods for detection of pathogenic variants in hereditary cancer syndromes. Polymorphic variants represent a risk forAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1579 misdiagnosis in genetic testing, since the presence of these NF1 features. We present two patients, both with early age variantsinprimer-annealingsitesmaycauseallele-dropout. onset malignancies, diagnosed with Lynch syndrome but We present a Lynch syndromefamily fulﬁlling Amsterdam with no evidence of CMMRD. II criteria. The proband was diagnosed of endometrial Patient 1was diagnosed at age 15 with poorly differ- canceratage39.GeneticdiagnosisofLynchsyndromewas entiated endometrial endometriod carcinoma of mullerian performedbySangersequencing.Apathogenicvariantwas origin.AclonallossofMSH6wasfoundinthetumor.This detected in exon-19 of MLH1: c.2150_2153dupAACA, result was suggestive of a biallelic somatic mutation, typi- with a clear homozygous pattern. Predictive genetic testing cally present with a driver POLE mutation. Multi-cancer was performed in eight relatives. Unexpected results were NGS testing revealed a heterozygous c.2906A>G mutation found. Proband´s mother presented the same homozygous in MSH6. No POLE germline mutation was found. The pattern for the pathogenic variant, while the proband´s mutation was inherited from the patient's mother. father was homozygous wildtype. Furthermore, proband´s Patient2wasdiagnosedwithaggressiveTcelllymphoma brother had also a homozygous pattern for the pathogenic atage16.NGScancerpaneltestingrevealedaheterozygous variant, while his son was homozygous wildtype. We mutationc.1865C>TinMSH2,inheritedfromhisfather.He considered the possibility of allele-dropout of the wildtype had no other pathogenic variants. allele due to a polymorphism in the primer-annealing sites. Discussion: Malignancies associated with Lynch syn- ProbandwasreanalyzedbyNGSwithhybridization/capture drome usually develop after age 25. MSH6 associated target enrichment. We evidenced a heterozygous indel Lynch syndrome manifests even later. Both patients were polymorphism in the annealing sequence of the reverse diagnosedwithcancerbeforeage20andhadnoevidenceof primer: c.*35_*37delCTT. Adequate external primers for CMMRD. Cancer diagnosis in the second decade is rare MLH1-exon-19 were designed. The proband and her among Lynch carriers. Such cases should be reported and relatives were re-tested by Sanger sequencing. We con- further explored. ﬁrmedthatpathogenicandindelvariantsareintransphase. I.M. Barnes-Kedar: None. A. Jakobson-Setton: None. Consequently, the patients previously considered homo- R. Eitan: None. D. Zoref: None. Z. Levy: None. S. Ash: zygous for the pathogenic variant were indeed heterozy- None. A. Yanir: None. Y. Goldberg: None. gous. We would like to remark the importance of be aware of, and try to minimize, the limitations of genetic testing P12.098C and consider to investigate deeper when unexpected Reduced PMS2 expression decreases signiﬁcantly ﬁndings are detected. mismatch repair efﬁciency E. Damaso: None. R. Ferrer-Avargues: None. A. Castillejo:None.M.Castillejo:None.A.Sánchez-Heras: M. Kasela1,2, M. Nyström1, M. Kansikas2 None. C. Guillén-Ponce: None. J. Soto: None. 1University of Helsinki, Faculty of Biological and P12.097B Environmental Sciences, Helsinki, Finland, 2LS An unusual presentation of Lynch Syndrome in CancerDiag Ltd., Helsinki, Finland teenagers Introduction:InheritedmutationsaffectingDNAmismatch I. M. Barnes-Kedar1,2, A. Jakobson-Setton1,3, R. Eitan1,3, repair(MMR)genesMLH1,MSH2,MSH6andPMS2cause D. Zoref1, Z. Levy1, S. Ash1,4, A. Yanir1,4, Y. Goldberg1,2 Lynch syndrome (LS). Yet, the cancer susceptibility associated with PMS2 mutations differ from the typical 1Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Recanati LS. The relatively small number of LS families found to Genetics Institute, Petach Tikva, Israel, 3Helen Schneider segregate PMS2 mutations and the associated low disease Women's Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel, 4Schneider's penetrance suggest that PMS2 may not be an important Childrens Hospital, Petach Tikva, Israel susceptibility gene. The effect of decreased PMS2 mRNA expression on MMR capability was determined by in vitro Introduction: Heterozygous mutations in the mismatch MMR assay. repair(MMR)genescauseLynchsyndrome.Phenotypeand Materials and Methods: Human ﬁbroblasts were trans- age of at cancer diagnosis differs among the various genes, fected with four different PMS2-speciﬁc shRNA targets to however mean age of cancer onset is 44-61 years and create knockdown (KD) cell lines with varying levels of surveillance is recommended from age 20-25 or 2-5 years PMS2mRNAexpression.AshRNAvector,withnoknown prior to the earliest family reported malignancy (NCCN target speciﬁcity in the human genome, was used as a guidelines V1.2018). Bi-allelic MMR mutations cause control. Quantitative PCR was carried out using Taqman® CMMRD characterized by childhood malignancies and assays for PMS2 with GAPDH, HPRT1 and ACTB as1580 reference genes. The repair efﬁciencies of the selected KD mutation carriers of these mutations. Penetrance of CRC proteinextractsweremeasuredbytheinvitroMMRassay. were calculated using modiﬁed segregation analysis Results: KD cell lines retaining 19%, 33% and 53% of implemented by Mendel. PMS2expressiondemonstratedsigniﬁcantlyreducedMMR Results:ThemedianageatCRCdiagnosiswereyounger efﬁciencycomparedtotheircontrolcells.Surprisingly,cells in patients with Lynch syndrome than in non-mutation retaining 53% of PMS2 expression indicated the most carriers (44.3 vs. 50.4 years, P = 0.0001). The cumulative severe problem in the repair capability. risk(penetrance)ofCRCattheageof70yearswere36.5% Conclusions: Signiﬁcant decrease in MMR efﬁciency (95% CI = 27.7%–46.9%), 34.8% (95% CI = due to reduced PMS2 mRNA expression conﬁrms that 26.1%–45.5%), and 42.7% (95% CI = 30.1%–57.8%) in PMS2 is an equally important susceptibility gene among the male carriers of MLH1 or MSH2, MLH1, and MSH2 MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 genes and that the reduction is germlinemutations,respectively.ThepenetranceofCRCin efﬁciently detectable by functional in vitro MMR assay. the female carriers of MLH1 or MSH2, MLH1, and MSH2 Contract grant sponsors: Jane and Aatos Erkko germlinemutationswere25.8%(95%CI=18.6%–35.2%), Foundation 24.5% (95% CI = 17.4%–33.6%) and 32.2% (95% CI = M. Kasela: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; 26.3%–39.1%), respectively. LS CancerDiag Ltd. M. Nyström: E. Ownership Interest Conclusions: Penetrance of CRC in Chinese patients (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); with Lynch syndrome is 34.8%–42.7% in men and Signiﬁcant; LS CancerDiag Ltd. M. Kansikas: A. 24.5%–32.2% in women. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; LS This study was supported by the National Science CancerDiag Ltd. Council, Executive Yuan, Taiwan (NSC 101-2314-B-038- 057), the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan P12.099D (MOST104-2314-B-038-009andMOST106-2314-B-038- Age- and sex-speciﬁc cumulative risks of colorectal 052-MY3), and the Health and Welfare Surcharge of cancer in Han Chinese patients with Lynch syndrome Tobacco Products (MOHW107-TDU-B-212-114020). A. Kamiza: None. W. Wang: None. J. You: None. R. A. Kamiza1, W. Wang2, J. You3,4, R. Tang3,4, H. Chien5, Tang: None. H. Chien: None. C. Lai: None. L. Chiu: C. Lai5, L. Chiu5,6, T. Lo7, K. Hung7, C. Hsiung7, None.T.Lo:None.K.Hung:None.C.Hsiung:None.C. C. Yeh1,8 Yeh: None. 1School of Public Health, College of Public Health, Taipei P12.100A Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2The Ph.D. Program Variant analyses ofPMS2by single-molecule long-read forTranslationalMedicine,CollegeofMedicalScienceand sequencing Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Colorectal Section, Department of Surgery, Chang Gung K. Neveling, A. Mensenkamp, L. de Bruijn, E. Askar, MemorialHospital,Taoyuan,Taiwan,4SchoolofMedicine, S. van der Heuvel, E. Hoenselaar, R. Derks, M. van der ChangGung University,Taoyuan, Taiwan,5Departmentof Vorst,M.Nelen,L.Vissers,M.Ligtenberg,R.M.deVoer Public Health, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,Taoyuan,Taiwan,6DepartmentofNutritionand Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands Health Sciences, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology, Taoyuan, Taiwan, 7Institute of Population Introduction: Germline mutations in the mismatch repair Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, gene PMS2 are a cause of Lynch syndrome. The detection Miaoli, Taiwan, 8Department of Public Health, China of PMS2 mutations is challenged by the presence of Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan numerous pseudogenes and frequent gene conversion events. Long-range PCR (LR-PCR) in combination with Introduction: Patients with Lynch syndrome have a high single-molecule long-read sequencing may overcome the riskofcolorectalcancer(CRC).Inthisstudy,weestimated use of multiple DNA- and RNA-based assays for the the penetrance of CRC in Chinese patients with Lynch detection of PMS2 mutations. syndrome. MaterialsandMethods:WeampliﬁedPMS2usingthree Materials and Methods: One hundred and thirty-three LR-PCR amplicons, covering the complete gene with families comprising 1009 members were collected. Each overlapping segments. In order to allow circular consensus familywasascertainedthroughaprobandwithadiagnosed sequencing, a method that increases the accuracy of long- CRC. Of these subjects, 300 were carriers of germline reads from 85% to >99%, we limited the size of amplicons mutations in MLH1 or MSH2, whereas 709 were non- to 16kb. Subsequently, twenty cases that showed loss ofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1581 PMS2expressionbyimmunohistochemicalstainingoftheir gastroenterologists in 19 hospitals and 13 pathology tumor tissue were characterized for the presence of patho- laboratories. Thefeasibility (uptakedMMR-testing, referral genic variants. rates for genetic testing, testing outcome) and appreciation Results: Long-read sequencing is able to detect single of patients and clinicians were evaluated. nucleotidevariants(SNVs),smallinsertions/deletions,exon Results: Pathologists implemented dMMR-testing in deletions >1kb in size and accurate breakpoint mapping. In 84% (3,025 of 3,602) of CRC<70. Gastroenterologists and the rare case a deletion is missed, potentially due to allelic surgeons referred 69% of those with dMMR without drop-out of deletions spanning the primer binding sites, hypermethylation for genetic testing. Participating clin- absenceofheterozygosityforSNVsinoneofthethreeLR- icians andpatients were overwhelminglypositive about the PCR amplicons can be used to preselect cases for deletion workﬂow. Among CRC patients with dMMR and without screening by multiplex-ligation probe ampliﬁcation hypermethylation 55% had LS, 43% somatic bi-allelic (MLPA). pathogenic MMR variants (non-hereditary) and for 1% the Conclusions: Long-range sequencing is an attractive result was ambiguous. The prevalence of LS was 18% in alternative strategy to accurately detect pathogenic variants CRC<40 and 1% in CRC40-70. and exon deletions in PMS2, limiting the use of multiple Conclusions: Pathologist very well adopted theU-MMR assays in diagnostics. Furthermore, long-range sequencing workﬂow and gastroenterologists and surgeons increased has the potential to identify novel pathogenic variants, like the referral rate of CRC<70 at high risk for LS, although intragenic inversions, in cases suspected of PMS2-related especiallyinthissteptheworkﬂowneedsimprovement.U- Lynch syndrome, which thus far have remained without a MMR workﬂow in all new CRC<70 is feasible and highly molecular diagnosis. appreciated by patients and clinicians. The project was K. Neveling: None. A. Mensenkamp: None. L. de supported by the Dutch Digestive Foundation with funding Bruijn:None.E.Askar:None.S.vanderHeuvel:None. from the ‘Vriendenloterij’. E.Hoenselaar:None.R.Derks:None.M.vanderVorst: J.R. Vos: None. I.E. Fakkert: None. L. Spruijt: None. None.M.Nelen:None.L.Vissers:None.M.Ligtenberg: R.W. Willems: None. S. Langenveld: None. A.R. Men- None. R.M. de Voer: None. senkamp: None. E.M. Leter: None. I.D. Nagtegaal: None. M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. N. Hoogerbrugge: P12.101B None. New multidisciplinary tasks in ﬁnding all Lynch Syndrome among patients with colorectal cancer below P12.103D age 70 Metastatic colorectal cancer chemotherapeutic drugs alter the expression of TGFβ signaling-related miR-17- J. R. Vos1, I. E. Fakkert1, L. Spruijt1, R. W. Willems2, 5p, miR-21-5p and miR-93-5p in vitro S. Langenveld3, A. R. Mensenkamp1, E. M. Leter3, I. D. Nagtegaal2, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1,2, J. Despotovic, A. Nikolic N. Hoogerbrugge1 Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Introduction:Thebackboneofmetastaticcolorectalcancer Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht (mCRC)treatmentconsistsof5-ﬂuorouracilcombinedwith University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) or irinotecan (FOLFIRI). Approxi- mately half of the mCRC patients respond to therapy, so a Introduction: Lynch syndrome (LS) is the most common major challenge remains to identify predictive biomarkers causeofhereditary colorectalcancer(CRC).Only~30%of fortreatmentresponse.Recentstudiesrevealedaninterplay CRC patients with an increased risk for LS based on age between TGFβ signaling and miRNAs and their role in and family history is referred for genetic testing. This may chemoresistance. The aim of this study was to identify be improved by universal mismatch repair deﬁciency TGFβ signaling-related miRNAs and test their potential as (dMMR) testing in newly diagnosed CRC below age 70 predictive biomarkers. (CRC<70) followed by germline and somatic testing of Materials and Methods: By in silico analysis we iden- MMR genes in those CRC patients with dMMR without tiﬁedmiR-17-5p,miR-21-5pandmiR-93-5pwhichregulate MLH1 hypermethylation (U-MMR workﬂow). mostTGFβsignalingmembersandshowalteredexpression Methods: The new U-MMR workﬂow was actively in CRC. To investigate the effects of anticancer drugs on implementedindailypracticeofpathologists,surgeonsand selected miRNAs expression, SW620 cells were treated1582 with 5-ﬂuorouracil, oxaliplatin, irinotecan or their combi- created a synergistic effect and signiﬁcantly reduced cell nations for 72h. proliferation in vitro. Results: MiR-21-5p expression was upregulated while Conclusions: We found that combination of metformin the levels of miR-17-5p and miR-93-5p were down- and FX11 which effect on glucose metabolism reduced the regulated in all treatments. To determine whether this metabolicactivityandcancercellgrowth.Thiscombination modulatory effect is transient or stable, the miRNA treatment could be change both energetic and apoptotic expressionwasmeasuredonthe1st,3rdand6thdayafterthe pathways.Furthermore,ﬁvecandidategenesforqPCRwere treatment with drugs combinations. Expression of miR-17- identiﬁed and three candidate proteins were selected for 5pandmiR-93-5phadadecreasingtrendfrom1stto6thday westernblot. after the treatments, while miR-21-5p expression was D. Turgut: None. E. Duman: None. A.N. Tekkok: upregulated on the 3rd day but was restored close to initial None. M. Bayindir Bilgic: None. N. Ekimci Gurcan: level on the 6th day. None. A. Cınar Kuskucu: None. O.F. Bayrak: None. Conclusions: Although tested chemotherapeutic drugs alter expression of all tested miRNAs, only miR-17-5p and P12.105B miR-93-5p represent potential predictive biomarkers can- Causal variants that underlie miReQTLs in prostate didates due to their lasting downregulation. cancer Funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (OI S. Farashi1, P. Gharahkhani2, T. O’Mara2, J. Batra1 173008) J. Despotovic: None. A. Nikolic: None. 1QueenslandUniversityofTechnology,Brisbane,Australia, 2QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, P12.104A Australia Investigation of the synergistic effect of metformin and FX11 agents on cell proliferation in PANC-1 cell line ThemicroRNAs(miRNAs)areshortnon-codingRNAsthat are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of gene D. Turgut, E. Duman, A. N. Tekkok, M. Bayindir Bilgic, expression in multicellular organisms. Alterations in the N. Ekimci Gurcan, A. Cınar Kuskucu, O. F. Bayrak expression of miRNA genes contribute to the pathogenesis of human malignancies incuding prostate cancer. In Yeditepe University, Istanbul, Turkey particular, the expression of miRNAs themselves could be affected by germline variants known as expression Introduction: Metformin, an insulin-lowering agent, has quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). These eQTLs exert the beenassociatedwithdecreasedcancerriskinepidemiologic allele speciﬁc effects on miRNA gene expression (miR- studies in diabetic patients. Interest of metformin in cancer eQTLs), thereby participating in a regulatory role in cancer treatment and prevention reﬂects the recent convergence of aetiology. To identify miR-eQTLs in prostate cancer, several areas of research. Preclinical studies have shown genome-wide germline genotype data (Affymetrix 6.0) that metformin can inhibit the cancer cells proliferation. were obtained for prostate cancer cases from The Cancer Cancer cells take up glucose and after than transform it to Genome Atlas (TCGA). Following genotyping quality lactateevenunderaerobicconditions,calledastheWarburg control, imputation of non-genotyped variants, we further effect. Sufﬁcient amounts of products of glucose metabo- obtained tumour tissue miRNA-sequencing data from the lism are required for cancer cell division and rapid growth. samesetofprostatecancerpatients.WeperformedmiRNA Studiesshowedthat,someglycolyticcelltypeshaveshown alignment and expression quantiﬁcation adding recently susceptibility to FX11-based lactate dehydrogenase-A reported novel miRNAs data to the analysis. Linear inhibition. So, we investigated that effect of metformin regression models were used to identify potential miR- and FX11 combination treatment on pancreatic cancer. eQTLs using the MatrixEQTL R package. We observed Materials and Methods: In this study, sole exposure to several recently reported novel miRNA genes whose metformin orFX11, and their combinationsin different are expression was signiﬁcantly associated (P < 0.05, false investigatedonPANC-1celllinefordeterminetheeffecton discoveryrate(FDR)<0.1)aswellasknownmiRNAswith cancer growth and progression. MTS assay was performed germlinevariantsinprimarytumoursamples.Moreover,the at 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours to measure time-dependent results demonstrated miR-eQTLs for isoforms of known/ change of metformin and FX11. novel miRNAs in addition to miR-eQTLs regulating the Results: Increased concentrations of metformin and known/novelmiRNAsthatcarryonemismatch.Theresults FX11alonereducedcellularmetabolicactivityofPANC-1. havehighlightedthepotentialofexploitingmiR-eQTLsasa Interestingly, the combination of metformin and FX11 tool to map new key miRNA genes involved in prostateAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1583 cancer,whichultimatelycouldleadustodiscovernetworks polyp, including the suggested tumor suppressor gene of dysregulated miRNAs contributing to prostate ELF3. A second hit was only found in APC. tumourigenesis. Conclusions: Our preliminary data demonstrate that S. Farashi: None. P. Gharahkhani: None. T. O’Mara: MSH3-related carcinogenesis seem to follow mainly the None. J. Batra: None. classical APC-driven pathway. We found similar mutation patterns of SNVs in MSH3-deﬁcient polyps compared to P12.106C sporadic adenomas, however, in line with the speciﬁc Variant proﬁling of colorectal adenomas from patients function of MSH3 in the mismatch repair system, we with MSH3-related adenomatous polyposis observed a high proportion of Indels. C. Perne: None. S. Peters: None. I. Spier: None. S. C. Perne1,2, S. Peters1, I. Spier1,2, S. Hurpaopan3, Hurpaopan:None.C.Grimm:None.J.Altmüller:None. C. Grimm4, J. Altmüller5,6, A. Hillmer7, H. Thiele5, A.Hillmer:None.H.Thiele:None.G.Möslein:None.M. G. Möslein8, M. Odenthal7, R. Adam9, J. Kirfel10, Odenthal: None. R. Adam: None. J. Kirfel: None. M. M. Peifer11, M. Schweiger4,5, S. Aretz1,2 Peifer: None. M. Schweiger: None. S. Aretz: None. 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Germany, P12.108A 2Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University Ruxolitinib regulates mechanisms of apoptosis and Hospital Bonn, Germany, 3Naresuan University, autophagy in multiple myeloma cells Phitsanulok, Thailand, 4Translational Epigenetics and Tumor Genetics, University of Cologne, Germany, A.Kusoglu,B.GokerBagca,N.OzatesAy,C.BirayAvci, 5Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, C. Gunduz, G. Saydam Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Germany, 7Institute of Pathology, University of Ege University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey Cologne, Germany, 8HELIOS Klinikum Wuppertal, University of Witten/Herdecke, Germany, 9Center for Multiple myeloma is distinguished by the aggregation of Experimental and Molecular Medicine, Academic Medical differentiatedplasmacellsprimarilyinthebonemarrow.In Center Amsterdam, Netherlands, 10Institute of Pathology, this study, we investigated the genetic basis of apoptosis University of Luebeck, Germany, 11Department of and autophagy co-regulation upon ruxolitinib treatment in Translational Genomics, University of Cologne, Germany multiplemyelomacellsARH-77andhealthyBlymphocyte NCI-BL2171 as a control group. Cell lines were incubated Aim: Biallelic MSH3 germline mutations cause a rare and cultured with optimal growth conditions. Ruxolitinib subtype of adenomatous polyposis. In the present study we dissolvedinDMSO.Thecytotoxicactivitywasdetermined comprehensively analyzed the variant spectrum of color- using the WST1 cell proliferation test. IC doses were 50 ectaladenomasfrompatientswithbiallelic MSH3germline calculated in a time and dose-dependent manner. The mutationstoidentifypotentialdrivergenesandpathwaysof Annexin V-FITC detection kit and Premo autophagy Tb/ MSH3 related tumorigenesis. GFP TR-FRET LC3B expression kit were used for Material and Methods: We performed whole exome apoptosis and autophagy analyses, respectively. Gene sequencing (WES) and array-based copy number variant expression changes were determined using real-time PCR (CNV)analysisof2-3adenomasandmatchednormaltissue method and analyzed by 2−ΔΔCt method. IC doses of 50 in three patients with biallelic MSH3 mutations. ruxolitinibinARH77andNCI-BL2171for72hrincubation Results:TheamountofallsomaticvariantsintheMSH3 period was found as 20,03 uM and 23,6 uM, respectively. adenomas (36-120) and the pattern of single nucleotide Ruxolitinib treatment induced apoptosis in NCI-BL2171 variants (SNVs) seem to be similar to sporadic adenomas, and ARH-77 cell lines by 6.5 and 2 fold, respectively. The whereas the fraction (16-40%) of small insertions/deletions agent increased the autophagic ﬂux by 1.7 and 3.45 fold in (Indels) is higher. Interestingly, pathogenic somatic APC NCI-BL2171 and ARH-77 cell lines, respectively. The mutationswerefoundinalladenomas,andthevastmajority expression levels of APAF1, BIK, CASP6, TRAF2 genes (6of7)areIndels,whichseemtooccurmoreoften(4of6) which regulate mechanisms of apoptosis and autophagy in short nucleotide tandem repeats compared to published wereupregulated12.07,4.06,2.81,2.77folds,respectively. somatic and germline APC Indels. On average, 26 large OurresultsindicatethatJAK2inhibitorruxolitinibregulates deletionswerefoundineachofthreefresh-frozenadenomas apoptosis and autophagy pathways simultaneously in perpatient.BesidesAPC,ﬁvemoregenesharbortruncating multiple myeloma cell line, ARH77. This regulation is mutations, missense variants, or deletions in more than one further conﬁrmed by analysis of critical gene expressions which paves the potential of the agent as a therapeutic for1584 multiple myeloma. Our study is supported by Ege A. Testori1,2, Z. Vaksman2, S. Diskin2,3, J. Maris2,3, University Scientiﬁc Research Projects Coordination. M. Devoto2,3,4 A. Kusoglu: None. B. Goker Bagca: None. N. Ozates Ay: None. C. Biray Avci: None. C. Gunduz: None. G. 1UniversityofNaplesFedericoII,Naples,Italy,2Children's Saydam: None. Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United P12.109B States, 4University of Rome Sapienza, Rome, Italy Mutation Pattern in Periampullary Carcinoma in Indian Patients Neuroblastoma (NB), a pediatric cancer with a high degree ofclinicalheterogeneity,israrerinAfrican-American(AA) S. K. Mishra, N. Kumari, N. Krishnani, R. K. Singh, children compared to children of European descent. AA S. Mohindra children with NB, however, more frequently develop the high-risk form of the disease and have associated lower SanjayGandhiPostGraduateInstituteofMedicalSciences overall survival. We have identiﬁed several loci associated Lucknow, Lucknow, India to NB by GWAS performed in children of European descent.Inthisstudy,wehavegenotyped674AANBcases Introduction: Periampullary carcinoma (PAC) is a hetero- and 3113 AA controls to investigate genetic susceptibility geneous group of cancer and genetic abnormality is one of to NB in this population. Following high density genome- themajorriskfactorassociatedwithprognosisandsurvival wideimputation,wewereabletoconﬁrmonesusceptibility of patients with this cancer. There are no studies on gene(BARD1),whichreachedgenome-widesigniﬁcancein mutation proﬁle from India in PAC. We present mutation thesubsetofhigh-riskcases.Polygenicscoreanalysisbased proﬁle of 60 PAC in Indian patients. on signiﬁcance and estimates of SNP effect sizes from the Materials and Methods: Sixty cases of PAC were European-American (EA) GWAS, detected a highly reviewed histologically. DNA was extracted from parafﬁn signiﬁcant association (p = 2.3x10-14) with a score which tissuesandultradeepsequencingwasdoneusingAmpliseq includedallSNPswithp<5.5x10-7,andexplained~3%of cancer hotspot panel v2 in tumour and normal tissue sam- NB risk variance in AAs. However, the signiﬁcance of the ples. The results were analysed on ion-reporter software polygenic score dropped rapidly with inclusion of addi- version 5.10. tionalSNPs,suggestingeitherlimitedsharingofNBgenetic Results: 30/60 (50%) cases of PAC showed high grade riskfactorsbetweenEAsandAAs,orageneticarchitecture tumor histology (moderate/poor differentiation). KRAS, ofNBwithlimitedcontributionfromcommonSNPs.Other CTNNB1, STK11, RET, HRAS, EGFR, ATM, NOTCH1 genetic analyses (including admixture mapping and haplo- and AKT1 gene mutations were found in 43%, 20%, 16%, type association analysis) are in progress to test whether 16%, 10%, 10%, 10%, 6.6% in high grade tumor, whereas otherNBsusceptibilityvariantsarelocatedinregionsofthe mutation of these gene in low grade tumorwas26%, 10%, genome that show different genetic ancestry in AA cases 6.6%, 6.6%, 6.6%, 6.6%, 3.3%, 3.3% respectively. Three versus controls. These in particular may help explain different actionable mutations were found in CTNNB1 susceptibility to developing the high-risk form of NB that mutantcases.PIK3CAmutationfrequencywasseenin30% disproportionately affects AA children with NB. of low grade tumor and 13.3% high grade tumor. A.Testori:None.Z.Vaksman:None.S.Diskin:None. Conclusion: KRAS, CTNNB1, STK11, RET, HRAS, J. Maris: None. M. Devoto: None. EGFR, ATM, NOTCH1 AKT1 and PIK3CA that are involved in different signalling pathways were found to be P12.111D frequently mutated in PAC indicating their role in disease Constitutional mismatch repair deﬁciency as a development and progression. Actionable mutation KRAS, differential diagnosis of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1: PIK3CA, CTNNB1, EGFR, NRAS and TP53, were found consensus guidelines for testing a child without in36/60(67%)caseswhichmaybeneﬁtedinfuturethrough malignancy targeted therapy. Funding:DepartmentofBiotechnology,NewDelhi,India M. Suerink1, T. Ripperger2, L. Messiaen3, F. Menko4, S.K. Mishra: None. N. Kumari: None. N. Krishnani: F. Bourdeaut5, C. Colas6, M. Jongmans7, Y. Goldberg8, None. R.K. Singh: None. S. Mohindra: None. M. Nielsen1, M. Muleris9, M. van Kouwen10, I. Slavc11, C. Kratz12, H. Vasen13, L. Brugiѐres14, E. Legius15, P12.110C K. Wimmer16 Genetic analysis of neuroblastoma in African-American childrenAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1585 11. Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University childrenwhohaveahigherprobabilityofhavingCMMRD. Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Pre-selection criteria and strategies for counselling and Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, testing were developed and reviewed in two rounds of cri- Germany, 3Department of Genetics, University of Alabama tical revisions. atBirmingham,Birmingham,AL,UnitedStates,44.Family Results and Conclusions: Existing diagnostic CMMRD Cancer Clinic, Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital and The criteria were adapted to serve as a guideline as to when to Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 55. consider CMMRD as differential diagnosis of NF1/Legius Département d'Oncologie Pédiatrique et d'Adolescents syndrome. In addition, the guidelines include counselling Jeunes Adultes, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 66. and testing strategies that are suggested to minimize Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris Sciences potential harms. Lettres Research Universit, Paris, France, 7Princess M. Suerink: None. T. Ripperger: None. L. Messiaen: Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, None. F. Menko: None. F. Bourdeaut: None. C. Colas: Netherlands, 810. Recanati Genetics Institute, Beilinson None. M. Jongmans: None. Y. Goldberg: None. M. Hospital, Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikva, Israel, 97. Nielsen: None. M. Muleris: None. M. van Kouwen: Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, INSERM, None.I.Slavc:None.C.Kratz:None.H.Vasen:None.L. CNRS, Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine (CRSA), Brugier̀ es: None. E. Legius: None. K. Wimmer: None. F75012, Paris, France, 1011. Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Radboud University P12.112A Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Validation and utilization of NGS based 11Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, HEMEaccuTestTM panel and analysis software for Vienna,Austria,1213.PediatricHematologyandOncology, Hematological malignancies Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 13Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden H. Choi, I. Lee, J. Im, K. Jung, K. Lee, Y. Moon, K. Kim UniversityMedicalCentre,Leiden,Netherlands,14Children and Adolescent Oncology Department, Gustave Roussy NGeneBio Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea, Republic of CancerCampus,Villejuif,France,15DepartmentofHuman Genetics, University Hospital Leuven and KU Leuven, Hematological malignancies are forms of cancer originated Leuven, Belgium, 16Division Human Genetics, Medical in blood-forming tissue or in the immune cells and can be University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria classiﬁed as leukemias, lymphomas, multiple myeloma, myelodysplastic syndromes, and myeloproliferative neo- Introduction: Constitutional mismatch repair deﬁciency plasms. Detecting genetic alterations in hematological (CMMRD) is a rare childhood cancer predisposition malignancies is important because of diverse variants syndrome caused by bi-allelic germline mutations in one associated with classiﬁcation and subtype diagnosis, and of four mismatch-repair genes. Besides very high tumour prognostic and therapeutic prediction. NGS is an advanced risks, CMMRD phenotypes are often characterized by the technology to simultaneously analyze multiple genes to presence of signs reminiscent of neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 identify clinically well-described variants, as well as rare (NF1). Because NF1 signs may be present prior to tumour variants related to hematological malignancies for clinical onset, CMMRD is a legitimate differential diagnosis in an diagnostics. HEMEaccuTestTM is a targeted NGS panel for otherwise healthy, suspected NF1/Legius syndrome child hematologic malignancies and NGeneAnalySysTM is auto- without a detectable underlying NF1/SPRED1 germline matic analysis software for estimating the relative patho- mutation.However,noguidelinesindicatewhentocounsel genicity of detected variants. HEMEaccuTestTM covers and test for CMMRD in this setting. entire exon regions of 108 genes putatively known for Methods:Ataninterdisciplinaryworkshop,wediscussed associations with the diseases according to the WHO, estimations of the frequency of CMMRD as a differential NCCN and ELN guidelines. The diagnostic utility of the diagnosis of NF1 and potential beneﬁts and harms of panel and software were validated using genotype-known CMMRDcounsellingandtestinginahealthychildwithno references and clinical specimens. The results showed that malignancy. Assuming that CMMRD is rare in these pathogenic variants were effectively detected with an patients and that expected beneﬁts of identifying CMMRD average coverage depth of 600x and a minimum coverage prior to tumour onset should outweigh potential harms depth of 100x. It demonstrated an excellent limit of associated with CMMRD counselling and testing in this detection, with 100% sensitivity for SNVs at 2% VAF setting, we elaborated a strategy to pre-select, among sus- and for indel at 4% VAF. In addition, the analytical pected NF1/Legius syndrome children without a causative sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the panel were high in a NF1/ SPRED1 mutation and no overt malignancy, those comparison to conventional methods such as Sanger1586 sequencing. Noticeably, the approximately 300-bp-size S. Chvojka: None. F. Lhota: None. F. Zembol: None. insertions of FLT3-ITD was detected by a simulating L. Cerna: None. M. Sekowska: None. B. Honysova: algorithm of NGeneAnalySysTM. Thus, this analytical None. M. Famfulikova: None. M. Koudova: None. A. validation demonstrated that HEMEaccuTestTM and NGe- Puchmajerova: None. M. Bittoova: None. D. neAnalySysTM can be an excellent tool for disease Stejskal: None. deﬁnition and therapeutic strategy in hematological malignancies. P12.114C H. Choi: None. I. Lee: None. J. Im: None. K. Jung: TransmembranenodalcomplexisabnormalinNOMO- None. K. Lee: None. Y. Moon: None. K. Kim: None. 1 deleted colon cancer P12.113B N. Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, J. Pérez1,2,3, M. Arriba4, P. García- ClinicalapplicabilityofNGSpanelinhereditarycancer Vallés1,3, M. Á. Pérez-Nieto1,2, J. J. Tellería1,2, J. L. García1,2,3, J. Perea5,4, R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3 S.Chvojka,F.Lhota,F.Zembol,L.Cerna,M.Sekowska, B. Honysova, M. Famfulikova, M. Koudova, 1Department of Medicine, Molecular Medicine Unit, A. Puchmajerova, M. Bittoova, D. Stejskal University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Gennet s.r.o, Prague, Czech Republic Spain, 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Introduction:Next-generationsequencing(NGS)allowsto Salamanca, Spain, 4Digestive Cancer Research Group, 12 concurrently analyze germline variants of multiple genes de Octubre Research Institute, Madrid, Spain, 5Surgery associated with hereditary cancer syndromes. Department, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Methods: 3118 DNA samples of oncologic patients Spain (2177)andhealthyrelatives(941)fromfamilieswithcancer history fulﬁlling clinical criteria were analyzed using NGS Introduction: NOMO-1 (located in 16p13.1) somatic panel CZECANCA (CZEch CAncer paNel for Clinical deletion has been proven in recent studies to occur in most Application) [1]. The most common types of the patients´ cases of early-onset, non-hereditary, microsatellite-stable cancer were: breast (62.6%), ovarian (12.6%), colorectal colorectal cancer. However, the role of this alteration in (9.2%). This panel targets 226 genes based on the genetic carcinogenesis is unknown. Thus, the main aims of this variability of Czech cancer patients. We evaluate 78 clini- studyaretogenerateastablecolorectalcancercelllinethat cally relevant genes. For CNV (copy number variation) doesnotexpressthisgeneandtoanalysethenodalpathway detection we use sequencing coverage analysis. in this line. Results: In total samples 18,6% a deleterious variants Materials and Methods: CRISPR-Cas9 technology was (class 4-5) were detected- in 20 % of patients with breast used to generate a NOMO-1 knockout from the colorectal cancer, in 21,9 % of patients with ovarian cancer and in cancer-derived cell line HT29. The efﬁcacy of its design 21,4 % of patients with colorectal cancer. In case of was tested by Sanger sequencing, quantitative polymerase reporting only variants in genes recommended by clinical chainreaction(qPCR)andwesternblot.Tostudyoff-target guidelines or genes covered by commercially available effects, chromosomal differences were measured by oncopanels the detection rate would decrease to 13%. CytoScangenomicmicroarraysplatform.ChangesinNodal Within CNV validation, we tested 90 ﬁndings in 1175 pathway protein expression were analyzed by western blot. individualsbyMLPA.29(32.22%)weretruepositive(TP), Results: The NOMO-1 knockout cell line’s design efﬁ- the remaining 61 samples (67.78%) were false positive cacy was proven. However, the genomic microarrays (FP). Costs in this settings dropped by 3/4 in comparison showed a complete deletion of chromosome 16. Nodal with MLPA testing only. pathwayproteinexpressionremainedunchangedexceptfor Conclusion: These results are consistent with the pub- severe downregulation of TMEM147 and Nicalin. Both lished ﬁndings and highlight the importance of extending proteinsarepartofatransmembranecomplexwithNOMO. the examination to other susceptibility genes which brings Conclusions: NOMO transmembrane complex has been more information to the patients. This allows more precise reported to be an antagonist of the nodal pathway. Our genetictestingandgenetic counsellinginfamiliesfollowed resultsshowthatNOMOtransmembranecomplexisabsent by preventive care. in NOMO-1 knockout cancer cells. However, downstream [1]Soukupovaetal.,2018,https://doi.org/10.1371/journa proteins remain unaltered in these cells, suggesting that l.pone.0195761 NOMO could regulate another signaling pathway in adult cancer cells. Further studies would be required forAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1587 completing the functional characterization of NOMO-1 of mutations found, the NOMO-mediated signaling could deletion in early-onset colorectal cancer. be implicated in the tumorigenesis of CRC. This work was This study was funded by FIS-FEDER: PI16/01920. supported by a grant from Instituto de Salud Carlos III N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. J. Pérez: None. M. Arriba: (Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness) (ISC III- None. P. García-Vallés: None. M.Á. Pérez-Nieto: None. FEDER: PI16/01920). J.J.Tellería:None.J.L.García:None.J.Perea:None.R. A. Martel-Martel: None. J. Pérez: None. P. García- González-Sarmiento: None. Vallés: None. M. García-Bengoa: None. R. Vidal: None. M.Arriba:None.J.L.García:None.J.Perea:None.M. P12.115D Urioste: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. Genetic study of the Nodal signaling pathway genes in colorectal cancer P12.116A Discoveryofhumanmir-1839:amiRNAderivedfroma A. Martel-Martel1,2,3, J. Pérez1,4, P. García-Vallés1, snoRNA/scaRNA M. García-Bengoa1, R. Vidal3, M. Arriba5, J. L. García1,2,4, J. Perea5,6, M. Urioste7, R. González- M. Martinez-Saucedo, Y. Bárcenas-Gómez, P. Baeza, Sarmiento1,2,4 J. Granados-Riverón, G. Aquino-Jarquin 1Department of Medicine, Molecular Medicine Unit, Hospital Infantil De México Federico Gómez, México, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Biomedical Mexico Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 3Medical Oncology Service, University Hospital of Small nucleolar RNAs are a class of small non-coding Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Institute of Molecular and RNAsinvolvedinthepseudouridylationandmethylationof Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of ribosomal RNAs. A subclass of snoRNAs, called Small Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, 5Digestive Cancer SmallCajalbody-speciﬁcRNAsperformthesamechemical ResearchGroup,12deOctubreResearchInstitute,Madrid, modiﬁcation of spliceosomal RNAs U1, U2, U4, U5 and Spain, 6Surgery Department, University Hospital 12 de U12. Previously, it has been shown that some microRNAs Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 7Familial Cancer Clinical Unit, can be a derivative of snoRNAs. By a small RNA-seq Spanish National Cancer Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain experimentoftotalRNAfromauterusadenocarcinoma,we identiﬁedanovelhumanmaturemicroRNAthatisidentical Introduction:Recentstudiesshowthecarcinogenicimpact to the microRNA mmu-miR-1839-5p. Upon alignment of oftheNodalpathway,whichisupregulatedincertaintypes the sequence of hsa-miR-1839-5p, we noticed that its of tumors and has been linked to tumorigenesis and maturesequenceisembeddedinthesamedirectionwithina metastasis in melanoma, breast, colon, ovarian, prostate, gene encoding a human scaRNA (scaRNA15/ACA45), endometrial and pancreatic cancers. Its inhibition decreases within the long arm of chromosome 15q25.2. We designed tumorigenesis. We performed a genetic study of the genes aninvitrostem-loopRT-PCRassayinordertovalidatethe relevanttothispathway,aswellastheirpotentialinhibitors existence of the novel species of microRNA in the tissue in colorectal cancer (CRC). where it was discovered and also to evaluate expression Materials and Methods: A speciﬁc Illumina panel was level in a number of total RNAs extract of different adult, designed by our group to study the Nodal pathway genes fetal and neoplastic tissues. The stem-loop RT-PCR assay and inhibitors. This panel includes the following genes: revealed that hsa-miR-1839-5p is more expressed in two ALK4 (ACVR1B), ACTRII, SMAD3, NCNL, SMAD4, neoplastic tissues in comparison with their non-neoplastic NOMO1, SMAD2, TEMEM147, LEFTY, GPR78, TDGF1. counterparts. Additionally, the novel human microRNA is Atotalof36CRCwerestudiedviasequencinginaMiSeq. expressedinwidely variabledegrees ina variety of9more The results were analyzed with VariantStudio (Illumina) adult total RNAs as well as 5 total fetal RNAs. and IGV 2.4 software. M. Martinez-saucedo: None. Y. Bárcenas-gómez: Results: A total of 20 pathogenic nonsense mutations None. P. Baeza: None. J. Granados-riverón: None. G. wereidentiﬁedin19ofthe36analyzedtumors;9ofwhich Aquino-jarquin: None. (45%) were found in the NOMO1 gene generating a trun- cated protein. Additionally, 4 pathogenic mutations were P12.117B found in SMAD3, 3 in SMAD2, 2 in SMAD4 and only one User-friendly and machine learning-empowered mutation was found in NCLN and ALK4. platformforclassiﬁcationofNSCLCbasedonRNA-seq Conclusions:AhighpercentageofCRCshowmutations proﬁling inoneoftheNodalpathwaygenes.Duetothehighnumber1588 F.C.Collin1,M.Niemira2,A.J.Krętowski2,3,J.Niklińsk4, 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (State M. Kwaśniewski1 University), Dolgoprudny, Russian Federation, 2Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian 1Centre for Bioinformatics and Data Analysis, Medical Federation, 3Institute of Chemical Biology and University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland, 2Center of Fundamental Medicine, SB of RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Clinical Research, Medical University of Bialystok, Federation Bialystok, Poland, 3Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Internal Medicine, Medical University of Introduction:Cell-freeDNA(cfDNA)circulatedinblood- Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland, 4Department of Clinical stream being packed into membrane coated structures or Molecular Biology, Medical University of Bialystok, forming deoxyribonucleoprotein complexes (DNPCs). Bialystok, Poland Materials and Methods: DNPCs were isolated by afﬁ- nity chromatography with antihistone antibodies, the pro- Introduction: RNA-seq hasbecomeastandardmethodfor teinswereidentiﬁedbyMALDI-TOF.Studyingtheprotein transcriptomeproﬁlingofcancertissues.Agreatnumberof content in DNPCs circulating in the blood plasma of ten studies investigated genetic expression in order to identify healthyfemales(HFs)vsprimarybreast cancertenpatients marker genes that could be used for diagnostic and/or (BCPs) by analysis of protein signatures & GO annotation. prognostic purposes. However, the generalisation of Results: HFs: 176 proteins joined with 195 GO terms expression pattern with limited number of genes may be werecharacterized;BCPs:167proteinsjoinedwith168GO inaccurate. Instead of using a speciﬁc subset of genes, we terms were characterized; only 38 proteins (12% of 305 propose to use the whole RNA-seq proﬁle to improve the different proteins) &96GO(40%of267different GO)are diagnosisandclassiﬁcationofNon-Small-CellLungCancer common for both HFs and BCPs. Our results assumed (NSCLC) through a user-friendly platform. extracellularproteinfragmentsareinvolvedinbindingwith Materials and Methods: A machine-learning algorithm cfDNA for BCPs over HFs states for two protein pools. (Random Forest) which learns from RNA-seq proﬁles of Only for BCPs we have identiﬁed DNPCs formed by 5 NSCLC tissues, collected in 123 patients (tumour and non- tetratricopeptide-like helical domain superfamily proteins tumour samples) was applied in order to discriminate his- (P61201, Q49AM3, Q6PGP7, Q92623, Q96EK5), and 5 tological subtypes of NSCLC. The method has been ion channels (P48167, P48995, Q6PIU1, Q8NEC5, implemented within the R environment and the web plat- Q96KK3). It allows suggest the reason for the increase of form has been built with the Shiny package. cfDNA concentration in the blood during the development Results: The web platform actually allows the user, ﬁrst, of tumors. In according GO analysis (cellular component) to provide its own RNA-seq library; then it automatically membrane proteins are more represented in the DNPC ﬁts a Random Forest model based on the expressed genes; composition, which suggests the binding of circulating ﬁnally, it returns a diagnosis along with its false discovery DNPC with the cell surface. rate. The prototype was assessed and cross validated. The References: [1]Tamkovich SN, et al (2015). Identiﬁca- bestresultswereobtainedwhenfullRNA-seqproﬁleswere tion of proteins in blood nucleoprotein complexes. provided. doi:10.1134/S1068162015060163; [2]Tamkovich SN, et al Conclusions: We propose our method as a universal (2016). Protein Content of Circulating Nucleoprotein approach of use of whole RNA-seq data for diagnostic Complexes. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-42044-8_26. [3]Bele- purposes in a simple and straightforward manner. nikinMS,etal(2018).Proteincompositioncharacterization The study was funded by the Polish National Centre for ofcirculatingnucleoproteincomplexes.ESHG-2018poster: Research and Development, the MOBIT project (STRA- E-P16.03. TEGMED2/266484/2/NCBR/2015). M. Belenikin: None. S. Tamkovich: None. P. F.C.Collin: None.M.Niemira:None.A.J.Krętowski: Laktionov: None. None. J. Niklińsk: None. M. Kwaśniewski: None. P12.119D P12.118C Signiﬁcance of variants of the unknown in clinical Circulating nucleoprotein complexes for breast cancer practice of oncogenetics patients are enriched by tetratricopeptide-like and ion channel proteins S. Vitkute1, I. Drejeriene1,2, M. Norvydas1, J. Kasnauskiene1 M. Belenikin1,2, S. Tamkovich2,3, P. Laktionov3 1Klaipeda University Hospital, Klaipeda, Lithuania, 2Vilnius University, Vilnius, LithuaniaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1589 III or IV FIGO stage), non-malignant (n=12) ovarian Introduction: Advancements in genetic techniques lead to tumors and inage-matched healthyvolunteers (n=60). The increasinglymoresequenceinformation.However,manyof relative amount of miRNAs was detected by qPCR. novel sequence variants are not meaningful in clinical Results: The expression levels of miR34a, miR34b and decision-making and are referred as -,the gray zone“. Our miR203awerehigherinthemalignantsamplescomparedto studyobjectivewastoreviewthedistributionofvariantsof the healthy donors (p<0.05; 0.001; 0.001 respectively). unknownsigniﬁcance(VUS)inhighriskbreastandovarian However,nosigniﬁcantdifferencewasdetectedinthecase cancer patients. ofmiR34c.Diagnosticaccuracywasthehighestinthecase Materials and Methods: 499 female patients with of miR203a: 84.09% with the AUC of 0.831 (95% increased risk (young age and/or positive family history CI=0.727-935). Spearman’s rank correlation revealed and/or triple negative breast cancer) of familial/hereditary positive correlation between the expression values of breast or ovarian cancer were included in this study. The miR34sandmiR203athatwasthehighestbetweenmiR34a meanageofpatientswas53.3±9.6.Geneticcounselingand and miR34b. The agreement between the diagnostic tests NGS analysis were performed at the Klaipeda University based on miR34s and miR203a proved to be good Hospital (Lithuania) from 2015 until 2018. Mutations were according to the Cohen’s kappa values with the highest detected using Next Generation Sequencing (Ion Torrent™ value between miR34a and miR34b. However, the diag- PGM)customIonAmpliSeq™On-Demandpanel(Thermo nostic tests based on these miRNAs and the standard Fisher Scientiﬁc). Custom oncogene-panel was made of CA125 and HE4 showed low agreement. Target analysis forty-four genes, associated with familial hereditary and revealedthatmiR34aandmiR34bshareseveraltargetgenes syndromic cancer diseases. involved in cancer development. Results: Mutations were detected in 181 of 499 (36%) Conclusions: We conclude that miR203a and miR34b samples. Pathogenic mutations consisted 61% (111) of all might be promising complementary markers of CA125 and detected mutations. High frequency of pathogenic muta- HE4 in ovarian cancer. tions is explained by targeted study group of cancer É. Márton: None. D. Herrera Villarroel: None. J. patients. 7 (4%) patients had a combination of pathogenic Lukács: None. A. Penyige: None. E. Janka: None. B. mutationandVUS.VUSwasdetectedin52(29%)patients. Soltész: None. R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None. M. Conclusions: Our results show that VUS remains an Szilágyi: None. important problem in the clinical interpretation of high-risk cancer patients analysis results. Thus, it is of paramount P12.121B importance in diagnostic studies to classify mutations Germline pathogenic variants of cancer susceptibility accordingtothestatus-pathogenicorbenign,andtoupdate genes among Japanese ovarian cancer patients biological databases. S. Vitkute: None. I. Drejeriene: None. M. Norvydas: A. HIRASAWA1, I. Imoto2, T. Naruto3, T. Akahane4, None. J. Kasnauskiene: None. W. Yamagami5, H. Nomura4, K. Masuda6, N. Susumu7, H. Tsuda8, D. Aoki4 P12.120A Study the role of miR34 family and miR203a in the 1Dept. Clin.Genomic.Med, Okayama, Japan, 2Risk Assess. diagnosis of ovarian cancer Cent, Aichi Can. Cent. Hos., Nagoya, Japan, 3Dep.Hum. Genet,Grad.Sch.BiomedSci,TokushimaUniv,Tokushima, É. Márton, D. Herrera Villarroel, J. Lukács, A. Penyige, Japan,4Dep.Obst.&Gyne.,KeioUniv.,Sch.Med.,Tokyo, E. Janka, B. Soltész, R. Póka, B. Nagy, M. Szilágyi Japan, 5Dep. Obst. & Gyne., Keio Univ., Sch. Med, Tokyo, Japan, 6Dep.Hum. Genet, Grad. Sch.Biomed Sci, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary TokushimaUniv.,Tokushima,Japan,7Dep.Obst.&Gyne., International.UnivHealth&Welfare.,Chiba,Japan,8Dep. Introduction: Ovarian cancer is the ﬁfth most common Basic Pathol. National Defense Med, Saitama, Japan formofcancerdeathamongwomen,duetothedifﬁcultyof diagnosis. Circulating miRNAs proved to be promising Aim: The aim of our study was to reveal the prevalence of biomarkers in various cancers. However, only few publica- pathogenic germline variants of candidate genes associated tions focus on circulating miRNAs in ovarian cancer with genetic predisposition to OC in Japanese OC patients. especially in European populations. Method: Germ-line DNA samples from 230 unselected Materials and Methods: We screened the members of OC patients were recruited from the Keio Women’s Health themiR34family(miR34a,miR34b,miR34c)andmiR203a Biobank atKeioUniversitySchool ofMedicine. Germ-line in the plasma samples of patients with malignant (n=28, I, DNA was enriched using the SureSelect XT Target1590 EnrichmentSystem(AgilentTechnologies)designedfor75 compared to healthy fallopian tube (FT) controls. To or79genesasacustomOCpanel,followedbysequencing investigate the regulation of survivin expression by GLI using MiSeq (Illumina). Detected variants were classiﬁed proteins, GLI knock-outs were developed and survivin accordingtotheAmericanCollegeofMedicalGeneticsand expression was determined. Genomics recommendations. Furthermore, BRCA1/2 var- Results: Fifteen different polymorphisms were found in iantswereinterpretedusingresourcesfromMyriadGenetic OC samples, and there was no difference in distribution Laboratories. between OC samples and controls. Several polymorphisms Results: Of 230 patients, 19 (8.3%) and 8 cases (3.5%) showed linkage disequilibrium in OC samples. All ﬁve carried germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathogenic variants, isoforms were detected in OC samples, and only two iso- respectively. No variant of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS) of forms in FT controls. Seven polymorphisms showed sig- BRCA1/2 genes was detected in our analysis according to niﬁcant associations with isoform expression. Survivin the database of Myriad Genetics. Six (2.6%) carried isoforms were downregulated in GLI1 and GLI2 knock- pathogenic germline variants of mismatch repair genes. outs, but not in the GLI3 knock-out. Treatment of GLI1 Carriers of BRCA1/2 or pathogenic variants of any other knock-out with GANT-61 showed an additional inhibitory genes tested were more likely to be diagnosed younger, effect on several isoforms. haveﬁrstorsecond-degreerelativeswithOC,andhaveOC Conclusions:Survivinisoformexpressionisregulatedby classiﬁed as high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC). both BIRC5 polymorphisms and the expression of GLI Conclusion:Ourdatacanfacilitategeneticpredisposition transcription factors that bind to its promoter. prediction in Japanese OC patients and referring high-risk V. Musani: None. M. Gregorić: None. D. Trnski: patients for genetic counseling and testing. None. P. Ozretić: None. S. Levanat: None. N. Rinčić: A. Hirasawa: None. I. Imoto: None. T. Naruto: None. None. D. Kalafatić: None. M. Sabol: None. T. Akahane: None. W. Yamagami: None. H. Nomura: None. K. Masuda: None. N. Susumu: None. H. Tsuda: P12.123D None. D. Aoki: None. Circulating miR200 family members are promising candidatebiomarkersinthediagnosisofovariancancer P12.122C The inﬂuence of BIRC5 polymorphisms and GLI M. Szilágyi-Bónizs, É. Márton, R. Szabó, J. Lukács, proteins on the expression of survivin isoforms in E. Janka, A. Penyige, B. Soltész, R. Póka, B. Nagy ovarian cancer University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary V. Musani1, M. Gregorić2, D. Trnski1, P. Ozretić1, S. Levanat1, N. Rinčić1, D. Kalafatić3, M. Sabol1 Introduction: Ovarian cancer is the most lethal form of gynecological malignancy. CA125 and HE4 are frequently 1Ruđer Bošković Institute, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 2Zagreb usedbiomarkersinovariancancer,however,thesehavelow Health School, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 3University diagnostic parameters. Here we studied the diagnostic Hospital Centre Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia potential of circulating miRNAs in ovarian cancer. Materials and Methods: We screened the members of Introduction:Ovariancancer(OC)isoneofthemostlethal the miR200 family (miR200a, miR200b, miR200c, cancers, mostly due to late diagnosis and limited treatment miR141, miR429) in the plasma samples of patients with options. Survivin (coded by BIRC5 gene) is an inhibitor of malignant(n=28,I,IIIorIVFIGOstage)ornon-malignant apoptosis, has at least ﬁve different splice variants and is (n=12) ovarian tumor and in age-matched healthy controls often overexpressed in cancer. Survivin is direct target of (n=60). The relative amount of miRNAs was detected Hedgehog-GLI signaling pathway, a major developmental by qPCR. pathway involved in organogenesis and stem cell Results: All the tested miRNAs showed signiﬁcantly maintenance. elevated expression in the malignant samples compared to We investigated the role of BIRC5 polymorphisms and the healthy controls (p<0.001). Moreover, the relative survivin isoform expression in OC. Additionally we expression of miR200a, miR141 and miR429 proved to be investigate the role of different GLI proteins in the regula- higher in the malignant than in the non-malignant samples tion of survivin isoform expression in the SKOV-3 OC (p<0.05).ROC-AUCprovedtobethehighestinthecaseof cell line. miR200c: 0.861 (95% CI=0.776-0.947). Spearman's rank MaterialsandMethods:40OCsamplesand74controls correlation analysis revealed positive correlation between were genotyped for BIRC5 polymorphisms. Survivin iso- the plasma levels of the studied miRNAs that was the form expression was analyzed on 29 OC samples and highest between miR200b and miR200c (r = 0.775; sAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1591 p<0.001). Target analysis also suggested tight interaction aging patients and patients with familial OC. In relation to between these miRNAs in the regulation of cancer devel- MLH1 gene (rs1800734), the GG genotype was associated opment.TheagreementofdiagnostictestsbasedonmiRNA withgreaterOCsusceptibilityinoldpatientsandinpatients levelsandthestandardCA125orHE4wasweakaccording with hereditary OC. The SNP rs1799977 of MLH1 gene to Cohen's kappa values. was associated with an increased risk of recurrence. Conclusions: MiR200 family members might be pro- Conclusions: Our study suggests that DNA repair genes mising complementary biomarkers in the diagnosis of differentfromBRCA1/2likeXRCC1,TP53,MLH1,XRCC3 ovarian cancer. The plasma level of tightly interacting and APEX1 could modify the risk of developing OC. This miRNAsshowsstrongpositivecorrelation.Grantreference: project was funded by FIS-FEDER PI16/01920. NTP-NFTÖ-18-B-0377 M.GomesFerreira:None.M.Ovejero-Sánchez:None. M.Szilágyi-Bónizs:None.É.Márton:None.R.Szabó: E. Sánchez Tapia: None. T. Martín-Gómez: None. R. None. J. Lukács: None. E. Janka: None. A. Penyige: Vidal: None. M. Sancho de Salas: None. M. Doyagüe- None. B. Soltész: None. R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None. Sánchez: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. P12.124A P12.125B Study of DNA repair gene polymorphisms in ovarian Identiﬁcation of differentially expressed miRNAs in cancer plasma samples of ovarian cancer patients M. Gomes Ferreira1,2, M. Ovejero-Sánchez1,3,4, A. Penyige1, M. Szilágyi1, B. Soltész1, É. Márton1, E. Sánchez Tapia1,3,4, T. Martín-Gómez5, R. Vidal5, J. Lukács2, R. Póka2, B. Nagy1 M. Sancho de Salas6, M. Doyagüe-Sánchez1,5, R. González-Sarmiento1,3,4 1Univ. of Debrecen, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Human Genetics, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Univ. of Debrecen, Faculty 1Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), ofMedicine,Dept.ofObstericsandGynecology,Debrecen, Salamanca, Spain, 2Gynecology Service, University Hungary Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the 6th most Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Institute of Molecular and commontumorinwomen.Itshighmortalityrateispartially Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University-CIC, due to lack of effective screening methods for early Salamanca, Spain, 5Oncology Service, University Hospital diagnosis. Given their ability to regulate gene expression of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 6Pathologic Anatomy and presence in bio-ﬂuids miRNAs could be non-invasive Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, biomarkers for cancer diagnosis. Spain Materials and Methods: Total RNA was isolated from plasma samples of 18 OC (6-6 FIGO stage I, III and IV) Introduction: Ovarian cancer (OC) is proven to be patients and 6 healthy controls. MiRNA copy number was inﬂuenced by alterations in some DNA repair genes (e.g. determined using the Nanostring System with nCounter BRCA1/2). In ourwork, we analyzed inDNA repair genes Human v3 miRNA Panel. Background and technical var- polymorphisms (SNPs) by TaqMan genotyping in OC iations were corrected for the mean±2SD of negative con- peripheral blood samples. trols and the positive code-set, respectively. Data was Material and methods: An association study of SNPs normalized by the geometric mean of 10 housekeeping rs1799782, rs25487, rs1130409, rs13181, rs11615, miRNA counts. Signiﬁcant differentially expressed (DE) rs1799794, rs861539, rs1042522, rs1799977 and miRNAs were identiﬁed by Kruskal±Wallis test with post rs1800734 of genes XRCC1, APEX1, ERCC2, ERCC1, hoc Dunn's test. Target genes, candidate pathways and XRCC3, MLH1 and TP53 was performed in the germinal lncRNA associations for signiﬁcant miRNAs were identi- DNA of 185 patients and 129 healthy controls. ﬁed by a network-based analysis using miRNet, mirTarge- Results: the GA genotype of XRCC1 polymorphism tLink and Networkanalyst tools. Functional annotation rs1799782, the CC genotype of TP53 polymorphism clustering of target genes and pathway analysis was done rs1042522 and the GG genotype of MLH1 polymorphism with the DAVID tool. rs1800734 were associated with increased susceptibility to Results: 26 miRNAs were upregulated, the tumor sup- OC. The T allele of APEX1 polymorphism rs1130409 was pressor miR-584-5p was down-regulated. In our DE associated with a later onset of the disease and hereditary miRNA set miR-25-3p/26b-5p/301a-3p/19b-3p/144-39 had OC. In relation to XRCC3 gene (rs1799794), the TT gen- the highest degree and betweenness centrality values, their otype was associated with increased OC susceptibility in1592 common targets are PTEN, BCL2L11, KAT2B, SMAD4, frequencies varied from 9%-47%. Altogether, approxi- TP53, MALAT1, XIST, HOTAIR. mately one in three of OC patients in our cohort could be Conclusion: Functional annotation and gene-GO term good candidates for therapies targeting defective mechan- enrichmentanalysisoftargetsidentiﬁedtheinvolvementof isms of DNA repair, including HR and MMR. Our study cell cycle regulation, FOXO/PI3-AKT/TP53/TGFβ/ highlightsthehighprevalenceofLoFvariantsinHRgenes, SMAD4 signaling pathways, negative regulation of apop- when combining germline and tumor testing in unselected, tosis, positive regulation of proliferation and epithelial- non-mucinousepithelialOCpatients. Thesegenetic defects mesenchymal transition in OC development. Speciﬁc can predominantly lead to HR deﬁciency, the ultimate plasmamiRNAproﬁlescouldrepresentpotentialdiagnostic biomarker for therapeutic intervention by PARP inhibition biomarkers for OC. leading to tumor-cell death. A.Penyige:None.M.Szilágyi:None.B.Soltész:None. F. Fostira: None. D. Kalfakakou: None. M.S. Papa- É. Márton: None. J. Lukács: None. R. Póka: None. B. mentzelopoulou: None. A. Delimitsou: None. P. Aposto- Nagy: None. lou:None.A.Vagena:None.C.Papadimitriou:None.G. Aravantinos: None. G. Fountzilas: None. D. Yannouka- P12.126C kos: None. I. Konstantopoulou: None. Combinationofgermlineandtumortestingyieldsahigh rate of loss-of-function variants in non-mucinous P12.127D epithelial ovarian cancer patients Pathogenic germline mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 in a single patient with pancreatic acinar cell F. Fostira1, D. Kalfakakou1, M. S. Papamentzelopoulou1, carcinoma A. Delimitsou1, P. Apostolou1, A. Vagena1, C. Papadimitriou2, G. Aravantinos3, G. Fountzilas4, A.Fischer1,2,A.Jahn1,2,K.Hackmann1,2,S.Zeugner2,3,4, D. Yannoukakos1, I. Konstantopoulou1 K. Riedmann5, N. Pfarr6, A. Grabmeier7, D. Aust2,3,4, A. Rump1,2, E. Schröck1,2, L. Gieldon1,2 1Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory, NCSR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, 2eDepartment of Clinical Therapeutics, 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl "Alexandra" Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Second Department of Medical Germany, 2Core Unit für Molekulare Tumor Diagnostik Oncology, Agii Anargiri Cancer Hospital, Athens, Greece, (CMTD), NCT Dresden, German Cancer Research Center 4Department of Medical Oncology, Aristotle University of (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 3Institut für Pathologie, Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus an der Technischen Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, Non-mucinous epithelial ovarian cancer diagnosis is a 4Tumor- und Normalgewebebank am stand-alone criterion for genetic testing referral, irrespec- Universitätskrebszentrum/ NCT-Standort Dresden, tivelyoffamilyhistoryorageatdiagnosis.Identiﬁcationof Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus an der at least BRCA1 & BRCA2 mutations are fundamental for Technischen Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, clinical decision making of ovarian cancer (OC) patients. 5Krebszentrum München CCCLMU, Medizinische Klinik We analyzed genomic DNA from 578 epithelial non- am Klinikum rechts der Isar, München, Germany, 6Institut mucinous OC patients for mutations, implementing a für Allgemeine Pathologie und Pathologische Anatomie, commercially available 94-gene panel. Additionally, 121 Technische Universität München, München, Germany, tumors were collected from OC patients with negative 7Onkologische Tagesklinik, Kreisklinik Ebersberg germlinetestingandassessedforsomaticBRCA1&BRCA2 gemeinnützige GmbH, Ebersberg, Germany mutations. Overall, 25.4% (147/578) of the patients carried germline loss-of-function (LoF) variants, distributed in 18 Here we report on a family with hereditary breast and genes.AfterBRCA1&BRCA2,whichaccountedfor72.1% ovarian cancer with a known BRCA1 frameshift mutation of the total, RAD51C LoF variants were the most frequent (NM_007294.3:c.5266dupC, p.(Gln1756Profs*74)). The (4.8%). Interestingly, the vast majority of LoF variants index patient’s son was diagnosed with pancreatic acinar (136/147; 92.5%) involved homologous recombination/ cell carcinoma at 34 years of age soon after the molecular Fanconi anemia genes, while 4.5% of the pathogenic testing in the family. Pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma is a variantsweredetectedinMismatchRepair(MMR)pathway veryraretumorwithapoorprognosisandlimitedtreatment genes. Subsequently, tumor analysis resulted in the options. He was therefore recommended testing of the identiﬁcation of damaging BRCA1 & BRCA2 variants in tumor tissue with regards to possible targeted therapeutic 11.5% of the ovarian tumors tested. Variant allele options in the future (PARB-inhibitor therapy).Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1593 Using a multi-gene panel we surprisingly not only iden- Germline DNA was analyzed using a custom designed tiﬁed the familial BRCA1 mutation in the tumor tissue in SeqCAP Target panel of 66 (pancreatic) cancer suscept- heterozygous state but additionally found a frameshift ibility genes (Roche). mutation in BRCA2 (NM_000059.3:c.3708dupA, p. Dataanalysisisstillongoing,butwefoundin21%ofthe (Ala1237Serfs*6))in50%ofreadsaswellasawell-known patientsanalyzedtillnow,atleastoneheterozygouslossof CHEK2-founder mutation (NM_007194.3:c.1100delC, p. function germline mutation in one of the 66 (pancreatic) (Thr367Metfs*15)) in 50% and an ATM stop mutation cancer susceptibility genes. (NM_000051.3:c.2426CG, p.(Ser809*)) in 23% of reads. As this is a high proportion of the patients, further ThemutationsinBRCA1,CHEK2andBRCA2couldallbe extension of the study cohort is certainly warranted. In conﬁrmed to be germline mutations, while the ATM parallel a matched control cohort is being analyzed to mutation was of somatic origin. Of interest the patient’s determine which genes are signiﬁcantly more implicated in pedigree showed a single case of breast cancer in his (pancreatic) cancer predisposition. Further segregation deceasedpaternalgrandfatherat60yearsofagethathadnot analysis in the families is indicated to evaluate their link further been investigated. with the different cancers and highlight the need for This case challenges the current concept of targeted recommendations governing germline multi-gene panel testing in hereditary cancer predisposition families, espe- testing of cancer patients with a personal or family history ciallywhencancerpredispositionisevidentintwobranches of pancreatic cancer. of the family tree. It also poses the question of adequate Research supported by a grant from King Baudouin clinical surveillance and predictive testing algorithms in a Foundation, Fund Maaike-Lars-Trees familywiththreeheterozygouspathogenicvariantsingenes G. Wieme: None. T. Rosseel: None. B. Parton: None. encoding for proteins that are involved in DNA repair B. Blaumeiser: None. S. Tejpar: None. B. Poppe: None. mechanisms. K. De Leeneer: None. K.B.M. Claes: None. A.Fischer:None.A.Jahn:None.K.Hackmann:None. S. Zeugner: None. K. Riedmann: None. N. Pfarr: None. P12.129B A.Grabmeier:None.D.Aust:None.A.Rump:None.E. Detection of genome-wide copy number alterations in Schröck: None. L. Gieldon: None. tumor tissue and cell-free DNA of pancreatic cancer patients P12.128A Analysis of patients with a personal and/or family G. Wieme1,2, F. Berrevoet3, A. Vanlander3, J. Van history of pancreatic cancer with a custom designed Dorpe4,2, A. Hoorens4,2, M. Van der Linden4,2, broad cancer predisposition gene panel B. Parton1,2, J. Van Limmen5, A. De Bruyne5, M. De Man6,2, K. Geboes6,2, K. B. M. Claes1,2 G. Wieme1,2, T. Rosseel1, B. Parton1,2, B. Blaumeiser3, S.Tejpar4,B.Poppe1,2,K.DeLeeneer1,2,K.B.M.Claes1,2 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Cancer Research 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Cancer Research General and Hepatobiliary surgery, Ghent University Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium, 3Centrum Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Department of Pathology, Medische Genetica Antwerpen, UZA, Antwerp, Belgium, GhentUniversityHospital,Ghent,Belgium,5Departmentof 4Moleculaire Digestieve Oncologie, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Anesthesiology,GhentUniversityHospital,Ghent,Belgium, Belgium 6Department of Gastroenterology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium Pancreaticcancerisestimatedtohaveafamilialbackground in 5-10% of the cases. Although the underlying genetic Diagnosis of pancreatic cancer is very challenging since basis for most of the familial clustering remains elusive, earlystagepancreaticcancerisassociatedwithnon-speciﬁc several familial cancer syndromes are associated with an and vague symptoms. Additionally, the current diagnostic increased risk of pancreatic cancer. tools by imaging and CA19-9 measurement have limita- In this retrospective study, 433 individuals were selected tions. Liquid biopsies make it possible to detect tumor- becauseofapersonalorfamilyhistoryofpancreaticcancer speciﬁc molecular alterations by analysis of cell free DNA in combination with breast and/or ovarian cancer, colon (cfDNA) isolated from plasma, which contains circulating cancer or melanoma. tumorDNA(ctDNA).Weevaluatedtheprevalenceoflarge genomicrearrangementsinpancreaticcancerresectionsand cfDNA of the patients. We applied shallow whole genome1594 sequencing (sWGS) to cfDNA samples from all patients at Results: In two of the patients we discovered a hetero- different time points. Concordance of the proﬁles was zygous deletion ofthewholeSTK11gene,determinedbya evaluated between cfDNA and matched FFPE tumor tissue 50% decrease in all MLPA probes. The third patient in samples of operable patients. Analyses were ﬁnished for showed a heterozygous deletion of exon 1. The fourth and 16operablepatients.Clearcopy-numberalterations(CNAs) the ﬁfth patient had similar alterations in exon 7, with were observed in 13 FFPE tumor samples (81%). The patient 4 having an in-frame deletion proﬁles were patient-unique but some recurrent alterations (c.907_915delATCCGGCAG) and the ﬁfth patient- in- wereascertained.IncfDNAofnoneoftheoperablepatients frame duplication (c.907_915dupATCCGGCAG) within CNAs were established. In cfDNA of 75% (6/8) of the the STK11 gene (GRCh38/hg19). metastatic pancreatic cancer patients, clear CNAs were Conclusions: While all of the patients reported here identiﬁed.Inanextstep,weareevaluatingifthisapproach exhibited symptoms of PJS, the severity of the disease and can predict recurrence. Indeed, a copy-number change in a the accompanying symptoms was not determined by the follow-up sample (6-months post-adjuvant chemotherapy) type of the mutation; even in patients 4 and 5, who had was observed in a borderline-operative patient with alterations in the catalytic kinase domain of STK11. This metastases. These results demonstrate CNAs in cfDNA of suggests that even in-frame alterations in the STK11 advanced pancreatic cancer cases and the potential use of sequence have a profound effect. Our ﬁndings are cfDNA derived proﬁles to monitor treatment response. encouraging us to further investigate the relationship Additionalpatientsarecurrentlybeinganalyzedandwillbe betweentheSTK11genedefectsandtheclinicalseverityof presentedatthemeeting.Researchprojectrealizedwiththe the disorder. support of “Kom op tegen Kanker” T.K. Kadiyska: None. I. Tourtourikov: None. T. G. Wieme: None. F. Berrevoet: None. A. Vanlander: Boushnakova: None. P. Getsov: None. K. Pavlov: None. None. J. Van Dorpe: None. A. Hoorens: None. M. Van L. Angelova: None. M. Padareva: None. der Linden: None. B. Parton: None. J. Van Limmen: None. A. De Bruyne: None. M. De Man: None. K. P12.131D Geboes: None. K.B.M. Claes: None. Somatic MYO5Bmutations in adrenal neural tumors promote cancer progression P12.130C Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and the spectrum of molecular J. Olausson1, T. Tešan Tomić1, A. Rehammar2, alterations in the STK11 gene in Bulgaria L. Deland1, K. Ejeskär3, S. Nilsson4, A. Muth5, B. Wängberg6, O. Nilsson-Wassén7, F. Abel6 T. K. Kadiyska1, I. Tourtourikov1, T. Boushnakova2, P. Getsov3, K. Pavlov2, L. Angelova4, M. Padareva2 1Inst. Biomedicine, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Inst. Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers Univeristy of 1Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Soﬁa, Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Inst. Biomedicine, Bulgaria, 2Gastroenterology Unit, MBAL “Tsaritsa Skövde University, Skövde, Sweden, 4Inst. Mathematical Yoanna”, Sliven, Bulgaria, 3Radiology Unit, University Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Hospital “Tsaritsa Yoanna - ISUL”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Sweden, 5Section for Endocrine Surgery and Abdominal 4University Hospital “St. Marina”, Varna, Bulgaria Sarcoma, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 6Inst. Biomedicine, Gothenburg University, Introduction: Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS, OMIM Gothenburg, Sweden, 7Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, 175200) is an autosomal dominant hereditary polyposis Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden syndrome. Clinical features include hamartomatous polyps, mucocutaneous pigmentation, and an increased risk for the We recently reported novel recurrent germline and somatic development of gastrointestinal (GI) and various extra-GI mutations in the myosin Vb motor gene (MYO5B) in malignancies. Serine-Threonine Kinase 11 (STK11/LKB1) malignant pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma (PCC/PGL), variants predispose to PJS. an adolescent/adult counterpart to neuroblastoma arising Materials and Methods: In this study, we used direct from the same neural crest origin. Here, we have explored sequencing, followed by MLPA of genomic DNA from 5 the functional impact of three MYO5B missense mutations patients, clinically and histologically suspected for PJS. (p.L587P, p.G1611S, and p.R1641C) with respect to Four of the patients carried out known disease causing proliferation, migration and intracellular trafﬁcking aberrations, while in one of the patients we found a muta- invitro.MYO5BmutatedcDNA clones(pCMV6-MYO5B tion which has not been reported in the literature or recor- Myc-DKK tagged) were generated by site directed ded in mutation databases. mutagenesis and stably transfected into human embryonicAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1595 kidney cells (HEK293) and SK-N-AS neuroblastoma cells. Heterozygous germline PMS2 variants are responsible for All three MYO5B mutants demonstrated a signiﬁcantly about 5% of Lynch syndrome (LS) but their prevalence is increasedproliferation rate comparedto MYO5B wild type most likely underestimated, because of the presence of clones (p<0.001). The Scratch-wound assay also indicated highly homologous pseudogenes, hampering routine and an increased migration rate (p<0.05) in cells harboring the exhaustive screening. Here, we describe a large series of twosomaticvariantsp.L587P(locatedinthemotordomain) PMS2 heterozygous variants identiﬁed in French LS andp.G1611S(locatedinthetaildilutedomain).Moreover, patients. Two hundred variants were identiﬁed in 195 investigating the endocytic recycling pathway by the patients including 114 unique variants classiﬁed as class-3/ transferrin assay showed an increased transferrin uptake in 4/5accordingtoconsensusguidelines.AlthoughSNVsand p.L587P and p.G1611S mutants, indicating a disturbed small insertion/deletions were predominant, genomic rear- intracellulartransport.Immunohistochemistryandtranscrip- rangements accounted for 18% of the alterations. The tomicanalysisof31primaryPCC/PGLtumorcasesshowa c.137G>T variant was observed in 36/195 families, differential expression of MYO5B mRNA and protein accounting for 18% of the PMS2-LS, but the haplotype levels in some malignant PGLs, as well as a changed analysis failed to show a clear founder effect. The median subcellular localization of MYO5B in one PGL case ageatﬁrsttumouronsetinclass4/5variantcarrierswas49, harboring an acquired p.G1611S MYO5B mutation. We and the predominantly observed tumours were colorectal arecurrentlyexploringdownstreameffectsinmutantclones cancers (76.4%) followed by endometrial cancers (8.1%). by expression microarrays to identify the proliferation The earliest age at tumour onset was 21 and 9 patients pathways activated by MYO5B mutations. Our study developed colorectal cancer by the age of 31. By now, no uncovers the functional role of MYO5B in proliferation genotype/phenotypecorrelationwasdetected.Amongcases and migration in adrenal neural tumors, which might with available family history, only 6.8% of class-4/5 improve future therapeutic implication. carriers had a family history fulﬁlling Amsterdam I/II J. Olausson: None. T. Tešan Tomić: None. A. criteria. Tumours from PMS2 variant carriers exhibited Rehammar: None. L. Deland: None. K. Ejeskär: None. microsatellite instability and loss of PMS2 expression in S. Nilsson: None. A. Muth: None. B. Wängberg: None. 96% and 76% of the cases, respectively. These results O. Nilsson-Wassén: None. F. Abel: None. conﬁrm the high predictive value of tumour loss of PMS2 expression and show that, while PMS2 variants are mostly P12.132A detectedinfamiliesnotfulﬁllingAmsterdamcriteria,which Characterization of heterozygous PMS2 variants in supportstheirlowerpenetrance,theycanneverthelesscause French patients with Lynch syndrome colorectal cancers before 31, which highlights the varia- bility of their penetrance. Q. Wang1, J. Leclerc2, G. Bougeard3, S. Olschwang4, Q.Wang:None.J.Leclerc:None.G.Bougeard:None. S. Vasseur3, K. Cassinari3, D. Boidin5, C. Lefol1, S. Olschwang: None. S. Vasseur: None. K. Cassinari: P. Naïbo1, T. Frebourg3, M. Buisine2, S. Baert- None. D. Boidin: None. C. Lefol: None. P. Naïbo: None. Desurmont3, French Consortium of Oncogenetic T. Frebourg: None. M. Buisine: None. S. Baert- laboratories forcolorectal cancers, Unicancer Genetic Desurmont: None. Group (UGG) P12.134C 1Centre Léon Bérard, Joint Constitutional Genetic CooperativeAndrogenandThyroidHormoneSignaling Laboratory HCL-CLB and Cancer Genomics platform, Drives Prostate Cancer Lyon,France,2InsermUMR-S1172,JPAResearchCenter, Lille University, and Department of Biochemistry and O. Aksoy1, J. Pencik1, A. Varady1, A. Moazzami2, MolecularBiology,LilleUniversityHospital,Lille,France, M. Schlederer1, T. Balber3, M. Susani1, M. Hassler4, 3Rouen University Hospital and UNIROUEN, Inserm G. Greiner5, T. Javaheri6, S. Turner7, G. Egger8, U1245 Normandy Centre for Genomic Medicine, Rouen, R. Moriggl9, Z. Culig10, O. Merkel1, L. Kenner1 France, 4Aix Marseille Université, INSERM GMGF UMR S_910; Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital 1Department of Pathology, Medical University Vienna, d'enfants de la Timone & Groupe Ramsay Générale de Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Molecular Sciences, Santé, Hôpital Clairval, Marseille, France, 5Departmentof Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of Agricultural Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Lille University Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Biomedical Hospital, Lille, France Imaging and Image Guided Therapy, Division of Nuclear Medicine, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 4Department of Urology, Medical University Vienna,1596 Vienna, Austria, 5Department of Laboratory Medicine, P12.136A Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 6Ludwig Genotype phenotype associations in a cohort of 1404 Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria, consecutively ascertained retinoblastoma index cases 7Division of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, F. Salviat1, M. Gauthier-Villars2, M. Carton1, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, N. Cassoux3, L. Lumbroso-Le Rouic3, C. Dehainault2, 8Ludwig Boltzmann Institute Applied Diagnostics, Vienna, I. Aerts4, F. Bonnet-Serrano2, S. Hayek2, A. Savignoni1, Austria, 9Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet2,5, C. Houdayer6,7 UniversityofVeterinaryMedicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 10Department of Urology, Innsbruck Medical University, 1Départementderecherchecliniqueetinnovation,Unitéde Innsbruck, Austria Biométrie, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2Service de Génétique, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 3Département Introduction: Androgens drive prostate cancer through d’Oncologiechirurgicale,serviced’Ophtalmologie,Institut androgen receptor signaling and antiandrogen therapy in Curie, Paris, France, 4Département d'Oncologie numerous forms is still key treatment for prostate cancer pédiatrique,InstitutCurie,Paris,France,5UniversitéParis (PC).Inadditiontoandrogens,thyroidhormoneshavebeen Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité et INSERM U830, Paris, shown to promote various cancers including PC. Active France, 6Service de Génétique, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, form of thyroid hormone Triiodothyronine (T3) acts France, 7Inserm U1245, IRIB, Rouen, France through interaction with nuclear receptors (TRβ/TRα) and bindingproteinsincytosolsuchasμ-crystallin(CRYM).In Retinoblastoma (Rb), the most common pediatric intrao- this study, we investigated the interaction of thyroid cular neoplasm, results from inactivation of both alleles of hormone with androgen signaling through its nuclear the RB1 gene. To deepen our understanding of Rb, we receptorbeta(TRβ1)andcytosolicbindingprotein(CRYM) performed genotype-phenotype associations in a cohort of in the progression of prostate cancer. 1404 consecutively ascertained Rb patients i.e. 866 Materials and Methods: Tissue microarray (TMA) unilateralRbs(URb)and538bilateral Rbs(BRb)followed containing patient samples together with cell lines derived between 2000 and 2017. Main characteristics included age from metastases were used to inspect molecular mechan- at diagnosis, sex, laterality, familial history, IRC stage and isms of thyroid hormone driven tumorigenesis. RNA-seq mutational status. Advanced IRC stages D and E were identiﬁed alterations of gene expressions in response thyr- mainly observed (67.1% and 19.4%, respectively). Germ- oid and androgen signalling. Co-immunoprecipitation and linedetectionratewas93.4%forBRband13.0%forURb. yeast two-hybrid were employed to inspect a cross-talk Mutationswerescatteredallalongthecodingsequencewith between androgen and thyroidsignaling.Therapeuticvalue a predominance of truncating mutations. Close to 50% of ofthyroidinhibitionwascarriedoutthroughinvivostudies. ﬁrstandsecondhitsoccurredin6distinctregionsbutthese Results:TRβgenewasidentiﬁedasacommonfeaturein regions differed according to the 1st or second hit drug-resistant tumors, which predicted metastases, and (signiﬁcant for promoter, exons 1, 2 and 24). Compared relapse in PC patients. Thyroid hormone binding protein to nonsense mutations, risk for bilateral Rb was lower for CRYM antagonized thyroid hormone action. Immunopre- missense,largerearrangementandinframesplicemutations cipitation and yeast two-hybrid revealed interaction (p<0.001, p<0.05 and p=0.05 respectively). As compared between androgen receptor (AR) and thyroid receptor togermlinemutationsmaintainingpRb,germlinemutations (TRβ). Inhibition of thyroid hormone signaling resulted in inducingtheabsenceofpRbledtoanearliermedianageat decreased growth of tumor in vivo. diagnosis (9 months vs 12 months, p<0.05), more frequent Conclusion:Inhibitionofthyroidhormonesynthesisand bilateral involvement (84.1% vs 65.2%, p<0.001), and an actionincombinationwithandrogenablationtherapymight advanced IRC stage (85.3% vs 73.9%, p<0.05). Surpris- have a therapeutic relevance by deducing free T3/T4 levels ingly, theoppositewas found for 2nd hits where absence of that might slow down the disease progression and delay pRb was more often associated with unilateral RB (OR = recurrence in patients with PCa. 46.11, p<0.001). This is the largest genotype-phenotype O.Aksoy:None.J.Pencik:None.A.Varady:None.A. studyreportedtodate,openingnewavenuesforanindepth Moazzami:None.M.Schlederer:None.T.Balber:None. understanding of the disease. M. Susani: None. M. Hassler: None. G. Greiner: None. F. Salviat: None. M. Gauthier-Villars: None. M. Car- T.Javaheri:None.S.Turner:None.G.Egger:None.R. ton: None. N. Cassoux: None. L. Lumbroso-Le Rouic: Moriggl: None. Z. Culig: None. O. Merkel: None. L. None. C. Dehainault: None. I. Aerts: None. F. Bonnet- Kenner: None. Serrano: None. S. Hayek: None. A. Savignoni: None. D. Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. C. Houdayer: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1597 P12.137B 1Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Ruxolitinib regulates energy metabolism of multiple University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Department myeloma cells of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary Ç.BirayAvci,B.GokerBagca,N.OzatesAy,A.Kusoglu, Z. Abbaszade, S. Cesmeli, G. Saydam, C. Gunduz Ovariantumorisoneoftheleadingcausesofcanceramong women. It is usually diagnosed at an advanced stage. In Ege University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey search for new speciﬁc and sensitive biomarkers we detected mitochondrial DNA copy number in whole blood Aim: Multiple myeloma is the cancer of bone marrow (wb-mtDNA) and in plasma (cell-free and exosome plasmacells.RuxolitinibwhichisapotentinhibitorofJAK encapsulated mtDNA) in patients with serous epithelial tyrosine kinases is approved for treatment of myeloproli- ovarian tumor. ferative neoplasms. In this study, our purpose was to DNA was isolated from EDTA blood and plasma determine the possible role of ruxolitinib on energy obtained from 24 patients and 24 healthy controls. Exo- metabolism of ARH77 multiple myeloma cells which has somes were isolated from cell-free plasma, and exosomal not been investigated so far. DNA was extracted. Quantitative-real-time PCR was per- Methods: ARH77 multiple myeloma cells were incu- formed with Human Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) Mon- batedviaRPMI-1640medium.Ruxolitinibwasdissolvedin itoring Primer Set. Kruskall-Wallis and Mann-Whitney test DMSO. Seahorse XFp Cell Energy Phenotype Test Kit were used for data analysis. (Agilent) was used to determine the phenotypic effects of Wb-mtDNA copy number was signiﬁcantly different ruxolitinibonenergymetabolismofARH77cells.Changes amonghealthycontrolsandpatientsinmultiplecomparison in expression level of the genes which control energy (p=0.0090 considering FIGO stages independently, and pathways were determined by Glucose Metabolism RT2 p=0.0048 considering early- and late-stage cancers). There Proﬁler PCR Array (Qiagen), RT2 SYBR Green qPCR was a signiﬁcant decrease among early-stage, all advanced Mastermix (Qiagen) and qRT-PCR instrument (Light- stage and all cancer patients (FIGO I: 32.5±8.3, p=0.0061; Cycler480,Roche).Foldchangeswerecalculated via2-ΔΔCt FIGO III+IV: 37.2±13.7 p=0.0139; FIGO I+III+IV: 35.6 quantitation method. ±12.2, p=0.0017) or FIGO III patients alone (32.8±5.6, Results: Ruxolitinib increased oxygen consumption and p=0.0089) compared to healthy controls (48.6±17.1). extracellular acidiﬁcation rates 1.45 and 1.68 folds com- We found signiﬁcant increase in exosomal mtDNA copy pared to control, respectively. Ruxolitinib also regulated number in cancer patients (236.0±499.0, p=0.0155), expression levels of PYGM, PGM2, PHKB, PCK2, H6PD, advanced-stage cancer patients (333.0±575.0, p=0.0095), PDK4andGYS2geneshigherthan2folds,whichregulate FIGO III (362.0±609.2, p=0.0494), and FIGO IV (304.0 cell energy metabolism. ±585.0, p=0.0393) patients alone compared to healthy Conclusion: The results of our study indicate that rux- controls (9.3±7.1) and in multiple comparison considering olitinib genetically regulates cell energy metabolism which early-and late-stagecancers (p=0.0253).Cell-free mtDNA hasnotbeenpreviouslyevaluatedinARH77cells, andthis copy numbers were not increased signiﬁcantly. change is reﬂected in cellular phenotype. Further studies We observed signiﬁcant difference in wb-mtDNA copy which research the potential role of ruxolitinib in energy number in case of early- and late-stage cancer patients and metabolism will provide a new perspective in myeloma in exosomal mtDNA copy number in case of late-stage genetics. cancer patients compared to healthy controls. Ç.BirayAvci:None.B.GokerBagca:None.N.Ozates J.S. Keserű: None. B. Soltész: None. J. Lukács: None. Ay: None. A. Kusoglu: None. Z. Abbaszade: None. S. É.Márton:None.M.Szilágyi-Bónizs:None.A.Penyige: Cesmeli: None. G. Saydam: None. C. Gunduz: None. None. R. Póka: None. B. Nagy: None. P12.138C P12.139D Detection of cell-free, exosomal and whole blood Generation of Single Cell NGS Library with High mitochondrial DNA copy number in plasma or whole Reproducibility, and Greatly Improved Coverage and blood of patients with serous epithelial ovarian cancer Fidelity for Precision Medicine J. S. Keserű1, B. Soltész1, J. Lukács2, É. Márton1, M. Pesant1, F. Sun2, D. Mellacheruvu2, B. Sisay2, M. Szilágyi-Bónizs1, A. Penyige1, R. Póka2, B. Nagy1 J. Langmore2, G. McLean2, A. Farmer2, E. Kamberov21598 1Takara Bio Europe, Saint Germain en Laye, France, 1DepartmentofPediatricHematologyOncology,Schneider 2Takara Bio USA, Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States Children's Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, Introduction: Accurate, reproducible detection of muta- 3Pediatric Genetics Clinic, Schneider Children's Medical tions and copy number variations (CNV) from small Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 4Raphael Recanati Genetics amounts of DNA, including single cells, is key for genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, analysis of clinical samples to assist in identifying the best 5Pediatric Rheumatology Unit, Schneider Children's treatmentregimenandmoleculardiagnosesofdiseasessuch Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 6Felsenstein Medical as cancer. Research Center, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Method: To allow accurate detection of both single Israel,7RegeneronGeneticsCenter,Tarrytown,NY,United nucleotide variants (SNVs) and CNVs, we release an States, 8Genomic Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department enhancedversionofourPicoPLEXchemistrythatimproves of Molecular Biolog, Ariel, Israel, 9Department of sequencing coverage, uniformity, and accuracy while Haematology-Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, increasing the resolution for CNV detection and retaining Toronto, ON, Canada, 10Zane Cohen Centre, Mount Sinai reproducibility.Thisenhancedchemistrynamed SMARTer Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 11Division of Human PicoPLEX Gold Single Cell DNA-Seq Kit (PicoPLEX Genetics,MedicalUniversityInnsbruck,Innsbruck,Austria, Gold) is a single-cell library-prep kit with a simple, four- 12The Arthur and Sonia Labbatt Brain Tumour Research step protocol to convert single cells into NGS libraries in Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, under three hours with minimum hands-on-time. Libraries Canada prepared from single GM12878 cells using the PicoPLEX Gold kit were sequenced on an Illumina® NextSeq® plat- Introduction: Biallelic mutations in any of the four form to a depth of ~35 million read pairs (2x150 cycles). mismatch repair genes MSH2, MSH6, MLH1, and PMS2 Results: PicoPLEX Gold kit generates >50% genome result in one of the most aggressive childhood cancer coverage. This coverage represents a 2-fold improvement predisposition syndromes, termed constitutional mismatch over the original PicoPLEX kit, along with a 4X reduction repair deﬁciency syndrome (CMMRD). In addition to a in duplication rates. The kit detected 3.5X more SNVs very high tumor risk, the CMMRD phenotype is often compared to Multiple Displacement Ampliﬁcation (MDA) characterized by the presence of signs reminiscent of with the same number of reads. PicoPLEX Gold kit pro- neuroﬁbromatosistype1.PediatricSystemicLupusErythe- duced up to 50% lower allele dropin (false-positive) rates matosus (pSLE) is very rare. It has been reported so far in than MDA.The increasedcoverageand lowbias translated three CMMRD patients and has not been considered a to extremely low allele-dropout rates (ADO), ~5X lower diagnostic feature of the syndrome. than MDA. Methods: Two female patients from two different Conclusion:AsinglePicoPLEXGoldkitlibraryenables families diagnosed clinically with pSLE presented with reliable, high-resolution CNV analysis with shallow featuressuggestiveofCMMRDandwerefoundtohavebi- sequencing, and an accurate and reproducible SNV and allelic pathogenic mutations in MSH6. CNV analysis with deeper sequencing. Results: We report two CMMRD female patients diag- M. Pesant: None. F. Sun: None. D. Mellacheruvu: nosed with pSLE and compare them to the three reported None. B. Sisay: None. J. Langmore: None. G. McLean: cases. Hence, there are a total of ﬁve out of approximately None. A. Farmer: None. E. Kamberov: None. 200 (2.5%) currently reported CMMRD patients that also have pSLE. P12.140A Conclusions: Given the rarity of both CMMRD and Pediatric Systemic Lupus Erythematosus as a pSLE this phenotype is signiﬁcant and should be further manifestation of Constitutional mismatch repair explored. pSLE should raise the possible diagnosis of deﬁciency CMMRD if supported by additional indicative features. H. Toledano: None. E. Sofrin: None. N. Orenstein: H. Toledano1,2, E. Sofrin3, N. Orenstein3,2, N. Rurman None.N.Rurman Shahar: None. G.Amarilyo: None. L. Shahar4, G. Amarilyo2,5, L. Basel-Salmon4,2,6, Basel-Salmon: None. A. Shuldiner: A. Employment (full A. Shuldiner7, P. Smirin-Yosef88, N. Lev El4, or part-time); Modest; Regeneron. P. Smirin-Yosef8: M. Aronson9,10, H. AlTarrah9, K. Wimmer11, None.N.LevEl:None.M.Aronson:None.H.AlTarrah: U. Tabori9,12, L. Bazak4, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui7, None. K. Wimmer: None. U. Tabori: None. L. Bazak: Y. Goldberg4 None.C.Gonzaga-Jauregui:A.Employment(fullorpart- time); Modest; Regeneron. Y. Goldberg: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1599 P12.141B Planells: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Impact of Next Generation Sequencing on clinical IMEGEN. practice in a Spanish cohort of paediatric and adult patients with solid tumours P12.142C Assessment of a highly-curated somatic oncology D.A.Garcia-Dios1,C.Perez-Garcia1,M.J.Garcia-Ruiz1, mutationdatabasetofacilitateidentiﬁcationofclinically R. Palomo1, C. Ruiz-Lafora1, C. Lavarino2, N. gene2, important variants in NGS results E. Jantus3, N. Camarasa4, J. Forteza5, C. Camps3, J. Garcia-Planells1 M. Ma, S. Yaung, L. Xi, C. Ju, J. Palma, M. Schmid 1Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna Roche Sequencing Solutions, Inc, Pleasanton, CA, United (Valencia), Spain, 2Fundacion de Investigacion Sant Joan States de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital General de Valencia, Valencia, Spain, 4Hospital de Castellón, Castellon, Spain, Introduction: The increasing adoption of Next Generation 5Instituto Valenciano de Patología/CIPF, Valencia, Spain Sequencing(NGS)inmolecularproﬁlingofcancerpresents a growing need for streamlined interpretation of NGS Survival rates in cancer patients are still improving butat a results in clinical labs. lower rate than the previous decade. There is a clear need Methods:WeperformedaninitialassessmentofanNGS for developing more efﬁcient tests to aid clinicians in result interpretation tool called NAVIFY Mutation Proﬁler choosingtheoptimumtreatmentforeachpatientinaperiod (NMP), which enabled us to process a Variant Call Format of time no longer than 10 days. Next-Generation Sequen- (VCF) ﬁle and generate a report with consensus recom- cing (NGS) has been proven to deliver these results in an mendations of NCCN, ASCO, CAP and ACMG. This excellent manner. In this work, we provide the results annotationtoolidentiﬁespathogenicvariantsandvariantsof obtained in a cohort of 75 adult patients suffering from unknown clinical signiﬁcance (VUS), and groups variants diverse solid tumours as well as 38 paediatric patients. by AMP Tiers. At the time of this assessment, NMP con- Adult patients obtained a signiﬁcantly higher beneﬁt from tained curation for ~4,000 variants. In this study, we used the study. We detected alterations of clinical relevance NGSresultsfrom38anonymizedclinicalcaseswithknown (SNVs,CNVs,fusiongenesandMSI)inmorethan90%of treatment regimens to retrospectively assess NMP as the thecases.Basedontheseresults,25%ofthepatientscould variant interpretation tool. beneﬁt from different therapies including FDA-approved Results: NMP correctly associated EGFR TKI therapies drugs or at least one clinical trial. Besides the somatic options with the corresponding 5 cases. As expected, NMP mutations, 10.7% of the patients harboured a germline did not recommend targeted therapies for the 10 chemo- pathogenic variant that had not previously detected. Out of treatedcontrolcases.ForthesubjectrelapsedagainstEGFR the38paediatricpatients,15hadtheoptiontojoinaclinical TKI, NMP correctly interpreted the complex EGFR muta- trial and another three showed a genetic alteration treatable tion proﬁle containing both activating (L858R) and drug- by an FDA-approved therapy. Germline alterations were resistance (T790M) variants. In addition, out of 22 cases more common in these patients that reached 28.9% of the relapsed against ALK TKI crizotinib, NMP correctly cases. Genetic counselling and family studies were offered marked 14 with crizotinib resistance when a known ALK whenrelevant.Thankstotheresultspresentedinthiswork, variant conferring crizotinib resistance was detected. There several patients beneﬁted from an accurate diagnosis that waslimitedornopublishedclinicalevidencetointerpretthe allowed clinicians to approach new therapeutic options. remaining 8 cases of ALK TKI resistance. Families of paediatric patients were able to identify Conclusions:NMPcorrectlyinterpretedcasescontaining germline mutations carried by some of their members that EGFR and ALK variants in this study. With a highly- were yet unknown. curated knowledge base, this tool simpliﬁes NGS clinical D.A. Garcia-Dios: A. Employment (full or part-time); reporting by identifying clinically actionable mutations. Signiﬁcant; IMEGEN. C. Perez-Garcia: A. Employment M. Ma: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; IMEGEN. M.J. Garcia- Roche Sequencing Solutions, Inc. S. Yaung: A. Employ- Ruiz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Roche Sequencing IMEGEN. R. Palomo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Solutions, Inc. L. Xi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; IMEGEN. C. Ruiz-Lafora: A. Employment Signiﬁcant; Roche Sequencing Solutions, Inc. C. Ju: A. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; IMEGEN. C. Lavarino: Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Roche None. N. gene: None. E. Jantus: None. N. Camarasa: Sequencing Solutions, Inc. J. Palma: A. Employment (full None. J. Forteza: None. C. Camps: None. J. Garcia- orpart-time);Signiﬁcant;RocheSequencingSolutions,Inc.1600 M.Schmid:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; adenocarcinomashedslightonthearchitectureofarare Roche Sequencing Solutions, Inc. sweat gland carcinoma P12.143D H. M. Surowy1, A. K. Giesen1, J. Otte2, R. Büttner3, The development of SureMASTR HRR assay for SNV, D. Falkenstein1, H. Friedl4, F. Meier5, P. Petzsch6, indelandCNV/CNAdetectionin17HRR-relatedtarget T. Wachtmeister6, D. Westphal5, D. Wieczorek1, genes in blood- and FFPE-derived DNA W. Wruck2, J. Adjaye2, A. Rütten7, S. Redler1 D.Salles,K.Bettens,C.DeVogelaere,N.vandenBroeck, 1Heinrich-Heine-University, Medical Faculty, Institute of N. Remmerie, H. Swennen, R. de Smet, J. De Schrijver, Human Genetics, Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, D. Goossens, J. Crappé, J. Del Favero, A. Rotthier 2Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf,, Agilent Technologies, Niel, Belgium Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Pathology, Institute for Pathology, UniversityHospital Cologne, Köln,Germany,4Department Introduction: Growing evidence shows that defects in the of Dermatology, Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, homologous recombination repair (HRR) pathway underlie 5Department of Dermatology, Carl Gustav Carus Medical hereditary and sporadic tumorigenesis and that HRR Center, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, Dresden, deﬁciency may dictate the sensitivity of tumors to cancer Germany, 6Biological and Medical Research Center chemotherapy that rely on defective DNA repair. (BMFZ), Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Methods: The SureMASTR HRR NGS assay contains Düsseldorf, Germany, 7Dermatopathology, Bodensee, 17selectedHRRmostrelevantgenes.These17geneswere Friedrichshafen, Bodensee, Germany selected based on mutational analysis of a 52 HRR gene panel in 300 high-grade serous ovarian cancer samples, Background: Sweat gland carcinomas are rare cutaneous together with the most recent literature research and input adnexal malignancies. Aggressive digital papillary adeno- from Key Opinion Leaders. The panel is comprised of the carcinoma (ADPA) represents a very rare sub-entity, full coding region of: ATM, BARD1, BRCA1, BRCA2, thought to arise almost exclusively from sweat glands of BRIP1, CDK12, CHEK1, CHEK2, FANCA, FANCL, NBN, the ﬁngers and toes. The aetiology of sweat gland PALB2, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, RAD54L and TP53. carcinomas and ADPA is largely unknown. ADPAs are Results: The SureMASTR HRR workﬂow was devel- mostlikelydrivenbysomaticmutations.However,somatic oped as a single tube assay, together with the MASTR mutation patterns are largely unexplored, creating barriers Reporter software application, to enable data quality con- to the development of effective therapeutic approaches to trol, detection of SNPs, indels and CNV/CNAs in the the treatment of ADPA. Objective: To investigate the coding regions of 17 selected genes, compromising 1164 transcriptome proﬁle of ADPA using a sample of eight amplicons, from blood and FFPE derived DNA. The assay formalin-ﬁxed,parafﬁnembedded(FFPE)tissuesamplesof is optimized for cost-efﬁcient use of the NGS capacity and ADPA and healthy control tissue. shown to obtain (i) excellent target read mapping (>98%), Methods: Transcriptome proﬁling was performed using (ii) uniformity of ampliﬁcation >96% within 0,2X mean the Affymetrix PrimeView Human Gene Expression coverage and (iii) low primer dimer (2%). Testing was Microarray and ﬁndings were validated via reverse- performed on Illumina’s MiSeq and NextSeq sequencers. transcription of RNA and real-time qPCR. Conclusions: The SureMASTR HRR assay is a single Results: Transcriptome analyses showed increased plex assay covering 17 most relevant HRR pathway genes, tumour expression of 2,266 genes, with signiﬁcant invol- signiﬁcantly reducing the hands-on time, DNA input, vement of cell cycle, ribosomal and crucial cancer path- required sequencing capacity and, in combination with the ways. Our results furthermore point to tumour- MASTR Reporter data analysis, to provide an accurate and overexpression of FGFR2 (p = 0.001). precise workﬂow. Conclusions: Our results indicate the involvement of D. Salles: None. K. Bettens: None. C. De Vogelaere: crucial oncogenic driver pathways, highlighting cell cycle None.N.vandenBroeck:None.N.Remmerie:None.H. and ribosomal pathways in the aetiology of ADPA. Sug- Swennen: None. R. de Smet: None. J. De Schrijver: gested tumour-overexpression of FGFR2 raises the hope None. D. Goossens: None. J. Crappé: None. J. Del that targeting the FGF/FGFR axis might be a promising Favero: None. A. Rotthier: None. treatment for ADPA and probably for the overall group of sweat gland carcinomas. Currently transcriptome proﬁling P12.144A is performed in a large sample of eccrine porocarcinoma, Gene expression proﬁling in aggressive digital papillary the most common sub-entity of sweat gland carcinomas. AAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1601 combinedanalysisofthetwoentitiesiscurrentlyperformed represent a low-risk BC allele. However, large case control to ﬁgure out common and speciﬁc pathways. studies, particularly in Balkan populations where it is H.M.Surowy:None.A.K.Giesen:None.J.Otte:None. probably more common, are warranted to conﬁrm our R.Büttner:None.D.Falkenstein:None.H.Friedl:None. ﬁndings. F. Meier: None. P. Petzsch: None. T. Wachtmeister: V. Trpchevska: None. M. Jakimovska: None. K. None. D. Westphal: None. D. Wieczorek: None. W. Kubelka-Sabit: None. M. Karagjozov: None. E. Lazar- Wruck: None. J. Adjaye: None. A. Rütten: None. S. ova: None. S. Smichkoska: None. D. Plaseska- Redler: None. Karanﬁlska: None. P12.146 P12.147D CTP53 c.847C&gtT (p.Arg283Cys) variant: A low-risk Balanced and unbalanced translocations in a series of breast cancer variant? 2,543 patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia V. Trpchevska1, M. Jakimovska1, K. Kubelka-Sabit2, D. Costa1, I. Granada2, B. Espinet3, R. Collado4, M. Karagjozov2, E. Lazarova3, S. Smichkoska3, A. Carrió1, N. Ruiz-Xivillé2, A. Puiggros3, M. Uribe4, D. Plaseska-Karanﬁlska1 J. Delgado1 1RCGEB “Georgi D. Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of 1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Germans Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, 3Hospital del Mar, Yugoslav Republicof, 2ClinicalHospital Acibadem Sistina, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital General Universitario, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, Valencia, Spain 3University Clinic of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Medical Faculty, University “Ss Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, Introduction: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of mostcommonleukemiaofadultsinWesterncountries,and has a highly variable clinical course. Clonal chromosomal Introduction: Based on ACMG criteria and ClinVar data, aberrationscanbedetectedin40-50%orinmorethan80% TP53 c.847C>T (p.Arg283Cys) represents a variant of of cases depending on the mitogenic agents used. The unknownsigniﬁcance.Ithasbeendetectedasgermlineand common recurrent abnormalities are del(13q)[50%], tris- somaticmutationindifferentcancers,butalsoincontrols.It omy 12 [15%], del(11q)[15-20%], del(6q) and del(17p) is also reported in population databases (gnomAD, ExAC) [5%] and t/der(14)(q32) [4-20%]. Chromosomal transloca- with a low frequency. Using transactivation activity, it has tions in CLL are uncommon and most of them occurred been classiﬁed as partially-deﬁcient allele, associated with within complex karyotypes. OBJECTIVE: To report the mild disease course. translocations identiﬁed in patients with CLL diagnosed in Material and methods: Aiming to clarify the clinical three different centers: Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, signiﬁcance of c.847C>T we studied 1061 breast cancer Hospital Trias i Pujol de Badalona Hospital del Mar de (BC) patients and 1490 controls from the general popula- BarcelonaandConsorcioHospitalGeneralUniversitariode tion. The methodology included multigene panel testing on Valencia. MiSeq platform and allele-speciﬁc PCR. Results:Twohundredandthirty-one(9%)translocations Results: Compared to the published allele frequencies were identiﬁed in 2,543 CLL patients, 172 (74%) balanced (0.02%),c.847C>Tvariantwassigniﬁcantlymorecommon and 59 (26%) unbalanced. All chromosomeswere found to amongourBCpatients(10/2122or0.47%),butalsoamong be involved in translocations, with the single exception of our controls (10/2980 or 0.34%). The majority of BC the Y chromosome. The chromosomes most frequently patientscarryingc.847C>Tmutationshadductal,ER+,PR involved were chromosome 14 (n=35), 17 (n=29), 2 +, HER2- BC. Seven of the 10 BC patients had familial (n=24),1(n=21),3(n=13),5(n=12),8,18(n=11)and10 history for cancer (four of them for BC/OC), but none of (n=10). The recurrent translocation most frequently them met the Li-Fraumeni syndrome criteria. Only one observed was t(14;18)(q32;q21)(n=28). Translocations patienthadco-inheritedpathogenicmutationinothercancer were found in karyotypes as the unique chromosomal gene (BRCA2 c.6937+1G>A) and somatic pathogenic abnormality (27%), associated with another chromosomal TP53 mutations were identiﬁed in two of the four studied abnormality (25%), and as a part of a complex breast tumors. karyotype (47%). Conclusion: Here, we report the highest frequency of Conclusion: The infrequency of translocations in CLL TP53 c.847C>T variant, detected among population of R. makes their identiﬁcation and reporting interesting for the Macedonia. We further suggest that TP53 c.847C>T might1602 recognition of the recurrent ones and the genes involved in P12.149B this neoplasia. NGS panel testing of negative BRCA1/2 index patients D. Costa: None. I. Granada: None. B. Espinet: None. with Triple-Negative Breast Cancer in Cyprus R. Collado: None. A. Carrió: None. N. Ruiz-Xivillé: None. A. Puiggros: None. M. Uribe: None. J. M. Zanti1,2,3, M. A. Loizidou1,3, K. Michailidou1,3, Delgado: None. P. Pirpa1, C. Machattou1, Y. Markou4, F. Kyriakou4, E. Kakouri4, G. M. Spyrou2,3, K. Kyriacou1,3, P12.148A A. Hadjisavvas1,3 High prevalence of BRCA mutations among Slovenian triple-negative breast cancer patients 1Department ofElectronMicroscopy/MolecularPathology, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, M. Banjac, A. Blatnik, K. Strojnik, V. Stegel, Cyprus, 2Bioinformatics Group, The Cyprus Institute of S. Novakovic, V. Setrajcic Dragos, P. Skerl, G. Klancar, Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Cyprus School M. Krajc of Molecular Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Departments of Medical Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia andRadiationOncology,BankofCyprusOncologyCenter, Nicosia, Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus Introduction: Genetic testing of ovarian cancer patients yieldsahighrateofBRCA-positiveresultsintheSlovenian Introduction: Triple-Negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an population. Here, we present genetic testing results in our aggressiveformofbreastcancer(BC),characterizedbylack breastcancer(BC)populationfulﬁllingthehereditarybreast of expression of the estrogen and progesterone receptors, and ovarian cancer (HBOC) testing criteria with an andthehumanepidermal growthfactor receptor 2(HER2). emphasis on triple negative (TN) cancers. The aim of this study was to assess the distribution of Methods: We analysed 402 consecutive BC cases tested germlinemutationsincancersusceptibilitygenesinCypriot usingamultigenesequencingpanel.Weevaluatedmutation TNBC patients that tested negative for theBRCA1/2genes. detection rates in BC-associated genes according to oes- Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA from 124 trogene/progesterone (ER/PR) and human epidermoid TNBC patients was sequenced using the TruSight Cancer growthfactor(HER2)receptorstatusandfurthersubdivided panel (Illumina). We followed the Genome Analysis TN (ER-/PR-/HER2-) BC patients according to their age at ToolKit guidelines and all variants were veriﬁed by Sanger diagnosis and family history of HBOC-associated disease. Sequencing. Rare variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS) Results: Pathogenic variants (PV) were detected in 81/ were evaluated using in-silico pathogenicity prediction 402 (19.9%) BC patients in 6 different genes (54.3% algorithms and variants predicted as deleterious, were BRCA1, 18.5% BRCA2, 11.1% CHEK2, 8.6% ATM, 6.2% selectedforfurtherinvestigation.Varioustoolswereusedto PALB2 and 1.2% TP53). 17.7% of ER+/PR+/HER2- BC predict the effect of VUS on protein structure and stability. patientscarriedaPV,12.0%wereBRCA1/BRCA2-positive. Results: Five mutations in BC susceptibility genes IntheHER2+group,14%werePVcarriers–onlyBRCA2 (PALB2(4) & TP53(1)) and ﬁve mutations in genes not variants were seen (6%) with no BRCA1-positive cases. proven to be associated with BC (ERCC2(1), ERCC5(1), 37.9% of our 87 TN BC patients were PV carriers. Most FANCL(1) and PRF1(2)) were found in10 TNBC patients. (29.9%) were BRCA1-positive, followed by PALB2 (3.4%) In addition, 20 VUS in established and promising BC and BRCA2 (2.3%). TN BC patients with a positive family susceptibility genes were predicted as deleterious, out of history (59.8%) were more likely to be BRCA1/BRCA2- which six were identiﬁedinmore than onesample(PALB2 positive (38.5% vs. 22.9%). When stratiﬁed according to (3),RAD51C(2),BRIP1(3),CHEK2(2),ATM(2),PMS2(3)). age at diagnosis, BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation detection rate Conclusions: In summary, ﬁve deleterious mutations was66.7%betweenages20-30,45.8%betweenages30-40, wereidentiﬁedinﬁveCypriotTNBCpatientsinestablished 31.0%betweenages40-50and18.2%betweenages50-60. BC susceptibility genes other than the BRCA genes Conclusions: Testing our TN BC patients produces a (4.03%).Functionalstudies,case-controlassociationstudies high diagnostic yield, possibly due to a high frequency of and/or co-segregation analyses are needed to evaluate the BRCA1 carriers in the Slovene population. VUS for potential pathogenicity. Grant: EU H2020; M.Banjac:None.A.Blatnik:None.K.Strojnik:None. 669026; Establishment of the Bioinformatics Chair at the V. Stegel: None. S. Novakovic: None. V. Setrajcic Dra- CING (BIORISE) gos: None. P. Skerl: None. G. Klancar: None. M. M.Zanti:None.M.A.Loizidou:None.K.Michailidou: Krajc: None. None. P. Pirpa: None. C.Machattou: None. Y. Markou: None. F. Kyriakou: None. E. Kakouri: None. G.M.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1603 Spyrou: None. K. Kyriacou: None. A. patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Hadjisavvas: None. Genomics, Inc. Y. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest P12.150C (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Ultra-high multiplexed 20,000-amplicon NGS panel for Signiﬁcant;ParagonGenomics,Inc.C.Li:A.Employment tumor mutational burden (TMB) analysis using a rapid (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. 4-hour workﬂow Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. E.Jan,L.Lee,K.Pendleton,Y.Liu,C.Li,L.Lin,G.Liu, L. Lin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Z. Liu ParagonGenomics,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc., Hayward, CA, United States Paragon Genomics, Inc. G. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Own- Introduction: In the immuno-oncology ﬁeld, tumor muta- ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intel- tional burden (TMB)isgainingsigniﬁcant importancewith lectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. Z. its correlation to patient response to checkpoint inhibitor Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Para- chemotherapy. TMB is generally calculated using whole gon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock exomesequencingusinglaborioushybrid-capture methods. options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; However, targeted sequencing provides better coverage of Paragon Genomics, Inc.. regions of interest at reduced costs. Here we present ® CleanPlex technology for TMB analysis, a 4-hour cost- P12.151D effective target enriched NGS library preparation method. Inﬂuence of the tumorsuppressor gene ITIH5 on We demonstrate excellent performance metrics using a different cervical carcinoma cell-speciﬁc 3D highly-multiplexed NGS panel that contains ~20,000 tumorspheroid models amplicons covering 355 genes for TMB assessment. Methods: Input of 20 ng of genomic DNA was used to C. Backsch1, A. K. Daum1, A. Gille1, M. Stein1, generate CleanPlex sequencing-ready libraries in a 3-step L.Jansen1,J.Clement2,W.Weigand3,I.B.Runnebaum1, workﬂow combining target enrichment and library pre- M. Dürst1 paration.Theprotocolincludesanultra-highmultiplexPCR step to amplify ~20,000 target regions of interest, a back- 1Department of Gynaecology and Reproductive Medicine, groundcleaningsteptoremovenon-speciﬁcPCRproducts, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany, 2Department of and a ﬁnal PCR to add Illumina® sequencing adapters and Hematology and Medical Oncology, Jena University sample indexes. Libraries were sequenced on Illumina Hospital, Jena, Germany, 3Institute for Inorganic and ® NextSeq platform. Sequencing metrics like on-target rates Analytical Chemistry, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, werecalculated, andvariants wereidentiﬁedusing Paragon Jena, Germany Genomics’ variant calling algorithm. Results: Using CleanPlex technology, this prototype Introduction: Progression from human papillomavirus- TMBpanelexhibits>95%uniformityat0.2Xmean,limited induced premalignant cervical intra-epithelial neoplasia to GC bias, and >94% detection rate for mutants with 5% cervical cancer is driven by genetic and epigenetic events. allele frequencies. CleanPlex background cleaning step is Previous studies revealed a progressive down-regulation of essential and removes undesirable PCR by-products. the gene ITIH5 in the course of cervical carcinogenesis. Conclusion: CleanPlex technology is an ultra-high mul- Functional in vitro analyses conﬁrmed a suppressive effect tiplexed PCR-based technology that generates consistent, ofITIH5onrelevantmechanisms for cancerprogressionin high quality amplicon libraries with high uniformity, low conventional two-dimensional cell culture. Aim of the GC bias, and sensitive variant calling even with ~20,000 current study is to investigate the inﬂuence of ITIH5 (with amplicons andwithaworkﬂowunder4hoursandidealfor and without use of cytostatics) on different cervical TMB analysis. carcinoma cell-speciﬁc 3D-tumorspheroid models. E.Jan:None.L.Lee:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Materials and Methods: ITIH5 was ectopically over- Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest expressed in SiHa and HeLa cells using retroviral trans- (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); duction. Cell line speciﬁc multicellular tumor spheroids Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. K. Pendleton: A. (MCTS) are generated using the hanging-drop method. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Proliferation-, migration-, invasion- as well as live/dead Genomics,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, assaysandimmunohistochemicalanalysesareperformedto1604 investigate the inﬂuence of ITIH5 on MCTS formation deletions in CDKN2A/2B genes. A total of 65.2% of before and after treatment with different cytostatics. patients had somatic defects in one of the two analyzed Results:Functionally,ITIH5overexpressionsigniﬁcantly genes ofwhich18.5%hadonlyadeletionofCDKN2A/2B suppressed tumor spheroid growth and spheroid invasive- genes,24.1%hadamutationintheFGFR3geneand22.6% ness in both, SiHa and HeLa spheroids. Immunohisto- had a combination of both defects. The most common chemical analyses revealed a signiﬁcant reduction in cell mutation was S249C (32.1%) followed by Y375C (6.5%). proliferationandhypoxiaaswellasanincreaseinapoptosis No signiﬁcant difference was found in the distribution of uponITIH5overexpression.Sofar,analteredsusceptibility these defects between men and women, whereas a higher on cervical MCTS to routinely used cytostatic drug treat- frequency of defects were detected in patients >50 (64.6) ment could be not observed. Investigations with novel compared to patients <50 years of age (28.5) (p<0.05). cytotoxic metal complexes are also ongoing. Thesedefectswerefound withhigherfrequencyinpatients Conclusions: Our results provide further evidence of with early stage (77.3%) compared to patients with more ITIH5 possessing tumor suppressive properties in cervical advanced disease (30.0%) (p<0.05). Our results indicate carcinogenesis. Possible effects of ITIH5 itself and on that molecular defects in FGFR3 and/or CDKN2A/2B are chemotherapy of cervical carcinoma cell lines using 3D important factors in the initiation of the urothelial tumorspheroid models may provide a new approach for cancerogeneis in patients with bladder cancer. individualised therapy of cervical cancer in the future. K.PopovskaJankovic:None.G.Bozinovski: None.Z. C. Backsch: None. A.K. Daum: None. A. Gille: None. Popov: None. A.J. Dimovski: None. M. Stein: None. L. Jansen: None. J. Clement: None. W. Weigand: None. I.B. Runnebaum: None. M. P12.153B Dürst: None. Population-based analysis of germline variations in the BAP1 gene in patients with uveal melanoma P12.152A FGFR3 and/or CDKN2A/2B somatic mutations are P.E.Repo1,2,R.Järvinen1,2,J.E.Jäntti1,S.Markkinen1, present with high frequency in patients with early stage M. Täll2, V. Raivio2, J. A. Turunen1,2, T. T. Kivelä2 urothelial cancer 1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, K. Popovska Jankovic1, G. Bozinovski1, Z. Popov1,2,3, 2University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, A. J. Dimovski1 Helsinki, Finland 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Pathogenic germline variants in BRCA1-associated protein Biotechnology,MacedonianAcademyofSciencesandArts, 1(BAP1)genecauseBAP1tumorpredispositionsyndrome Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, (BAP1-TPDS) with increased risk of several cancers, 2Zan Mitrev Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former especially uveal melanoma (UM). Pathogenicity of loss- Yugoslav Republic of, 3University Clinic for Urology, of-function BAP1 variants is clear, as opposed to missense UKIM-Faculty of Medicine, Universtity "Ss Cyril and and regulatory region variants. We sequenced coding, Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav promoter,UTR,andintronicregionsofBAP1andanalyzed Republic of copy number variations in a nation-wide study, enrolling 432 of 533 consecutive Finnish UM patients diagnosed Urothelialcancerisoneofthemostcommontypeofcancer from 2010 to 2017, and one Finnish-Swedish UM family. worldwide and the molecular defects associated with the We analyzed BAP1 functions necessary for tumor suppres- initiation of this tumor has great clinical importance. sionusingnuclearlocalizationanddeubiquitinatingactivity Several studies have implicated the involvement of FGFR3 assays.Wefoundtwentyrarevariants,andclassiﬁedﬁveof and CDKN2A/2B genes in urothelial cancerogenesis. We themaslikelypathogenic.TwoLOFvariants(c.67+1G>T; evaluated the frequency of the most common mutations in c.1780_1781insT)areputativefounder mutations,andboth theFGFR3geneanddeletionsoftheCDKN2A/2Bgenesin abolished nuclear localization in vitro. The former as well snap-frozen tumors from 196 patients (163 males, 33 astwoheterozygousexon5(c.281A>G)and9(c.680G>A) females) with early stage bladder cancers collected missensevariantsreduceddeubiquitinatingactivity.Adeep immediately after surgery. The methodology included intronic 25bp deletion in intron 1 caused aberrant splicing SNaPshot analysis for nine variants in FGFR3 gene in vitro. Based on functional studies and family cancer (S249C, Y375C, R248C, G372C, A393C, K652E/Q and history, three exon 13 missense variants were classiﬁed as K652M/T) and MLPA analysis for determination of benign. No copy number variations were found. FrequencyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1605 of pathogenic variants was 1.9% (95% conﬁdence interval, was found between mRNA expression levels of β-catenin 0.8-3.6) overall and 25% among 16 UM families. To andmetastasisinlymphnodes.Asfarasbreastcarcinomas establish the pathogenicity of BAP1 variants, family cancer are concerned, increased relative mRNA expression levels history and functional assays are essential. Pathogenic of Wnt3 and β-catenin were found in 49% and 24% of variants outside BAP1 coding region can cause BAP1- carcinomas, respectively. Interestingly, decreased relative TPDS. mRNA expression levels were observed in Frizzled7 in Funding: the Helsinki University Hospital Research 84% of the cases. Expression levels of β-catenin were sig- Fund; the Cancer Foundation; the Sigrid Jusélius Founda- niﬁcantly correlated with patients’ age and tumour grade, tion; the Eye and Tissue Bank Foundation; the Folkhälsan whereas expression levels of Wnt3 were signiﬁcantly cor- Research Foundation; the Eye Foundation; the Mary and related with tumour grade and expression levels of Georg C. Ehrnrooth Foundation. β-catenin. P.E.Repo:None.R.Järvinen:None.J.E.Jäntti:None. Conclusions: The study of Wnt pathway components is S. Markkinen: None. M. Täll: None.V. Raivio: None. J. of potential clinical importance considering the emergence A. Turunen: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers of prognostic and predictive biomarkers for the adminis- bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Thea Fin- tration of targeted therapies against Wnt pathway ligands land, Blueprint Genetics. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; and receptors, which are used in ongoing clinical trials. Modest; Novartis Finland. T.T. Kivelä: D. Speakers M. Michelli: None. A. Zougros: None. I. Chatzian- Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert dreou: None. N.V. Michalopoulos: None. G. Theodor- witness); Modest; Santen Finland. opoulos: None. E. Patsouris: None. A.A. Saetta: None. P12.154C P12.155D Expression of Wnt signalling pathway in colorectal and Mutational landscape of the nucleotide excision repair breast cancer: Clinicopathological associations (NER) deﬁciency revealed from skin tumours of the Xeroderma pigmentosum subgroups M. Michelli1, A. Zougros1, I. Chatziandreou1, N.V.Michalopoulos2,G.Theodoropoulos3,E.Patsouris1, A.A.Yurchenko1,H.Fassihi2,A.Lehmann3,A.Sarasin4, A. A. Saetta1 P. Kannouche5, S. Nikolaev1 11st Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, 1INSERM U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Université Paris Saclay, Villejuif, France, 2National Greece, 2Department of Surgery, Attikon Hospital, School Xeroderma Pigmentosum Service, St John’s Institute of of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Dermatology, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Athens, Athens, Greece, 31st Department of Propaedeutic Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Genome Damage and Surgery, Hippokrateion Hospital, School of Medicine, Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton, United National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Kingdom, 4Laboratory of Genetic Instability and Greece Oncogenesis, UMR8200 CNRS, University Paris-Sud, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 5UMR8200 Introduction: Wnt pathway regulates important cell CNRS, Stabilité Génétique et Oncogenèse, Gustave Roussy functions such as proliferation and migration and is Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France dysregulated in colorectal and breast cancer. Thus, it is considered an attractive therapeutic target with many drugs Rare autosomal disease Xeroderma Pigmentosum (XP) is being investigated in clinical trials. characterisedby1000timesincreasedriskofskincancer.8 MaterialsandMethods:TherelativemRNAexpression XP subgroups can be classiﬁed as deﬁcient in only global levels of Wnt3 ligand, Frizzled7 receptor, and β-catenin in NER (E, C); in both global and transcription coupled NER 102 samples of colon cancer and 88 samples of breast (A, B, D, G, F) and in translesion synthesis (V). We cancerweredeterminedbyRT-PCRandtheΔΔCtmethod. characterised genomic mutational landscapes of skin Results: Regarding colorectal carcinomas, increased tumours (n=10) in XPC, XPD and XPV subgroups relative mRNA expression levels of Wnt3 and Frizzled7 representing different types of deﬁciencies and compared were found in 60% and 53% whereas decreased mRNA themwithtumourtypematchedsporadiccancersinorderto expression levelsof β-cateninwere observedin 57% ofthe reveal their unique mutagenic properties. XPC samples cases respectively.Statistically signiﬁcantlinear correlation werecharacterisedbyhighmutationload(80mut/Mb)with was observed between theexpression ofWnt3 orFrizzled7 3.5timesmoredi-nucleotidemutations(CC>TT15%)than and β-catenin. In addition, statistical signiﬁcant correlation in normal samples and very strong transcriptional bias in1606 intensivelytranscribedgenes(1:5.5vs.1:1.5).Excessinthe 18p11.23) revealed a more complex mosaic with two dis- mutation load in XPC in late replication was lower than in tinctcelllines:~70%ofcellscarriedamicrodeletionofthe sporadic cancers (1.5 times, vs. 2.5 times). XPD tumour 18p subtelomeric region, and ~30% the large 18p- deletion demonstrated unique signature of transcription coupled (involving 18p11.23). In oral buccosa of the mother the damage on actively transcribed genes and absence of ratio was 95% microdeletion and 5% larger deletion. The mutation enrichment in the late replicating regions. XPV karyotypes including FISH of the father and one brother tumors were characterised by unique mutational signature were normal. SNP array analysis in the mother and FISH with excess of CpCpN>CpTpN mutations and depletion of analysis in the second brother are currently underway. mutations in late replicating regions. NpCpG context was While deletions involving chromosome 18 are common, particularly mutable in XPV and XPD skin tumours. mosaicismforstructuralrearrangementsisexceedinglyrare. Moreover striking unique mutational properties of XP This is the ﬁrst report of mosaicism for two different size subgroups in the context of nucleosomes and replication deletions of chromosome 18p with vertical transmission of fork polarity were observed. Our results reveal unique the larger deletion to a symptomatic daughter. mutagenic properties of major NER elements which can be L. Pölsler: None. M. Locher: None. M. Obwegeser: mechanistically associated with the diverse syndrome None. C. Fauth: None. J. Zschocke: None. S. manifestations in XP patients and shed light on our Rudnik: None. understanding of repair of UV damage in humans. A.A. Yurchenko: None. H. Fassihi: None. A. Leh- P13.02B mann: None. A. Sarasin: None. P. Kannouche: None. S. Extrapineal melatonin synthesis during aging Nikolaev: None. B. Popovic P13 Institute of Human Genetics, School of Dental Medicine, Basic mechanisms in molecular and cytogenetics Belgrade, Serbia P13.01A Diminished expression of many antioxidant factors during Maternal mosaicism involving different 18p (micro-) agingcouldberesponsiblefordevelopingofmanydiseases deletions transmitted as a typical 18p deletion to a associatedwithaging.Oneofthemostimportantscavenger patient with De Grouchy syndrome I of ROS, with more efﬁcient properties than classical antioxidant enzymes, is melatonin. The goal of our study L. Pölsler1, M. Locher1, M. Obwegeser2, C. Fauth1, was to better understand the role of melatonin in the J. Zschocke1, S. Rudnik1 antioxidant defense during aging in extrapineal organs. Since two key enzymes are involved in melatonin 1Division of Human Genetics; Medical University synthesis, AA-NAT and ASMT, their gene expression was Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Pediatrics evaluated in the brain, liver, kidney, heart, skin, and intes- and Adolescent Medicine, LKH Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria tine, of 2.5 and 36-months-old Wistar rats. Also, as mela- tonin might inﬂuence the expression of antioxidant Complete loss of the short arm of chromosome 18 (18p- enzymes, the activity of SOD, CAT, and GSH in liver was deletion syndrome or DeGrouchy syndrome I) causes estimated. In addition, microelements (Cu, Zn,and Mn) cognitive impairment, ptosis, structural brain malforma- were also measured in liver due to their role in regulating tions,andotherfeatures.Wedescribeafamilyinwhichthe the activity of antioxidant enzymes. mother of a child with 18p- syndrome showed several The ﬁnding of signiﬁcantly increased expression of AA- differentmosaic18pdeletions.Indexpatientwasa10-year- NAT and HIOMT in liver and skin of older animals sug- old girl with intellectual disability (IQ 60), ptosis, white gests that all organs do notage at thesame rate. Moreover, matter abnormalities and mild facial dysmorphism. Her themaintainingofantioxidantdefenseinliverduringaging mother and two older brothers were healthy but had mild was conﬁrmed by our results that the activity of CAT learning disability. enzymewassigniﬁcantlyhigherinolderones,SODactivity SNP array in the girl showed near-total loss of 18p (14,7 was decreased, while in both age groups there were no MB deletion). Chromosome analysis of the mother indi- differences in GSH activity. Also, a less amount of micro- cated a normal karyotype in 20/30 metaphases, with 18p elements in liver leads to decreased activity of SOD and deletion in 10/30 metaphases (33%). Interphase FISH with increased activity of CAT in older animals. probes for the subtelomeric (D18S552, Vysis) and a more proximal region (RP11-620N7, Empire Genomics, maps toAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1607 In all, metabolic products of melatonin, the antioxidant C.Jimenez:None.S.Monzón:None.I.Cuesta:None.M. enzymes and microelements in extrapineal organs have an Huch: None. B. Martinez-Delgado: None. important role in the aging process. B. Popovic: None. P13.04D Whole-exome sequencing identiﬁes heterozygous de P13.03C novo stop-loss mutations in HBB resulting in an Transcriptomic analysis of liver organoids reveals elongated β-globin chain in two children with severe altered metabolic pathways in alpha 1 antitrypsin anemia deﬁciency T. T. Koopmann1, G. W. E. Santen1, Q. Waisﬁsz2, G. Gomez-Mariano1, N. Matamala1, S. Martínez1, M. W. Elting2, F. J. Smiers1, J. L. Kerkhoffs3, P. J. de I. Justo2, A. Marcacuzco2, C. Jimenez2, S. Monzón3, Pagter1, C. L. Harteveld1 I. Cuesta3, M. Huch4, B. Martinez-Delgado1 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Health Carlos III 2Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 2General and Digestive Surgery Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Haga Hospital, The Hague, Department. Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, Netherlands 3BioinformaticsUnit,InstituteofHealthCarlosIII(ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 4Wellcome Trust–Medical Research Background: β-Thalassemia is a genetic disease character- Council Stem Cell Institute. University Cambridge, ized by reduced or absence of β-globin gene (HBB) Cambridge, United Kingdom expression.SomemutationsinHBBmayproduceunstable, abnormal hemoglobins causing (haemolytic) anemia or Introduction:Alpha-1antitrypsindeﬁciency(AATD)isan dominantly inherited β -thalassemia. inherited disorder associated with lung and liver disease. Methods: Two unrelated children presented with mac- The most common deﬁciency allele is the Z allele rocephaly and severe congenital anemia. They required (Glu342Lys), which causes AAT polymerization and stem cell transplantations at ages 2 and 4 without clear accumulation within the hepatocytes, and predisposes to diagnosis.Sincetheparentsofbothprobandshadnofamily neonatal hepatitis, hepatic cirrhosis and hepatocellular history of anemia or abnormal Hb, thalassemia was carcinoma. In addition, the reduction of circulating AAT unsuspected. As genetic testing for variants in genes asso- leads to lung tissue damage. Our objective was to study ciated with congenital anemia did not result in an expla- hepatic disease in organoids from patients with AATD nation for the phenotype, whole-exome sequencing was using RNA sequencing technology. performed. Materials and Methods: We have established liver Results:Weidentiﬁedtwonovel,denovomissensestop- organoidsfromAATDpatientsandcontrols.Organoidsare loss mutations in HBB (c.422T>C and c.422T>A). The 3Dculturesystemsinwhichadultstemcellsdifferentiateto mutations identiﬁed caused the loss of a stop codon and an specialized cells under the appropriate culture conditions. elongation of the translated β-globin chain of 21 amino We have performed RNA sequencing of liver organoids acids (167 a.a. instead of the usual 146) fromcontrolsandpatientswithZZgenotypewithTruSeq™ due to a new stop codon in the 3' untranslated region Stranded mRNA (Illumina) using a NextSeq System de (3'UTR) of the HBB gene. The predicted β-globin chains Illumina. We have determined differentially expressed were p.(*148Glnext*21) or p.(*148Lysext*21); the latter genes between control and ZZ organoids and identiﬁed the variant was called HbMokum. pathways enriched for these genes. Discussion: Using whole-exome sequencing, we identi- Results: The transcriptomic analysis revealed 157 dif- ﬁed a de novo mutation in two previously undiagnosed ferentially expressed genes in ZZ organoids versus control. children with severe anemia. Both children carry an almost Interestingly,anumberofgenesalteredinZZorganoidsare identical heterozygous stop-loss mutation in HBB resulting involved in glycan biosynthesis and metabolism, speciﬁ- inanelongatedβ-globinchain, whichmostlikelyproduces cally glucosaminoglycans and glucoesphingolipids. an unstable hemoglobin. Frameshift mutations in the HBB Conclusions: We have identiﬁed new molecular targets gene resulting in elongated β-globin chain have been and pathways involved in AATD hepatic disease. Our describedbefore,butresultedinshorterβ-chains(max.157 results demonstrate that organoids are appropriate systems a.a.) and milder phenotypes than the mutations for modeling hepatic disease in AATD. described here. G. Gomez-Mariano: None. N. Matamala: None. S. T.T. Koopmann: None. G.W.E. Santen: None. Q. Martínez: None. I. Justo: None. A. Marcacuzco: None. Waisﬁsz: None. M.W. Elting: None. F.J. Smiers: None.1608 J.L. Kerkhoffs: None. P.J. de Pagter: None. C.L. P13.07C Harteveld: None. Endoreduplication in cultured lymphocytes: genotoxic or promising ﬁnding of compound testing P13.06B Characterization of genomic alterations of cytarabine- M. Hadzic, A. Haveric, S. Haveric resistant AML cells with FLT3-ITD mutation Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, J. H. Yen1, Z. A. Chen2, L. I. Lin3, P. Y. Chen4 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 1Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Introduction: Endoreduplication is a special type of Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan, 2Department of Life nuclear polyploidization presented by multiple, uniform Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan, copies of chromosomes, more common in plants and 3Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical invertebrates. Phenomenon of endoreduplication is related Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, to homeostasis maintenance and tumorigenesis. Endopoly- Taiwan, 4Center of Medical Genetics, Hualien Tzu Chi ploid cells are non-reproductive, but they may possess the Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan potential for DNA double-strand break repair and ability to delay apoptosis. We have compared endoreduplications Introduction: Cytarabine (ara-C) is a key agent for induction in lymphocyte cultures from healthy donors and standard treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). psoriatic patients treated by the same antiproliferative Despite its clinical efﬁcacy, chemoresistance to cytarabine compound. isstillacommonandseriousprobleminAMLtherapy.The Materials and Methods: Chromosome aberrations ana- presenceofaninternaltandemduplication(ITD)withinthe lysis was conducted on 100 metaphases per each blood FLT3 gene confers a worse prognosis in patients with sample and treatment. Lymphocytes were cultivated for 72 AML;however,itsunderlyingmechanismsremainunclear. h, treated with potential antiproliferative compound, con- Anara-CresistantcelllinewithFLT3-ITDmutation(MV4- trolsweresetaswell.Inordertotestantigenotoxicpotential 11-R) had previously been established. In this study, we of selected bioﬂavonoids, they were added in normal lym- aimed tocharacterize genomicchanges for ara-C resistance phocyte cultures after induction of genotoxic effects by in the MV4-11-R cells. tested antiproliferative compound. Materials and Methods: Cell growth rate was accessed Results: Results have shown that the antiproliferative using counting orMTT assay. Cytogenetic alterations were compound treatment induces endoreduplications in both studied using traditional G-banding and spectral karyotyp- psoriatic and normal lymphocyte cultures but in different ing (SKY) analysis. Gene expressions related to ara-C conditions. In lymphocytes from psoriatic patients, endor- metabolism, such as ENT1 and DCK, were investigated eduplications occurred after addition of antiproliferative using qRT-PCR. compound, while the same effect was not observed in Results: Firstly, we conﬁrmed that MV4-11 cells con- normal lymphocytes. We recorded that selected bio- tained the homozygous FLT3-ITD mutation as previously ﬂavonoids induce endoreduplications in normal lympho- reported. The cell growth rate of MV4-11-R showed dra- cytes after genotoxic insults of tested compound thereby matically increase to 2.5-fold compared with that of native inhibiting damage progress and reducing genotoxicity. MV4-11cellsat96hculture.Cytogeneticanalysisrevealed Conclusions: Our ﬁndings show that endoreduplication thatresistantandparentcellshadamodalnumberof47~49 may be result of genotoxic activity of potential anti- chromosomes.Themostprominentdifferenceswithinthem proliferative compound in psoriatic patients but not in are gain of many structural aberrations in resistant cells. normal lymphocyte cultures where it may be a potential Interestingly, 15% of resistant cells showed tetraploid kar- mechanism for cell survival. yotypes and acquired additional structural rearrangements. M.Hadzic:None.A.Haveric:None.S.Haveric:None. Conclusions: Our data found that the resistant clone MV4-11-R exhibited stronger proliferative activity and P13.08D morecomplexkaryotypethanitsparentcells.Theseresults The ﬁne-tuned balance between expression and suggest that acquisition of resistance to ara-C could be degradation regulates the cells' fate accompanied by global genomic changes and possibly involved chromosomal instability. A. S. Atemin, A. V. Ivanova, S. D. Uzunova, J.H.Yen:None.Z.A.Chen:None.L.I.Lin:None.P.Y. R. Aleksandrov, S. S. Stoynov, M. N. Nedelcheva-Veleva Chen: None. Institute of Molecular Biology, Soﬁa, BulgariaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1609 Results: With our approach, we veriﬁed with BEA In order to ensure their survivability cells have evolved similar levels of the c.1118A>G mutation in sperm numerous mechanisms to control their gene expression. (~1.65x10-5) as measured with DS. We observed an These mechanisms have precise time and space temporal increased mutation frequency with donor’s age in regulation. To investigate them our laboratory used a state 118spermdonorsofdifferentages.Moreover,thereisa~5- of art microscopy system which allows long term live cell folddifferencebetweenyoung(≤30years)andmiddle-aged imaging and a variety of biochemical approaches. In donors (>45 years). Interestingly, analysis of ~30% of one Saccharomyces cerevisiae we excreted the key protein testis from an 80-year-old man did not show any high- (Dia2) which is part of a modular ubiquitin ligase SCF frequency clusters previously observed for other mutations (Skp1/cullin/Fbox)thatplaysacrucialrolethroughnormal in the FGFR3 (TDII and ACH). replication and as well as in the S-phase checkpoint Conclusions: BEA can validate mutations discovered by activation. Our results show that when this protein is DS, and more importantly be used for a more detailed and missing the replication control of the cell is dysregulated high-throughput screening of age-related expansions of and thus the genome expression is destabilized. Further- theseinthemalegermline(spermandtestes)togainfurther more,thedia2deletionstrandalsoexhibitedveryintriguing knowledge about the mechanisms in germline mutagenesis phenotype regarding its cell cycle progression and protein and their potential consequences. expression. We have observed the same phenotype in Project funded by FWF (P30867-B26). higher eukaryotes when the destabilization of proteins is S. Moura: None. R. Salazar: None. I. Tiemann- blocked via an inhibitor (MG132), which inhibits the Boege: None. proteasome. This shows that these mechanisms are universally conserved. We speculate that the protein which P13.10B plays the same role in higher eukaryotes is βTrCP. To CDH1 intronic Cis-Regulatory Elements control CDH1 investigate that we have silenced the gene in Hela Kyoto gene tissue-speciﬁc expression celllinesandwehavepreliminaryresultsthatthisubiquitin ligase targets numerous proteins and thus regulates the cell C. São José1,2,3, A. Ferro1, P. Oliveira1, J. Carvalho1, cycle and the whole genome expression. H. Pinheiro1, D. Huntsman4,5,6, R. Acuna-Hidalgo3,7, A.S. Atemin: None. A.V. Ivanova: None. S.D. Uzu- S. Mundlos3,7,8, C. Oliveira1,2 nova: None. R. Aleksandrov: None. S.S. Stoynov: None. M.N. Nedelcheva-Veleva: None. 1Ipatimup/i3S, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology at the University of Porto (Ipatimup), Porto, P13.09A Portugal & Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde High-throughputanalysisofdrivermutationsinFGFR3 (i3S), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Faculty of by digital PCR Medicine of theUniversity ofPorto, Porto, Portugal,3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, S. Moura, R. Salazar, I. Tiemann-Boege 4Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, 5Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics (CTAG), Austria BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 6Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, University of British Introduction:Mutationsoccurringatincreasedfrequencies Columbia and Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, in the germline of older men in the FGFR3 gene were BC, Canada, 7Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, suggested to confer a selective growth advantage to Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 8Berlin- spermatogonial stem cells. These mutations have been Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), associated with several congenital disorders. Many more Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany mutationshavebeenreportedinFGFR3forcancer,anditis possible that these expand in the male germline with age. Introduction: Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC) Materials and Methods: To test an age-related expan- iscausedbygermlineCDH1codingalterations.Despitenot sion ofdrivermutations, we are screening spermand testes having CDH1 coding mutations, nor in the remaining of different aged donors with two high-throughput techni- exome, >50% of HDGC patients present germline mono- ques:beademulsionampliﬁcation(BEA)andallele-speciﬁc allelic CDH1 expression, which may indicate a role for PCR. We are focusing on 13 de novo mutations occurring CDH1 locus, beyond the coding sequence. We aimed at within a ~3kb region of the FGFR3, identiﬁed in sperm dissecting the potential role of intronic Cis-Regulatory DNA by duplex sequencing (DS) in our laboratory.1610 Elements (iCREs) in an attempt to identify novel causes typeofHPFHhasanincreasedriskforahemoglobinopathy of HDGC. if the partner is carrier of a mutation in the beta-globin MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedabioinformatics (HBB) gene, in which mutations are relatively frequent in analysis based on open chromatin proﬁles and prioritized certain populations. iCRE1andiCRE8forfurtherstudies.iCREswereclonedin Peripheral complete blood count was performed in a LacZ-reporterconstructsandintegratedintoColA1locusof pregnant woman after a bike trauma, including ﬂow cyto- mouse embryonic stem cells to generate transgenic mice. metry and hemoglobin electrophoresis. This excluded feto- Empty-vector mice were used as control for ColA1-driven maternal transfusion but showed a HbF fraction of 15%. expression. To test tissue-speciﬁc β-galactosidase expres- Additional testing showed a mosaic (delta-beta)0-thalasse- sion, endoderm (stomach, esophagus, duodenum, liver), mia deletion, identifying the HPFH-type 2. This deletion ectoderm (heart) and mesoderm (skin) tissues were dis- explains the elevated HbF, usually resulting in a HbF sected. iCRE8 was sequenced in HDGC probands. fractionof30%.Toconﬁrmthemosaicdeletion,whichmay Results: While no obvious β-galactosidase expression explain the lower HbF fraction, SNP array was performed. was observed for iCRE1 across tissues, in iCRE8 mice The mosaic deletion was conﬁrmed, but surprisingly the B embryos, tissue-speciﬁc expression was detected in allele frequency plot showed a genome-wide complex and endodermal-derived tissues (stomach, esophagus and duo- patchy chromosomal pattern which could be explained by denum), where E-cadherin exerts a primordial function. genetic chimerism, or alternatively, by an around 50% iCRE8 sequence overlaps several genomic and epigenomic contamination of the DNA sample withthe fetus or a close regulatoryfeatures,ismutatedinoneHDGCprobandandis relative. being explored by 4C-seq and ATAC-seq. Short tandem repeat (STR) marker analysis was per- Conclusion: iCRE8 is likely a CDH1 cis-regulatory formed and repeated with an independent blood sample. region important for CDH1 expression in the stomach, and This test conﬁrmed the genetic chimerism in the patient. may encompass a novel target for CDH1 deleterious var- Since no Y chromosome contribution was seen, this chi- iants in HDGC patients. mericstateismostprobablyofnofurtherclinicalrelevance Funding: 1)The Solve-RD project has received funding to the patient. from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and J. Knijnenburg: None. M. van Zwam: None. K. de innovation programme under grant agreement No 779257; Graaff: None. J.A.C. ter Huurne: None. S. Bhagwan- 2)FEDER/COMPETE,“POCI-01-0145-FEDER-030164”; dien-Bisoen: None. M. Verschuren: None. S.G.J. 3)FCT Fellowship, “SFRH/BD/140796/2018”. Arkesteijn: None. A.C. Schaap: None. K. Kuipers-Heij- C. São José: None. A. Ferro: None. P. Oliveira: None. boer: None. C.L. Harteveld: None. J. Carvalho: None. H. Pinheiro: None. D. Huntsman: None. R. Acuna-Hidalgo: None. S. Mundlos: None. C. P13.13A Oliveira: None. Gain-of-function mutations in KCNN3 encoding the small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel SK3 P13.11C cause Zimmermann-Laband syndrome Identiﬁcation of a possible chimera following routine peripheralbloodscreeningafteratraumainapregnant C. K. Bauer1, P. E. Schneeberger2, F. Kortüm2, woman J. Altmüller3,4, F. Santos-Simarro5, L. Baker6, J. Keller- Ramey7, S. M. White8,9, P. M. Campeau10, K. W. Gripp6, J.Knijnenburg1,M.vanZwam2,K.deGraaff2,J.A.C.ter K. Kutsche2 Huurne1, S. Bhagwandien-Bisoen1, M. Verschuren1, S. G. J. Arkesteijn1, A. C. Schaap1, K. Kuipers-Heijboer1, 1Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, C. L. Harteveld1 UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg, Germany,2InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityMedical 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Reinier de Graaf Groep, Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, Delft, Netherlands 3Cologne Center for Genomics University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Center for Molecular Medicine Hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH) is a Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, benign condition caused by deletions in the beta-globin Germany, 5Sección de Genética Clínica, Instituto de gene cluster, or by point mutations in the gamma-globin Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital gene promoter sequences. In heterozygous carriers, 2 to Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, 30% of fetal type of hemoglobin (HbF) continues to be Spain, 6Division of Medical Genetics, Alfred I. duPont expressed after birth. Offspring of a carrier of a deletion Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1611 7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 8Victorian I. Papaevripidou1, A. Alexandrou1, P. Evangelidou1, Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children’s Research L. Kousoulidou1, V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou2,3, Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, G. A. Tanteles2, C. Sismani1,4 9Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 10Department of Pediatrics, Sainte- 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Department, The Cyprus Justine Hospital, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, Canada 2Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Clinical Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (ZLS) is characterized by Genetics Clinic, Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, coarsefacialfeatureswithgingivalenlargement,intellectual Nicosia, Cyprus, 4The Cyprus School of Molecular disability (ID), hypertrichosis, and hypoplasia or aplasia of Medicine, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, nails and terminal phalanges. De novo missense mutations Nicosia, Cyprus + in KCNH1 encoding the voltage-gated K channel Eag1 have been identiﬁed in a proportion of subjects with ZLS. Chromosomal region 22q11.2 is susceptible to genomic We report de novo missense variants in KCNN3 in three rearrangements due to low-copy repeat (LCR) clusters. individuals with typical clinical features of ZLS. KCNN3 These high homology sequences mediate meiotic non- (SK3/KCa2.3) constitutes one of three members of the allelic homologous recombination, resulting in copy small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (SK) channels that number variations (CNVs), the most common being are part of a multiprotein complex consisting of the pore- DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial syndrome (MIM# 192430, forming channel subunits, the constitutively bound Ca2+ 188400). sensor calmodulin, protein kinase CK2 and protein Here we present a novel deletion within 22q11.2, indi- phosphatase 2A. CK2 modulates Ca2+ sensitivity of the catinganovel recombination eventmediatedbyLCRA-G. channels by phosphorylating SK-bound calmodulin. Patch- In light of this new ﬁnding, we re-investigated the CNVs clampwhole-cellrecordingsofKCNN3channel-expressing within 22q11.2 by revisiting array-CGH data from 2700 CHO cells demonstrated that disease-associated mutations prenatal and postnatal cases of Greek-Cypriot patients with resultingain-offunctionofthemutantchannels,character- intellectual disability and multiple congenital anomalies. ized by increased Ca2+ sensitivity leading to faster and The novel LCR22A-G deletion was identiﬁed in a fetus more complete activation of KCNN3 mutant channels. with high NT and atrioventricular septal defect and Pretreatment of cells with the CK2 inhibitor 4,5,6,7- encompassedDiGeorge/VelocardiofacialSyndromeandthe tetrabromobenzotriazole revealed basal inhibition of wild- 22q11.2 distal deletion syndrome (MIM# 611867). This is type and mutant KCNN3 channels by CK2. Analogous the ﬁrst report of a LCR22A-G deletion revealing the experiments with the KCNN3 p.Val450Leu mutant pre- occurrence of a novel recombination event. viously identiﬁed in a family with portal hypertension The frequencies of CNVs mediated by different LCRs indicated basal constitutive channel activity and thus a wereshowntobeinagreementwithpublishedliterature.A differentgain-of-functionmechanismcomparedtotheZLS- total of 32/2700 individuals (1.2%) carried CNVs (18 associated mutant channels. With the report on de novo deletions and 14 duplication) mediated by LCR22A to H KCNK4 mutations in subjects with facial dysmorphism, with the most common (43.75%) spanning the proximal hypertrichosis, epilepsy, ID, and gingival overgrowth, we LCR22A-D (14/32). In 15.6% (4/32) and 6.25% (2/32) the propose to combine the phenotypes caused by mutations in CNVs were mediated by the central LCR22B-D and KCNH1, KCNK4 and KCNN3 in a group of neurological LCR22C-D respectively. The remaining were classiﬁed in + potassium channelopathies caused by an increase in K the distal group with one D-F (3.12%), three F-H (9.4%), conductance. two F-G (6.25%), one G-H (3.12%) and one D-G (3.12%). C.K. Bauer: None. P.E. Schneeberger: None. F. NewlydiscoveredCNVswithin22q11.2regionmayhelp Kortüm: None. J. Altmüller: None. F. Santos-Simarro: elucidate pathological genetic mechanisms leading to None. L. Baker: None. J. Keller-Ramey: A. Employment abnormal phenotypes, thus contributing to better under- (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx, Gaithersburg, standing, management and prognosis for 22q11.2 CNV Maryland, USA. S.M. White: None. P.M. Campeau: carriers. None. K.W. Gripp: None. K. Kutsche: None. I. Papaevripidou: None. A. Alexandrou: None. P. Evangelidou: None. L. Kousoulidou: None. V. Christo- P13.14B phidou-Anastasiadou: None. G.A. Tanteles: None. C. A novel 22q11.2 deletion mediated by LCR22A-G and Sismani: None. meta-analysis in a Greek-Cypriot cohort1612 P13.15C causes of mortality. Recent studies identiﬁed genetic Mosaic ring chromosome 13 syndrome: approach to variants in seven loci that associate with human leukocyte conventional and molecular cytogenetics telomere length (LTL). Many contain genes known to regulate telomere length, e.g. components of the telomere E. Genis, A. Aydin Gumus, D. Gun Bilgic, S. Cam cappingSHELTERINcomplexorofthetelomeraseenzyme required for telomere length maintenance. However, some Manisa Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey loci contain no candidate, suggesting they may contain genes with previously unidentiﬁed roles in telomere Introduction: Ring chromosome 13 is a rare chromosome biology. abnormality in which the ends of chromosome 13 join Ourmostrecentanalysis(unpublished)identiﬁedaregion togethertoformaringshape.Whenaringforms,theremay containing MPHOSPH6 that associates with LTL at a level be missing genes where the chromosome's ends fuse of genome-wide signiﬁcance (P<5x10-8). Bioinformatics together. The aim of this study was to investigate the analysis revealed that the LTL associated variants also formation of ring 13 chromosomes by cytogenetic and strongly associate with MPHOSPH6 expression changes, molecular techniques. suggesting a link between MPHOSPH6 expression and Methods: Standard conventional cytogenetic method LTL. MPHOSPH6 is an RNA exosome component and is with 72 hour-culture was done to peripheral blood lym- involved in the maturation of snoRNAs in yeast, therefore phocytes. Molecular analysis was performed with sub- we hypothesised MPHOSPH6 could affect LTL through telomeric FISH and SNP array. regulating telomerase RNA (TERC) maturation and con- Results: A 5-month-old baby girl, was borned 2530 gr sequently telomerase activity. weight, 36-week, from a couple’s second IVF pregnancy We reduced MPHOSPH6 expression via siRNA- wassenttouswithsuspicionofchromosomalanomaly.Her mediated knockdown in HCT116 cells and investigated parents were the third generation consanguineous. On TERC expression using RT-qPCR and telomerase activity physical examination, umbilical hernia, VSD, plump using the telomerase repeated ampliﬁcation protocol assay. cheeks, depressed nasal bridge, small mouth-thin lip, Signiﬁcant reductions of MPHOSPH6 expression (4.61- hypoplasticearlobeandtragus,normalgenitaldevelopment fold decrease, p<0.01, n=3) were achieved independently were found. According to ISCN 2016, in 30 metaphases with two siRNAs. This resulted in substantial loss of telo- with G-band; 46,XX karyotypes in 3 metaphases; 46,XX,r merase activity (4.37-fold decrease, p<0.01, n=3) and (13) chromosomes in the other metaphases were found. reduction of TERC RNA levels (2.06-fold decrease, Normalconstitutionalkaryotypes(46,XYand46,XX)were p<0.01, n=3). detected in her parents. After G-banding, FISH study with These data indicate a role for MPHOSPH6 in TERC 100nucleus/20metaphaseandlocus-speciﬁcsubtelomeric processing and telomerase activity. probes showed no deletion in ring chromosomes. The SNP This work is supported by the van Geest Heart and Car- array (illumina 656K) was performed to verify the FISH diovascular Diseases Research Fund and the University of method, no deletion or duplication was detected. Discus- Leicester. sion:A few de novo ring 13 chromosome familial cases F. Gibson: None. P.S. Braund: None. M.J. Denniff: have been reported in the literature. This is a rare case of None. N.J. Samani: None. V. Codd: None. individuals with complete-ring 13 chromosome who have normal phenotypes and no loss of genetic material. P13.17A E. Genis: None. A. Aydin Gumus: None. D. Gun Bil- Molecular weight of a protein-DNA complex can be gic: None. S. Cam: None. inferred from native gel electrophoresis P13.16D T. Schwarz1, Y. Striedner1, K. Haase1, J. Kemptner2, Investigating the potential role of MPHOSPH6 in N. Zeppezauer1, P. Hermann3, I. Tiemann-Boege1 human telomere length regulation 1Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, F. Gibson, P. S. Braund, M. J. Denniff, N. J. Samani, Austria, 2Red Cross Blood Transfusion Center Upper V. Codd Austria, MedCampus II, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria,3DepartmentofAppliedStatistics,JohannesKepler University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom University, Linz, Austria Telomere length is associated with atherosclerotic cardio- Introduction: PRDM9 is a multi-domain protein respon- vascular disease and cancer, both of which are leading sible to determine the locations of meiotic recombinationAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1613 hotspots by recognizing speciﬁc DNA motifs via its healthy controls. The sample DNA was gently isolated repetitive array of zinc ﬁngers (ZnFs). Recently it was using the Genomic Mini AX kit according to protocol. shown that PRDM9 forms an active multimer; however, Northern Lights assay (NLA) was used to detect structural neitherthesizenorthefactorsinducingthemultimerization damage in cfDNA such as single/double-stranded breaks, are known. bends, and inter/intra strand links. Study was approved by Materials and Methods: We performed in vitro binding National Bioethics Committee and Icelandic Data studies, based on gel shift assays, to infer the size of the Authority. protein multimer using DNA fragments that increased in Results:DamageincfDNAwasobservedinallthesepsis length,containingeitheroneortwospeciﬁctargetsites.We patientsincluding:Nickingindouble-strandednucleosomal tested different protein constructs including truncated pro- fragments, incomplete degradation of nucleosomal DNA, tein versions, and analyzed the molecular weight and the and lesions causing bending of DNA molecules. Elevated corresponding migration distance of binding complexes in levels of plasma cfDNA were lowered after treatment and relationship to known standards to further determine the cfDNA damage decreased. protein stoichiometry. Conclusion: To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst demon- Results: We observed that PRDM9 multimerizes to an stration of cfDNA damage in sepsis patients. Damage in active trimer which is formed within the repetitive DNA- cfDNA might reﬂect increased damage to DNA or lack of binding ZnF domain and 5 out of 11 ZnF repeats are suf- repair associated with cell death prior to release into the ﬁcient to form the trimer. Moreover, we demonstrated that bloodstream. Alternatively, these results might reﬂect only one of the ZnF arrays within the trimer contacts the damagetonucleosomalDNAinplasma.DamageincfDNA DNA,whereastheremainingtwoZnFslikelyperformZnF- might contribute to intense immune stimulation in sepsis ZnF interaction to maintain the multimeric conformation. patients and be a biomarker for sepsis. Icelandic Technol- Conclusions: In this work, we report a method using ogy Development Fund 142709-0613 native gel electrophoresis to infer the size, as well as, to H. Helgason: None. B. Gudmundsson: B. Research investigatethemolecularinteractionofamultimericprotein Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand with DNA. This simple method is suitable especially for pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig- proteinswithcomplexstructuresorrepetitivemotifsasitis niﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule). E. Ownership Interest the case for many ZnF proteins. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); This project was funded by FWF P27698. Modest; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule). H.G. Thormar: A. T. Schwarz: None. Y. Striedner: None. K. Haase: Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. None. J. Kemptner: None. N. Zeppezauer: None. P. (BioCule). B. Research Grant (principal investigator, col- Hermann: None. I. Tiemann-Boege: None. laboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrants already received); Signiﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule). E. P13.19C Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Nicking of double-stranded nucleosomal cell free DNA intellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;Lifeindehf.(BioCule).S. in sepsis patients Karason: None. K. Sigvaldason: None. J.J. Jonsson: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or H. Helgason1, B. Gudmundsson1,2, H. G. Thormar1,3, consultant and pending grants as well as grants already S. Karason1,2, K. Sigvaldason2, J. J. Jonsson1,2 received);Signiﬁcant;LIfeindehf.(BioCule).E.Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual 1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Landspitali, property); Signiﬁcant; Lifeind ehf. (BioCule). Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Lifeind ehf. (BioCule), Reykjavik, Iceland P13.20D Smallsupernumerarymarkerchromosomesasareason Introduction:ElevatedlevelsofcellfreeDNA(cfDNA)in for infertility can only be reliably assessed by plasma are associated with various medical emergencies cytogenetics & molecular cytogenetics such as sepsis and stroke and trauma. In sepsis, levels of cfDNA correlate with disease severity. The goal of this A. B. H. Al-Rikabi study was to examine if structural damage in cfDNA is present in sepsis patients. Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany Materials and Methods: Samples were collected from nine consenting patients (age 18+) admitted with severe Impaired spermatogenesis is indicative for gross chromo- sepsistothetwoICU´sofLandspitalifromDecember2016 somal anomalies, including small supernumerary marker until May 2017. Samples were also collected from ﬁve chromosomes (sSMCs). sSMCs can easily, reliable and for1614 due to their speciﬁc features like mosaicism and often pure deﬁcient ALT cells, suggesting that these abnormalities are heterochromatic constitution be exclusively identiﬁed by a an exaggeration of the ALT phenotype. standard chromosome analyses. Almost 200 cases were Our results support models in which failed telomeric includedinthisstudy,whichcouldshowthatsSMCcanbe replicationforksgiverisetoDNAbreaksandgapsusedby optimally characterized by single cell directed (molecular) BLM/polδ-dependent break induced replication to drive cytogenetics.IninfertilemalessSMCderivepredominantly ALT and produce ECTR DNA. FANCM and FAAP24 from one of the acrocentric chromosomes, especially #15, restrain ALT by preventing collapse of stalled telomeric #14 and #22. Altered spermiograms were found in 62% of replication forks. Consequently, loss of FANCM or these male sSMC-carriers, while the remainder ones had FAAP24 increases the natural substrate for ALT, failed infertility in connection with repeated abortions in partner- telomeric replication forks, which results in a hyper-ALT ship. Meta analyses for detectability of sSMC by array- phenotype.Asthehyper-ALTphenotypeisassociatedwith comparativegenomichybridizationrevealedthat81-87%of cell death, disruption of the BRCA/Fanconi anemia path- the cases would not have been picked up by exclusive use way may be a novel treatment strategy for ALT tumours. of this approach. As impaired spermatogenesis isknown to M.Meyn:None.J.Te:None.M.Komosa:None.F.Al- be indicative for gross chromosomal anomalies in infertile Azri: None. male patients, it is obvious from this study that sSMC presence also needs to be considered. However, sSMC can P13.22B only be reliably detected by standard karyotyping and not A Molecular diagnosis of WOREE syndrome that by modern high throughput approaches, as proven here. required genome sequencing to identify the second hit A.B.H. Al-Rikabi: None. pathogenic variant in WWOX P13.21A A. Plagos1, P. Callier1,2, A. Bruel1,3, S. Moutton1,4, The Fanconi anemia proteins FANCM and FAAP24 M. Chevarin1,3, T. Jouan1,3, F. Tran Mau Them1,3, limit telomere instability and BLM/Polδ-dependent Y. Duffourd1,3, L. Faivre1,4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,3,4, break induced replication in the alternative lengthening A. Vitobello1,3, C. Philippe1,3 of telomeres (ALT) pathway 1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de M. Meyn1,2,3, J. Te2, M. Komosa2, F. Al-Azri2,3 génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, Plate-forme Hospitalo-Universitaire de Biologie, CHU Dijon,, Dijon, 1University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI, United France, 3Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic States, 2The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Canada, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du Développement et ~15%ofhumantumoursusetheAlternativeLengtheningof syndromes malformatifs », centre de génétique, FHU- Telomere (ALT)mechanism to maintain telomeres. We TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France previously demonstrated that depletion of FANCD2, a member of the BRCA/Fanconi anaemia DNA repair Introduction: Bi-allelic germline variants in WWOX (WW pathway, causes a hyper-ALT phenotype. We now extend domain-containingoxidoreductase)havebeenimplicatedin ouranalysistotheDNAtranslocaseFANCManditspartner spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) and WOREE syndrome FAAP24. (WWOX-related epileptic encephalopathy). We report here WeﬁndsiRNAdepletionofFANCMorFAAP24inALT a molecular diagnosis of WOREE syndrome that required human cells results in increased replicative stress at telo- genome sequencing (GS) to identify the second hit. meres, rapid telomere elongation, and 4-5 fold increases in Material and Methods: Solo exome sequencing (ES) ECTR DNA number. Importantly, FANCD2 localizes to followed by trio GS were performed on a girl presenting telomeric foci in FANCM or FAAP24 depleted ALT cells, with generalized hypotonia, myoclonic epilepsy, ataxia, suggesting that FANCM and FAAP24 protect against psychomotor delay, stereotypies, strabismus and cerebral telomeric replicative stress independently of other Fanconi atrophy. anaemia proteins. Results:AfterES,twocompoundheterozygousmissense siRNA depletion of the BLM DNA helicase or the polδ mutations in SLC30A10 were considered as candidate DNA polymerase in ALT cells resulted in telomere short- variations for the disease in this patient and classiﬁed of ening and markedly fewer ECTR DNA molecules. Deple- unknown signiﬁcance. A missense variation (p.Thr12Arg) tion also suppressed the excessive ECTR production and in WWOX without any other variation in a gene associated increased telomere length seen in FANCM and FAAP24- with an autosomal recessive encephalopathy did notAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1615 particularlycatchourattentionatﬁrstduringanalysisofES pinpointed that cellular assembly and maintenance are data. The identiﬁcation of a second hit was only possible among the most expressed pathways in ovarian cells. after GS which revealed a complex CNV consisting of two Additionally, GWAS showed that immune pathway-related intronic deletions in introns 4 and 5 associated with an genes were associated with age at normal menopause, inversion of the ﬁfth exon of WWOX. The deletions/ allowing to postulate that genes involved in this regulation inversion was conﬁrmed at the genomic level for both couldalsobeinvolvedinPOF.Astheperturbedtranscripts intronic junction fragments. RNA studies showed that this are neither mapping to the X chromosome, nor to the intragenic rearrangement resulted in abnormal pre-mRNA autosome breakpoint, this might indicate that the effect is splicing. indirect, and the phenotype is triggered by perturbations of Conclusions: GS allowed us to identify the second hit normal contacts between genes and their regulatory pathogenic variant in a patient heterozygous for a missense elements. To further challenge this model, we are currently variant after ES. This compound heterozygous genotype is assessing the chromatin accessibility of the same cell lines. likelyresponsibleforthesevereepilepticencephalopathyin These results should help elucidating the impact of this patient, a phenotype consistent with a WOREE syn- derivative chromosomes repositioning within interphase drome.Interestingly,thispatientistheﬁrstonepresentinga nuclei. Financial support: FAPESP#2017/20847-9. WWOX-related phenotype associating epileptic encepha- A. Di-Battista: None. M. Moyses-Oliveira: None. M. lopathy and ataxia. Zamariolli: None. M. Melaragno: None. A. A. Plagos: None. P. Callier: None. A. Bruel: None. S. Reymond: None. Moutton: None. M. Chevarin: None. T. Jouan: None. F. Tran Mau Them: None. Y. Duffourd: None. L. Faivre: None.C.Thauvin-Robinet:None.A.Vitobello:None.C. P14 Philippe: None. Newdiagnosticapproaches-Technicalaspects-Quality control P13.23C Balanced X-autosome translocations and premature P14.001D ovarianfailureareassociatedwithalteredexpressionof Speciﬁcgenotypevariantshavedistinct3Dfacialgestalt growth factors, junction organization and immune morphometry: pilot study on Czech cases with 16p11.2 pathways microdeletions / microduplications and STAT3 variants A. Di-Battista1,2, M. Moyses-Oliveira3, M. Zamariolli1, M. Havlovicová1, V. Moslerová1, J. Drábová1, M. Melaragno1, A. Reymond2 H. Zůnová1, T. Rašpličková1, M. Malíková1, R. Kremlíková Pourová1, P. Tesner1, V. Zoubková1, 1Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, A. Šedivá2, D. Novotná1, M. Macek jr.1 2University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston, MA, United States 1DepartmentofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,2ndMedical Faculty of Charles University and University Hospital Patients with balanced X-autosome translocations and Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of prematureovarianfailure(POF)areaninterestingparadigm Immunology, 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University to study positioning effect of chromosome segments. They and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic present breakpoints that do not disrupt genes related to the phenotype and map within cytobands Xq13-Xq21, from Craniofacialassessmentisinstrumentalinthediagnosticsof which 80% cluster in Xq21. As deletions within Xq21 do syndromic disorders, where typical facial features lead to not cause POF, and since different breakpoints and etiological diagnosis. However, massively parallel sequen- translocation with different autosomes lead to the same cing brought the commonly applied “genotype ﬁrst” phenotype, we hypothesized a “position effect” as possible diagnostic strategy. In such cases 3D facial morphometry mechanism.Weﬁne-mappedthebreakpointsinsixpatients (3D) digitalizes patients' facial phenotype and enables with POF and balanced Xq-autosome translocations, phenotype driven variant prioritization. established lymphoblastoid cell lines from patients and Here we report 2 groups of syndromic cases versus age matched female controls and proﬁled their transcriptome and sex-matched population controls. Firstly, patients with through RNA-seq. The 68 genes differentially expressed in recurrentmicrodeletions /microduplications inthe16p11.2 the patients’ group are enriched for genes encoding proximalregion(diagnosedbyaCGH,SNParray,FISHand important proteins for the organization of cell junctions MLPA)whohadsimilarpatterninbothCNVs,whichwere and the immune response. Previous transcriptome studies only partially mirrored and were more pronounced in cases1616 with microdeletions. These 3D observations are in accor- Results:27%(15/56)oftestedgeneswerenotexpectedto dance with previously reported differential penetrance of be expressed in whole blood according to the GTEx data- other phenotypic features (e.g. head circumference, BMI), base,butonlyin5%(3/56)caseswewerenotabletodetect whichisingenerallowerincaseswithmicroduplicationsin a transcript. 23 case (41%) validated the disease causing patients with 16p11.2 syndrome. Secondly, we analyzed 2 variant, resulted in misspliced transcripts. cases with combined immunodeﬁciency and pathogenic Conclusions: The cases validated with RNA extracted variantsinSTAT3withonehavingalossoffunction,while from lymphocytes included developmental delay, hypoto- the other has a gain of function. Interestingly, reverse 3D nia, ataxia and other phenotypes not involving the circu- phenotyping found almost “inverse” facial features. lating system, demonstrating the feasibility of detecting Speciﬁcpatternsof3Dfacialphenotypeandalsoacertain aberrant splicing events in an accessible tissue, suggesting degree of mirroring of phenotypes in opposite genotypes that improving the ability to detect rare transcripts with have been found in presented groups of patients. Our cur- RNAseq, will allow this method to serve as a clinical rent results support the use of 3D as a useful tool in ana- diagnostic tool. lyzing and comparing facial features, including M. Gur: None. A. Shaag: None. O. Elpeleg: None. characterization of the overall age-speciﬁc facial gestalt in syndromes without consistent facial phenotype and/or in P14.003B ultrarare genetic disorders where there are limited data on Sequencing the previously unsequencable using their facial phenotype. ampliﬁcation-free targeted enrichment powered by Supported by CZ11-PDP-3-003-2014, LM2015091, 17- CRSIPR-Cas9 29423A and 00064203. M. Havlovicová: None. V. Moslerová: None. J. Drá- J. Ekholm, Y. Tsai, I. McLaughlin, B. Galvin, J. Ziegle bová:None.H.Zůnová:None.T.Rašpličková:None.M. Malíková: None. R. Kremlíková Pourová: None. P. Paciﬁcs Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States Tesner: None. V. Zoubková: None. A. Šedivá: None. D. Novotná: None. M. Macek jr.: None. Genomic regions with extreme base composition bias and repetitive sequences have long proven challenging for P14.002A targeted enrichment methods, as they rely upon some form Identiﬁcationofdiseasecausingaberrantspliceeventsin of ampliﬁcation. Similarly, most DNA sequencing technol- lymphocytes ogies struggle to faithfully sequence regions of low complexity. This has especially been trying for repeat M. Gur, A. Shaag, O. Elpeleg expansion disorders such as Fragile X disease, Huntington disease and various Ataxias, where the repetitive elements Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, range from several hundreds of bases to tens of kilobases. Israel We have developed a robust, ampliﬁcation-free targeted enrichment technique, called No-Amp Targeted Sequen- Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) revolutio- cing,thatemploystheCRISPR/Cas9system.Inconjunction nizedtheﬁeldofHumanGeneticswithaquickandaccurate with SMRT Sequencing, which delivers long reads methodtoidentifydiseasecausingvariants,withdiagnostic spanning the entire repeat expansion, high consensus rates of approximately 25-50%. Whole genome sequencing accuracy, and uniform coverage, these previously inacces- (WGS) improves the diagnostic rate, but not dramatically, sibleregionsarenowaccessible.Thismethodiscompletely mainly due to an interpretation gap, yet to be closed. ampliﬁcation-free, therefore removing any PCR errors and RNAseq was suggested as a complementary method, biases from the experiment. Furthermore, this technique allowing direct observation of the transcriptome and the also preserves native DNA molecules, allowing for direct identiﬁcation of missplicing events derived from deep detection and characterization of epigenetic signatures. The intronic or coding sequences variants, that are difﬁcult to No-Amp method is a two-day protocol that is compatible interpret, even when identiﬁed with WES or WGS. with multiplexing of multiple targets and multiple samples AlthoughRNAseqwasprovedtoimprovediagnosticyield, inasinglereaction,usingaslittleas1μgofgenomicDNA the need to obtain RNA from the relevant disease tissue is input per sample. We have successfully targeted a number an obstacle to implementing it as a clinical method. of repeat expansion disorder loci (HTT,FMR1, ATXN10, Methods: 56 cases of varied phenotypes were tested by TCF4,C9orf72)withallelesaslongas>2700repeatunites PCR for speciﬁc gene missplicing or abnormal expression (>13 kb). Using the No-Amp method we have isolated in RNA extracted from lymphocytes. Most cases were hundreds of individual on-target molecules, allowing for identiﬁed with WES, where a splice variant was suspected. reliable repeat size estimation, mosaicism detection andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1617 identiﬁcation of interruption sequences - all aspects of purchases, and the vast majority has wide availability of repeat expansion disorders which are important for better questionnaire and laboratory variables. Additionally, there understanding the underlying disease mechanisms. are cells available for >10,000, RNA for >3,000 and NMR J. Ekholm: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- metabolomics for >40,000 of these. niﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock ResultsandConclusions:THLBiobankdataisavailable options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; for research use for researchers and companies worldwide. PacBio. Y. Tsai: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Since 2015, 98 biobank projects have been initiated, niﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock including interesting projects ranging from pharmacoge- options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; nomics and returning genetic data to study participants to PacBio.I.McLaughlin:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); cardiovascular and cancer research. Of the biobank pro- Signiﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock jects93%(91/98)haveincludedgenomicdata,thusgenetic options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; data is of high interest for researchers seeking biobank PacBio. B. Galvin: A. Employment (full or part-time); material. Signiﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock A. Joensuu: None. K. Silander: None. M. Perola: options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; None. S. Soini: None. PacBio. J. Ziegle: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock P14.006A options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Splinted ligation adapter tagging (SPLAT), a sensitive PacBio. and versatile library preparation method for single stranded DNA P14.005D Finland’s largest next generation biobank provides A. Raine, U. Liljedahl, J. Nordlund valuable resources for genomics research SNP&SEQ Technology Platform, National Genomics A. Joensuu1,2, K. Silander1, M. Perola1,2, S. Soini1 Infrastructure(NGI),ScienceforLifeLaboratory,Uppsala, Sweden 1THL Biobank, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 2Research Program for Clinical and Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) com- Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of bined with bisulﬁte conversion is the gold standard Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland technique for interrogation of DNA methylation levels. However, sample preparation for whole genome bisulﬁte Background: Studying the genetics of complex diseases sequencing(WGBS)ischallengingduetothesideeffectsof requires large genotyped datasets of tens of thousands of the bisulﬁte treatment causing DNA strand breakage and individuals, while whole-exome (WES) or whole-genome single strandedness. We recently developed Splinted (WGS)sequencingdataisoftennecessaryforstudyingrare Ligation Adapter Tagging (SPLAT), a sensitive library variants. High-quality analyses require high-quality pheno- preparation method for WGBS (Raine et al, 2017, NAR). type data and well-deﬁned disease endpoints. Since 1992 To evaluate platform-related bias, we have evaluated theFinnishNationalInstituteforHealthandWelfare(THL) SPLAT in comparison with commercial WGBS library has systematically collected DNA samples from all preparationkitsondifferentIlluminaplatforms(Raineetal, participants of its health examination surveys. These 2018, PLoS One). samples have now been processed, and vast amounts of MaterialsandMethods:WehaveoptimizedtheSPLAT genomic data is available to researchers through THL protocol for preparing sequencing libraries from samples Biobank. containing low quantities of single-stranded DNA or mix- Materials and Methods: THL Biobank collections turesofsingle/double-strandedDNA.Thisincludessamples include genetic data from >10 Finnish study cohorts. Cur- of ultra low-input (picograms) and direct WGBS library rently the collections include: GWAS chip data N>74,000, preparation from cells. ofwhich>50,000imputedintheFinnGenprojecttoahigh- Results and Conclusion: We show that SPLAT is a fast coverage population-speciﬁc reference panel (N>100,000 simple and cost efﬁcient library preparation method that reached within a year); WES N>12,500; WGS N>2,000; produces sequencing libraries of high complexity, uniform methylation data N>500; gene expression data N>550. All genome coverage and compares favorably to commercial study participants can be followed up (for up to 25 years) WGBS kit. Moreover, SPLAT can be applied to low (and from national registers for disease endpoints and drug1618 ultra-low) levels of DNA and may be useful for cell-free MGITechCo.,Ltd.H.Jiang:A.Employment(fullorpart- (liquid biopsy) DNA library preparation. time); Modest; MGI Tech Co., Ltd.. A. Raine: None. U. Liljedahl: None. J. Nordlund: None. P14.008C Variants with reduced variant fractions in NGS-based P14.007B germline diagnostics for hereditary breast and ovarian BRCA germline mutation detection in cervical cancer exfoliated cells by next-generation sequencing M. Larsen1, K. Keupp1, K. Weber-Lassalle1, L. Bülow1, M. He, M. Li, C. Huang, Z. Mei, F. Chen, H. Jiang B. Bluemcke1, B. Versmold1, A. Waha1, J. Driesen1, A. Baasner1, C. Eßer1, B. Schömig-Markiefka2, MGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China B. Wappenschmidt1, R. Schmutzler1, E. Hahnen1, E. Pohl-Rescigno1 Introduction: Female deleterious germline BRCA1 and BRCA2(BRCA1/2)genemutationareatincreasedriskfor 1CenterforHereditaryBreastandOvarianCancer,Center developingbreastorovariancancer.1Theaimofthisstudy for Integrated Oncology (CIO), University of Cologne, was to develop an NGS-based workﬂow for BRCA Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, mutation screening in cervical exfoliated cells, which are Cologne, Germany, 2Institute for Pathology, Center for usually used to assay human papillomavirus (HPV) IntegratedOncology(CIO),UniversityofCologne,Faculty infection in primary cervical cancer screening. of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted Germany from64cervicalswabspecimensfromhealthywomen.And an NGS-based workﬂow was designed using the MGICare Next generation sequencing (NGS) is the standard for BRCA1/2 multiplex PCR amplicon libraries followed by detecting germline variants in a routine diagnostic setting. MGISEQ-2000RS sequencer. A reference BRCA1/2 The high sensitivity of NGS allows the detection and mutationdatasetfromwholegenomesequencing(WGS)of accurate quantiﬁcation of variants showing low variant these samples was used to assess detection performance. fractions (VFs). In 11 index patients with familial breast Results:Total680BRCA1/2benignvariantswerefound and/orovariancancer,NGS-analysisofblood-derivedDNA in these swab specimens and the consistency with WGS identiﬁed 11 distinct deleterious variants (IARC class 4/5) data was 99.41% (671 in 675 reference BRCA1/2 muta- with unusually low VFs of 10-30%. These were found in tions). The same reference variant (chr13, 32912299, T>C, four established cancer predisposition genes (7xTP53, 50%) from four samples not detected by multiplex PCR- 2xCHEK2, 1xBRCA1 and 1xMSH2). Complementary NGS was with low sequencing depth (7x, 12x, 19x, and NGS-analysis of DNA derived from tumour or non- 19x, respectively) in WGS data and it does not exist con- diseased tissue (available from 8 of 11 patients) conﬁrmed ﬁrming by Sanger sequencing. Another 9 real BRCA1/2 three variants (2xTP53, 1xBRCA1). Inheritance of the variantsdetectedbymultiplexPCR-NGSwerealsoveriﬁed deleterious mutation to the offspring was seen in the case bySangersequencing.Nopathogenicmutationswerefound of the BRCA1-positive patient. The ﬁve remaining variants in these healthy women. (3xTP53, 2xCHEK2) were absent in the complementary Conclusions: We found better SNP detection accuracy testedtissueandthereforemaybeblood-speciﬁc.Onelikely thanWGSandnewinsightsintoBRCAmutationscreening scenario for the occurrence of these variants is accompanying HPV screening. chemotherapy-induced clonal hematopoiesis, as recently Reference: shown for TP53. In line with this hypothesis, four of the 1. Chan, M., et al. (2012).Development of a next- ﬁve patients (3xTP53, 1xCHEK2) received chemotherapy generation sequencing method for BRCA mutation screen- (carboplatin)priortoblooddraw.Insummary,variantswith ing: a comparison between a high-throughput and a low VFs may be due to somatic mosaicism (e.g. clonal benchtop platform. J Mol Diagn 14, 602-612. hematopoiesis) or mosaics affecting germline. These data M.He:None.M.Li:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); indicate that VFs needs to be considered in the interpreta- Modest; MGI Tech Co., Ltd. C. Huang: A. Employment tion of NGS results and variants with low VFs need to be (fullorpart-time);Modest;MGITechCo.,Ltd.Z.Mei:A. conﬁrmed inindependent tissues. Thiscanprovideinsights Employment (full or part-time); Modest; MGI Tech Co., intothecauseofthetumordiseaseandpossibleheredityof Ltd. F. Chen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; mutations to provide the patient with accurate counseling. M. Larsen: None. K. Keupp: None. K. Weber-Las- salle: None. L. Bülow: None. B. Bluemcke: None. B.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1619 Versmold: None. A. Waha: None. J. Driesen: None. A. 1Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc., Redwood City, CA, Baasner: None. C. Eßer: None. B. Schömig-Markiefka: United States, 2Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc., None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. R. Schmutzler: None. Coralville, IA, United States E. Hahnen: None. E. Pohl-Rescigno: None. Clinical oncology samples are often limited in quality and P14.009D quantity, making NGS-based detection of pathologic Estimation of tumor mutational burden based on direct variants challenging. Sensitive and accurate detection of comparison to a panel of normals or a panel of tumors low-frequency variants can be accomplished using hybrid captureandultra-deeptargetedsequencing,butrelyonhigh J. Rehker, M. Ball, C. Heydt, R. Pappesch, R. Buettner, conversion during library construction. Size-selection is S. Merkelbach-Bruse required to remove adapter-dimers resulting in signiﬁcant sample loss and reduced sensitivity to low frequency University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany variants. Speciﬁcity also suffers as many low-frequency artifactsariseduringsamplepreparationandhybridcapture. The amount of somatic variants in cancer, the tumor Duplexedmolecularbarcodingcaneliminatetheseartifacts, mutationalburden(TMB)hasbeenassociatedwithpositive but conventional duplexed adapters are difﬁcult to synthe- outcomeofimmune checkpointinhibitortherapy inseveral size and purify, leading to reduced ligation efﬁciency. We cancer entities. Distinguishing somatic variants from high present the IDT library preparation kit optimized for low- levels of germline variants or sequencing artifacts can be input and degraded samples. Our chemistry relies on a accomplished by sequencing a matched normal sample proprietaryengineeredDNAligaseandsequencingadapters from the same individual, which is often not available in that prevent chimeras and suppress dimer-formation negat- routinediagnosis.Whilerawvariantcallscanbeﬁlteredfor ing the need for size-selection. We adopted the workﬂow germline variants by population frequency in public for both DNA and RNA applications and demonstrated databases, sequencing artifacts are speciﬁc to wet-lab efﬁcacy using diverse sample types. To assess sensitivity, methodology. We employed standardopen source software we created libraries using mixtures of genome in a bottle for alignment (bwa) and variant calling (GATK4 mutect2) gDNA and performed hybrid capture using a custom panel combined with a one on one artifact ﬁltering different to targeting single nucleotide variants (SNVs), copy number GATK's best practices. Variants in in the tumor were variants (CNVs), and gene fusions. When compared to directly compared to the alignments of a panel of normals commerciallyavailablemethods,ourapproachyieldeda1.5 rather than being called in each sample and then combined to 4-fold increase in library complexity with improved in a vcf ﬁle which then serves as a blacklist. We estimated sensitivity to <0.25% variants using 1-25 ng cfDNA, and TMB on a custom gene panel of ~1GB coding exons and <0.5% using 25-250 ng FFPE DNA. RNA libraries were comparedresultsof9samplestoseveralsequencingpanels constructedfromFFPENGSreferencestandardstoevaluate and software solutions of commercial vendors. Our fusion detection. Our method provides superior sensitivity approach showed different levels of correlation with tested andspeciﬁcityfordetectionoflow-frequencyvariants,even alternative solutions, peaking R^2=0.995 (Illumina with highly degraded DNA and RNA. TSO500) and R^2=0.959 (QIAseq TMB Panel). We U.DasChakravarty:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); currently evaluate the pipeline in tumor only mode and Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. A. Royall: A. will present a detailed comparison. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA J. Rehker: None. M. Ball: None. C. Heydt: None. R. Technologies, Inc. M. Hong: A. Employment (full or part- Pappesch: None. R. Buettner: None. S. Merkelbach- time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. H. Bruse: None. Huang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Inte- grated DNA Technologies, Inc. K. Lai: A. Employment P14.010A (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies, Low frequency variant detection from highly degraded Inc.K.Dilger:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Modest; DNA and RNA Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. K. Bryan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA U. Das Chakravarty1, A. Royall1, M. Hong1, H. Huang1, Technologies, Inc. Y. Wang: A. Employment (full or part- K. Lai1, K. Dilger1, K. Bryan2, Y. Wang1, L. Lewis2, time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. L. S. Rose2, Y. Zheng1 Lewis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Inte- grated DNA Technologies, Inc. S. Rose: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies,1620 Inc.Y.Zheng:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest; comprehensive pan-ethnic spinal muscular atrophy Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc.. (SMA) carrier screening P14.011B D. A. Zeevi1, J. Harting2, R. Bringer1, I. McLaughlin2, Allelic drop-out is a common phenomenon reducing the S. Scher3, J. Ekstein3 diagnostic yield of PCR-based target sequencing 1DorYeshorimCommitteeforPreventionofJewishGenetic A. Shestak1, A. Bukaeva1, S. Saber2, Diseases, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo E. Zaklyazminskaya1,3 Park, CA, United States, 3Dor Yeshorim Committee for Prevention of Jewish Genetic Diseases, New York, NY, 1Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, Moscow, United States Russian Federation, 2Cardiac Electrophysiology Research Center, Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research Introduction:Carrierscreeningforspinalmuscularatrophy Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, (SMA) often involves copy number assay of SMN1 exon 7 Islamic Republic of, 3Pirogov Russian National Research dosage.Theseassaysaretypicallyinsensitiveto2ciscopies Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation of SMN1 on one chromosome and none on the other; a scenario which accounts for 8%-29% of carrier states, Allelic drop-out (ADO) is a known phenomenon of depending on ethnicity. Thus, we established a new pan- selective allele ampliﬁcation representing the potential ethnic assay to improve cis allele carrier detection. problemofcorrectDNAdiagnostics.BothNGSandSanger Materials and Methods: 96 Jewish subjects, from var- sequencing are PCR-based methods, Sanger sequencing is iouscountriesoforiginacross4continentswereselectedfor used to verify NGS results. The purpose of this study is to study. An established qPCR assay was performed on all demonstrate the incidence of ADO reducing the diagnostic samples to assay SMN1 exon7 dosage. Subsequently, a yield in primary cardiomyopathy genetic testing via 16kb region, encompassing SMN1/2 exon 7 and ﬂanking semiconductor NGS and Sanger sequencing of target gene polymorphic SNP sites, was PCR ampliﬁed from each panels. sample with barcoded primers for SMRT sequencing on a Methods: We have developed 3 AmpliSeq custom gene SequelSystem(PaciﬁcBiosciences).Consensusreadswere panels for mutational screening: “K+/Na+ ion channels”, uniquely mapped to either SMN1 or SMN2 and c.840C>T “Desmosomal proteins”, “Sarcomeric proteins”, contains statuswasindependentlydetermined.Finally,SMN1exon7 1049 primer pairs (37 genes) totally, 152 kb. About 140 dosage was validated by a commercial MLPA kit (MRC probands were screened with at least one of these gene Holland). panels. AmpliSeq sequences were analyzed in silico and Results: The combined qPCR and long-read amplicon visually compared with Sanger control sequences, noting analysis correctly identiﬁed the allelic state of 95 samples the facts of heterozygosity loss. passing quality control. Interestingly, SMN1>SMN2 gene Results:Wehavedetected12ADOcasesbothinSanger conversion events were identiﬁed in both a zero copy and (5cases)andAmpliSeq(7cases)sequencingdata.AllADO anunrelated1copycarrier.Inaddition,SMN2>SMN1gene events happened due to frequent or rare SNVs in the oli- conversion events were also detected in 3 cis carrier con- goprimerannealingsitesandweredetectedduetomismatch trols and 3 other unrelated 3-copy individuals. None of the in frequent SNPs zygosity nearby. Three pathogenic var- gene converted samples were of the same ethnicity. iantswouldbemissedifwerenotrevealedbyre-sequencing Conclusion:Wedescribeanovelrapidandlow-costpan- with alternative method and alternative oligos. ethniccarrierscreenforSMA,expandingthescopeofSMA Conclusion:AllPCR-basedmethodshaveariskofADO carrier detection beyond that of currently established leading to a decrease of diagnostic yield of genetic testing. screening methods. ADO can theoretically affect 1% amplicons. It seems that D.A. Zeevi: None. J. Harting: A. Employment (full or real scope of ADO might be much higher and depends on part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. R. Bringer: numbersofprimerpairs.ThesoftwareforADOdetectionis None. I. McLaughlin: A. Employment (full or part-time); needed. This work was supported by RNF grant №16-15- Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. S. Scher: None. J. 10421. Ekstein: None. A. Shestak: None. A. Bukaeva: None. S. Saber: None. E. Zaklyazminskaya: None. P14.013D The epigenomic landscape of coverage variability in P14.012C low-pass plasma cell-free DNA sequencing from non- Utilizing long-read amplicon sequencing for invasive prenatal screeningAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1621 N. B. Larson, J. Na, C. P. Sosa, R. A. Rowsey, C. Wang Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Geneton, Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia Low-pass whole-genome sequencing of plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has been widely adopted as an assay Introduction: Cystic ﬁbrosis is a relatively common but technology for a variety of non-invasive applications, severe autosomal recessive disorder. Molecular-genetic includingprenatalscreeningoffetalgenomicabnormalities. testing of the associated CFTR gene is routinely performed These aligned reads can be summarized as binned read instandardclinical care. Duringavalidation processofour counts overlapping contiguous partitions of the genome, massively-parallel-sequencing (MPS) results, we identiﬁed providing evidence of copy-number aberrations and aneu- a region around exon_10 that was found to be particularly ploidy. However, our experience indicates cfDNA sequen- prone to speciﬁc sequencing errors. cing exhibits a greater degree of regional coverage Material and Methods: MPS data were generated using variabilitybothwithinandacrosssamplesthanencountered different sequencing panels on Illumina MiSeq/NextSeq in typical whole-genome sequencing. Moreover, we have platforms.Readmappingandvariantcallingwasperformed found that traditional intra-sample GC content and mapp- usingBowtie2andVardict,respectively.Genotypingofthe ability correction are insufﬁcient to fully account for this TG /T motifwasperformedusingDante,analignmentfree n n variability, resulting in temporal trends in chromosomal STR genotyping tool. Exon_10 and surrounding intronic coverages across samples. To comprehensively explore regions were validated by Sanger sequencing. genomic features that may contribute to this variability, we Results: We identiﬁed several types of false variants in examined cfDNA sequencing coverage proﬁles for N = this region. One group was found to be caused by a highly 2258 normal non-invasive prenatal screening (NIPS) assay homologous but not fully matching region in chromosome results. Autosomal GC-corrected bin-level coverage (10kb 20. Since this region was not present in GRCh37, corre- bin size) was modeled as a function of assay date using sponding reads were attracted by the CFTR gene creating smoothingsplines,adjustingforestimatedfetalfraction.We thus false variant calls. Using GRCh38 these variants dis- identiﬁed 42,683 10kb segments (16.6%) throughout the appeared. The same homologous region caused problems genome with signiﬁcant temporal associations (FDR also to our STR genotyping tool which detected an addi- <0.05). Next, we explored genomic annotation enrichment tionalTG/Tallele.Anothergroupwasfoundtobetypically among the signiﬁcant regions using >8000 epigenomic associated to sequencing reads directly spanning the intro- features from the Roadmap Epigenomics Project and other nic TG /T polymorphic locus. These were associated to n n public resources. Hypergeometric enrichment testing iden- largerrepeatnumbersandhadtheirorigininrepeat-induced tiﬁed 817 signiﬁcant associations (Bonferroni-adjusted sequencing errors. P<0.05), with the top enrichment results corresponding to Conclusion: The mentioned CTFR region revealed ﬁnd- H3K9me3 histone modiﬁcations in leukocyte cell-lines. ings worth of investigations, possibly having implications These ﬁndings suggest cell-speciﬁc heterochromatin com- for anothergenomic regionstoo.Sucherror sourcesshould position may contribute tointer-andintra-sample coverage be kept in mind when evaluating variants and considering correlation patterns via differential cfDNA degradation, additional validation analyses. Supported by: which could be leveraged to improve coverage normal- VaV_MZSR_2018/46-SAV-5 and VEGA_1/0433/19. ization and increase screening assay performance. Z. Kubiritova: None. J. Budis: None. M. Kucharik: N.B.Larson:None.J.Na:None.C.P.Sosa:None.R.A. None. T. Szemes: None. J. Radvanszky: None. Rowsey: None. C. Wang: None. P14.015B P14.014A Clinical reporting of NGS data: A systematic Nordic High error rate in a speciﬁc region of the CFTR gene collaborative, peer-reviewed benchmarking may lead to false variant ﬁndings when using massively parallel sequencing in molecular diagnostics of cystic C. Nadeau1, S. Alagaratnam1, O. Agafonov1, ﬁbrosis G. M. Pedersen1, B. N. Ray-Sannerud1, S. McAdam1, J. J. Jónsson2, K. A. W. Wadt3, M. Dunø3, K. Lagerstedt- Z. Kubiritova1,2, J. Budis3,4, M. Kucharik3, T. Szemes2,3,4, Robinson4, D. Undlien5, V. Wirta6, M. Rossing7 J. Radvanszky1,3,4 1DNV GL, Høvik, Norway, 2Dept. of Genetics and 1Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Molecular Medicine, Landspitali - National University Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, HospitalandDept.ofBiochemistryandMolecularBiology,1622 Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, P14.016C Iceland, 3Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen Quality improvement in clinical NGS through a peer- University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Department driven Nordic collaboration of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet and Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska Univ S. Alagaratnam1, G. Meldre Pedersen1, S. McAdam2, Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 5e. Department of Medical V. Wirta3, J. Lundeberg4, M. Dunø5, K. A. W. Wadt5, Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, M. Rossing6, J. J. Jónsson7, J. Saarela8,9, D. Undlien10 Oslo,Norway,6ScienceforLifeLaboratory,Departmentof Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska 1Precision medicine programme, Group Technology and Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 7Center for Genomic Research, DNV GL, Høvik, Norway, 2Digital Health Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Incubator, Digital Solutions, DNV GL, Høvik, Norway, Denmark 3Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet and Science The clinical genomics report details key ﬁndings from the for Life Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal interpretation of diagnostic next-generation sequencing Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Science for (NGS) data and represents a core hand-off between Life Laboratory, School of Biotechnology, KTH Royal specialized clinical genomics laboratories and the broader Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Dept. of healthcare community. However, the design of clinical Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, genetics reports is not standardized, where misunderstand- Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Center for Genomic Medicine, ing of results, limitations or key ﬁndings can lead to Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, incorrect therapeutic decisions and directly impact patient 7Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali – management. In this study, we ﬁrst reviewed existing NationalUniversityHospitalandDept.ofBiochemistryand guidelinesandregulationsonclinicalreporting.Toevaluate Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of variation across clinical reports, we then conducted a peer- Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 8Centre for Molecular reviewed benchmarking exercise among members of the Medicine Norway, Oslo, Norway, 9Institute for Molecular Nordic Alliance for Clinical Genomics (NACG) from MedicineFinland,UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki,Finland, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. Partici- 10Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University pating laboratories were given three ﬁctional clinical cases, Hospital, Oslo, Norway from which they produced clinical reports using their current production pipelines. Participants then evaluated Although the technology for high-quality next-generation each other’s reports using a structured questionnaire. The sequencing (NGS) data is widely available in a research results of the benchmarking showed a signiﬁcant variation context, clinical implementation of high-throughput NGS- ofreportingononehand,anddifﬁcultiesincomprehending based diagnostics has proven difﬁcult. This requires many keyinformationontheother.Finally,weperformedaseries topics surrounding quality assurance, assay validity, data of semi-structured interviews with specialists involved in security, legal and regulatory considerations and the medical genetic testing and end-users of the reports. interface with pre-existing hospital infrastructure all to be Through these activities, we identiﬁed gaps in existing addressed.Manymoleculardiagnosticsdepartmentsrunin- guidelines for clinical reporting of genetic variants as well house developed bioinformatic and variant interpretation as pain points for effective information transfer. The ﬁnal pipelines, with wide variation in the extent to which phaseofthisprojectfocusedonthereportenduser’sneeds comparisons against gold standards and proﬁciency testing and challenges as input for a redesign of the clinical are performed. An alliance of Nordic laboratories imple- genomics report, with the aim to ensure effective and menting genomics in clinical settings, the Nordic Alliance accurateﬂowofinformationfromthegenomiclaboratoryto for Clinical Genomics, has applied the approach of peer- the end user. driven collaboration to a series of benchmarking exercises. C. Nadeau: None. S. Alagaratnam: None. O. Agafo- Components of the NGS diagnostic pipeline including nov: None. G.M. Pedersen: None. B.N. Ray-Sannerud: variant calling, variant interpretation and clinical reporting None. S. McAdam: None. J.J. Jónsson: None. K.A.W. were all examined in turn. Benchmarking exercises were Wadt: None. M. Dunø: None. K. Lagerstedt-Robinson: designed by members of the alliance to reﬂect their real- None. D. Undlien: None. V. Wirta: None. M. world needs, then executed, before the results were Rossing: None. discussed in plenum at a series of bi-annual workshops. 6 workshops have been held to date, with the number of participants growing from 18 to 66 at each workshop, and the corresponding number of participating organizationsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1623 from5to19.Thisapproachgavetheparticipatingunitsthe 35 known, 47 novel variants (submitted to ClinVar) and 8 unique opportunity to compare their production perfor- variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS). mance against each other, and for differences and ﬁndings Discussion: NGS supports marked improvement in tobediscussedonapracticallevelandsummarized.Forall diagnostic-yield for many RDs, sometimes revealing aty- threeexercises,oneormoreparticipatingunitsincorporated pical phenotypesand/or genotypes.Higher diagnostic yield learnings and implemented changes in their current clinical is achieved for clinically well-deﬁned cases, supported by pipelines, demonstrating the value of a peer-driven forum familysegregationstudies.Closecollaborationbetweenthe for such quality improvement activities. laboratory and clinics, supports high quality standards S. Alagaratnam: None. G. Meldre Pedersen: None. S. (clinical, laboratory, interpretation, counselling/reporting), McAdam: None. V. Wirta: None. J. Lundeberg: None. fundamentaltooptimisedeﬁnitivediagnosis,althoughVUS M.Dunø:None.K.A.W.Wadt:None.M.Rossing:None. remain challenging. J.J. Jónsson: None. J. Saarela: None. D. Undlien: None. N. Marinakis: None. G. Christopoulou: None. D. Veltra: None. M. Sviggou: None. K. Kekou: None. C. P14.017D Sofocleous: None. E. Tsoutsou: None. K. Kosma: None. Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) as a key player in A. Oikonomaki: None. P. Constantoulakis: None. H. improving diagnostic yield for rare diseases (RDs): the Fryssira: None. J. Traeger-Synodinos: None. collaborative experience of 2 centres in Greece P14.018A N. Marinakis1, G. Christopoulou2, D. Veltra1, Utility of gene panel testing in children with seizure M. Sviggou1, K. Kekou1, C. Sofocleous1, E. Tsoutsou1, onsetafter2yearsofage:ResultsfromaEuropeanand K. Kosma1, A. Oikonomaki2, P. Constantoulakis2, Middle Eastern epilepsy genetic testing program H. Fryssira1, J. Traeger-Synodinos1 K. Gall1, E. Izzo2, N. Miller2, K. Alakurtti1, 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,National&Kapodistrian E.H.Seppala1,L.Koskinen1,J.Koskenvuo1,T.Alastalo1 University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Genotypos-Science Labs MSA, Athens, Greece 1Blueprint Genetics, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA, United States Introduction:Wereport12monthsofclinicalNGSbythe Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, and a Background: Epilepsy is one of the most common collaborating service lab, for patients referred for a wide childhood-onset neurological conditions with a genetic range of genetic conditions. basis.Geneticdiagnosisprovidespotentialforetiologically- Material and Methods: During 12 months, 186 patients based management and treatment. Existing research has (85%pediatric)werereferred,followingclinicalevaluation, focused on early-onset (<2 years) epilepsies while data pre-test counselling and signed informed-consent. Clinical regarding later-onset epilepsies is limited. Program goals: geneticists and other medical specialists selected whole or Determine, in a selected pediatric epilepsy cohort, the clinical exome sequencing (~19,000 or ~4,500 genes) overall and actionable molecular diagnostic (MDx) yield according to phenotype. Library preparation used Whole andtheCLN2diseaseMDxyield.CLN2isasevere,rapidly Exome Solution and Clinical Exome Solution kits (Sophia progressive neurodegenerative disease with onset of Genetics),runonaNextSeq-500(Illumina).Bioinformatics seizures at/after 2 years and average age-of-diagnosis of ® analysis used SOPHiA DDM and VarAFT 2.14. Variants 5 years. were categorised according to ACMG guidelines; only Methods: Blueprint Genetics’ next-generation sequen- “Pathogenic” or “Likely pathogenic” variants were repor- cing(NGS)-based283-geneepilepsypanelwasused.Copy ted. In most cases Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed variants number variant (CNV) detection from NGS data was and family segregation. included.Variantinterpretationwasperformedaccordingto Results: RDs included: Neurodevelopmental (28 ACMG guidelines. Program results (Oct/2017-Nov/2018) patients), Neuromuscular (31), Skeletal/connective tissue are reported from 210 patients (Europe, Middle East) with (20), Metabolic (8), Dysmorphic syndromes (16), Intellec- inclusion criteria: Age 24-60 months, ﬁrst seizure at/after tual disability/Autism (6), Kidney (10), Cardiopathies (10), 24months,andatleastoneadditionalﬁnding.Theprogram Skin (6), Ears/Eyes (11), Other (30). Diagnostic yield was was sponsored by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. 42% overall (78/186 cases), reaching >60% for Neurode- Results: Median age-at-testing: 42 months; median age- velopmental,Skeletal/connectivetissue,Skin,Ears/Eyes;56 of-ﬁrst-seizure-onset: 30 months; average delay from ﬁrst cases exhibited autosomal dominant inheritance (49 de- seizure to comprehensive genetic testing: 10.3 months. novo, 7 inherited), 12 recessive and 10 X-linked, including Genetic diagnosis was established in 42 patients; 20.0%1624 MDx yield. CNVs were reported in 26.2% of diagnosed related AML. Peripheral blood karyotype detected multiple patients; 27.3% of CNVs identiﬁed were intragenic. MDx spontaneous chromosomal changes, including: single and included 5 CLN2 (TPP1 gene) diagnoses, 4 MECP2, 3 double strand breaks, quadri-radial structures, marker SCN1A,3Angelmansyndrome,2eachofCHD2,KCNA2, chromosomes and translocations. Diepoxybutane-induced MFSD8, SCN2A and STXBP1. breakage test did not indicate increased breakage. Bone Conclusion: This program demonstrates the clinical uti- marrow karyotype showed 6p deletion, partial trisomy of lity of a comprehensive epilepsy gene panel for patients 11q, mosaicism for del5q, consistent with t-AML. Whole with ﬁrst seizures at/after 2 years for MDx of pediatric exome sequencing revealed a homozygous missense epilepsy and CLN2 disease to guide management and mutation in BLM (c.3416G>C), indicating Bloom syn- treatment. drome, explaining the clinical presentation. Here we K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; demonstrate that in addition to diagnosis of deletion/ Blueprint Genetics. E. Izzo: A. Employment (full or part- duplication syndromes, mosaicism and CN-LOH, the use time); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin. N. Miller: A. Employment of SNP-based CMA platforms allows detection of pre- (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin. K. Alakurtti: A. viously undiagnosed systemic maladies. We urge CMA Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint analysts to be alert to changes in SNP pattern. Genetics.E.H.Seppala:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); S. Zeligson: None. O. Weiss: None. R. Sheffer: None. Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. L. Koskinen: A. Employ- O. Lobel: None. A. Frumkin: None. M. Ben Uziyahu: ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. None.S.RevelVilk:None.D.Harel:None.G.Goldstein: Koskenvuo:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; None. O. Weinstein: None. J. Dagan: None. V. Meiner: Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment (full or None. R. Segel: None. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. P14.020C P14.019B Identifying rare copy number variants using genome- Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) based wide array data chromosomal microarray analysis may detect early stages of malignancy J. G. Dennis, D. Easton S. Zeligson1, O. Weiss1, R. Sheffer2, O. Lobel1, Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Cambridge, A.Frumkin2,M.BenUziyahu1,S.RevelVilk1,D.Harel2, United Kingdom G. Goldstein2, O. Weinstein2, J. Dagan2, V. Meiner2, R. Segel1 Introduction: Genotyping experiments by the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC) have identiﬁed 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, morethan100lociassociatedwiththeriskofbreastcancer. 2Hadassah Medical center, Jerusalem, Israel Rare deletions and duplications within susceptibility genes areknowntoincreasebreastcancerriskbutthecontribution Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) detecting con- of rare CNVs within other genes and non-coding regions stitutional copy number variations (CNVs), is the ﬁrst-tier has not been studied with large sample sizes. test for individuals with developmental delay or congenital Materials and Methods: We called CNVs from the anomalies. We present a patient with acute myeloid intensity measurements from Illumina custom arrays leukemia (AML) incidentally diagnosed by CMA done on (iCOGS and Oncoarray) for ~150,000 breast cancer cases peripheral blood. A nine years old boy of consanguineous and ~120,000 controls. To reduce noise we applied a parents was referred to CMA because of multiple CAL principal component adjustment to the intensities and strict spots with axillary freckling, and severe failure to thrive sample and locus quality control. We calculated z-scores (weight and height: -3.5SD, head circumference: -4SD). At from the distribution of intensities at each probe and used age four years he had Wilms tumor, with a relapse at age circular binary segmentation to identify runs of probes six. Former genetic workup included normal karyotype, where the z-scores for a sample were shifted. We derived methylation pattern of H19 and NF1 sequencing. SNP- cut-offs for the mean z-scores of segments that indicated based CMA testing revealed multiple changes in mosaic probable deletions or duplications. state: mosaic duplications of 1q, 3q, 6p, 21q, 11q, 21q, Results: Comparison with known rare CNVs in 1000 mosaic loss of 6p, and mosaic copy neutral loss of Genomes samples indicate a sensitivity rate of approxi- heterozygosity (CN-LOH) of 10q, 19q, 21q, with multiple mately 86% for deletions and 71% for duplications. We homozygous regions (22%). This CMA result indicated estimated the rate of false positive CNV calls to be around hematological malignancy, later diagnosed as therapy 7% for deletions and 16% for duplications. The z-scoresAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1625 provide a metric for the conﬁdence of the CNV call. Tests was shown to be more cost-efﬁcient than all the other for breast cancer risk showed the strongest associations for methods. known CNVs in CHEK2 and BRCA1. Conclusion: The universal dPCR CNV assay is simple, Conclusions: By accounting for the variance in probe robust and cost-efﬁcient as it combines a straightforward intensity on genotyping arrays, our method improves the design allowed by universal probes and endpoint PCR, the calling of rare CNVs and may provide more powerful tests advantages of a relative quantiﬁcation of the target to the of disease association. reference within the same reaction, and the high speciﬁcity J.G. Dennis: None. D. Easton: None. of the LNA-hydrolysis probes. This method should be a useful tool for genomic medicine, which requires simple P14.021D methods for the interpretation and segregation analysis of Auniversalsimpleandcost-efﬁcientdigitalPCRmethod genomic variations. for the targeted analysis of copy number variations K. Cassinari: None. O. Quenez: None. G. Joly-Hélas: None. L. Beaussire: None. N. Le Meur: None. M. Cas- K. Cassinari1,2, O. Quenez1,2, G. Joly-Hélas1, telain:None.A.Goldenberg:None.A.Guerrot:None.A. L. Beaussire1, N. Le Meur1, M. Castelain1, Brehin: None. J. Deleuze: None. A. Boland: None. A. A. Goldenberg1, A. Guerrot1, A. Brehin1, J. Deleuze3, Rovelet-Lecrux: None. D. Campion: None. P. Saugier- A. Boland3, A. Rovelet-Lecrux1,2, D. Campion1,2,4, Veber: None. N. Gruchy: None. T. Frebourg: None. G. P. Saugier-Veber1, N. Gruchy5, T. Frebourg1, Nicolas: None. N. Sarafan-Vasseur: None. P. G. Nicolas1,2, N. Sarafan-Vasseur1, P. Chambon1 Chambon: None. 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen P14.022A University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F76000, Prenatal CNV detection by means of exome sequencing NormandyCentreforGenomicandPersonalizedMedicine, instead of microarray diagnostics: one test ﬁts all! Rouen, France, 2Rouen University Hospital, CNR-MAJ, F76000, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized D. Westra1, R. Pfundt1, S. J. C. Stevens2, I. Feenstra1, Medicine, Rouen, France, 3Centre National de Recherche C. F. H. A. Gilissen1, K. Neveling1, M. R. Nelen1, enGénomiqueHumaine,InstitutdeGénomique,CEA,Evry, H. G. Yntema1, D. F. C. M. Smeets1, N. de Leeuw1, France, 4Department of Research, Rouvray Psychiatric B. H. W. Faas1 Hospital, Sotteville-lès-Rouen, France, 5Caen University Hospital, Department of Genetics, F 14000, Normandy 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Caen, Netherlands, 2Maastricht UMC+, Maastricht, Netherlands France Introduction: Nowadays, in fetuses with structural Introduction: Rare copy number variations (CNVs) are a abnormalities, rapid whole exome sequencing (WES) is major cause of genetic diseases. Simple targeted methods frequentlyperformedinadditiontoroutinediagnosticstests arerequiredfortheirconﬁrmationandsegregationanalysis. (QF-PCR and microarray analysis). Since our in-house We developed a simple and universal CNV assay based on diagnostic workﬂow now allows for prenatal WES results dPCR and universal Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA)-hydro- within two weeks, we evaluated whether genome-wide, lysis probes. exome-basedCNVanalysisonprenatalsampleswithanon- Methods: We analyzed the mapping of the 90 LNA aberrantQF-PCRresultissufﬁcientlyrobustandaccurateto hydrolysis probes from the Roche Universal Probe Library replace the current microarray workﬂow. (UPL).ForeachCNV,selectionoftheoptimalprimersand Methods: For all samples received between01/2016 and LNA probe is almost automated, probes are reused across 10/2018forwhichbothrapidWESandmicroarrayanalysis assays and each dPCR assay includes the CNV amplicon wereperformed,aberrantmicroarrayproﬁlesexplainingthe and a reference amplicon. We assessed the assay perfor- ultrasound abnormalities were compared to exome-based mances on 93 small and large CNVs and performed a CNV proﬁling data. In addition, for all clinically relevant comparative cost-efﬁciency analysis. CNVsreportedintheprenatalsettingin2018,thepotential Results: UPL-LNA probes presented nearly 20,000,000 detection of these using exome sequencing data, based on occurrences on the human genome and were homo- CNV size and/or gene content, was investigated. geneously distributed with a mean interval of 156 bp. The Atotalof21clinicallyrelevantCNVs(withsizesranging assay accurately detected all the 93 CNVs, except one from 500 kb – 8.7 Mb) were examined. (<200pb),withvariationcoefﬁcientsbelow10%.Theassay Results: Exome-based CNV analysis detected 21/21 of the investigated chromosomal aberrations, including1626 recurrent pathogenic CNVs such as the 22q11 microdele- deviations with length of at least 200k and even some with tion.TheadvantageofsimultaneouslydetectingbothSNVs smaller length (between 100k and 200k). and CNVs by WES is underscored by a fetus in which a Conclusions: We compared clinical samples deﬁned by paternal 1q21.1 microdeletion and a maternal SNV in the aCGH method in Slovakia (Human Genome CGH Micro- RBM8A gene were identiﬁed, resulting in autosomal array Kit, 4x44K), which has roughly 200k bases resolu- recessive TAR syndrome. tion. This resolution is in line with GenomeScreen. The Conclusions: Our results show that exome-based CNV disadvantage of the aCGH method are huge gaps longer proﬁling can detect clinically relevant copy number varia- than 200k bases leaving 38% of genome uncovered, tions in prenatal samples that are also identiﬁed by micro- whereas only 13% is uncovered when GenomeScreen is array analysis. Exome-based CNV analysis can, therefore, used(mainlycentromeres).Lastly,costpersampleisabout replaceprenatalmicroarrayanalysisforsampleswithanon- 2.5 times lower for GenomeScreen. aberrant QF-PCR result. M. Kucharík: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- D. Westra: None. R. Pfundt: None. S.J.C. Stevens: niﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Budiš: A. Employment (full or None. I. Feenstra: None. C.F.H.A. Gilissen: None. K. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. A. Gnip: A. Neveling:None.M.R.Nelen:None.H.G.Yntema:None. Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Medirexa.s.T. D.F.C.M. Smeets: None. N. de Leeuw: None. B.H.W. Szemes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Faas: None. Geneton Ltd.. J. Turňa: None. P14.023B P14.024C Low-coverage WGS with CNV detection is a viable Reproducibility of genome-wide CNV analysis and new replacement for aCGH concept for distant relatedness determination M. Kucharík1, J. Budiš1,2,3, A. Gnip4, T. Szemes1,5,2, M. Korabecna1, A. Zinkova1, I. Brynychova1, J. Turňa5,3 H. Simkova1, J. Geryk2 1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Comenius University 1First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Slovak Center of Czech Republic, 2University Hospital Motol, Charles Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia, University, Prague, Czech Republic 4Medirex a.s., Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia Introduction: High resolution microarray technology is widely used to detect CNVs. Interpretation of results is Introduction: Copynumbervariations(CNV) arerepeated based on correct evaluation of the extent and clinical sequence segments of DNA in the human genome which signiﬁcanceofeachdetectedvariant.Duetolowpopulation contribute substantially to normal population variability. frequencyofmanybenignvariants,wedecidedtoexplorea However abnormal CNVs are a cause of numerous genetic new concept - application of CNV detection for distant disorders.SeveralmethodsforCNVanalysisareused,from relatedness determination. We analysed a large four- the conventional cytogenetic analysis through microarray- generation pedigree without any genetic impairment, we based methods (aCGH) to next-generation sequencing. We followed the segregation of CNVs and reproducibility of present GenomeScreen - NGS based CNV detection their calls. method. Materials and Methods: We tested the performance of Materials and Methods: A previously described CNV Agilent Sure Print G3 Human Microarray 2x 400K. We detection algorithm used for NIPT was adjusted to allow isolated DNA from saliva using Oragene technology. Agi- replacement of aCGH for whole blood or buffy coat. We lent Male and Female Control DNAs were used. determined theoretical limits of its accuracy and conﬁrmed Results: We compared 27 pairs of ﬁrst degree relatives, it with extensive in-silico study as well as genotyped 12 pairs of ﬁrst cousins, 12 pairs of ”uncle -nephew samples. type”(r=1/4),4pairsofdoubleﬁrstcousinsand15pairsof Results: When using WGS achievement of theoretical second cousins. We followed three times the segregation limit for Z-score of >7, at least 3M uniquely mapped reads from a common ancestor to the fourth generation and four are required to detect deviation with the length of 200k times to the third generation. Typically we detected around bases or more. This ﬁnding is supported both with the in- 30 CNVs per individual and we followed the segregation silicoanalysisandanalysisonlab-preparedsamples.Inboth with high precision (identical genomic coordinates for the analyses we were able to detect all of the simulated analysed CNV in different individuals).Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1627 Conclusions: In our pilot study, we provided the evi- neither any false positive nor any false negative among dence that a microarray with evenly distributed probes is 465 samples (Sensitivity (Se) = speciﬁcity = 100%). In able to detect segregation of CNVs with high reproduci- addition, CANOES detected 97 candidate CNVs in 95 bility across four generations and that more efﬁcient CNV additional samples, 86 of which were conﬁrmed by a tar- detection algorithm based on WGS and appropriate popu- geted technique (PPV= 90.1% overall). From the WES lation data may represent a handy tool for distant related- data, CANOES detected 159 of the 195 exonic events nessdetermination.SupportedbytheMinistryofInteriorof previously detected by aCGH among the 135 samples with the Czech Republic grant no.VI20172020102. WES+aCGH data available (Se=81.5%).Overall,thePPV M. Korabecna: None. A. Zinkova: None. I. Bry- of CANOES from WES data was 94.8% after the con- nychova: None. H. Simkova: None. J. Geryk: None. ﬁrmationof108ofthe123callstargetingalistof355genes among 1,056 additional patients. P14.025D Conclusions: CANOES showed very high diagnostic Detection of copy number variations from NGS data performances in the context of NGS gene panels. Combi- usingreaddepthinformation:adiagnosticperformance nation with other detection tools may increase the diag- evaluation nostic performances. O. Quenez: None. K. Cassinari: None. S. Coutant: O. Quenez1, K. Cassinari2, S. Coutant2, F. Lecoquierre2, None. F. Lecoquierre: None. K. Le Guennec: None. S. K. Le Guennec1, S. Rousseau1, A. Richard1, S. Vasseur2, Rousseau:None.A.Richard:None.S.Vasseur:None.E. E. Bouvignies2, J. Bou2, G. Lienard2, S. Manase2, Bouvignies: None. J. Bou: None. G. Lienard: None. S. S.Fourneaux2,M.Vezain2,P.Chambon2,G.Joly-Helas2, Manase:None.S.Fourneaux:None.M.Vezain:None.P. N. Le Meur2, M. Castelain2, A. Boland3, J. Deleuze3, Chambon: None. G. Joly-Helas: None. N. Le Meur: c. FREX4, E. Kasper2, T. Frébourg2, P. Saugier-Veber2, None. M. Castelain: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze: S. Baert-Desurmont2, D. Campion1,5, A. Rovelet-Lecrux1, None. C. Frex: None. E. Kasper: None. T. Frébourg: G. Nicolas1 None. P. Saugier-Veber: None. S. Baert-Desurmont: None. D. Campion: None. A. Rovelet-Lecrux: None. G. 1Department of Genetics and CNR-MAJ, Normandie Univ, Nicolas: None. UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized P14.027B Medicine, Rouen, France, 2Department of Genetics, Development of a genetic risk score for coeliac disease Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen and validation in a clinical diagnostic setting University Hospital, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 3Centre National S.A.Sharp1,S.E.Jones1,R.A.Kimmitt2,M.N.Weedon1, de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, Institut de A. Halpin3, A. R. Wood1, S. King4, R. N. Beaumont1, Génomique, CEA, Evry, France, 4FREX Consortium, W. A. Hagopian5, J. M. Turner4, R. A. Oram2,1 Rouen, France, 5Department of Research, Centre hospitalier du Rouvray, Sotteville-lès-Rouen, France 1Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, Introduction: The detection of Copy Number Variations 2Academic Renal Unit, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS (CNVs) from NGS data is under-exploited and chip-based Foundation, Exeter, United Kingdom, 3Alberta Transplant technologiesortargetedtechniquesarestillcommonlyused Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, for their detection in a diagnostic setting. We assessed the 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, performancesofCNVcallingusingCANOES,aread-depth Edmonton, AB, Canada, 5Paciﬁc Northwest Diabetes comparison method applied to gene panels and whole Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States exome sequencing (WES). Methods: We applied CANOES to NGS data obtained Introduction: Therehasbeenincreasinginterestingenetic from (i) 465 samples with both gene panel and compre- risk scores (GRS) in disease diagnosis. Speciﬁc HLA-DQ hensive Quantitative Multiplex PCR of Short Fluoresent alleles predispose to coeliac disease (CD) and HLA typing (QMSPF)dataavailable(totalof60exonsassessed),(ii)95 is occasionally used as a rule-out test. However, CD is additional samples with NGS data from 2 different gene polygenic and genome wide association studies (GWAS) panels, (iii) 135 samples with both WES and array CGH haveimplicated~40additionalloci.Usingsinglenucleotide (aCGH) data available and (iv) 1,056 additional WES. polymorphisms(SNPs)weaimedtocombineallassociated Results:Fromthegenepaneldata,CANOESdetectedall loci into a GRS and assess its utility as a clinical tool. 14 events that were previously identiﬁed by QMPSF, with1628 Methods: We used imputation to identify SNPs strongly MaterialsandMethods:During2018,275patientswere correlated(r2>0.95) with 4 key HLA-DQ haplotypes studied using the NGS technique without obtaining an (DQ2.5/DQ2.2/DQ7.5/DQ8) in UKBiobank. We derived accurate genetic diagnosis. HLA-DQ odds ratios from 12,000 cases and 12,000 con- Bioinformatic tools that compare the normalized trols(Wellcome Trust). We combined this with additional sequencing depth between patients and controls were used SNPs from recent GWAS to generate a coeliac genetic risk to determine CNVs. The results obtained were compared score(C-GRS).We validated the C-GRS in a population with patients owns laboratory database. CNVs were con- based cohort(UKBiobank) with 1237 cases identiﬁed by ﬁrmed by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampliﬁca- hospital admission codes. We genotyped the C-GRS in tion (MLPA). 161 samples from a paediatric clinic where patients had Results: Pathogenic CNVs causing the disease were beenassessedusinganti-tissuetransglutaminaseantibodies, detected in 11 out of the 275 patients (4%). Speciﬁcally, biopsy and HLA typing. CNVs were detected for pathologies with autosomal Results: The C-GRS consisted of 42 SNPs and was dominantinheritancepatterns(TSC2,MSH2andFBN1),as highly discriminative of CD in UKBiobank. The C-GRS well as for genes with autosomal recessive inheritance was more discriminative than HLA stratiﬁcation alone patterns,includingtwohomozygousdeletions(KCNV2and (ROC-AUC=0.88 [95%CIs:0.87-0.89] v 0.81, p<0.0001) RDX) and one heterozygous deletion with a Single and highly discriminative in the paediatric clinic (ROC- Nucleotide Variant (SNV) in the PKHD1 gene. One of the AUC=0.82 [95%CIs:0.75-0.90], p<0.0001). most notable cases corresponds to a patient suspected of Conclusions: A C-GRS can aid in identifying incident hypomagnesemia who showed compound heterozygous cases of CD and is more effective than HLA typing alone. deletions in the TRPM6 gene. Given the low costs of SNP genotyping relative to HLA Conclusion: These results conﬁrm that the inclusion of typingaC-GRScouldimprovetheavailabilityandutilityof the detection of CNVs by NGS in the genetic diagnostic coeliacgenetictestinginCDdiagnosisandinrecruitmentto routine allows to increase the diagnostic efﬁciency offered, research studies. obtaining increasingly signiﬁcant results and with a better S.A. Sharp: None. S.E. Jones: None. R.A. Kimmitt: cost-effectiveness than conventional techniques. None. M.N. Weedon: None. A. Halpin: None. A.R. A. Ferran Martín: None. L. Gonzalez: None. M. Wood: None. S. King: None. R.N. Beaumont: None. W. Calvo: None. I. Royo: None. C. Camprubi: None. D. A. Hagopian: None. J.M. Turner: None. R.A. Trujillano: None. X. Maçia: None. C. Torres: None. E. Oram: None. Gonzalez: None. I. Segura: None. M. Flores: None. H. SanNicolas:None.J.Fortuño:None.N.Campos:None. P14.028C A. Torrents: None. Clinical validation of Copy Number Variant (CNVs) detection by Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) P14.029D Evaluation of preliminary benchmark deletions for the A. Ferran Martín, L. Gonzalez, M. Calvo, I. Royo, reference sample NA12878 C. Camprubi, D. Trujillano, X. Maçia, C. Torres, E. Gonzalez, I. Segura, M. Flores, H. San Nicolas, R. Rajagopalan1,2, S. Pastor3, L. K. Conlin1,4 J. Fortuño, N. Campos, A. Torrents 1Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Children's Hospital of Reference Laboratory, Hospitalet de Llobregat Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2School f (Barcelona), Spain Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Dept. Objectives: Despitethegreat advances achievedinclinical of Biomedical and Health Informatics, Children's Hospital genetics enabled by the incorporation of Next-Generation of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, Sequencing(NGS),asigniﬁcantpercentageofpatientswith 4Perelman School ofMedicine,University ofPennsylvania, genetic diseases still do not have a conclusive molecular Philadelphia, PA, United States diagnosis. The incorporation of speciﬁc pipeline bioinfor- matic methods has allowed the implementation of Copy Introduction: Reference materials and standards play a Number Variants (CNVs) detection in NGS analysis, pivotal role in research and clinical settings alike for improving its diagnostic efﬁciency. In this study, the benchmarking the quality of genetic material used, data clinical utility of the detection of CNVs by NGS has been produced and performance of software tools used for proven. bioinformaticanalyses.Deﬁcienciesinthebaselinetruthset willresultinmisleadingperformancemetrics.Inthiswork,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1629 we evaluated the preliminary benchmark deletions pub- Materials and Methods: The genome proﬁling of forty- lishedbythegenomeinabottleconsortium(GIAB)forthe two patients with syndromic craniosynostosis was carried reference sample NA12878. outbyoligoarrayCGH.AgilentISCA,4x44,v2.0,with35 Methods: We used orthogonal data from Illumina SNP kbp backbone resolution were used. The slides were scan- array, Illumina short-read sequencing and long-read ned on Agilent ﬂuorescent scanner G2505C and analyzed sequencing data from PacBio and Nanopore to manually by BlueFuse Multi, v 4.2 (20289) (BlueGnome, revieweverydeletiongreaterthan1kbinsize.Toassessthe Cambridge, UK). presence of each deletion call, we computed the relative Results: We found ﬁve pathogenic rearrangements con- read depth across the deletions compared to the rest of the sisting of: three deletions (ranging from 1.1 to 11.24 Mb) genome, evaluated paired-end, and split-reads supporting andtwoduplications(rangingfrom14.92to25.19Mb).We the deletion call. alsofoundtwolikelypathogenicmutations:oneduplication Results: There were 610 deletions (>1kb) in the pre- (4.62 Mb) and one deletion (177.93 Kb). liminarybenchmarkdatasetpublishedbytheGIAB.Fifteen Conclusion: Finally we concluded that 16.6 % of our percent of the deletions (94/610) were found to be LINE patientscarryclinicallysigniﬁcant,pathogenicand/orlikely insertions in the reference genome falsely identiﬁed as pathogenic mutations. These data strongly support the idea deletions in the NA12878. Sixteen percent of the dele- that only a whole-genome high-resolution analysis such as tions (98/610)had conﬂicting evidence across datasets. We array CGH is able to provide an accurate diagnosis for saw evidence for 69% of the deletions (423/610) across genetic imbalances in patients with syndromic datasets. craniostenosis. Conclusion: We performed a manual review of 610 T.N. Delchev: None. D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. H. preliminary benchmark deletions dataset for the sample Kathom: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D. NNA12878.Wefound31%ofthevariantswereeithertobe Toncheva: None. likely false-positive or ambiguous across orthogonal plat- forms. This is the ﬁrst important step in understanding the P14.031B false positive deletions from genome sequencing data and CRISPR/Cas9mediatedenrichmentoftargetedgenomic reﬁne the existing benchmark dataset. regions in human Funding: NIH grant R01-HG009708. R. Rajagopalan: None. S. Pastor: None. L.K. R. Šket1, T. Tesovnik1, M. Debeljak1,2, J. Kovač1,2 Conlin: None. 1Unit of Special Laboratory Diagnostics, University P14.030A Children'sHospital,UMC,Ljubljana,Slovenia,2Facultyof Detection of genetic imbalances by array-based Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia comparative genomic hybridization in patients with syndromic craniostenosis Introduction: CRISPR/Cas9 technology has been widely used for different modiﬁcation of eukaryotic and bacterial T. N. Delchev, D. Avdjieva-Tzavella, H. Kathom, genomes. Here we applied (inactive) Cas9 for guided S. Hadjidekova, D. Toncheva enrichment and hence targeted sequencing of human genomic regions in proximity of LDLR (chr19), PCSK9 Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria (chr1) and APOB (chr2), genes associated with the familial hypercholesterolemia. Introduction: Craniosynostosis is characterized by the Materials and Methods: Speciﬁc single guide RNA premature fusion of one or several of the calvarial sutures. (sgRNA) probes were constructed and used for targeting This fusion restricts normal growth of the skull, face and LDLR, PCSK9 and APOB genes in human DNA, extracted brain causing a number of neurological and neurosurgical from whole blood samples. Different approaches encom- complications. Craniosynostosis can be isolated or syn- passing SNAP-tag, biotin-tag, and immunoprecipitation of dromic. Syndromic craniostenosis is usually caused by a (inactive)Cas9enzyme,wereusedforcapturingofdouble- genomicimbalanceordeﬁcitalthoughtheexactmechanism strandedDNAtargetregionsinfragmentsofapp.30kbpin oftenly remains unknown. Array-based comparative geno- size. Captured DNA was further used for Illumina library mic hybridization (array CGH) is a powerful and high- preparation, sequencing and downstream bioinformatics resolution approach for detection of DNA copy number analysis. variants (CNVs). Results: Applying different ratios between sgRNA, human DNA, and dCas9 enzyme, together with multiple capture techniques, resulted in successful enrichment,1630 especially when using biotin based capture and molar upstream, antibody-independent CTC enrichment methods excess of sgRNA/Cas9. Control and reduction of off-target for its application in patient liquid biopsy specimens. DNA/Cas9 associations and unspeciﬁc binding of DNA to J. Scerri: None. S. Baldacchino: None. C. Saliba: paramagnetic particles used for immunoprecipitation None. C. Scerri: None. G. Grech: None. emerged as the crucial parameters affecting the enrichment efﬁciency. P14.033D Conclusion: Altogether, our approach offers additional Comparative validation of two molecular tag-based insight into speciﬁc enrichment of targeted genes and pre- library systems for sequencing of circulating tumor sentscost-effectiveandrapidtoolintheinvestigationofthe DNA speciﬁc genomic regions associated with familial hyperch- olesterolemia.Grantinformation:TertiaryProjects,Medical T. Nouspikel, L. Ho, T. McKee, T. Koessler University Centre of Ljubljana (Nr. 20170085). R.Šket:None.T.Tesovnik:None.M.Debeljak:None. Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland J. Kovač: None. Liquid biopsy, the analysis of cell-free DNA released by P14.032C tumorcellsintoplasma,isbecomingapromisingbiomarker Breast cancer circulating tumour cell (CTC) detection in clinical oncology. Potential applications include: opti- andcharacterizationusingabead-basedRNAmultiplex mizing therapy (e.g. detecting resistance), monitoring panel residual disease, appraising tumor mutation burden, and early detection of relapses. Yet, this analysis is technically J. Scerri, S. Baldacchino, C. Saliba, C. Scerri, G. Grech challenging, largely because the minute amounts of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) often require detecting University of Malta, Msida, Malta mutationsatfrequencieslowerthan1%.Moleculartagsare a recent technical improvement allowing to better distin- Introduction: The presence of ≥5 circulating tumour cells guish low frequency mutations from sequencing noise. (CTCs) per 7.5 ml of blood correlates with poor prognosis With the aim of implementing novel diagnostic tests in inmetastaticbreastcancerpatients.Molecularcharacterisa- our hospital, we systematically compared two leading tion of CTCs requires highly sensitive assays capable of commercial systems for molecular tags libraries: Avenio detecting low-frequency RNA transcripts. (Roche) and QiaSeq (Qiagen), both with synthetic control Method: A QuantiGene™ 4-plex assay was optimized DNA (Horizon) and with DNA from patients with lung or for direct use on lysed CTCs, to quantitatively assess coloncarcinoma.Ourcomparisonincludedasetof12cases molecular biomarkers associated with breast cancer classi- of colorectal cancer for which we compared sequencing of ﬁcation (ERBB2), epithelial CTC detection (EPCAM, liquidbiopsieswiththatoftheinitialtumors.Overall,there KRT19) and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (FN1). was excellent agreement between the two ctDNA sequen- Serialdilutions(5-1000cells)ofﬁvebreastcancercelllines cing techniques, but poor correlation with the initial tumor, known to express at least one of the target genes (SKBR3, likely due to tumor evolution during the delay between BT474, JIMT-1, MCF7 and Hs578T) were prepared and surgery and liquid biopsy. Dilution experiments revealed microscopically counted. The cells were lysed and used excellent linearity of detection, with a lower limit of directly in the QuantiGene™ 4-plex assay. Readings were quantiﬁcation around 0.2%. Repeatability and reproduci- taken on the Luminex® 200™ and MAGPIX® instruments. bility were good. A key factor was bioinformatic analysis, Results:Theassaygavelinearreadings(R2≥0.99)forthe and dedicated software proved superior to generic open- genes expressed by each cell line down to a mean limit of source programs. 26 cells (range: 6-58). KRT19 outperformed EPCAM as In conclusion, both ctDNA sequencing systems proved epithelialbiomarker.The mesenchymal,triple-negativecell equally good and provided sensitivities in the 10-3 range, lineHs578TexpressedonlyFN1,whichmaintainedalinear thus approaching the theoretical limit that can be expected signaldowntoonly6cells.IntheHER2-positivecelllines, given the low amount of ctDNA in plasma. ERBB2wasanexcellentbiomarker,eveninJIMT-1,which T.Nouspikel: None.L.Ho:None.T.McKee:None.T. is known to be a low expresser. High concordance Koessler: None. (R2≥0.87) was recorded between the two instruments. Conclusion: Direct cell lysis and signal ampliﬁcation P14.034A technology make bead-based multiplex RNA panels Effectiveneonatalgeneticdiagnosticsofcysticﬁbrosisin applicable on liquid biopsies in the clinical laboratory. The Khanty-Mansi region (Russia) technique is being currently optimized with the use ofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1631 M. Donnikov1,2, V. Mescheryakov1, A. Vorobev1, 4 c.412_413insACT(p. L138ins 2 2.9 Leu137_Leu138insThr) A. Popov1, N. Satsuk3, L. Kolbasin2, D. Lozhkin1, 5 c.1399C>T(p.Leu467Phe) L467F 2 2.9 N. Kuntsevitch1, L. Kovalenko1, I. Urvantseva1,4 6 c.1545_1546delTA(p. 1677delTA 2 1.5 Tyr515X) 1Medical Institute of Surgut State University, Surgut, 7 c.3196C>T(p.Arg1066Cys) R1066C 2 1.5 8 c.43delC(p.Leu15PhefsX10) 175delC 1 1.5 Russian Federation, 2Medical Genetics Counseling Service 9 c.489+1G>T 621+1G->T 1 1.5 of the Regional Cardiological Hospital “Center of 10 c.653T>A(p.Leu218X) L218X 1 1.5 Diagnostics and Cardiovascular Surgery", Surgut, Russian 11 c.1040G>A(p.Arg347His) R347H 1 1.5 Federation, 3Regional Children Clinical Hospital, 12 c.1624G>T(p.Gly542X) G542X 1 1.5 Nizhnevartovsk, Russian Federation, 4Regional 13 c.2012delT(p.Leu671X) 2143delT 1 1.5 Cardiological Hospital "Center of Diagnostics and 14 c.3208C>T(p.Arg1070Trp) R1070W 1 1.5 Cardiovascular Surgery", Surgut, Russian Federation 15 c.3846G>A(p.Trp1282X) W1282X 1 1.5 16 c.3983T>A(p.Ile1328Lys) - 1 1.5 68 100 Introduction: Newborn screening (NBS) dramatically improved cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) preclinical diagnostics, although the need of early detection of CFTR mutations M. Donnikov: None. V. Mescheryakov: None. A. stillchallengesregionalgeneticslaboratoriesinRussia.We Vorobev: None. A. Popov: None. N. Satsuk: None. L. applied 3-step approach using known molecular methods Kolbasin: None. D. Lozhkin: None. N. Kuntsevitch: for fast mutation search, which helped physicians quickly None. L. Kovalenko: None. I. Urvantseva: None. start appropriate neonatal treatment. Materials and Methods: gDNA from 501 dried blood P14.035B spots (DBS) obtained using column extraction; high reso- Newborn screening EQA for Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) and lution melting (HRM) analysis performed using “Precision Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deﬁciency Melt Software” (Bio-Rad); Sanger sequencing, MLPA (MCADD): Ten year review (2008-2018) performed on “GenomeLab GeXP” (Beckman Coulter) according to manufacturers’ protocols. F. Moon, R. Treacy, Z. C. Deans Results: We applied 3-step approach (HRMA-Sanger- MLPA) for all suspicious CF cases after NBS. In 2016 - GenQA, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 2018we studied 401samplesand revealed 34carriers with one CFTR mutation and 17 children (later included in Newbornscreeningisperformedwithintheﬁrst8weeksof regional CF registry) with two mutations. First we looked life to screen for diseases which are treatable if detected for seven major regional mutations using HRM-based early. Most of these tests are biochemical based but two genotyping,thenHRM-basedgenescanningrevealedexons disorders include molecular testing for conﬁrmation of with deviating melting patterns, which in turn were sub- diagnosis; Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deﬁ- jected to Sanger sequencing. Finally, MLPA was used for ciency (MCADD) and cystic ﬁbrosis (CF). To monitor the all samples. All ﬁndings (see Table) were validated later ability of molecular laboratories to detect MCADD and CF with100%concordancebyNGSperformedelsewhere.This mutations from neonatal blood spot cards, an external study also updated the list of major regional CFTR quality assessment (EQA) was set up in 2008. For these mutations. EQAs, samples are distributed four times a year to provide Conclusions: the proposed approach allowed to perform continualmonitoringofthequalityoftesting.Tomimicthe CFTR mutation testing rapidly (TAT 3 - 4 days) for neo- newborn screening carried out in laboratories as closely as natal DBS samples at level of regional genetics laboratory, possible,routineneonatalbloodspotcardsareusedwithreal which is particularly important for new CF cases among patient blood samples. For the CF EQA a variety of scattered population in Siberia. different CF variants are tested including the four most common European CFTR variants (p.Phe508del, p. Gly542*, p.Glu551Asp and c.621+1G>T). Compound Listofmutantallelesrevealedinthestudy heterozygotesandsamplesinwhichnovariantsaredetected № HGVS Legacy mutant % allelesnumber fromtotal are also included. For the MCADD EQA, participants are requestedtotestthesamplesforthemostcommonACADM 1 c.1521_1523delCTT(p. [delta]F508 44 64.6 Phe508del) variantc.985A>Gp.(Lys329Glu)Approximately30labora- 2 c.274G>A(p.Glu92Lys) E92K 4 5.9 tories currently participate in one or both bloodspot EQAs. 3 c.54-5940_273+10250del21kb CFTRdele2,3 3 4.4 Theseincludeparticipantsfromninecountries.Areviewof (p.Ser18ArgfsX16) these EQAs over the last ten years will be presented.1632 Including participating countries, the samples used in the T. Mantere: None. K. Neveling: None. M. Stevens- EQA runs, common errors and changes in mutation Kroef: None. D. Olde Weghuis: None. D. Smeets: None. nomenclature. A. Hoischen: None. F. Moon: None. R. Treacy: None. Z.C. Deans: None. P14.037D P14.036C Identiﬁcation of genomic aberrations in children with Next-generation cytogenetics in medical genetics with global developmental delay or intellectual disability high-resolution optical mapping through detecting copy number changes and whole exome sequencing T. Mantere1, K. Neveling1, M. Stevens-Kroef1, D. Olde Weghuis1, D. Smeets1, A. Hoischen1,2,3 P. Chen, Y. Chen 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Department of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome MedicalCenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands,2RadboudInstitute Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan of Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Internal Developmental delay (DD) is the late emergence of Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases developmental milestones during infancy and early child- (RCI), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, hood. Copy number variations (CNVs) have been regarded Netherlands asoneofthemajorcausesofDD.Theaimofthisstudyisto determinetheefﬁciencyofwholeexomesequencing(WES) Structuralvariants(SVs)areanimportantsourceofgenetic as a ﬁrst-tier diagnostic test in comparison with array variation in the human genome and they are involved in a comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) for DD. multitude of human diseases, including cancer and devel- We have enrolled 322 subjects diagnosed with global opmental disorders. In a diagnostic set-up, comprehensive developmental delay or intellectual disability of unknown analysis of all molecular cytogenetic aberrations in a given cause.AllindividualshavecompletedaCGHtests(Positive sample still requires a combination of techniques, such as rate: 17.1%). WES was performed on 24 trios and 10 pro- CNV-microarrays, karyotyping and FISH. We hypothesize bands with Agilent SureSelect target enrichment system that the combination of classical approaches could be usingIlluminaHiSeq2000.Twelvetrioshavebeenanalyzed largely replaced by novel optical mapping technology. by Golden Helix Varseq. On average, 339 CNVs with We had early access to the new SaphyrDC system (Bio- conﬁrmed states, absent quality control ﬂags, and p- Nano Genomics), which enables SV detection based on values<0.01werecalled.SpansoftheseCNVsrangedfrom optical mapping of labeled high-molecular weight DNA. 118bp to 2Mbp, with approximately 329 CNVs <100kb, 9 We performed optical mapping with >100X genome cov- CNVs 100kb-1Mb, and 1 CNV >1Mb in each case. erage to detect cytogenetic aberrations in 4 leukemia sam- Duplications accounted for 57.6% conﬁdent CNV calls. ples and compared the results with those obtained using Moreover, WES allows us to investigate single nucleotide classical methods. In all samples, a very good concordance variations(SNVs).Amongthe12trios,wehavediscovered with the results was achieved. This held true for deletions, causalSNVsfortwocasescorrespondingwiththeirclinical insertions, inversions and translocations, including 3-way phenotypes. Further validation by qPCR is required to Philadelphia chromosome (46,XX, t(9;22;14)(q34;q11; conﬁrm the precision of CNV detection results by WES. q11.2))andevenchromothripsis.Importantly,wewereable WewillalsoevaluatehowconsistentWESdetectionresults toidentifyaberrationsinsampleswithacancercellcontent are with aCGH. ofjust~40%,using thelatestsingle-molecule SVdetection Here we demonstrate the capacity of WES for detecting tool from BioNano. Optical mapping also identiﬁed novel CNVs and SNVs. WES may be considered a promising events e.g. an inversion of chromosome 11 ﬁrst-tierdiagnostictoolforitsversatility,moderatecost,and (chr11:24,875,044-26,299,641) and a translocation (t(5;14) the potential to reduce diagnostic odyssey. (q35.2;q 32.2)), both validated afterwards. P. Chen: None. Y. Chen: None. Optical mapping may have the potential to replace most classicalcytogenetictests.Therefore,wearenowlaunching P14.038A a study to systematically compare the sensitivity and spe- Ahead-to-headevaluationofthediagnosticefﬁcacyand ciﬁcity of optical mapping in 100 leukemia samples and costs of trio versus singleton exome sequencing analysis 50 samples with known germline cytogenetic aberrations against the standard of care workﬂow. T. Y. Tan, S. Lunke, B. Chong, D. Phelan, M. Fanjul- Fernandez,J.Marum,V.SivaKumar,Z.Stark,A.Yeung,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1633 N. J. Brown, C. Stutterd, M. B. Delatycki, S. Sadedin, M. Martyn, I. Goranitis, N. Thorne, C. L. Gaff, Introduction: Myotonic dystrophies are autosomal domi- S. M. White nant, multisystemic disorders with variable expressivity characterized by progressive myopathy. Myotonic dystro- VictorianClinicalGeneticsServices, Parkville,Melbourne, phy type 1 (DM1) is caused by CTG expansions in the 3’ Australia UTR of the DMPK gene on chromosome 19q13.3. The severity of disease and age at onset is roughly correlated Diagnostic exome sequencing (ES) can be performed on with the number of the trinucleotide repeats. Reliable the proband only (singleton; sES) or proband and both assessment of CTG expansions is critical for diagnosis of ® biological parents (trio; tES). In this study we sought to DM1.WedevelopedandvalidatedtheAmplideX DM1Dx comparetheefﬁcienciesofexomesequencing(ES)bytrio Kit, which generates numerical values for alleles ≤200 (tES) versus singleton (sES) approach, determine costs, repeats and a categorical value for alleles >200 repeats. andidentifyfactorstoconsiderwhendecidingonoptimal Materials and Methods: The kit enables repeat-primed implementation strategies for the diagnosis of monogenic PCRofgenomicDNAisolatedfromwholeblood,followed disorders.WeundertookESin30triosandanalysedeach by capillary electrophoresis (CE), manual peak annotation, proband’s sES and tES data in parallel. Two teams were and automated repeat length calculations. For exploratory randomly allocated to either sES or tES analysis for each size estimation beyond 200 repeats, the kit facilitates an case and blinded to each other’s work. Each task was optional agarose analysis. timed and cost analyses were based on time taken and Results: Analytical validation spanned 2192 valid mea- diagnostic yield. We modelled three scenarios to deter- surements, 1588 genotypes, and 730 unique CE ﬁles. minethefactorstoconsiderintheimplementationoftES. Single-siteprecisiondemonstratedthatalleleswith5to145 sESdiagnosed11/30(36.7%)casesandtESidentiﬁedone repeatsweresizedwithin1repeatofthemode(n>200).The additional diagnosis (12/30 (40.0%)). tES obviated the limit of detection was <4% fractional mosaic by probit need for Sanger segregation, reduced the number of analysis. All homozygous and heterozygous samples were variants for curation, and had lower cost-per-diagnosis correctly identiﬁed. Expanded alleles were accurately sized when considering analysis alone. When sequencing costs when≤200repeatsandlargerexpansionsuptoatleast1900 were included, tES nearly doubled the cost of sES. repeatswereampliﬁedandcategoricallydetected.Amethod Reﬂexing to tES in those who remain undiagnosed after comparison yielded highly correlated results (100% con- sES was cost-saving over tES in all as ﬁrst-line. This cordance and y=0.91+1.01x, R2=1.00). approach requires a large differential in diagnostic yield Conclusions: This single-tube assay combines gene- between sES and tES for maximal beneﬁt given current speciﬁcandrepeat-primeddesignstoassessDM1genotype sequencing costs. tES may be preferable when scaling up and resolve zygosity. It is a streamlined procedure that laboratory throughput due to efﬁciency gains and reduces the labor and turnaround time required for opportunity cost considerations. Our ﬁndings are relevant southern blot. to clinicians, laboratories and health services considering G. Latham: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- tES over sES. niﬁcant; Asuragen. K. Jefferson: A. Employment (full or T.Y. Tan: None. S. Lunke: None. B. Chong: None. D. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. J. Kemppainen: A. Phelan: None. M. Fanjul-Fernandez: None. J. Marum: Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. V. None. V. Siva Kumar: None. Z. Stark: None. A. Yeung: Le: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asura- None. N.J. Brown: None. C. Stutterd: None. M.B. gen. J. Wisotsky: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Delatycki:None.S.Sadedin:None.M.Martyn:None.I. niﬁcant;Asuragen.M.Fahey:A.Employment(fullorpart- Goranitis: None. N. Thorne: None. C.L. Gaff: None. S. time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. B.Hall:A.Employment(full M. White: None. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. J.T. Brown: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Asuragen. P14.039B Analytical validation of a sensitive myotonic dystrophy P14.040C type1(DM1)diagnostictestthatprovidespreciserepeat Solution-based isolation of ultra-high-molecular weight sizing and resolves zygosity in a single PCR (UHMW) DNA from fresh/frozen human blood and cultured cells in less than 3 hours G. Latham, K. Jefferson, J. Kemppainen, V. Le, J. Wisotsky, M. Fahey, B. Hall, J. T. Brown H. B. Sadowski1, C. Proskow2, A. Files2, K. Pham2, Y. Zhang2, G. Pljevaljcic2, A. Hastie2, M. Borodkin2 Asuragen, Austin, TX, United States1634 1Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States, Normalase is a novel enzymatic library normalization 2Bionano Genomics, San Deigo, CA, United States method that eliminates library quantiﬁcation and manual concentration adjustment of each sample prior to library Optical mapping of genomic DNA on the Bionano pooling.WhencombinedwithSwift2STurborapidlibrary Genomics Saphyr® system for genome assembly or kits, a highly streamlined ‘Turbolase’ workﬂow is created structural variation detection relies on starting with that is readily automated on the Hamilton Star and other UHMW DNA. To achieve this, we developed methods platforms,wheresimplebulkprocessingimprovesthrough- for the isolation of genomic DNA that involves the put and reduces cost for NGS laboratories. Swift 2S Turbo embedding of material in agarose plugs, and overnight kits comprise two enzymatic steps and a single puriﬁcation lysis in situ with detergent and proteinase K. After that completes DNA fragmentation, end repair and adapter extensive washing on day 2, the agarose plug is melted, ligation. This is followed by standard library ampliﬁcation treated with beta agarase, and the liberated DNA drop usingNormalasePCRprimerstoconditionthelibrariesand dialyzed. The UHMW DNA is ready for quantiﬁcation produce a required minimum yield in excess of the 4 nM and labeling on day 3. This “plug lysis” method is ﬁnalconcentration.Thisisfollowedbyasinglepuriﬁcation extremely robust, but it is also labor intensive, difﬁcult to and two 15-minute Normalase incubation steps that; 1) automate, lengthy and expensive. To address these enzymatically select 4 nM of each library, and 2) shortcomings, we coupled solution-based lysis with a enzymatically normalize each library to 4 nM within a puriﬁcation step that leverages a novel process to bind, single pool. The pools can then be directly sequenced wash and elute UHMW genomic DNA. This entire withoutfurtherpuriﬁcation.Normalaseallowsfor>10-fold protocol can be conducted in less than 3 hours on a batch variation in input quantity, while generating ≤ 10% of 6 samples, allowing 12 samples to be processed in one variation in sample representation within a pool resulting day. The eluted material is ready to use by day 2 and in optimal cluster density and sample balance for Illumina contains high quality DNA that is clean enough for the sequencing. The ‘Turbolase’ workﬂow is compatible with direct label and stain (DLS) protocol. The resulting full-length indexed adapters that have been added by labeling metrics of this labeled DNA on a Saphyr Chip® ligation as well as workﬂows that require indexing PCR arecomparabletolabeledDNAisolatedbythetraditional primers. Normalase is also compatible with library “plug lysis” protocol. We have validated protocols for preparation kits available from other vendors. Normalase fresh/frozen human blood and cells, and are developing for pooling of libraries for pre-hybridization capture is protocols for plant and animal tissue. These protocols are currently under development, which make multiplexed automatable, providing the needed solution for research- hybridizationcaptureprotocolsstreamlinedandrobustfrom ersneedingtopurifyDNAfromhundredstothousandsof library generation to sequencing. individuals per year. H. Fiske: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; H.B. Sadowski: A. Employment (full or part-time); SwiftBiosciences.D.Masser:A.Employment(fullorpart- Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. C. Proskow: A. Employ- time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. R. Stedtfeld: A. ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;BionanoGenomics.A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Bios- Files: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bio- ciences. J. Lenhart: A. Employment (full or part-time); nano Genomics. K. Pham: A. Employment (full or part- Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. V. Makarov: A. Employ- time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. Y. Zhang: A. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Swift Biosciences. L. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Kurihara: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genomics. G. Pljevaljcic: None. A. Hastie: A. Employ- Swift Biosciences. ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;BionanoGenomics.M. Borodkin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; P14.042A Bionano Genomics. New approaches for adapter synthesis in Duplex Sequencing P14.041D Turbolase: a radically streamlined high throughput M. Ivankovic1, R. Salazar1, J. Pröll2, I. Tiemann-Boege1 sample prep to sequencing workﬂow 1Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, H.Fiske,D.Masser,R.Stedtfeld,J.Lenhart,V.Makarov, Austria, 2Center for Medical Research, Faculty of L. Kurihara Medicine, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria Swift Bioscience, Ann Arbor, MI, United States Introduction:DuplexSequencing(DS)isanextgeneration sequencing methodology capable of detecting ultra-lowAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1635 mutation frequencies by exploiting the fact that genetic testisnotstraightforward;cost,turnaroundtime,likelihood information is stored on complementary DNA strands. of success and the possibility of uncovering unsolicited Therefore, DNA fragments are ligated to adapters contain- ﬁndings are important considerations that leave many ing a double stranded degenerate sequence. Currently, fork clinicians favouring gene panels over WES. adapters consisting of two partially complementary oligo- We analysed 601 consecutive trios referred for diag- nucleotides are being used in DS. However, it has been nostic testing using an in-house pipeline to ﬁlter rare suggestedthatadapterscomprisingahairpinloopstructure, potentially deleterious variants by mode of inheritance. suchastheNEBNextadapters,showimprovedperformance Variant classiﬁcation was as according to the ACMG- in library preparation and sequencing. Here, we propose AMPguidelinesandvariantsofinterestwerediscussedin different synthesis methods for creating hairpin loop an MDT meeting. adapters for DS in house. A diagnosis was identiﬁed in 38.4% of cases (231/601) Material and Methods: We have developed a synthesis and in a further 4% (26/601) a candidate variant is under strategy for a hairpin adapter and for adapters containing a investigation. De novo variants explained 55% of the phosphorothioatebondattheligationsite.Currentlyweuse diagnoses with the remaining cases having a recessive an adapted protocol for DS library preparation with those (38%), X-linked (6%) or mitochondrial aetiology (1%). loop adapters. Adapter synthesis and proper function has Parental mosaicism was rare (<1% of cases). A number of been veriﬁed by gel electrophoresis and sequencing. the diagnoses were in newly discovered genes where Results: We have successfully synthesized the proposed associationwiththedisorderwaspublishedwithin<3years hairpin adapters and replaced the fork adapter used in the of the referral. original protocol by Schmitt et al. (2012) with our loop We will discuss the limitations of a gene panel approach adapters. Sequencing data conﬁrm their experimental which in our series would leave 5-10% of the diagnoses feasibility. unidentiﬁed. WES offers a higher diagnostic yield and Discussion: Our hairpin adapters might offer advantages allows for future data re-analysis to include newly over previously used fork adapters due to structural differ- discovered genes. ences.Additionally,weintegratedaphosphorothioatebond J.Baptista:None.K.Stals:None.E.DeFranco:None. into DS hairpin adapters which might increase the stability L.Mallin:None.V.Fryer:None.M.Wakeling:None.A. oftheligationsite,reduceremovalofthe3’T-overhangand Parrish: None. A. Johnson: None. J. Settle: None. R. thus, decrease potential adapter dimer formation between Caswell: None. C. Tysoe: None. E. Baple: None. S. blunt-ended sites. Ellard: None. Project funded by the Linz Institute of Technology (LIT213201001) and FWF (FWF308667000). P14.044C M. Ivankovic: None. R. Salazar: None. J. Pröll: None. Exome sequencing of pooled parental DNA: a cost- I. Tiemann-Boege: None. efﬁcient “trio-like” strategy to increase diagnostic yield in developmental disorders P14.043B A gene-agnostic trio exome strategy maximises F. Tran Mau-Them1,2, A. Vitobello1,2, Y. Duffourd1,2, diagnostic yield by uncovering disease-causing variants A. Bruel1,2, S. Moutton1,2,3, A. Sorlin1,2,3, S. Nambot3, in newly discovered disease genes A. Denomme-Pichon1,2, C. Poe1, T. Jouan1,2, M. Chevarin1, M. Bordessoules1, E. Tisserand1,2, J. Baptista1,2, K. Stals1, E. De Franco2, L. Mallin1, A. Mosca-Boidron1,4, P. Callier1,4, L. Faivre1,2,3, V. Fryer1, M. Wakeling2, A. Parrish1, A. Johnson1, C. Philippe1,2,4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,5 J. Settle1, R. Caswell2, C. Tysoe1, E. Baple1,2, S. Ellard1,2 1Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique des 1Royal Devon and Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 2Inserm 2University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom – UB UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, Rare genetic diseases in patients with non-speciﬁc/hetero- 3Centre de Référence Maladies rares « Anomalies du geneous disorders are difﬁcult to diagnose and many Développement et syndromes malformatifs », Centre de patientsgo through a “diagnostic odyssey”of severalyears Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire andmultipletestingbeforeageneticdiagnosisisconﬁrmed. de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, FHU- Genomic testing holds the promise of timely diagnoses TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 5Centre de Référence « but the choice between numerous gene panels versus Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes rares », Centre de “whole”exome sequencing(WES) asaﬁrst linediagnostic Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France1636 preparation methods available, AmpliSeq and SureSelect. Introduction: In intellectual disability and developmental Although of major interest, a comparison of the two abnormalities (ID/DA), clinical exome sequencing (cES) is methods is hitherto missing in the literature. Here we efﬁcient for identifying variants in known disease-causing systematically evaluate the performance of AmpliSeq and genes with a diagnostic yield around 30% in singleton SureSelect and present an improved variant calling pipe- strategies that can increase to 40-50% with a trio-based line. We used 12 in-house DNA samples with genome- strategy. Indeed, trio-based strategy facilitates variants wide and exome microarray data and a commercially interpretation thanks to parental segregation but increases available reference DNA (NA12878) for evaluation. Both sequencing cost. We so explored an alternative cost- methods had a high concordance (>97%) with microarray efﬁcienttrio-likeapproach,basedonparentalDNApooling. genotypes and when validating against NA12878 a Materials and Methods: We pooled 6 paternal and 6 sensitivity and positive predictive value (PPV) of >93% maternal DNA into two separate mixes. ES was performed and >80%, respectively. Application of our variant calling with an average depth of 70X (TWIG) or 100X (Agilent pipeline decreased the number of false positive variants CREV2)andanexpectedallelicbalanceinthepoolof5.8% dramatically by 90% and resulted in PPV of 97%. This and 8.3%, respectively. improvement is highly relevant in research as well as Results:Afteraconclusiveproof-of-conceptin6positive clinical setting. individuals, this pool strategy was initially applied in 29 Grants: Austrian National Bank Anniversary Fund, Aus- individuals with DI and/or AD, as second-tier after normal trian Ministry of Science under the aegis of the EU Joint singleton cES. We so identiﬁed candidate variants in 19 Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease Research, PhD different genes. After datasharing, we conﬁrmed causal program ‘Molecular Medicine’ and Franz-Lanyar Stiftung implicationof7genesin8/29individuals(27%)including3 of the Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. genesnewlyinvolvedinhumandisorders.Thishighrateled P. Gampawar: None. Y. Saba: None. U. Werner: us to deploy this strategy as a ﬁrst-tier exam in 82 indivi- None. R. Schmidt: None. B. Müller-Myhsok: None. H. duals without previous cES. Schmidt: None. Conclusion: In ID/DA, parental pool strategy appears verycost-efﬁcientbycombiningincreaseddiagnosticyields P14.046A compared to singleton ES and decreased sequencing costs, Reanalysis of exome sequencing data from an Estonian comparedtoclassicaltrioapproach.Thiscouldrepresentan cohort of 85 families with suspected Mendelian interesting alternative to trio-based ES in molecular disorders laboratories performing exome routinely. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. Vitobello: None. Y. K. Õunap1,2,3, K. Reinson1,2, K. Muru1,2, Ü. Murumets1, Duffourd: None. A. Bruel: None. S. Moutton: None. A. T. Kahre1,2, M. H. Wojcik3,4, E. Seaby3, T. Reimand1,2, Sorlin: None. S. Nambot: None. A. Denomme-Pichon: S. Pajusalu1,2,5 None. C. Poe: None. T. Jouan: None. M. Chevarin: None. M. Bordessoules: None. E. Tisserand: None. A. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Mosca-Boidron:None.P.Callier:None.L.Faivre:None. Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. ClinicalGenetics,InstituteofClinicalMedicine,University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Broad Institute of MIT and P14.045D Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Division of Establishing high sensitivity and speciﬁcity for exome Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine, Boston sequencing on Ion Proton Children'sHospital,HarvardMedicalSchool,Boston,MA, United States, 5Yale University School of Medicine, P. Gampawar1, Y. Saba1, U. Werner1, R. Schmidt2, Department of Genetics, New Haven, CT, United States B. Müller-Myhsok3, H. Schmidt1 Exome sequencing (ES) is a proven powerful tool to 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Medical identifythemolecularetiologyofMendeliandisorders,with University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department of a diagnostic yield of 25-40%, 29.3% in our lab after initial Neurology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, diagnostic analysis. We performed reanalysis of ES data 3Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany andtriogenomesequencing(GS)datainunsolvedEstonian familieswithsuspectedMendeliandisorderstoincreasethe Library preparation for whole exome sequencing is a diagnostic yield. ES reanalysis was performed in 85 critical step serving the enrichment of the regions of families (66 trios, 19 singletons) at Broad Institute of MIT interest. For Ion Proton, there are only two exome library and Harvard. Additionally, ten families with proband-onlyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1637 ES were expanded to trio ES, and 39 ES-negative families ExternalQualityControls(EQAs).Oneoftheobjectivesof were re-sequenced with trio GS at Broad Institute for theBelgianPlanforRareDiseasesistodevelopfundingfor improved variant detection. We identiﬁed a pathogenic their participation to EQAs for genetic tests focused on variant in a known disease gene in 14 (16%) cases; these hereditary rare diseases. weremainlymisseddueto:limitedabilitytodetectdenovo A screening of quality controls focused on rare diseases variants in proband-only ES; bioinformatics issues in early available in Belgium and abroad was ﬁrstly performed. ES studies; or analysis being executed before the relevant Based on this preliminary step, a survey was sent to the disease gene discovery. In 15 (18%) families, we identiﬁed BCHGs to collect information about their participation to apathogenicvariantinanoveldiseasegene,ofwhichsome these inventoried quality controls, their provider and their are already published via collaborations initiated through evaluation of the schemes. Then, a working group (WG) the Matchmaker exchange (RORA, RAB11A, and CYFIP2). composed of members from the BCHGs and the Belgian In 27 (32%) families a candidate gene was found and institute for health has been set up. functional studies are in progress for eight of these. The This working group is selecting priority EQAs for which remaining 29 (34%) patients are still unsolved. Using this participation fees should be covered by the Belgian approach, we improved our diagnostic yield for previously healthcare authorities according to clinical relevance undiagnosedcasesbysolvinganadditional1/3ofthecases and costs. (total 53%) and by having a promising gene candidate for Since there is no rules, the WG is also focusing on the another 1/3 of the remaining families. Funding: Estonian harmonization of the participation frequencies to EQAs by Research Council grants PUT355, PRG471, and writingguidelinesontheminimalfrequencyofparticipation PUTJD827. to EQAs focused on hereditary rare diseases’ diagnosis. K. Õunap: None. K. Reinson: None. K. Muru: None. These guidelines will provide recommendations on how Ü. Murumets: None. T. Kahre: None. M.H. Wojcik: often it is necessary for the BCHGs to perform EQAs and None. E. Seaby: None. T. Reimand: None. S. they will serve as basis for the reimbursement of the Pajusalu: None. selected EQAs. The proposed EQAs and the budget to cover participation fees will be submitted to the Belgian P14.047B National Institute for Health and Disability Insurance Initiative for the harmonization of the quality (RIZIV-INAMI) for evaluation and approval. assessment for analyses performed by the Belgian Grant: Centers for Human Genetics in the context of Rare work funded by RIZIV-INAMI. Diseases J. Lantoine: None. V. Benoit: None. A. Brysse: None. K. Claes: None. A. Corveleyn: None. M. De Rycke: J. Lantoine1, V. Benoit2, A. Brysse3, K. Claes4, None.V.Dideberg:None.E.Fastré:None.L.VanLaer: A. Corveleyn5, M. De Rycke6, V. Dideberg3, E. Fastré7, None. M. Ravoet: None. S. Rombout: None. C. Rydle- L. Van Laer8, M. Ravoet7, S. Rombout2, C. Rydlewski9, wski: None. S.Seneca: None.S. Symoens:None.K.Van S. Seneca6, S. Symoens4, K. Van Den Bogaert5, Den Bogaert: None. F. Wilkin: None. W. Wuyts: None. F. Wilkin9, W. Wuyts8, P. Van De Walle1, P. Van De Walle: None. N.M. Vandevelde: None. N. M. Vandevelde1 P14.048C 1Department of Quality of Laboratories, Sciensano, Developmentandcharacterizationofasampletoanswer Brussels, Belgium, 2Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Factor II/V assay Gosselies, Belgium, 3Centre de Génétique Humaine - CHU Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium, 4Centrum Medische Genetica N. Pelte1, S. A. Dunbar2, S. Morrison1 -UZGent,Gent,Belgium,5Centrummenselijkeerfelijkheid - UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 6Centrum voor Medische 1Luminex Corporation, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Luminex Genetica - UZBrussel VUB, Brussels,Belgium, 7Centre de Corporation, Austin, TX, United States Génétique Humaine - Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc UCL,Brussels,Belgium,8CentrumMedischeGenetica-UZ Introduction: Prothrombin G20210A and Factor V Leiden Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium, 9Centre de Génétique (G1691A)aredominantautosomalmutationsthatincreasethe Humaine – ULB, Brussels, Belgium risk of blood clots, including deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. Here we present the development and The Belgian healthcare authorities want to support the characterization of a Factor II/V real-time PCR genotyping Belgian Centers for Human Genetics (BCHGs) in the assaycompatiblewithLuminex’sARIES®System,asampleto development of a Quality System and participation to answer device capable of running laboratory developed tests.1638 Materials and Methods: Fluorescently labeled modiﬁed Materials and Methods: We propose several fetal frac- primers were designed to bind to wildtype and mutant tion estimation improvements with special focus on the Factor II/V alleles with the 3’ end of the primer located at samples that are most prone to wrong diagnostic conclu- position 1691 for Factor V and 20210 for Factor II. DNA sions. We introduced new method for estimating fetal extraction and real-time PCR were performed using the fraction (Non-linear regression model) and also compared ® ® ARIES System, ARIES Extraction Cassettes, and DNA other statistical (Linear regression model) and machine ® Ready Mix (an ARIES compatible lyophilized master learning methods (Neural networks, Support vector mix). Performance was evaluated using EDTA-stabilized machines). human blood samples, banked nucleic acid with known Results: We demonstrate, that although understudied, genotypes, and synthetic DNA. prediction based on length of sequenced DNA fragments Results: All Factor II/V genotypes were correctly iden- mayachievenearlytheprecisionasstate-of-the-artmethods tiﬁed in a set of 98 fresh human blood samples and 43 based on their genomic locations. Finally, we show that previously characterized DNA samples. SNPs near the combinationofseveralsampleattributesleadstoapredictor mutations showed no impact on assay performance. The that has superior prediction accuracy over any single sample to answer assay required only 5 minutes hands-on approach. timeandtoleratedcommonbloodinterferingsubstancesand The presented work was supported by the “REVOGENE variation in blood input volumes from 50 to 500 μL. - Research centre for molecular genetics” project (ITMS Conclusions: The Factor II/V assay presented here is 26240220067) supported by the Operational Programme both highly speciﬁc and robust. The assay’s compatibility Research and Development funded by the ERDF. with the sample to answer ARIES® System signiﬁcantly R.Hekel:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; reduced the hands-on time required to perform the test. Geneton Ltd. J. Gazdarica: A. Employment (full or part- N. Pelte: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Budiš: A. Employment Luminex Corporation. S.A. Dunbar: A. Employment (full (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;GenetonLtd.M.Kucharík: or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Luminex Corporation. S. Mor- A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;GenetonLtd.F. rison: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Ďuriš:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;Geneton Luminex Corporation. Ltd. J. Radvánszky: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd.. J. Turňa: None. T. Szemes: A. P14.049D Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.. Improved fetal fraction estimation by combining estimators based on fragment lengths and fragment P14.050A counts in non-invasive prenatal testing PerformanceofrapidDNAextractionfrombuccalswab using a new molecular system for the detection of a R.Hekel1,2,3,J.Gazdarica1,2,3,J.Budiš2,4,3,M.Kucharík2, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) F. Ďuriš2,3, J. Radvánszky1,5, J. Turňa1,3, T. Szemes1,2,4 B. Mombelli1, M. Boles Savoldi1, S. Castriciano2 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 1Bioside SRL, San Paulo, Italy, 2Society Copan Italia, 3Slovak Center of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Brescia, Italy Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Institute for Clinical and Introduction:SNPgenotypingmeasuresgeneticvariations Translational Research, Biomedical Research Center, of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). HPV infec- Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia tions immune-response have been implicated in cervical cancer and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) develop- Introduction: The reliability of non-invasive prenatal mentassociatedtodiSNP:rs1800629.Biosidedevelopeda testing is highly dependent on the accurate estimation of rapid DNA extraction and lyophilizate ready-to-use SNPs fetal fraction. Several methods have been proposed up to systems. The objective of this study was to validate the date, utilizing different attributes of analysed genomic Copan hDNA free FLOQSwab (hDNAFS) for buccal material, for example length and genomic location of samples (BS) collection with the Bioside rapid DNA sequenced DNA fragments. These sources of information extraction and new SNPs systems. are relatively different, but so far, at least according to our Materials and Methods: In this study DNA quantity/ knowledge, there were no published attempts to combine quality ofBS, collected with hDNAFS, cellulose, polyester them to get an improved predictor. andrayonswabs,werecompared.BS(N=50)wereusedfor this validation. Thermo Scientiﬁc (TF) SAMPLE TO SNPAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1639 system (ST-SNP-S) and Bioside DNA extraction system, (termed CTG18.1) at the nucleotide level within a FECD (equipment-free buffer that extracts DNA in 10min RT patient cohort. incubation) analyzed with TF ST-SNP-S and the Bioside Materials and Methods: We applied an ampliﬁcation- ready- to-use SNP-rs 1800629 analysis system for the free method, utilising the CRISPR/Cas9 system, in combi- detection of the TNF-A, A>G mutation. Genotyping was nationwithPacBiosinglemoleculerealtime(SMRT)long- performed by sequencing and quantiﬁcation by read sequencing, tostudy CTG18.1. FECD patient samples luminometer. (n=11) displaying a diverse range of CTG18.1 allele Results: Optimal DNA quantity/quality was obtained lengths and zygosity status (as determined by conventional with hDNAFS BS and Bioside extraction. In the 50 BS PCR-basedmethods)wereanalysed.Arobustdataanalysis analysed with both SNP systems, hDNA FS + Bioside pipeline was developed to effectively ﬁlter, align and obtained an average DNA better yield of 0.5 log compared interrogate CTG18.1-speciﬁc reads. to hDNAFS +TF ST-SNP-S. In the samples tested 50/50 Results:CRISPR-guidedSMRTsequencingofCTG18.1 were correctly genotyped by the Bioside-system and 49/50 provided accurate genotyping information for all samples by TF ST-SNP-S. Inhibition was detected in 2/50 by ST- and phasing was possible for 18/22 alleles sequenced. SNP-S and in 0/50 by Bioside-system. Repeat length instability was observed for all expanded Conclusions:BetterDNAyieldandgenotypingwithout- (≥50 repeats) phased CTG18.1 alleles analysed. Further- inhibition was obtained from BS collected with Copan more, higher levels of repeat instability were associated hDNAFSbybothBioosiderapidnucleicacidextactionand with increased CTG18.1 allele length (mode length ≥91 ready-to- use lyophilizate SNP-rs 1800629 analysis for repeats) indicating that expanded alleles behave TNF-A, A>G mutations. dynamically. B. Mombelli: None. M. Boles Savoldi: None. S. Conclusions: CRISPR-guided SMRT sequencing of Castriciano: None. CTG18.1 has revealed novel insights into CTG18.1 length instability.Furthermore,thisstudyprovidesaframeworkto P14.051B improve the molecular diagnostic accuracy for CTG18.1- CRISPR/Cas9-targeted enrichment and long-read mediated FECD, which we anticipate will become sequencing of a non-coding corneal dystrophy- increasingly important as gene-directed therapies are associated TCF4 triplet repeat developed for this common age-related and sight threaten- ing disease. N. J. Hafford-Tear1, Y. Tsai2, A. N. Sadan1, B. Sanchez- N.J.Hafford-Tear:None.Y.Tsai:A.Employment(full Pintado1, C. Zarouchlioti1, G. J. Maher3, P. Liskova4,1, or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. C. Other S. J. Tuft5,1, A. J. Hardcastle1, T. A. Clark2, Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or A. E. Davidson1 other in-kind support); Modest; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United intellectual property); Modest; Paciﬁc Biosciences. A.N. Kingdom, 2Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United Sadan: None. B. Sanchez-Pintado: None. C. Zarou- States,3ClinicalGeneticsGroup,MRCWeatherallInstitute chlioti: None. G.J. Maher: None. P. Liskova: None. S.J. of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Tuft: None. A.J. Hardcastle: None. T.A. Clark: A. Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Bios- of Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles ciences. C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, University and General University Hospital in Prague, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Paciﬁc Prague, Czech Republic, 5Moorﬁelds Eye Hospital, Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, London, United Kingdom patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Paciﬁc Biosciences. A.E. Davidson: None. Introduction: More than 40 human diseases are caused by expansions of simple nucleotide repeat sequences (micro- P14.052C satellites). Diagnosis and prognosis of these conditions Challenges, warnings and recommendations for gene relies upon accurate sizing of mutant alleles for which panel testing in hereditary cancer currentPCR-basedsizingmethodsareinsufﬁcient.Herewe demonstratethecustomapplicationofanampliﬁcation-free L. Feliubadaló1,2,3, J. del Valle1,2,3, E. Tornero1,2,3, long-read sequencing method, termed ‘No-Amp Targeted M.Menéndez1,2,3,X.Muñoz1,2,R.Cuesta1,2,O.Campos1,2, Sequencing’, to characterise the Fuchs endothelial corneal E. Montes1,2, C. Gómez1,2, S. González1,2,3, J. Brunet1,2,3, dystrophy (FECD)-associated intronic TCF4 triplet repeat G. Capellá1,2,3, M. Pineda1,2,3, C. Lázaro1,2,31640 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of S. Lincoln1, M. Lebo2,3,4, J. Zook5, R. Truty1, C. Lin4, Oncology (ICO-IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, J. Paul1, V. Ramey1, M. Salit5,6, H. Rehm2,4,7, Barcelona,Spain,2PrograminMolecularMechanismsand R. Nussbaum1,8 Experimental Therapy in Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de 1Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Harvard Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Brigham and Madrid, Spain Womens Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Partners HealthCare Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, SincetheincorporationofNGSintogeneticdiagnostics,the Cambridge, MA, United States, 5National Institute of laboratories test-portfolio has broadened. However, the Standards, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 6Stanford analysisofmultiplegenesatonceisnotalwayspairedwith University, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 7Massachusetts enough knowledge regarding molecular pathology, genetic GeneralHospital,Boston,MA,UnitedStates,8Universityof utility,associatedrisksandclinicalmanagement.Ouraimis California, San Francisco, CA, United States to discuss some of the current challenges in hereditary cancer testing. Introduction: To reliably inform medical care, clinical Concerning special gene features: sequencing must provide high sensitivity for pathogenic -Not always truncating variants in tumour suppressor variants. This can be difﬁcult to achieve given the high genes are pathogenic, due to functional rescue by other prevalence of technically challenging pathogenic variant transcripts (i.e. BRCA1, TSC2). types in patients1. Unfortunately, the highest sensitivity -Several genes have nearly identical sequences and exist NGS methods can also produce false positives, necessitat- in multiple locations as a result of segmental duplications. ing the use of orthogonal conﬁrmatory assays, a signiﬁcant Thisfactcancauseanimportantdecreaseintheaccuracyof cost and time burden. Optimizing both sensitivity and variant detection, even reporting pseudogene variants as speciﬁcity at minimal total cost may be aided by careful pathogenic. We face this problem in PMS2, PRSS1, analysis of large clinical data sets. BMPR1A, CHEK2, BRCA1, NF1 and PTEN. Methods: Thirteen validated genetic tests in two clinical Concerning variant classiﬁcation: laboratorieswereappliedtoasuiteofreferencesamplesand -Some hereditary cancer conditions are caused by acti- over 50,000 patients with orthogonal data. A novel opti- vating variants, so the widely used ACMG/AMP classiﬁ- mizationalgorithmdividedthesevariantsintoclassesbased cation guidelines should be applied with caution. on NGS quality metrics, type and genomic context. Each -In the same gene, different pathogenic variants can class was characterized using rigorous statistics. confer different cancer risk. Results:Mostpathogenicvariants(90%)couldbeplaced -Exon/geneduplicationsarenotnecessarilypathogenic.It into classes having perfect observed accuracy (both sensi- ismandatorytoproveineachcasethatthevariantdamages tivity and analytic PPV) with CIs 99.5% or better. Strong the transcript. claims regarding sensitivity for such variants would be -ClinVar clinical assertions should not be directly trans- justiﬁed, and these variants do not beneﬁt from conﬁrma- ferred to a diagnostic report since some are based on tion. The remaining variants require additional steps to insufﬁcient evidence. detect (e.g. additional algorithms and low stringency ﬁl- In the “one-gene-at-a time” era, ﬁnding a pathogenic tering, to reduce false negatives) and often do require variant often led to stop the analysis. However, compre- conﬁrmation (to reduce false positives). hensive (sub)exomic analysis reveals numerous cases of Conclusion: Our methods are applicable to panels, digenic, trigenic, and more complex inheritance patterns as exomes, and genomes. They described in detail and can be seen in the increasing number of patients with Multilocus appliedbymanylaboratories1,2.Thesemethodsanddatamay Inherited Neoplasia Alleles Syndrome (MINAS). inform emerging international guidelines on clinical NGS3. L. Feliubadaló: None. J. del Valle: None. E. Tornero: References: [1] Lincoln ESHG 2018; Manuscript in None.M.Menéndez:None.X.Muñoz:None.R.Cuesta: review; [2] Lincoln JMD in press; [3] Crooks AMP 2018; None. O. Campos: None. E. Montes: None. C. Gómez: Manuscript in preparation None. S. González: None. J. Brunet: None. G. Capellá: S. Lincoln: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- None. M. Pineda: None. C. Lázaro: None. niﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; P14.053D Illumina, Thermo Fisher. E. Ownership Interest (stock, Optimizing diagnostic sequencing to both improve stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig- clinical sensitivity and reduce conﬁrmatory testing: An niﬁcant; Invitae. M. Lebo: None. J. Zook: None. R. interlaboratory approach Truty: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant;Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1641 Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent approval from the MND Association. We would like to or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. C. Lin: thank the MND Association, and the Wellcome Trust for None. J. Paul: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- funding the formation of the cell line collection. niﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock D. Blick: None. C. Wilson: None. A. Lual: None. S. options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Bahia: None. B. Bolton: None. E. Burnett: None. J.E. Invitae. V. Ramey: A. Employment (full or part-time); Russell: None. Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; P14.055B Invitae. M. Salit: None. H. Rehm: None. R. Nussbaum: GenoinVar: an end-to-end solution to the discovery of A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. causal variants Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. H. Froufe1, D. Martins1, S. Magalhães1, C. Barroso1,2, C. Egas1,2, M. J. Simões1 P14.054C Patientbloodderivedcelllinesprovideunlimitedsupply 1Genoinseq, Next-Generation Sequencing Unit, Biocant, of DNA Cantanhede, Portugal, 2Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal D. Blick, C. Wilson, A. Lual, S. Bahia, B. Bolton, E. Burnett, J. E. Russell Geneticdiagnosisiscrucialinformationforclinicalpractice in many cases. The untargeted solutions based on next- European Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures, generation sequencing have proved to be cost-effective in Salisbury, United Kingdom the diagnosis of a wide range of conditions and have also led to a signiﬁcative reduction in time to diagnosis. Background: Advances in genomic proﬁling techniques We developed GenoinVar, an integrative end-to-end have enabled researchers to identify risk factor genes that solution from the biological sample to exome sequencing can contribute towards an individual’s susceptibility to a and variant analysis to the discovery of causal genetic disease. The validity and reproducibility of research relies variants. The solution involves Illumina whole exome on access to ethically sourced, authenticated, quality sequencing using a capture procedure from IDT, with uni- controlled samples. The UK MND Collections (formerly form and above speciﬁcations sequencing metrics. the UK MND DNA Bank) is a biological resource, Sequencing data is processed using an in-house pipeline, containing DNA, cell lines and epidemiological data for and an encrypted database of variants with the corre- MND research. sponding annotations is created. Candidate variants are Objectives: To collect and make available samples, and prioritized in our ExomeLoupe platform, an intuitive and associated clinical data, from cohorts of patients, their user-friendly Windows software for variant selection and parents/siblingsandcontrols,representingcasesofsporadic interpretation. ExomeLoupe interacts directly with the and familial MND for research into genetic risk factors. encrypteddatabaseenablinguserstosecurelystore,analyze Methods: Over 3000 patient and control blood samples and share this sensitive genetic information in compliance were collected and sent to the European Collection of with the GDPR. Authenticated Cell Cultures for storage and Epstein-Barr Thisend-to-endsolutionwasdevelopedintheframework virus (EBV) transformation into lymphoblastoid cell lines of In2Genome, a multidisciplinary project to integrate (LCL).EBVtransformationhadbeendemonstratedtobean exome sequencing in clinical practice, with experts of efﬁcient, cost-effective method for immortalising patient Genoinseq,CoimbraGenomicsandtheGeneticsUnitofthe samples, allowing for a potentially unlimited supply of Coimbra Pediatric Hospital(CHUC).GenoinVar validation DNA. The LCL underwent authentication testing to ensure included 13 molecular diagnosed patients selected by clin- thattheymatched theoriginalpatientbloodsampleandthe ical geneticists. The GenoinVar sequencing results were respective DNA. analyzed by two independent blinded specialists using Results:LCLweregeneratedfromallbloodsamplesand ExomeLoupe that successfully identiﬁed the previously in 2017, the MND Association selected 193 samples to be reported causal variants in all 13 cases. made available to researchers. Gene mutations present in GenoinVar represents a true end solution for identifying this sub-set of cell lines include C9orf72, SOD1, FUS and causal variants in clinical and research contexts. TARDBP. Funding: In2Genome (CENTRO-01-0247-FEDER- Discussion: To support MND research the patient and 017800), GenomePT (POCI-01-0145-FEDER-022184) and control cell lines are available from ECACC following Strategic Project (POCI-01-0145-FEDER-007440).1642 H. Froufe: None. D. Martins: None. S. Magalhães: J. Fletcher, K. Brion, E. Douglas, A. Dubowsky, None. C. Barroso: None. C. Egas: None. M.J. K. Friend, J. Geoghagan, S. Grist, M. Gurner, R. Hall, Simões: None. D. Henry, G. McKavanagh, C. Nicholls, T. Pyragius, L.Rawlings,J.Rossini,L.Sanchez,H.Scott,J.Soubrier, P14.056C C. Vakulin, A. Wells, S. Yu, K. Kassahn A new diagnostic approach to calling CNVs from low read-depth genome sequencing data SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia B. Wild1, K. Mann2, C. Donaghue2, D. Bonthron3, Introduction: We audited our germline genomic testing in C. Watson3, J. W. Ahn1 South Australia using massively parallel sequencing from 2014 to 2018. 1Genetics Laboratories, Guy's Hospital, London, UK, Method: Data were extracted from laboratory records. London,UnitedKingdom,2GeneticsLaboratories,Viapath, Testing was initially performed on the Illumina Inherited London, UK, London, United Kingdom, 3MRC Medical Disease™, Trusight Cancer™ and Trusight One™ Bioinformatics Centre, Leeds Institute for Data Analytics, sequencing panels, dependent on genes requested. We University of Leeds, Leeds, UK, Leeds, United Kingdom currently use virtual panels on either a custom-designed Roche 1228 gene panel or the Roche NimbleGen SeqCap Low read-depth genome sequencing (GS) has been EZ MedExome. Libraries were sequenced on the Illumina demonstrated to detect CNV and proposed as a cost- MiSeq or NextSeq sequencing systems. Results were clas- effective, resilient alternative to cytogenomic microarrays siﬁed according to the ACMG standards. Pathogenic/likely (CMA). We aimed to assess this technology in comparison pathogenic results were conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. to the current standard of care. Results: 3068 tests were performed. The highest diag- GSdatawithanaverage readdepthof5Xwasprocessed nosis rate (98%) was for conﬁrmation of a biochemical with a number of CNV callers to evaluate performance. diagnosis.HighdiagnosisrateswereachievedforDuchenne These included: WisecondorX, Canvas, Lumpy, Manta, muscular dystrophy (71%, 15% VUS), Alport syndrome Breakseq2, Breakdancer, Delly, and CNVnator. We also (55%, VUS 7%), neuromuscular (48%, VUS 38%) and investigated a CNV caller developed by the Leeds MRC connective tissue (42%, VUS 32%) panel testing. The Medical Bioinformatics Centre. Data was downsampled in lowest diagnostic rates were seen in Ehlers Danlos (9%, order to test these algorithms at a series of read depths. VUS 55%), Noonan (27%, VUS 20%), Cornelia de Lange After optimising the algorithms by modifying the seed (29%, VUS 43%), single gene/small panel (28%, VUS lengthorwindowsize,wedemonstrateddetectionofCNVs 21%)andlargegenepaneltesting(22%,VUS24%).Sanger down to 0.3Mb at a read depth of 0.05X. To determine sequencing conﬁrmed 1460 of 1478 positive results(99%). whetherthismethodisafeasibleandcosteffective,samples 6 non-conﬁrmations related to repeat regions, 4 each to with known CNV calls were prepared using the NEXT- sample mix up, pseudogenes and “noisy” regions. FELX Rapid DNA-Seq kit, sequenced on the Illumina Conclusions: We are now testing more exomes, with a NextSeq platform and analysed using the reﬁned pipeline. preference for phenotype-driven analysis. As expected, To match the current cost of CMA analysis, each sample genes for which molecular testing has been performed can be sequenced to roughly 0.225X. Furthermore, tissue longer have more positive diagnoses and less VUS. There samples were run to investigate the resilience of low read was a high concordance for variant conﬁrmation. depthGSforpoorqualitysamples.Inconclusion,lowread- J. Fletcher: None. K. Brion: None. E. Douglas: None. depth GS performed similarly to CMA for CNVs >0.3Mb, A. Dubowsky: None. K. Friend: None. J. Geoghagan: even at read depths as low as 0.05X. Although issues sur- None. S. Grist: None. M. Gurner: None. R. Hall: None. rounding mapping repetitive regions and breakpoint accu- D. Henry: None. G. McKavanagh: None. C. Nicholls: racy need to be resolved, we have demonstrated that low None.T.Pyragius:None.L.Rawlings:None.J.Rossini: read-depth GS can offer an improved, low-cost service in None. L. Sanchez: None. H. Scott: None. J. Soubrier: comparison to CMA. None.C.Vakulin:None.A.Wells:None.S.Yu:None.K. B. Wild: None. K. Mann: None. C. Donaghue: None. Kassahn: None. D. Bonthron: None. C. Watson: None. J.W. Ahn: None. P14.058A P14.057D Advantages of genotype imputation with ethnically Outcome of genomic testing in in South Australia: matched reference panel for rare variant association detection rate is not the same for all (virtual) panels analysesAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1643 K. Mart1,2, T. Nikopensius1, K. Läll1,3, K. Pärn2, Metspalu: None. T. Esko: None. P. Palta: None. R. T. T. Sikka1,4, J. Suvisaari5, V. Salomaa5, S. Ripatti2,6, Mägi: None. A. Palotie2,6, A. Metspalu1, T. Esko1,6, P. Palta1,2, R. Mägi1 P14.061D IdentiﬁcationofanovelgermlineBRCA2duplicationby 1Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, targeted gene enrichment and next generation UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,2InstituteforMolecular sequencing MedicineFinland(FIMM),UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki, Finland,3InstituteofMathematicsandStatistics,University J. Bublitz, J. van Luttikhuizen, G. Schmidt, S. Morlot, of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Biotechnology, R. Buurmann, B. Auber, D. Steinemann InstituteofMolecularandCellBiology,UniversityofTartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5National Institute for Health and Welfare, Department of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany Helsinki, Finland, 6Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States Introduction: About 70% of women with a pathogenic germline variant in BRCA1 or BRCA2 (BRCA1/2) will Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been developbreastcancerbytheageof80.Theidentiﬁcationof widely used for detecting genetic biomarkers in a wide BRCA1/2 mutations is required to estimate the cancer risk range of traits. Typically, GWASs are carried out using forrelatives,initiatepreventivemeasuresanddeterminethe chip-based genotyping data, which are then combined with best choice of treatment. Although multiple screening a more densely genotyped reference panel to infer untyped techniques are routinely applied, genetic predispositions in genetic variants in chip-typed individuals. Publicly avail- BRCA1/2 and other core risk genes are identiﬁed in able and ethnically heterogeneous imputation reference approximately 40% of hereditary breast cancer cases. panels (IRPs) such as 1000G are sufﬁciently accurate for Materials and Methods: By multiplex ligation- imputation of common and low-frequency variants. dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) of BRCA2, a Population-speciﬁcIRPshavedemonstrated great improve- duplicatedregionspanningexon22to24wasdetectedina mentinimputationaccuracyofrarevariants,buttheireffect patient with bilateral breast cancer at age 35 and 44. To to the downstream analysis is not very well examined. determine the location and orientation of the duplicated We systematically compared downstream association area, targeted enrichment of the genomic BRCA2 locus analysis effects in ~37,000 Estonians imputed with ethni- followedbyNGSwasperformed.Itsspatialpropertieswere cally mixed 1000G and ethnically matched Estonian- identiﬁed by the bioinformatic tool CNV-Hunter and vali- Finnish IRPs. Firstly, variant-wise GWASs were per- datedbybreakpointspanningPCRandSangerSequencing. formedoneightcomplextraits(bodymassindexandseven Additionally, the probands’ four sisters were tested for the complex diseases of major public health importance). duplication via Sanger Sequencing. Although several previously reported common variant Results:UsingNGS,weshowedthetandemorganization associations were replicated in both imputed datasets, no of the BRCA2 exon 22 to 24 duplication, Chr13(GRCh37): major differences were observed. Secondly, a gene-based g.32951528_32960522dup, in the proband, but not in her tests of rare (MAF < 1%) nonsynonymous and loss-of- sisters. Theoretically, the duplication causes a frameshift function variants were conducted and identiﬁed signiﬁcant andleadstoaprematurestopcodon(p.Ala3088PhefsTer3). gene-trait associations were studied in the UK Biobank This may lead to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and is data. Gene-based analysis demonstrated that ethnically likely to be pathogenic. matched panel outperformed the 1000G-based imputation, Conclusions: We demonstrate rapid and accurate identi- provided 10-fold increase in tested genes and signiﬁcant ﬁcation of a genomic rearrangement using next generation ﬁndings. Validation indicated that most of the signiﬁcantly sequencing. This case study demonstrates the ability of associated genes were previously known, but there were high-throughput sequencing to detect and characterize, some which turned out to be worthwhile novel ﬁndings. besides single nucleotide variants, large genomic Inconclusion,weobservedthatpopulation-speciﬁcpanel rearrangements. ensures a better imputation quality for rare variation and J. Bublitz: None. J. van Luttikhuizen: None. G. captures more population-speciﬁc variants, enabling more Schmidt:None.S.Morlot:None.R.Buurmann:None.B. efﬁcient discovery of disease-associated genes. Auber: None. D. Steinemann: None. K. Mart: None. T. Nikopensius: None. K. Läll: None. K.Pärn:None.T.T.Sikka:None.J.Suvisaari:None.V. P14.062A Salomaa: None. S. Ripatti: None. A. Palotie: None. A. Copy number variant detection tool for targeted sequencing data1644 T. Vold, A. K. Singh, L. A. S. Lavik, M. F. Olsen separating genomic DNA up to 165kb in as little as 70 minutes, down from the 16+ hours required for St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway traditional agarose PFGE. The unparalleled single cell gDNAsensitivityoftheFemtoPulseallowsforpreparation Introduction: With the use of NGS genepanels in genetic of low input NGS libraries from cfDNA, RNA, and diagnostics,moregenesarenowbeingtestedcomparedtoa miniaturizedtraditionalDNANGSlibraries.Qualitycontrol few years ago. Copy Number Variant (CNV) detection is metrics such as the RNA Quality Number (RQN) and user often done using MLPA, which is labor intensive, deﬁned Genomic Quality Number (GQN) aids in the expensive and limited to some speciﬁc genes. As more determinationofsamplequality/integrity.Thispostershows genes are being tested, the amount of MLPA testing has theuniqueuseoftheFemtoPulseSysteminhighmolecular become massiveand unmanageable. Therefore, the Depart- weight gDNA separation and low input library preparation ment of Medical Genetics at St. Olavs Hospital (Norway) with subsequent analysis features highlighted. has developed an in-house CNV detection tool for targeted K. Luttgeharm: A. Employment (full or part-time); sequencing data. Signiﬁcant; Agilent. J. Molitor: A. Employment (full or Materials and Methods: The “in-house” tool calculates part-time); Signiﬁcant; Agilent. R. Nitsche: A. Employ- CNV detection scores by comparing coverage depths of a ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Agilent. test-sample with a pool of normal samples. A sliding- window approach is used for dynamic region selection. P14.064C Validation of the tool included 36 positive controls with NeatSeq-Flow: A Friendly High-Throughput CNVs in 12 genes and 11 negative controls. Sequencing Workﬂow Platform for Local Use by Results: All the CNVs of the positive controls were Programmers and Non-Programmers Alike successfully detected resulting in a measured sensitivity of 100%. The speciﬁcity was measured to be 91% were most M. Y. Sklarz1, L. Levin1, M. Gordon2, V. Chalifa-Caspi2,1 of the false positives were due to systematic errors in challenging genomic regions (e.g. high GC –content, low 1National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer- coverage, high homology). Sheva, Israel, 2Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer- Conclusion: Our CNV detection tool has been validated Sheva, Israel andestablishedinroutinediagnosticsofhereditarycancerat our department. CNV detection using targeted NGS data Genomic experiments involving High-throughput sequen- makes it possible to broaden our genetic testing services to cingusuallyproducelargeamountsofdata,whoseanalysis also include CNV detection of genes where there is no requiresmulti-stepworkﬂows.Creatingandexecutingthese MLPAanalysisavailable.Thistoolisshowntobesensitive workﬂowslocallyisoftentimeconsuminganderrorprone, and speciﬁc in addition to time- and cost-effective. especially when considering projects with hundreds or T.Vold:None.A.K.Singh:None.L.A.S.Lavik:None. thousands of samples, with many steps and plenty of M.F. Olsen: None. intermediate ﬁles, or when the same analysis has to be repeated with different combinations of programs and P14.063B parameters. Sample quality control of longread sequencing and low The NeatSeq-Flow platform allows for modular bioin- input libraries formatics workﬂow design and execution on a local com- puter or, preferably, computer cluster, using either a K. Luttgeharm1, J. Molitor2, R. Nitsche2 command-line interface or a fully functional graphical user interface (GUI). Analysis programs can be anything 1Agilent, Ankeny, IA, United States, 2Agilent, Waldbronn, executablefromtheLinuxcommand-line,thusenablinguse Germany of cutting-edge (public, commercial or in-house) tools for high-throughput sequencing data analysis. Creation and Long-read sequencing and miniaturization of library pre- sharing of new workﬂows is easy and intuitive. Further- parations are becoming increasingly common as new next- more, NeatSeqFlow provides ready-to-use workﬂows for generation sequencing workﬂows are developed. Tradi- common bioinformatics analyses. tional quality control methods do not provide the required To execute a workﬂow, users only need to specify the sizingaccuracyofDNAgreaterthan50kborthesensitivity order and parameters of analysis steps and the location of allowingforsampleconservationduringthequalitycontrol inputﬁle.Workﬂowexecutionisparallelizedonthecluster, assessment steps. The Femto Pulse system by Agilent and progress can be tracked in real time. Workﬂow results Technologies works to streamline quality control by are neatly organized in an intuitive directory structure. AllAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1645 workﬂow components and their order of execution are prioritization of this terms. The use of a genotype- stored in one ﬁle, which together with the shell scripts phenotype strategy allows greater diagnostic rate since produced by NeatSeq-Flow comprise a complete doc- there may be cardinal symptoms not identiﬁed during the umentation of the workﬂow and enable future execution of clinical evaluation of the patients. the exact same workﬂow or modiﬁcations thereof. C. Gómez Sánchez: None. A. Romera: None. J. Mon- All these features make NeatSeq-Flow an easy-to-use toya: None.D. Cantalapiedra: None. C.Moya: None.C. workﬂow platform without compromising ﬂexibility, Casañ:None.A.ArillaCodoñier:None.S.Lois:None.I. reproducibility, transparency and efﬁciency. NeatSeq-Flow Valenzuela:None.F.López-Grondona:None.A.Cueto- is free available at https://neatseq-ﬂow.readthedocs.io González: None. A. Abulí: None. C. Serra: None. M. M.Y.Sklarz:None.L.Levin:None.M.Gordon:None. Codina: None. S. Santillán: None. V. Chalifa-Caspi: None. P14.066A P14.065D Phenotero: annotate as you write Testing the use of Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) terms for the identiﬁcation of causal variants in clinical S. Köhler, D. Hombach, J. Schwarz, E. Knierim, exomes M. Schuelke, D. Seelow C. Gómez Sánchez1, A. Romera1, J. Montoya1, Charité Universtätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany D. Cantalapiedra1, C. Moya1, C. Casañ1, A. Arilla Codoñier1, S. Lois1, I. Valenzuela2, F. López-Grondona2, Inclinicalgenetics,theHumanPhenotypeOntologyaswell A. Cueto-González2, A. Abulí2, C. Serra2, M. Codina2, asdiseaseontologiesareoftenusedfordeepphenotypingof S. Santillán1 patients and coding of clinical diagnoses. However, assigning ontology classes to patient descriptions is often 1Sistemas Genómicos (ASCIRES), Valencia, Spain, disconnected from writing patientreports or manuscriptsin 2Hospital Vall d`Hebron, Barcelona, Spain wordprocessingsoftware.Thisadditionalworkloadandthe requirement to install dedicated software may discourage Introduction: Clinical utility of exome sequencing has usage of ontologies for parts of the target audience. been well established during the last few years. In this Here we present Phenotero, a freely available and simple context, HPO terms provides an important source of solution to annotate patient phenotypes and diseases at the information that allows to correlate phenotypes, diseases time of writing clinical reports or manuscripts. We adopt and genes. Zotero, a citation management software to create a tool Methodology: Exome data from 188 patients were which allows to reference classes from ontologies within evaluated retrospectively. Primitively, these patients were text at the time of writing. We expect this approach to analyzed using 7165 disease associated genes, that was decrease the additional workload to a minimum while considered as the gold standard. Performance of three dif- ensuring high quality associations with ontology classes. ferent gene prioritization strategies was compared: candi- Standardised collection of phenotypic information at the date genes, genes associated to HPO terms provided bythe time of describing the patient allows for streamlining the physician and genes associated to prioritized HPO terms. clinicworkﬂowandefﬁcientdataentry.Itwillsubsequently Results: Clinical exome allowed the diagnosis of 35% promote clinical and molecular diagnosis with the ultimate (66/188) of the patients. The candidate gene strategy was goal of better understanding genetic diseases. Thus, we positive in 15% of the patients (29/188), while the strategy hope that Phenotero eases the usage of ontologies and based on the selection of genes through the combination of controlled vocabularies in the ﬁeld of clinical genetics. HPOs reached a 29% diagnosis (54/188). Using HPOs S. Köhler: None. D. Hombach: None. J. Schwarz: terms,anaverageof796geneswasevaluated.Theselection None. E. Knierim: None. M. Schuelke: None. D. of genes based on the combination of prioritized HPO Seelow: None. terms, obtained a diagnostic rate of 25% (45/188). A detailed analysis of positive cases not identiﬁed under any P14.067B oftheseprioritizationstrategies(12/66),showedthattheuse Inborn Errors of Metabolism (IEM) - analytical of less speciﬁc HPO terms would help detect the affected validation of NGS assays for conﬁrmative diagnostics gene in 8/12 cases. Conclusion: The use of HPO terms is a strategy that T. Simakova1, M. Glushkova1, A. Slepchenkov1, allows the diagnosis in a high percentage of cases, but its Y. Churyumova2, S. Shliaga2, N. Vokhmianina2, efﬁcacy depends signiﬁcantly on the selection and L. Porcaro3, V. Caporale3, A. Pavlov11646 1Parseq Lab, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands Genetic Diagnostics Centre, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Medical Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione Pathogenic variants in the red and green cone opsins, IRCCSCa'GrandaOspedaleMaggiorePoliclinico,Milan, encoded by OPN1LW and OPN1MW respectively, lead to Italy visual impairment. The genes are located in tandem on Xq28andshow98%homology.Currentroutinediagnostics Introduction: MS/MS is routinely used for newborn uses gene-speciﬁc long-range (LR-)PCRs, followed by screening nevertheless, it requires fast accurate and shearingandshort-readsequencing,combinedwithMLPA, inexpensive conﬁrmatory method due to high rate of which are hampered by the high homology, variable copy false-positive results. We aimed to develop and validate 5 numbers and occurrence of hybrid OPN1 genes. We NGSassaysforseveralIEMgroups:organicaciduria(AO), therefore investigated the power of long-read sequencing fatty acidoxidation defects (FAO), aminoacidopathy (AA), compared to standard short-read sequencing. Hereto, vitamin B defects (AAVB) and carbohydrate disorders OPN1LW and OPN1MW of 47 known clinical samples (GH).Materialandmethods:5IEMpanels(4-37genes,15- wereampliﬁedusinggene-speciﬁcLR-PCRsof~16kb,and 158kbp) were designed for multiplex PCR targeted sequenced as 2x 8kb fragments. In addition, a subset was enrichment and evaluated in-silico before production. In- also sequenced as 16kb fragments. Library preparation, vitroassessmentwasperformedonNISTRM-8398,1000G sequencing, and circular consensus sequence (CCS) analy- reference materials and dried blood spot samples. Libraries siswereperformedaccordingtoPacBioprotocolsusingthe were prepared with Parseq protocol based on targeted Sequel system. enrichment followed by adapter ligation, barcoding and All pathogenic variants and hybrid genes were conﬁrmed sequencingonMiSeqandIonTorrentplatforms. Alignment using the 8kb read length, with the advantage of decreased and variant calling were performed using VariFind™ hands-on time for data analysis and interpretation. Mapping Software. Analytical characteristics were calculated within of the 8kb fragments was however still hampered by high all targeted regions (all variants and wild-type positions). sequence homology. The latter was overcome by 16kb frag- Clinically relevant variants from ClinVar database were ment long-read sequencing data, which showed improved evaluated. qualityandmappingcomparedtothe8kbreads.Wetherefore Results: Analytical performance of 5 IEM panels were conclude that long-read sequencing can detect both point established: sensitivity - 95.5-100%, speciﬁcity - 97.0- mutationsandhybridOPN1genes.With8kbreadshavingthe 99.4%. Assays limitations and clinically relevant variants power toaccelerate OPN1 data analysis andinterpretation in within regions with low quality were described. comparisontostandardshort-readsequencing,weexpectthat Conclusions: 5 assays for conﬁrmative IEM diagnostics with further improvements using 16kb CCS reads, it will are validated on Parseq protocol and pipeline, using MiSeq become possible to also detect OPN1 copy number variants and IonTorrent (data not shown) platforms. IEM panels and point mutations using a single test. couldbemixedinasinglerun.Assaysaresuitablefordried K. Neveling: None. A. den Ouden: None. R.C. Derks: blood spot samples. Analytical performance of assays is None.M.Tjon-Pon-Fong:None.H.G.Yntema:None.M. sufﬁcient for the further clinical trials. Diagnostic perfor- R.Nelen:None.L.E.L.M.Vissers:None.D.Lugtenberg: mance of assays as a second-tier test following MS/MS None. L. Haer-Wigman: None. newbornscreeningisstudiedattheSt.Petersburg’sMedical Genetic Diagnostics Centre (Russia) and Medical Genetics P14.069D Laboratory, Policlinico, Milan (Italy). Molecular diagnostic challenges of repeat expansion T. Simakova: None. M. Glushkova: None. A. Slep- disorders in the era of genome scale DNA sequencing: chenkov: None. Y. Churyumova: None. S. Shliaga: the myotonic dystrophy example None. N. Vokhmianina: None. L. Porcaro: None. V. Caporale: None. A. Pavlov: None. J.Radvanszky1,2,3,J.Budis2,3,M.Kucharik2,L.Kadasi1,4, T. Szemes2,3,4 P14.068C The power of 16kb Long-Read Circular Consensus 1Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, Sequencing for the homologous OPN1 genes Biomedical Research Centre, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton, Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Comenius University K. Neveling, A. den Ouden, R. C. Derks, M. Tjon-Pon- Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Department of Fong, H. G. Yntema, M. R. Nelen, L. E. L. M. Vissers, Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius D. Lugtenberg, L. Haer-Wigman University, Bratislava, SlovakiaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1647 Introduction: In general, molecular testing of repeat- documented from diagnostic and health economic stand- expansion-disorders (REDs) require two complementing points in real-life clinical settings. methods, while sequencing has no special place among Methods: We performed medical exome analyses them.Becauseofthis,REDspatientsyethavenotbeneﬁted focusingonaclinicallyinterpretableportionofthegenome from the advent of massively parallel sequencing (MPS), a (4813 genes) as a ﬁrst-tier genetic test for 360 consecutive method that otherwise revolutionised differential diagnos- patients visiting a genetics clinic at a tertiary children’s tics of the majority of monogenic and complex disorders. hospital in Japan, over a 3-year period. Bioinformatics Materials and Methods: We developed an alignment- analyses were conducted using standard software including free bioinformatics tool to characterize clinically relevant BWA, GATK, and SnpEff. attributesofSTRlocifromMPSdatasets.Itwastestedona Results:Amoleculardiagnosiswasmadein171patients commercial targeted MPS panel, using different disease- involving a total of 107 causative genes. Among these 107 associated STR loci. Validation was extended to samples causative genes, 57 genes were classiﬁed as genes with havingexpansionsinthemyotonicdystrophytype1(DM1) potential organ-speciﬁc interventions and management associated DMPK gene. Results were validated by gold strategies. Hence, clinically relevant results were obtained standard methods such as conventional and repeat-primed in approximately a quarter of the patients. A cost- PCR. We then characterized aspects of MPS based REDs effectiveness analysis indicated that the overall cost would testing in routine practice. have been less expensive by 330 euros if a medical exome Results: We were able to reliably genotype ampliﬁable analysishadbeenperformedatthetimeoftheinitialvisitto STR alleles, determine their sequence structure, to phase a tertiary center, rather than after multiple visits to various individual alleles, and also to identify the presence of specialists, a brain MRI examination, and G-banded chro- expanded alleles exceeding the ampliﬁcation limit of the mosome analysis. used MPS assay, overcoming thus the conventional ampli- Conclusions: The present study demonstrated a high ﬁcation derived limitations of MPS. When compared to diagnostic yield (47.5%) for singleton medical exome ana- usingMPSformorecommonvariationtypes,suchassingle lysis as a ﬁrst-tier test in a real-life setting. From a public nucleotide variants, we found several practical problems, health policy standpoint, genomic testing can be more especially connected to automated annotation of identiﬁed efﬁcientfordiagnosiswithacostthatiscomparableorless repeat alleles. to that of currently used tests with lower diagnostic poten- Conclusions: Beyond technological questions, to fully tial, including brain MRI and chromosome testing. beneﬁt from MPS based differential diagnostics there are R. Kosaki: None. M. Kubota: None. T. Uehara: None. several aspects of testing which requires modiﬁcations H. Suzuki: None. T. Takenouchi: None. K. when compared to current practice, from nomenclature of Kosaki: None. alleles, through database feeding, up to automated annota- tion of alleles. Supported by: APVV_-17-0526, P14.071B VaV_MZSR_2018/46-SAV-5 and VEGA_ 1/0433/19. Detection of IL-1 family rare genetic variants in J. Radvanszky: None. J. Budis: None. M. Kucharik: metabolic disorders using single-molecule Molecular None. L. Kadasi: None. T. Szemes: None. Inversion Probes (smMIPs) P14.070A A.Mirea1,2,R.C.vanDeuren2,E.J.M.Toonen3,P.Arts2, Consecutivemedicalexomeanalysisatatertiarycenter: M. Steehouwer2, I. van den Munkhof2, K. Schraa2, Diagnostic and health-economic outcomes M. Jaeger2, F. L. van de Veerdonk2, C. A. Dinarello4, M. G. Netea2, N. P. Riksen2, C. J. Tack2, A. Hoischen2, R. Kosaki1, M. Kubota1, T. Uehara2, H. Suzuki2, L. A. B. Joosten2,1 T. Takenouchi2, K. Kosaki2 1Iuliu Haţieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 1Divisions of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, 2Center for Netherlands, 3Hycult Byotechnology, Uden, Netherlands, Medical Genetics, Keio University School of Medicine, 4University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, United States Tokyo, Japan Introduction: The role of rare genetic variants has been Background:Theutilityofwholeexomeanalysishasbeen neglected in obesity-associated metabolic disorders. In this extensively demonstrated in research settings, but its study we investigated whether rare genetic variation in clinical utility as a ﬁrst-tier genetic test has not been well Interleukin-1(IL-1)cytokinefamilymembersinﬂuencesthe development of obesity-associated metabolic disorders,1648 using an exon re-sequencing technology called single- multiple targets in parallel. Efﬁcient bisulﬁte conversion is molecule Molecular Inversion Probes (smMIPs). acriticalaspectofthistechniqueandincompleteconversion Material and methods: We developed a unique MIP- or the preferential ampliﬁcation of an allele and strand can panel for 48 genes encoding proteins involved in pathways lead to inaccurate results. To avoid the cost and time of related to IL-1 processing or -signaling. All coding exons redesigning new assays, calibration methods based on were sequenced by smMIPs in two well-characterized standard controls have been suggested to correct PCR bias. Dutch cohorts of in total 703 obese patients with different Methods: We have developed a novel Bayesian calibra- metabolic complications (a.o. cardiovascular diseases, type tiontool,MethylCal,whichanalysesjointlyallCpGswithin 2diabetes,andliversteatosis)andinacontrolcohortof520 a CpG island or a differentially methylated region (DMR) healthy individuals. avoiding “one-at-a-time” CpG calibration. Results:Rarevariantsweredeﬁnedasthosewithaminor Results: Compared to existing methods, MethylCal is allele frequency less than 1% in the exome-sequencing moreﬂexibleandﬁttedthedatabetterandprovidedamore Genome Aggregation Database. In the obese cohorts ±62- accurate prediction of the methylation levels. We success- 68% of the total identiﬁed variants were rare, compared to fully tested MethylCal on six imprinting DMRs and two ±73%inthehealthyindividuals.Amongtheserarevariants CpG islands and beneﬁts of the new method, including the 10-20% were newly described and 5-10% had a predicted ability to detect outliers and impute missing values. deleterious effect on protein structure. In the obese patient Conclusion:MethylCalwiththespeciﬁcationofdifferent cohortweobservedanenrichmentofrarevariantsinATG7, random effects adequately accounts for the patterns of IL33 and CASP1 as compared to healthy individuals; sug- variances and correlations of the methylation levels across gesting that rare variants in these genes may play an actual methylation percentages better than existing important role in metabolic diseases. calibration tools. Conclusion: Here we show that smMIPs are a valuable EO is funded by/supported by/receives funding from the technologyforidentifyingrarevariantspossiblyinvolvedin National Institute for Health Research [Cambridge Bio- metabolic diseases. This is a ﬁrst step towards a better medical Research Centre at the Cambridge University understanding of the role of rare genetic variation in HospitalsNHSFoundationTrust].Theviewsexpressedare metabolic disease. those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, Funding sources: Else- Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung, the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. Interleukin Foundation. E. Ochoa: None. V. Zuber: None. N. Fernandez- A. Mirea: None. R.C. van Deuren: None. E.J.M. Jimenez:None.J.R.Bilbao:None.G.Clark: None.E.R. Toonen: None. P. Arts: None. M. Steehouwer: None. I. Maher: None. L. Bottolo: None. van den Munkhof: None. K. Schraa: None. M. Jaeger: None. F.L. van de Veerdonk: None. C.A. Dinarello: P14.073D None. M.G. Netea: None. N.P. Riksen: None. C.J. Tack: Effective faeces and vaginal, cervical, rectal and ear None. A. Hoischen: None. L.A.B. Joosten: None. swabs preparation for metagenomic analyzes P14.072C K. Jaskiewicz1,2, P. Gutaj3, D. Kamińska1, K. Tomela4, MethylCal: Bayesian calibration of methylation levels M. Rydzanicz5, R. Płoski5, E. Wender-Ożegowska3, M. Gajecka1,2 E. Ochoa1, V. Zuber2, N. Fernandez-Jimenez3, J. R. Bilbao3,4, G. Clark1, E. R. Maher1, L. Bottolo1,2,5 1Department of Genetics and Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Kingdom, 2MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge, United Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Kingdom, 3Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology Reproduction, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, and Animal Physiology, Leioa, Spain, 4CIBER Diabetes Poznan, Poland, 4Chair of Medical Biotechnology, Poznan and associated metabolic disorders-CIBERDEM, Madrid, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, Spain,5TheAlanTuringInstitute,London,UnitedKingdom 5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland Background: The identiﬁcation of clinically relevant epigenetic biomarkers and the translation to clinical Background:Geneticidentiﬁcationofdifferentelementsof diagnosticsrequirereliableandaccuratemethylationassays. microbiome (bacteria, archaea, fungi, small eukaryotes, Targeted bisulﬁte sequencing has become the primary viruses) supports innovative personalized patients’ treat- choice for single-base methylation quantiﬁcation of ment. Metagenome analyzes enable precise assessment ofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1649 bothmicrobialcommunitycompositionanditsfunction.As Introduction: The success rate of check point inhibitors in biologicalmaterial’svariability(includingphysicalfeatures the treatment of patients with colorectal cancers displaying and microbiota abundance), the storage and experimental microsatellite instability (MSI) underscores the need for conditionscausebiases,reliableandvalidatedprotocolsare novel techniques, because of the fact that serial tumor required. Aim: Establishing the microbiota genome extrac- specimens are usually not available. In our study, we tion protocols and procedures toward metagenomics evaluatedtheliquidbiopsyasanimportantsourceofcancer applications. derived DNA for MSI detection. Materials and Methods: Newborns' faeces and various Materials and Methods: Formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn- swabstypes(auricle,vagina,cervix,rectum)storedat−80° embedded (FFPE) tumor tissue and liquid biopsy samples C, were proceeded using different kits for microbiota werecollectedfrom23colorectal cancer patients.Genomic extraction. The 16S rRNA sequencing has been performed DNAandcirculatingcell-freeDNA(ccfDNA)wereisolated using Illumina’s MiSeq. fromblood samples,then concentrationsandqualitieswere Results: We established microbiota extraction protocols’ compared. based on the same consumables for all types of samples, Testing for MSI was performed using kits obtained from whichenablesadequatecomparisonanalysis.Thefollowing PromegaCorporation.Microsatellitealterationswerescored difﬁculties were recognized: extremely low amount of bycomparingtheelectrophoreticproﬁlesofeachbiomarker biological material (swabs from newborns’ auricle and (targetedgeneregionsofBAT-25,BAT-26,NR-21,NR-24, faeces), mechanical lysis, presence of reaction inhibitors, MONO-27, Penta-C and Penta-D) in genomic DNA versus host genome contamination, false results of samples con- ccfDNA. centration including aspects of DNA input’s quantiﬁcation Results:Ofthe23patients,theelectrophoreticproﬁlesof for PCR reactions, and chimeras. Various extraction pro- microsatellite biomarkers tested in ccfDNA matched those tocols’ modiﬁcations were implemented: concentrating intherespectiveprimarytumorsinallcaseswiththehigher samples, applying selective primers and high-ﬁdelity poly- quality in liquid biopsy samples relatively. merase and carefully chosen numbers of PCR cycles. To Conclusions: There was an excellent concordance verify assumptions 16S rRNA sequencing was performed between liquid biopsysamples andFFPEtumorsamples to and satisfying number of reads, % Reads Passing Quality detect MSI. Moreover, liquid biopsy might be useful in Filtering, % Reads PF Classiﬁed to Genus and species colorectalpatientsundergoingtreatment,thatcanbereadily diversity in various biological materials were received. obtained using minimally invasive procedure. Conclusion: The optimized protocols ensure appropriate S. Tug Bozdogan: None. C. Rencuzogullari: None. A. quality and quantity of material for downstream and high- Rencuzogullari: None. A. Bisgin: None. throughput application in metagenomic studies. Support: Polish Diabetes Association 2015, 2017 and PUMS Medi- P14.075B cal Faculty’ Scientiﬁc Grant 502-01-01110142-05618. Nanopore sequencing via targeted enrichment for K. Jaskiewicz: None. P. Gutaj: None. D. Kamińska: medical diagnostics None.K.Tomela:None.M.Rydzanicz:None.R.Płoski: None. E. Wender-Ożegowska: None. M. Gajecka: None. G. Schmidt1, C. Davenport2, B. Auber1 P14.074A 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical Detection of MSI in circulating cell-free DNA from School, Hannover, Germany, 2Research Core Unit colorectal cancer patients Genomics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany S. Tug Bozdogan1,2, C. Rencuzogullari2, Introduction: Withnanoporesequencingrapidlyevolving, A. Rencuzogullari3, A. Bisgin1,2 it is now possible to routinely sequence individual DNA strands in the kilobase range, independent of their base 1CukurovaUniversityFacultyofMedicine,BalcaliHospital composition. However several aspects, like lower base and Clinics, Department of Medical Genetics, Adana, accuracy and relatively high whole genome sequencing Turkey, 2Cukurova University AGENTEM (Adana Genetic costs have hindered nanopore sequencing from becoming DiseasesDiagnosisandTreatmentCenter),Adana,Turkey, established in medical diagnostics. Here, we describe our 3CukurovaUniversityFacultyofMedicine,BalcaliHospital targeted approach for the analysis of patient samples using and Clinics, Department of General Surgery, Adana, the MinION sequencing device (Oxford Nanopore Tech- Turkey nologies, ONT), addressing several types of variants relevant in human genetics.1650 Materials and Methods: Long-range PCR was per- library. DNA analysis processing was automated using formed for target enrichment, with high molecular weight pipelines implemented in the SnakeLines framework run- DNAorcDNAasinput.Librarypreparationwasperformed ning on the Snakemake workﬂow engine. using the SQK-LSK108 sequencing kit (ONT) and either Results: The data from sequencer were processed by de R9.4 or R9.5 ﬂow cells were used for sequencing on a novo assembly method to generate contigs from short MinION device. Base calling was carried out using Alba- fragments without the aid of reference genome. We were coreandBWAmemorminimap2wereusedforalignment. abletoreconstructtotalmtDNAbyRNAsequencingwhere Results: A 2h MinION run on a long-range ACVRL1 the most problematic were RNA non-coding regions, par- product(cDNA)yieldedover300,000xcoverage,with50% ticularlytheD-loopregion.However,usingourmethod,we ofthereads showingtheaberranttranscript.Eventhereuse were able to sequence also non-coding regions. ofﬂowcellsyieldedsufﬁcientreadsfortheidentiﬁcationof Conclusion: mtDNA represents a small but signiﬁcant the genomic breakpoints of a large EPCAM deletion and segmentofthetotalDNAoftheindividual.Theverysmall allowed the phasing of two NPC1 variants (one of them de amount compared to genomic DNA is the enormous pro- novo) revealing that both variants are in trans. blem in its successful study. Therefore, our method is not Conclusion: Nanopore sequencing combined with long- basedondirectDNAsequencingformitochondrialgenome range PCR is a cost effective and rapid tool to address reconstruction, but on RNA sequencing of cell lysate. complex variants. Traditional PCR limitations, such as loss L.Striešková:None.I.Gazdaricová:None.M.Kajsik: of base modiﬁcations, enrichment of repeat expansions or None.K.Šoltýs:None.J.Budiš:None.O.Pös:None.M. large regions (>20 kb), could be solved by application of Ličková: None. B. Klempa: None. T. Szemes: None. CRISPR-Cas enrichment techniques. G. Schmidt: None. C. Davenport: None. B. P14.078A Auber: None. Evaluation of two molecular methods to detect CALR mutations in myeloproliferative neoplasms P14.077D Effective mitochondrial genome reconstruction from T. Er1,2, T. Chan3 total RNA sequencing 1Division of Laboratory Medicine, Asia University L. Striešková1, I. Gazdaricová2, M. Kajsik3, K. Šoltýs2,3, Hospital, TAICHUNG, Taiwan, 2Department of Food J. Budiš1,3,4, O. Pös2,1, M. Ličková5, B. Klempa5, Nutrition and Health Biotechnology, Asia University, T. Szemes1,2,3 Taichung, Taiwan, 3Department of Food Nutrition and Health Biotechnology, Asia University, TAICHUNG, 1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Faculty of Natural Taiwan Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia, Background: Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are 4Slovak Centre of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, hematopoietic disorders characterized by abnormal prolif- Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Institute of Virology, Biomedical eration of the myeloid lineage. Three classic subtypes are Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, polycythemia vera (PV). Essential thrombocythemia (ET) Slovakia and primary myeloﬁbrosis (PMF). These disorders are well knownfortheirassociationwiththeJAK2V617Fmutation, Introduction: Variants in mitochondrial genome have an in addition to mutations on MPL exon10, and JAK2 exon impact on several inherited diseases as well as they may 12. CALR mutations were detected in approximately 20% trigger the formation of a tumor or inﬂuence the behaviour to 25% of patients with ET and PMF and not in patients of cancer. However, the analysis of mitochondrial DNA with PV. Most CALR mutations were deletions and (mtDNA)anddetectionofmutationsisproblematicduetoa insertions in exon 9, which cause frameshift mutations. low portion of mtDNA in total cellular DNA and Methods: This study included 60 patients with MPN in phenomenon of heteroplasmy that occurs in mitochondria. Taiwanese population. We identiﬁed CALR mutation in Considering human mtDNA does not contain introns, the patients with MPN by high-resolution melting (HRM) reconstruction of whole mitochondrial genome through analysis. Additionally, HRM analysis was compared with RNA sequencing seems to be effective. ipsogen CALR RGQ PCR. To conﬁrm the results of HRM Materials and Methods: VERO E6 lineage of cells was and ipsogen CALR RGQ PCR, sequencing analysis was used as a material for molecular analysis. RNA isolation also carried out for all samples. was accomplished from the cell suspension and subsequent Results: Up to 6.25% of the CALR mutation was suc- reverse transcription werefollowed by preparation ofDNA cessfully detected in patients with MPN using HRMAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1651 analysis. Four out of 60 patients (6.67%) were positive for C. Kubu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; thepresenceofCALRmutationincludingp.L367fs*46and Fluidigm Corporation. J. Alipaz: A. Employment (full or p.K385fs*47.Theresultsproved100%comparabletothose part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. J. Brockman: obtained by ipsogen CALR RGQ PCR. A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Conclusions: The HRM analysis and ipsogen CALR Corporation.S.Chamnongpol:A.Employment(fullorpart- RGQ PCR are feasible and reliable technique for the time);Signiﬁcant;FluidigmCorporation.N.GopiDevaraju: detectionofCALRmutation.Furthermore,theHRMoffers A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm several beneﬁts including saving of time, non-expensive, Corporation. B. Fowler: A. Employment (full or part-time); fast and lower workforce. Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. J.A. Geis: A. Employ- T. Er: None. T. Chan: None. ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;FluidigmCorporation.T. Goralski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; P14.079B Fluidigm Corporation. B. Lacar: A. Employment (full or Nanoliter-scale automation of library prep solutions for part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. C. Park: A. RNA sequencing Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Cor- poration. M. Phelan: A. Employment (full or part-time); C. Kubu, J. Alipaz, J. Brockman, S. Chamnongpol, Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. C. Stolarczyk: A. N. Gopi Devaraju, B. Fowler, J. A. Geis, T. Goralski, Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Cor- B. Lacar, C. Park, M. Phelan, C. Stolarczyk, J. Wang, poration. J. Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- D. A. King niﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. D.A. King: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fluidigm Corporation. Fluidigm Corporation, South San Francisco, CA, United States P14.080C The development of a fast newborn screening method RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) provides a more precise for common neonatal metabolic disorders based on measurement of transcript levels and their isoforms than nanopore sequencing technology other expression proﬁling methods. We have developed an elegant microﬂuidics-based workﬂow and chemistry for H. Onay1,2,3, B. Akgun4, T. Yalcinkaya2, E. Dilsizoglu2, RNA-seq library prep (LP). This method performs bead- A. B. Kaya2, O. Tasar3,5, I. Turkoglu3,5, T. Atik2,4 based sample capture and elutes polyadenylated RNA from totalRNAsamples.Theworkﬂowsupportsreversetranscrip- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ege University Faculty tion, adapter addition and sample indexing PCR. The entire of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 2MULTIGEN Sag.Hiz.Tic.Ltd. workﬂowisautomatedwithinacompactnanoscaleintegrated Sti., Izmir, Turkey, 3Gene2Info Tic.Ano.Sti., Istanbul, ﬂuidiccircuit(IFC)inamicrotiterplateformat.Theworkﬂow Turkey,4SubdivisionofGenetics,DepartmentofPediatrics, supports simultaneous processing of up to 48 samples. We Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 5IDEA developed two LP methodologies that use similar chemistry Teknoloji Tic.Ano.Sti., Istanbul, Turkey andworkﬂow, one forthe3′-end of transcripts andthe other for full-length transcripts enabling detection of alternatively Introduction: Inherited metabolic diseases (IEM) are spliced isoforms. usually devastating, and caused by single gene defects. In To demonstrate performance, we processed samples con- newborns, for the differential diagnosis of IEM, a number taining10ngand100ngofUHRRRNA+ERCCMix1and of laboratory tests must be performed. During these HumanBrainRNA+ERCCMix2.Weloadedsamplesand intensive investigations, a vast majority of severely ill sample barcodes into their corresponding inlets along with patientsdiewithoutadeﬁnitediagnosis.Recently,anumber reagentsontheIFC.Afterasinglebuttonpushtoinitiatethe of newborn screening tests based on next-generation workﬂow,thebeadafﬁnitycolumnwasformed,polyARNA sequencing (NGS) have been develop to replace expensive wereenrichedandtemplateRNAwasconvertedintocDNA, and time consuming conventional laboratory tests. In this whichwasampliﬁedwithsampleindexes.Finally,wepooled, study, we describe a rapid and effective screening test for puriﬁed, quantiﬁed and sequenced harvested libraries on an 3 severe metabolic diseases (maple syrup urine disease, Illumina® NextSeq™ system. biotinidase deﬁciency and mucopolysaccharidosis type-1) Results show that the performance of this workﬂow sur- based on Oxford Nanopore Technology (ONT). passes conventional methods in the diversity of detected Materials and Methods: PCR based target enrichment transcripts across the full range of input amounts. Our IFC wasperformedonallexonsofthe5genes(DBT,BCKDHB, technology automates the RNA-seq library prep workﬂow BCKDHA, IDUA, BTD) responsible for the 3 diseases. and reduces reagent use while improving performance. Multiplex PCR studies were performed using super-fast1652 thermalcyclersandfastpolymerases.Theampliﬁedregions Methods: We retrospectively collected postnatal health- werethensequencedwiththeONTMinIONdevice.Results care data of 1,423 children admitted to the NICU at the were veriﬁed with the Illumina Miseq platform. Based on RadboudumcbetweenOctober2013andOctober2015.We the data obtained, the appropriate bioinformatic tools were distinguishedbetweenchildrenwithaconclusivemolecular selected and their parameters were optimized. diagnosis found within the ﬁrst 30 days of life (for com- Results: Using ONT, satisfactory molecular genetic parisontorWES)andthosegeneticallydiagnosedafterthis screening results were obtained for in a far shorter time period. period (below 4 hours), than is currently available utilizing Results: Overall, the average costs spent were €24,357 NGS. Despite the protocol being highly successful for per patient. Of the 1,423 patients, 149 (10.5%) underwent single nucleotide variations, for insertions and deletions genetic diagnostic testing. In 13 (8.7%) a genetic diagnosis artifacts were present. was obtained during the ﬁrst 30 days of life and for 35 Conclusions:ThisistheﬁrststudydevelopedusingONT (22.8%) thereafter. For patients with a genetic diagnosis for the screeningof metabolic disease. The development of <31 days of life, total costs spent on genetic diagnostics speciﬁc bioinformatic tools is necessary to further improve accounted for 3.4% of all costs (€1.842 per patient), the speed and accuracy of the results. whereas for those receiving a genetic diagnosis >30 days, H.Onay:None.B.Akgun:None.T.Yalcinkaya:None. costs for genetic testing were 5.0% (€3.495 per patient) of E.Dilsizoglu:None.A.B.Kaya:None.O.Tasar:None.I. total costs. Turkoglu: None. T. Atik: None. Conclusions: Genetic diagnostic testing in a NICU patient cohort accounts for a small fraction of total costs. P14.081D With an anticipated increase in genetic diagnoses, a shorter Medical costs of children admitted to the Neonatal time-to-diagnosis, and reduction of sequencing costs, IntensiveCareUnit;theroleandpossiblevalueofrapid implementation of rWES for this patient cohort may be Whole Exome Sequencing warranted. R.A.C.M.OldeKeizer:None.A.C.Deden:None.W.A. R. A. C. M. Olde Keizer1, A. C. Deden2, W. A. G. van G. van Zelst-Stams: None. W.P. de Boode: None. L. Zelst-Stams3,W.P.deBoode4,L.Henneman5,J.K.Ploos Henneman: None. J.K. Ploos van Amstel: None. L.E.L. van Amstel6, L. E. L. M. Vissers7, G. W. J. Frederix1,6 M. Vissers: None. G.W.J. Frederix: None. 1Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, P14.082A University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, Phenotypic characterization and functional analysis of 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University cases suspect for Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, R.vanMinkelen,B.vanOmmeren,H.Douben,M.Kroos- Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Nijmegen, de Haan, M. van Vliet, A. Wagner, M. Nellist, Y. van Netherlands, 4Department of Neonatology, Radboud Ierland, ENCORE Expertise Center for University Medical Center, Radboud Institute for Health Neurodevelopmental Disorders Sciences, Amalia Children’s Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands,5Department ofClinicalGenetics,Amsterdam Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands UMC, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Genetics, Utrecht University Medical Background: Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) mutation Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 7Department of Human detection and variant interpretation is challenging. We Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and compared clinical characteristics of patients with NF1- Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS) or no mutation identiﬁed (NF1-NMI) to those with pathogenic NF1 Introduction: Novel genetic technologies are promising variants. Secondly, we performed in vitro functional but often come at high costs. To adequately quantify the assessment to reclassify NF1 VUS. impactoftheirintroduction inpatientcare, it isessential to Methods: Clinical characterization Clinical and genetic have detailed insight in current costs of diagnostic information of clinically suspected NF1 patients was procedures. We provide an overview of average healthcare extractedfromthedepartmentalNF1database(1993-2016). costs for patients admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care CharacteristicsoftheNF1-VUSandNF1-NMIgroupswere Unit (NICU) to facilitate discussion on the possible impact compared to the NF1 pathogenic variant group. Functional of rapid Whole Exome Sequencing (rWES) on total characterization of NF1-VUS Expression constructs healthcare costs. encoding NF1 VUS were derived by site-directedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1653 mutagenesis. By in vitro assays, we estimated the RAS enzymatically removes off-target sequence, and directly GAP activity of the neuroﬁbromin variant proteins using a converts captured molecules into Illumina-ready libraries. RAS-GTP pull-down assay. Secondly, we used coimmu- The sequencing reads have highly deﬁned start sites and noprecipitation to investigate whether the interaction produce uniform coverage across a given target. The between neuroﬁbromin and SPRED1 was affected. NEBNext Direct CFTR Panel consists of a single pool of Results: We identiﬁed 417 (68%) pathogenic NF1 var- baits targeting both strands of DNA across 27 exons and 7 iants, 33 (5%) VUS and 167 (27%) NF1-NMI individuals. intronic sites, for a total captured territory of 6.751 The percentage of patients in each group who met the kilobases. The panel enables screening and detection of clinical NF1-NIH criteria was 64%, 67% and 34% respec- overthe2,000variantsthathavebeenrecordedworldwide. tively. In the NF1-NMI group 45% of the individuals only The NEBNext Direct Cardiogenomics Panel covers 160 had one NF1-NIH criterion identiﬁed. Functional assess- genes associated with a range of cardiomyopathies as well ment on27NF1-VUSresultedinreclassiﬁcationof 6VUS as Brugada, Noonan, Marfan, and Long QT syndromes. as pathogenic and 10 as likely pathogenic. Here, we will demonstrate the utility of these panels for Conclusions:Clinically,theNF1-VUSgroupwaslargely producing highly speciﬁc, highly uniform enrichment of comparable to the pathogenic variant group. Functional gene targets prior to next-generation sequencing. analyses were useful to further classify NF1 VUS. Due to B. Textor: None. A.B. Emerman: None. K.M. Patel: theclinicalandfamilialconsequencesofanNF1diagnosis, None. S.K. Bowman: None. S.M. Adams: None. B.S. future studies should focus on optimizing assays of neuro- Desmond: None. J.S. Dunn: None. A. Barry: None. S.E. ﬁbromin function to facilitate establishing an accurate Corbett: None. C.D. Elfe: None. E. Mauceli: None. C.L. molecular diagnosis. Hendrickson: None. R. van Minkelen: None. B. van Ommeren: None. H. Douben: None. M. Kroos-de Haan: None. M. van Vliet: P14.084C None. A. Wagner: None. M. Nellist: None. Y. van Comparison of molecular inversion probe versus Ierland: None. Truseq® custom methods for targeted next-generation sequencing in peripheral neuropathy P14.083B Targeted next generation sequencing for genetic testing R. Almomani1,2, M. Marchi3, E. Salvi3, S. Magri4, of inherited diseases with NEBNext Direct I. D'Amato3, P. Lindsey1, M. Sopacua5, H. Smeets1, S. Santoro6, F. Martinelli Boneschi7,8, S. Dib-Hajj9,10, B.Textor1,A.B.Emerman2,K.M.Patel2,S.K.Bowman2, S. G. Waxman9,10, I. S. J. Merkies5,11, M. M. Gerrits1, S. M. Adams2, B. S. Desmond2, J. S. Dunn2, A. Barry3, C. G. Faber5, G. Lauria3,12, PROPANE Study Group S. E. Corbett2, C. D. Elfe2, E. Mauceli2, C. L. Hendrickson2 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of 1New England Biolabs GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany, MedicalLaboratorySciences,JordanUniversityofScience 2DirectedGenomicsInc.,Ipswich,MA,UnitedStates,3New and Technology, Irbid, Jordan, 3Neuroalgology Unit, England Biolabs Inc., Ipswich, MA, United States Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 4Unit of Medical Genetics and Next generation sequencing is increasingly being adopted Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico for the screening of inherited disorders. A patient’s genetic Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 5Department of Neurology, information is useful for the diagnosis, prognosis, and Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, management of disease as well as factors impacting Netherlands, 6Laboratory of Human Genetics of expanded familial screening. To demonstrate the applic- Neurological Disorders, Institute of Experimental ability of NEBNext Direct target enrichment for genetic Neurology (INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San screening of germline variants, we have developed target- Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milano, Italy, 7Laboratory of enrichment panels speciﬁc to inherited disease. Spanning Genetics of Complex Disorders and Department of from a single-gene panel for cystic ﬁbrosis screening to a Neurology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Milan, Italy, comprehensive panel for screening an array of cardiac- Milano, Italy, 8Department of Biomedical Sciences for related diseases, the NEBNext Direct technology can be Health, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 9Department of applied to a wide range of genomic targets, using a novel Neurology, Yale University School of Medicine, New hybridization-based, single-day workﬂow. The approach Haven, CT, United States, 10Center for Neuroscience and rapidly hybridizes both strands of genomic DNA to Regeneration Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, biotinylatedbaits,capturesthetargetsonstreptavidinbeads, West Haven, CT, United States, 11Department of1654 Neurology, St Elisabeth Hospital, Willemstad, Curaçao, 1Slovak Centre of Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, 12Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences Luigi Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, Sacco, University of Milan, Milano, Italy 3Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Faculty of Introduction: Resolvingthegeneticarchitecture ofpainful Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, neuropathy, a disabling feature of peripheral neuropathy Slovakia, 5Institute for Clinical and Translational (PN), will lead to better disease management. Several Research,BiomedicalResearchCenter,SlovakAcademyof targetedNext-generation sequencing(NGS) approachesare Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Medirex a.s., Bratislava, currently available. Aim of this study was to develop a Slovakia, 7Department of Human Genetics, University of reliable technique to rapidly and accurately re-sequence Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 8Comenius University multiplegenesinalargecohortofPNpatientsatalowcost. Science park, Bratislava, Slovakia Materials and Methods: We compared the sensitivity, speciﬁcity,efﬁciency,reproducibilityandcost-effectiveness Introduction: Non-invasive prenatal testing or NIPT is of TruSeq® Custom Amplicon (TSCA, Illumina) and currently among the top researched topic in obstetric care. Molecular Inversion Probes (MIPs) NGS methods. To tar- While the performance of the current state-of-the-art NIPT get nine sodium channel genes, capture probes were solutions achieve high sensitivity and speciﬁcity, they still designed using their respective informatics pipelines. One- strugglewithaconsiderablenumberofsamplesthatcannot hundred-sixty-six patients with PN were tested by both beconcludedwithcertainty.Suchuninformativeresultsare methods, 70 samples were also validated by Sanger often subject to repeated blood sampling and re-analysis, sequencing. usually after two weeks, and this period may cause a stress Results: Approximately 39kb were sequenced. 95% of to the future mothers as well as increase the overall cost of thetargetedregionsshowedanaveragecoverageof≥20xin the test. TSCA, and 96% in MIPs. Sanger sequencing showed a Materials and Methods: We propose a supplementary 100% agreement with MIPs and TSCA. Sensitivity, speci- methodtotraditionalz-scorestoreducethenumberofsuch ﬁcity,performanceofthetwotechniques werecomparable, uninformative calls. The method is based on a novel ana- showinguser-friendlysoftwaretodesignprobesandsimilar lysisofthelengthproﬁleofcirculatingcellfreeDNAwhich on-targetefﬁciency.MIPshasamoreversatileassaydesign, compares the change in such proﬁles when random-based ﬂexible, allowing probes re-placement and integration. and length-based elimination of some fragments is TSCA results less ﬂexible, but probes dosage adjustment performed. was unnecessary. The per-sample price for MIP was about Results: Although the proposed method is not as accurate 10x less than TSCA. as the standard z-score, the combination of these two inde- Conclusions: MIPs approach is more suitable for wide pendent methods correctly resolves a substantial portion of NGS panels on high sample numbers, reducing single- healthy samples with an uninformative result. Also the sample pricing if processed on a high-performance plat- method can be used to identify maternal aberrations, thus form, whereas TSCA seems to be very time-effective and reducing the risk of false positive and false negative calls. could represent the best solution to analyze smaller sample Conclusions: Reliability of traditional NIPT tests based sizes on a cheaper ﬂow-cell. (FP7-PROPANE Grant on low coverage sequencing can be improved by closer n.602273) analysis of lengths of sequenced DNA fragments. R.Almomani:None.M.Marchi:None.E.Salvi:None. The presented work was supported by the “REVOGENE S.Magri:None.I.D'Amato:None.P.Lindsey:None.M. - Research centre for molecular genetics” project (ITMS Sopacua: None. H. Smeets: None. S. Santoro: None. F. 26240220067) supported by the Operational Programme Martinelli Boneschi: None. S. Dib-Hajj: None. S.G. Research and Development funded by the ERDF. Waxman: None. I.S.J. Merkies: None. M.M. Gerrits: J. Budiš: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; None. C.G. Faber: None. G. Lauria: None. Geneton Ltd. J. Gazdarica: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Radvanszky: A. P14.086A Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd.. G. Innovative method for reducing uninformative calls in Szucs: None. M. Kucharík: A. Employment (full or part- non-invasive prenatal testing time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. L. Striešková: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd.. I. Gaz- J.Budiš1,2,3,J.Gazdarica1,2,4,J.Radvanszky5,2,G.Szucs3, daricova: None. M. Haršányová: A. Employment (full or M. Kucharík2, L. Striešková2,4, I. Gazdaricova4, part-time);Modest;GenetonLtd.F.Ďuriš:A.Employment M.Haršányová4,2,F.Ďuriš1,2,G.Minárik6,M.Sekelská6, (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. G. Minárik: A. B. Nagy7, J. Turňa1,4,8, T. Szemes4,2,8 Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Medirex a.s.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1655 M. Sekelská: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Agilent. F. Lozach: A. niﬁcant; Medirex a.s.. B. Nagy: None. J. Turňa: None. T. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Agilent. S. Szemes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Romana: None. T. Attie-Bitach: None. Geneton Ltd.. P14.088C P14.087B Gene expression proﬁling of peripheral blood treated Simultaneous detection of CNVs and SNVs by Oneseq with different pretreatments and storage conditions technique: a retrospective study of 21 cases Y. Xing1, X. Yang1, H. Chen1, S. Zhu2, J. Xu1, Y. Chen1, V. Malan1,2, M. Egloff1,2, H. Haj Abdallah1, M. Le J. Zeng1, F. Chen1, H. Jiang1, W. Wang1 Lorc’h1, N. Elkhartouﬁ1, L. Boutaud1, A. Jeanniard3, D. Goidin3, F. Lozach3, S. Romana1,2, T. Attie-Bitach1,2 1BGI-Shenzhen,Shenzhen,China,2ShenzhenMaternityand Child Healthcare Hospital, Shenzhen, China 1Histology-Embryology-Cytogenetics Department, Necker- EnfantsMaladesHospital, Paris, France, 2Paris Descartes Introduction: Peripheral blood, as a type of liquid biopsy, University,Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, providesasourceofnon-invasivebiomarkersforevaluation France, 3Life Sciences and Diagnostics Group, Agilent ofhealthanddisease,andRNA-seqisapowerfulmethodto Technologies France, Les Ulis, France investigate genome-wide gene expression proﬁles. Various factors, for example, pretreatments and storage conditions Introduction: Congenital malformations are found in of blood, which are critical in sample collection, could approximately 3% of newborns. While improvement of affect gene expression detection. However, how these fetal imaging allows their detection during pregnancy, factors would actually inﬂuence transcriptome remains genetic investigations carried out in the prenatal setting are largely unknown. most often limited to search for a genomic imbalance by Methods:WeusedRNA-seqtoexplorethedifferencesof karyotyping and/or chromosomal microarray analysis expression proﬁles of samples from four pretreatments (CMA). Presently, molecular genetic analysis is rarely including Whole Blood (WB), Buffy Coat (BC), White proposedduetothetimeandthecostneededtosequencea BloodCell(WBC)andPeripheralBloodMononuclearCell gene by Sanger, and the genetic heterogeneity of many (PBMC) and the effects of storage conditions. syndromes.Theobjectiveofourstudyistotestacombined Results: Transcriptome of BC shows comparable globin approach detecting Copy Number Variants (CNVs) and mRNA ratio and gene detection ability with that of WB, Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) in one experiment. while lower globin mRNA ratio and higher expressed gene MaterialsandMethods:InpartnershipwithAgilent,we number are observed in WBC and PBMC transcriptomes. adapted OneSeq® product for the prenatal diagnosis by Granulocytes related genes are well characterized in WBC. selecting panels of genes involved in developmental dis- Transcriptome changes along with blood stored at both ordersandusingasimilarstrategytoour“customchip”for roomtemperature(RT)and4°C,andmoregeneschangesat the detection of CNVs. Validation was performed on a RT especially genes related to granulocytes, while much series of 21 fetuses or patients with known CNVs and/or fewer genes changed at 4°C. Reference genes such as SNVsandcomparedtotheresultspreviouslydeterminedby CHMP2A and PSMB4 are relatively stable, while the CMA and panels of genes. expression of IL1RN, which is similar in both men and Results: All the 10 CNVs larger than 500kb were iden- women, increases more in women than men after 24 hours tiﬁed by Oneseq® technique. Regarding the SNVs, they stored at RT. were all detected except one intragenic duplication in the Conclusion: Our study provides a full-scale ex vivo LBMR1 gene. change ofperipheral blood expressionproﬁle,and suggests Conclusions: Our study demonstrates the reliability of rigorous sample collection strategies to obtain authentic the OneSeq® technique and emphasizes the advantage of transcriptome. having a simultaneous detection of CNVs and SNVs in the Funding: National Natural Science Foundation of China prenatal setting. Thus, a more precise genetic counseling (No.81300075),ShenzhenMunicipalGovernmentofChina can be provided to couples which can help them to make a (No.JCYJ20170412152854656). decision on a possible termination of a pregnancy. Y.Xing:None.X.Yang:None.H.Chen:None.S.Zhu: V. Malan: None. M. Egloff: None. H. Haj Abdallah: None. J. Xu: None. Y. Chen: None. J. Zeng: None. F. None. M. Le Lorc’h: None. N. Elkhartouﬁ: None. L. Chen: None. H. Jiang: None. W. Wang: None. Boutaud: None. A. Jeanniard: A. Employment (full or part-time);Signiﬁcant;Agilent.D.Goidin:A.Employment1656 P14.089D P14.090A Phasing of de novo mutations using multiple amplicon Feasibility of amino-acid sensing on dried blood spot long read sequencing using near infrared spectroscopy G. S. Holt1, M. J. Xavier1, M. S. Oud2, B. Alobaidi1, G. Bonapace1, M. Vismara2,3, O. Marasco4, R. Smits3, H. Ismail1, A. Garcia-Rodriguez1, P. F. de G. Scozzafava4, A. Michael5, M. Pittelli4, T. Greto4, Vries2, H. Sheth1, L. E. L. M. Vissers2, L. Ramos3, M. Moricca6, S. Vismara7, A. Valentini8, N. Perrotti9,10, J. A. Veltman1 D. Concolino6 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, 1Department of Medical and Surgical Science, Pediatric Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Department of Unit, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy, 2PhD HumanGenetics,DondersInstituteforBrainCognitionand school of medical genetics, Sapienza University, Rome, Behavior, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Roma, Italy, 3Pathological Anatomy Unit, University 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Division of "Magna Græcia", Catanzaro, Italy, 4Centro Regionale di Reproductive Medicine, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Screening Neonatale, A.O.U. "Mater Domini", Catanzaro, Netherlands Italy, 5Department of Health Sciences, Nephrology Unit. "Magna Graecia" University, Catanzaro, Italy, Denovomutations(DNMs)playanimportantroleinsevere 6Department of Medical and Surgical Science, Pediatrics genetic diseases with an impact on ﬁtness. Our research Unit, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy, 7Ente focuses on the role of DNMs in severe male infertility by Ospedaliero Cantonale del Ticino, Istituto pediatrico della studying unique cohorts of infertile patients and their Svizzera italiana, Ospedale Regionale “La Carità”., parents. To better understand DNMs and their role in Locarno, Switzerland, 8“Caravaggio” medical center, disease,itisimportanttodeterminetheparentoforiginand Toxicology Unit, Roma, Italy, 9Department of Health timing of DNMs. This in turn requires phasing of DNMs, Sciences, University of Catanzaro Magna Graecia, which is usually impossible from short-read sequencing Catanzaro, Italy, 10Centro Regionale di Screening data as informative SNPs (iSNP) are often located 100- Neonatale, A.O.U. "Mater Domini", Catanzaro, Austria 1000s of bases from a DNM. Therefore, we developed and validated a low-cost long-read sequencing approach. First, Introduction: We are developing a new, fast, non- weidentiﬁedallDNMspresentinexomesfrom108patients destructive method to sense phenylalanine in human blood with severe male infertility and their parents, using the using Near Infra-Red (NIR) spectroscopy. Illumina Novaseq6000. Next, the short-read sequencing Methods: By using a sensor calibrated in the Near data was used to collect the location and genotypes of all Infraredspectrum(opticalwindow:700nmto1000nm),we iSNPs surrounding the DNMs. These target regions were acquired spectra from DBS card alone, DBS card with a then sequenced using the Oxford-Nanopore MinION. reference concentration scale for Phe alone, and Phe Several difﬁculties were addressed; DNA origin, amplicon plus Tyr. size, coverage, and high basecalling error. Depending on Based on these data we selected the most sensitive amplicon read length and based on coverage obtained thus wavelength window within the NIR and exploited this far, this approach can accurately phase ~100 de novo parameter to acquire spectra from DBS containing μ blood mutations per MinION run. This analysis indicated that spiked with 0 to 1200 μM Phe, 0 to 1200 Tyr and with 68%oftheDNMsidentiﬁedintheseinfertilemenoccurred different Phe/Tyr ratios. in the paternal gamete pre-fertilization, not unlike what is An additional experiment using 100 calibrators with 5 known for DNMs in the normal population. From further data points for phenylalaninemia was performed. For each analysis we identiﬁed the timing of all DNMs, noting 26% sample, at least 20 scans in duplicate were acquired. Prin- occurred postzygotically. Had these postzygotic DNMs cipal component analysis (PCA) was conducted. occurred earlier they could have negatively impacted Results: The analysis of the “scrubbed” data both by a gametogenesis and/or the reproductive success of the speciﬁcspectrometrysoftwareandbydatapointalgorithms, parents. clearlyshowthatitispossible tocorrelate thenatureofthe G.S. Holt: None. M.J. Xavier: None. M.S. Oud: None. analyte and its relative concentration. B. Alobaidi: None. R. Smits: None. H. Ismail: None. A. Acquired spectra present signiﬁcative differences, and it Garcia-Rodriguez:None.P.F.deVries: None.H.Sheth: is possible to isolate a speciﬁc Phe NIR ﬁngerprint. None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. L. Ramos: None. J.A. Theseobservationsopentheexcitingpossibilitytodesign Veltman: None. a chemometric model to assay the amount of Phe in DBSAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1657 without elution and the expensive chromatographic P14.092C procedures. Pathway based ﬁltering for rare variant analysis in G. Bonapace: None. M. Vismara: None. O. Marasco: frontotemporal dementia None. G. Scozzafava: None. A. Michael: None. M. Pit- telli: None. T. Greto: None. M. Moricca: None. S. Vis- C. Koçoğlu1,2, C. Van Broeckhoven1,2, J. van der Zee1,2 mara: None. A. Valentini: None. N. Perrotti: None. D. Concolino: None. 1Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Center for MolecularNeurology,VIB,Antwerp,Belgium,2Department P14.091B of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Rapid clinical WES, 3 years of experience - challenges Belgium and choices Genome-wide rare variant analysis has become a preferred R. Pfundt, K. Neveling, D. Lugtenberg, W. Steenhuis- strategy for disease gene discovery. Several algorithms are Hettema, E. Kamsteeg, I. Feenstra, C. Deden, S. de availabletotestassociationofthesevariantstodiseaseina Munnik, T. Hofste, W. van Zelst-Stams, A. Simons, case-control study design. However, achieving the neces- C. Gilissen, L. Vissers, T. Rinne, H. Yntema, M. Nelen sarypowertodetectexome-widesigniﬁcanceinrarevariant associationstudiesischallengingduetovariantnumberand Radboud umc, Nijmegen, Netherlands sample size limitations. Therefore, additional strategies are needed to prioritize and interpret rare variants in under- The high diagnostic yield of clinical whole exome powered patient cohorts. Accumulating evidence indicates sequencing (cWES) has made this test the ﬁrst choice for that the endosomal-lysosomal system is a key mediator in patients with (heterogeneous) genetic diseases. However, the neurodegenerative process. In search of novel disease turnaround times aretraditionally toolong toserve patients genes for unresolved frontotemporal dementia (FTD), we whoareingreatneedofaquickdiagnosis.Thedemandfor applied a pathway-based approach to prioritize endo- in house rapid cWES procedure increased swiftly from 1-2 lysosomal pathway related genes with rare variants from triosamplesamonthin2016to5-7trio’sperweekin2018. in-house generated patient-control exome datasets. Starting We are continuously optimizing our procedures and work- fromalistof49seedgenesgeneticallylinkedorassociated ﬂow to increase capacity, to better ﬁt demands of patients toFTDorrelatedneurodegenerativediseases,weidentiﬁed and referring clinicians, but also to improve data analyses ﬁrst and second layer interaction partners of these known and diagnostic yield. This resulted in a very robust dementia-relatedproteins.Therawinteraction network was workﬂow with little or no sample failure. Our present then ﬁltered for brain-expressed genes based on GTEx. setup, used for prenatal, neonatal and postnatal referrals, is Following, we selected genes based on endo-lysosomal fully automated with respect to sample and data processing pathway related Gene Ontology terms and KEGG path- (combining both SNV and CNV analysis) and has a ways. This step-wise ﬁltering resulted in 2236 endo- turnaroundtimecloseto7days.Todatewehaveprocessed lysosomal pathway related genes to be submitted to gene- more than 800 rapid cWES samples, mostly patient-parent burden testing in search of novel candidate genes for FTD. trio’s. We will present overall results and discuss choices Inconclusion,pathwayandinteractomeanalysisisauseful and challengeswithrespect topatient inclusion, processing approach to mine for genes from high-throughput data. steps,datainterpretation,andreporting.Theoverallyieldof C. Koçoğlu: None. C. Van Broeckhoven: None. J. van the rapid cWES procedure is ~30% irrespective of the der Zee: None. patient group (prenatal - neonatal - postnatal). The experience of the past three years clearly shows the P14.093D excellentclinical utility ofafastcWEStrack.Italso shows Orangutan has all the variants you need: monitoring thisfasttrackshouldbeofferedtoanyoneinurgentneedfor speciﬁcity and sensitivity of diagnostic next-generation- a genetic diagnosis. sequencingbyestablishingorangutanDNAasreference R. Pfundt: None. K. Neveling: None. D. Lugtenberg: standard None.W.Steenhuis-Hettema:None.E.Kamsteeg:None. I.Feenstra:None.C.Deden:None.S.deMunnik:None. A.Rump,F.Kuhlee,L.Gieldon,D.Abdin,K.Hackmann, T. Hofste: None. W. van Zelst-Stams: None. A. Simons: E. Schrock None. C. Gilissen: None. L. Vissers: None. T. Rinne: None. H. Yntema: None. M. Nelen: None. Institut für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Germany, Dresden, Germany1658 Evaluating the performance of diagnostic sequencing a repeat locus are indicative of disease severity and age of requires reference samples (RS) with validated genetic onset, and are therefore of clinical importance. Due to the variations. In human RS, there will always be numerous repetitive nature and length (up to several kilobases) it is exons in any given panel where a sequence variation will hard to determine the exact structure of repeats with notbeavailable for quality control(QC).To overcomethis traditional sequencing technologies. Long-read nanopore problem we tested orangutan (OrU) as donor for QC sequencing has the potential to overcome this problem by reference materials. Since OrU NGS reads have only been sequencing the entire disease locus including the full obtained from whole genome sequencing (WGS) so far, (expanded) repetitive region and associated epigenetic information of how OrU/human sequence divergence modiﬁcations. effects targeted enrichment by human capture probes is Wepresentourworkonthedevelopmentandtestingofa limited. Here, we applied capture-based whole exome cost-effectiveandcomprehensivediagnostictestthattargets sequencing (WES) panels from different suppliers to the clinically relevant repeat structures in one experiment. The male OrU cell line “EB185-JC” (Sigma-Aldrich). As test is based on multiplexed sequence enrichment of ten positive control, the male HapMap sample NA12877 was repeat loci using CRISPR-Cas technology combined with sequenced in parallel, along with a 1:1 gDNA mixture of Oxford Nanopore sequencing. We used this approach to EB185-JCand NA12877.The reads were mappedtohg19, sequence controls and patients and demonstrate that our totheOrUreferencesequenceandtoacombinedhg19/OrU approach is able to effectively enrich and sequence clini- “mix” reference. Using this approach, we could show that cally relevant genomic repeat structures. In comparison to OrU performs just as good as the competing human DNA. our current diagnostic assays we show that the number of When mapped to the human reference, the OrU exome repeat units within these loci can be detected with high provides 903.763 variants (average 4.4 variants/WES accuracy. target), and many of these would be disease causing if M.G. Elferink: None. I.J. Renkens: None. D. Dooijes: presentinahumanbeing.Therefore,OrUDNAcanbeused None. M.J. van Roosmalen: None. E. Raimondeau: A. to measure both analytical and diagnostic sensitivity for Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Oxford Nano- almosteveryhumanexonandexceedsthevariantvarietyof poreTechnologies.R.Bowen:A.Employment(fullorpart- NA12877 DNA (average 0.3 variants/WES target) by a time); Signiﬁcant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies. A.J. factor of 13.5 fold. Therefore, OrU DNA is especially Heron: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; valuable for small, disease-focused NGS panels where Oxford Nanopore Technologies. J.E. Graham: A. humanRSfailtoprovideenoughvariantsforareliableQC. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Oxford Nano- A. Rump: None. F. Kuhlee: None. L. Gieldon: None. pore Technologies. H. Ploos van Amstel: None. W.P. D.Abdin:None.K.Hackmann:None.E.Schrock:None. Kloosterman: None. K.L. van Gassen: None. P14.094A P14.095B Detection of disease causing repeats by multi-locus Mosaicism in patients with sporadic bilateral CRISPR-Cas enrichment and nanopore sequencing retinoblastomadetectedbyNGSusingaRB1genepanel M. G. Elferink1, I. J. Renkens2, D. Dooijes1, M. J. van G. Gómez-Mariano1, B. Baladrón1, A. Navarro1, Roosmalen2, E. Raimondeau3, R. Bowen3, A. J. Heron3, S. Ramos1, V. Aquino1, A. Damian1, C. Sábado2, J.E.Graham3,H.PloosvanAmstel1,W.P.Kloosterman2, A. Fenandez-Teijeiro3, A. Sastre4, P. García-Miguel4, K. L. van Gassen1 B. Martinez-Delgado1 1Genome Diagnostics, Department of Genetics, UMC 1Genetic Diagnostic Unit. Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Genetics, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Center for Molecular Medicine, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Barcelona,Spain,3HospitalInfantilLaPaz,Madrid,Spain, Netherlands, 3Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, 4Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain United Kingdom Introduction:Retinoblastomaisanembryonictumorofthe With the maturation of long-read sequencing technologies, retina diagnosed in children under 4 years of age. the applications of genome diagnostic tests in patient care Conventional techniques (Sequencing of Sanger and areexpanding.Apromisingapplicationisthesequencingof MLPA) allow the detection of 40% of the cases that are clinically relevant repeat structures in disorders such as carriers of inactivating mutations in heterozygosis in the ALS, Huntington's disease, fragile X syndrome, and RB1gene.Itisdescribedthatbetween10-15%aremosaics spinocerebellar ataxias. Increasing repeat units within such forthedisease.ThesetechniquesarenotsensitiveenoughtoAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1659 identify variants in low proportion present in these cases. wellastopinpointaffectedgenesandpathways.Hereinwe Our objective was to study patients with sporadic bilateral describeanRNAsequencingworkﬂowdesignedtobeused retinoblastoma using massive sequencing techniques (RB1 inaroutineclinicalsetting.Furthermore,wedemonstrateits panel). usefulness on a wide range of patient cases. Materials and Methods: We designed a RB1 panel Materials and Methods: The pipeline uses publicly (Roche-NimbleGen) with 148,330 bp target sequence cov- available software and databases to detect and present ered (83.2% of the RB1 gene) and performed genetic ana- fusion genes, monoallelic expression, alternative splicing lysisof10patientswithsporadicbilateralretinoblastomain and differential expression. RNA was extracted from blood whomthemutationhasnotbeenidentiﬁedbyconventional samples, and neuronal stem cells from patients visiting techniques. Clinical Genetics, and the Centre for Inherited Metabolic Results:Genetic analysis with theRB1 panel allowed us Diseases at Karolinska University hospital. Paired-end to detect mosaicism in the RB1 gene of 3 patients in dif- sequences were generated using Illumina technology. ferent percentages: 16.28% (RB1:NM_000321:c.1363C>T: Results: We present our pipeline, as well as our analysis p.R455*), 7.09% (RB1:NM_000321:c.1390+2T>C) and of a variety of patient cases, including down syndrome 14.07% (RB1:NM_000321:c.2092_2093del:p.Arg698A- patients and translocation carriers (germline and somatic). lafs*22). 30% of the retinoblastomas analyzed were mosa- Conclusions: RNA sequencing is a valuable tool in ics for the disease. clinical settings, herein we demonstrate a workﬂow which Conclusions: By conventional techniques, mutations we aim to implement in routine diagnostics during 2019. were identiﬁed in 85.6% of patients with sporadic bilateral A.Jemt:None.J.Eisfeldt:None.A.Lindstrand:None. retinoblastoma. RB1 panel allowed reaching 90% of A. Wedell: None. H. Stranneheim: None. patients diagnosed and the identiﬁcation of mosaicism of some patients. The existence of mosaicism can modify the P14.097D risk of transmission to offspring, as well as the appearance RNA sequencing solved the most common but of other tumors in adulthood, its identiﬁcation is a sig- unrecognized pathogenic variant in Japanese nemalin niﬁcant improvement in genetic counseling to families. myopathy G. Gómez-Mariano: None. B. Baladrón: None. A. Navarro: None. S. Ramos: None. V. Aquino: None. A. N. Matsumoto, K. Hamanaka, S. Miyatake Damian: None. C. Sábado: None. A. Fenandez-Teijeiro: None. A. Sastre: None. P. García-Miguel: None. B. Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Martinez-Delgado: None. Yokohama, Japan P14.096C ThediagnosticrateforMendeliandiseasesbywholeexome A RNA workﬂow designed for routine clinical sequencing (WES)is typically 20%-40%. The low rate is diagnostics partly because ES misses deep intronic or synonymous variantsleadingtoaberrantsplicing.Inthisstudy,weaimed A. Jemt, J. Eisfeldt, A. Lindstrand, A. Wedell, to apply RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to efﬁciently detect H. Stranneheim the aberrant splicings and their related variants. Aberrant splicing in biopsied muscles from six nemaline myopathy Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (NM) cases unresolved by WES were analyzed with RNA- seq. Variants related to detected aberrant splicings were Introduction: Next generation sequencing (NGS) is analyzed with Sanger sequencing. Detected variants were commonplace in today’s clinical practice. Whole exome screenedinNMpatientsunresolvedbyWES.Weidentiﬁed sequencing(WES)andwholegenomesequencing(WGS)is a novel deep-intronic NEBvariant in one case, and another routinely used for the detection of a wide range of variant novel synonymous NEBvariant in three cases. The former types,includingsinglenucleotidevariantsandcopynumber variant was observed to be the most frequent among all variations. Despite advances in the ﬁeld, most diagnostic NEBpathogenic variants in normal Japanese populations NGS workﬂows suffer from a relatively low diagnostic with a frequency of 1 in 178 (20 alleles in 3,552 yield (30-50%). This is partly due to the difﬁculty of individuals), but was previously unrecognized. Expanded predicting the pathogenicity of genetic variation. RNA screening of the variant identiﬁed it in further four sequencing offers a wide range of analyses complementary previously unsolved nemaline myopathy cases. These to WGS/WES: including differential expression analysis, resultsindicatedthatRNA-seqmaybeabletosolvealarge and detection of alternatively spliced transcripts. These proportion of previously undiagnosed neurological/mucle analyses may be used to evaluate non-coding variants, as diseases. Acknowledgements: We appreciate Drs. Eriko1660 Koshimizu, Yoshinori Tsurusaki, Satomi Mitsuhashi, L.G.Kyriakopoulou:None.K.Yuki:None.Z.Zhang: Kazuhiro Iwama, Ahmed N. Alkanaq, Atsushi Fujita, None. D. Sokolowski: None. H. Hou: None. R. Jobling: Nozomu Tawara, Yukio Ando, Yohei Misumi, Mariko None. S. Mayen: None. D.J. Stavropoulos: None. R. Okubo, Aritoshi Iida, Ichizo Nishino for their contribution Hayeems:None.S.Shuman:None.G.Costain:None.N. to this study. Monfared: None. M. Snell: None. M. Curtis: None. R. N. Matsumoto: None. K. Hamanaka: None. S. Khan: None. R. Mendoza: None. R.D. Cohn: None. S. Miyatake: None. Pereira:None.S.W.Scherer:None.C.R.Marshal:None. A. Shlien: None. M. Wilson: None. P14.098A Evaluation of the QuantSeq method for transcriptome P14.099B analysis using a cohort of genome clinic patients PCR based target enrichment for variant conﬁrmation, gene panels and multiplex PCR sample tracking in a L. G. Kyriakopoulou, K. Yuki, Z. Zhang, Dustin whole exome sequencing workﬂow Sokolowski, Huayun Hou, Rebecca Jobling, Stephen Meyn, Dimitri James Stavropoulos,, D. Sokolowski, C.Frauke1,2,T.VanLaethem3,M.DeSmet2,P.Coucke2, H. Hou, R. Jobling, S. Mayen, D. J. Stavropoulos, E. De Baere2, K. Claes2, B. Menten2, J. Vandesompele1,3, R. Hayeems, S. Shuman, G. Costain, N. Monfared, L. Steve1,3 M. Snell, M. Curtis, R. Khan, R. Mendoza, R. D. Cohn, S. Pereira, S. W. Scherer, C. R. Marshal, A. Shlien, 1pxlence, Dendermonde, Belgium, 2Center for Medical M. Wilson Genetics Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada University, Ghent, Belgium Objectives:Severalstudieshaveshownthatanalysisofthe Targeted PCR-based resequencing is an important applica- transcriptomebyRNA sequencing(RNA-seq)can improve tion in clinical diagnostics. Using primerXL, we have ourabilitytointerpretthefunctionalandclinicalimportance designed one million PCR assays for high-quality and of the genetic variants identiﬁed by Whole Exome fragmented DNA, covering the entire human exome. Over Sequencing (WES) and Whole Genome Sequencing 6200 assays for hundreds of clinically relevant genes were (WGS). Our aim is to develop an RNA-seq method that wet-lab validated. In addition, over 5000 patient-speciﬁc can be used in a clinical diagnostic laboratory and identify variants were conﬁrmed using pxlence assays. All single- genetic variants affecting RNA isoforms and gene. To this plexPCRassaysworkunderuniversalconditionsandresult end, we have been comparing a number of RNA-seq in equimolar sequencing coverage. Here, we present the platforms to determine key aspects of their performance. compatibility of pxlence assays with multiplex PCR Methods:TheQuantSeq3'mRNA-seqkitbyLexogenwas applications. As a ﬁrst product, we designed and validated used to develop an RNA-seq method. The UTR-seq was a cost-effective and ﬂexible sample tracking test. This applied to 134 pediatric clinical blood samples collected primer pool enables fast identiﬁcation of sample swapping through the Genome Clinic (Centre for Genomic Medicine). or contamination which may occur in laborious library Thesampleswerecollectedaspartofacohortofpatientswho preparation workﬂows. had previously been tested by gene speciﬁc panels and Thirty SNPs were selected based on their minor allele microarray and were subsequently analyzed by WGS. frequency, exonic location and overlap with the capture Results: Using our UTR-seq platform, we successfully region of exome enrichment kits. We evaluated three dif- generated high quality libraries from RNA samples. We ferent PCR mastermixes and two library preparation meth- determinedthat33ofthegeneswithcausativevariantswere ods, followed by 150 bp paired-end sequencing (MiSeq, expressedinbloodandin3ofthosegenesRNAlevelsmay Illumina). differ signiﬁcantly in the patient compared to RNA levels The SsoAdvanced PreAmp Supermix (Bio-Rad) resulted from all other patients. in superior homogenous coverage following multiplex Conclusions:Wehavedevelopedanautomated,scalable PCR. No signiﬁcant difference in coverage uniformity was and high-throughput RNA-seq platform that can generate observed between the Nextera DNA Flex and the Nexter- robust and reproducible result. Having established our ﬁrst aXT DNA library prep method (Illumina). In virtually all automated clinical RNA-seq pipeline suitable for gene tested DNA samples (n=393), 86.29% of the SNPs had a expressionanalysiswearenowsettingupfulllengthRNA- uniform coverage within 2-fold of the mean. Based on the seqthat will allow ustocapturestructural changes inRNA SNP genotypes, DNA samples could unambiguously be (splice junctions and gene fusions). discriminated.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1661 In conclusion, we designed and validated a novel sample In conclusion, CovReport is a new easy-to-use tool to tracking test for whole exome or genome sequencing. In generate graphic and understandable summary of sequen- principle, this strategy could also be used to design gene cing coverage data that can be directly amended to the panel-speciﬁc sample tracking solutions. diagnostic report. C. Frauke: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, S.Gorokhova:None.M.Gorokhov:None.M.Bartoli: patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; pxlence. None. M. Krahn: None. T. Van Laethem: None. M. De Smet: None. P. Coucke: None. E. De Baere: None. K. Claes: None. B. Menten: P14.101 None. J. Vandesompele: E. Ownership Interest (stock, Didentifying SMN1 intragenicmutations usinga newly- stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig- developed allelic-speciﬁc rt-PCR(as-rt-PCR)method niﬁcant; pxlence. L. Steve: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig- Y.Xu1,2,B.Xiao1,2,Y.Liu1,2,X.Qu3,M.Dai1,2,X.Ying1,2, niﬁcant; pxlence. J. Zhang1,2, X. Liu1,2, Y. Chen2, X. Ji2 P14.100C 1Shanghai Institute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai, A new tool CovReport generates easy-to-understand China, 2Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai sequencing coverage summary for diagnostic reports Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, 3Shanghai First MaternityandInfantHospitalAfﬁliatedtoShanghaiTongji S. Gorokhova1,2, M. Gorokhov3, M. Bartoli1, M. Krahn1,2 University, Shanghai, China 1Aix Marseille University, INSERM, MMG U1251, Introduction:Spinalmuscularatrophy(SMA)iscausedby Marseille, France, 2Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, homozygous deletions of the SMN1 gene in approximately Department of Medical Genetics, La Timone Hospital, AP- 95% of patients. The remaining 5% of cases have HM, Marseille, France, 3JDotSoft, Germantown, MD, compound heterozygous mutations with one deleted/ United States converted-SMN1 allele and one mutated allele. SMN1 mutation detection is complicated by the highly homo- Gene panel sequencing has become the standard ﬁrst-tier logous SMN2 gene, which remains a challenge in clinical approach to identify the genetic cause of many diseases. practicefordiagnosingSMApatientswithamutatedallele. With increased use of these tests, there is a critical need to Methodologies: Nine unrelated families that received a make the resulting diagnostic reports extremely clear to SMA molecular diagnosis during 2011-2016 were enrolled avoid any misinterpretation. Target sequence coverage is a in this study. Heterozygous deletions of SMN1 were key quality control information for any diagnostic sequen- detected by quantitative PCR, and suspected SMN muta- cing test, since important clinical decisions are made based tions were scanned through DNA sequencing. A newly on this data. If coverage is not sufﬁcient even for a small developed approach named as allelic speciﬁc RT-PCR regionofahighlysuspectedcandidate gene,acomplemen- method (AS-RT-PCR) was used to conﬁrm whether the tary sequencing test is needed to make sure that the identiﬁed mutation occurred in SMN1 or SMN2. pathogenic variant is not missed. Results: Six SMN1 mutations (c.683T>A, c.22_23insA, To facilitate the coverage data interpretation by test pre- c.815A>G, c.19delG, c.551_552insA and c.401_402delAG) scribers,wedesignedanoveleasy-to-usevisualizationtool, were identiﬁed in 8 families. The latter three are novel CovReport. The concise coverage data summary generated mutations that have not been previously reported. Three by CovReport allows one-glance assessment of the families carried the same mutation, c.22_23insA. A rare sequencing test performance. Moreover, exon-level cover- variant c.84C>T in one family found in SMN2. age information can be immediately appreciated and taken Conclusions:ThisstudydemonstratedAS-RT-PCRtobe intoconsiderationforfurthermedicaldecisions.CovReport arelativelysimpleandreliablemethodfortheidentiﬁcation can be easily adapted by any diagnostic laboratory, since it of SMN1 subtle mutations. Mutation analysis revealed a does not require complex installation. The user friendly distinct ethnic speciﬁcity in the SMN1 mutational spectrum interfacegeneratesagraphicsummaryofcoveragedatathat and enriched the SMN1 mutation database. isdirectlyamendabletothediagnosticreport.Inadditionto Y. Xu: None. B. Xiao: None. Y. Liu: None. X. Qu: the stand-alone version, we also provide the command line None. M. Dai: None. X. Ying: None. J. Zhang: None. X. version of CovReport that can be integrated in any bioin- Liu: None. Y. Chen: None. X. Ji: None. formatics pipeline. CovReport is now part of the routine analysis pipeline for all diagnostic tests by gene panels in P14.102A our Department. Individual assessment for Single Nucleotide Variant1662 Classiﬁcation using the Genomics Training, Assessment successfullyusedtoidentifypathogenicvariantsinpatients and Competency Tool (G-TACT) lacking a molecular diagnosis (Kremer et al., 2017; Cummingsetal.,2017)andthereforewehaveimplemented R. Treacy, F. Khawaja, Z. C. Deans RNA-seq in our clinical diagnostic laboratory to help (i) identify pathogenic variants in WES mutation-negative GenQA, Edinburgh, United Kingdom patients and (ii) investigate the effects of variants of uncertain clinical signiﬁcance (VUS) on pre-mRNA spli- The aim of this external quality assessment (EQA) was to cing. We will report our results on an initial series of 9 provide an online competency assessment for individuals cases. RNA isolated from cultured skin ﬁbroblasts and/or routinely performing interpretation and classiﬁcation of blood was subjected to RNA-seq. In 3 cases we conﬁrmed variants. Participants were required to apply their usual that the identiﬁed VUS affected pre-mRNA splicing, processes to classify ﬁve single nucleotide variants (SNVs) resulting in a more accurate molecular diagnosis. In and to submit evidence supporting the assigned classiﬁca- addition, in 2 cases we identiﬁed splicing abnormalities tion. The variants ranged from class 3, uncertain signiﬁ- that had not been detected using other technologies. Both cance to class 5, pathogenic and included variants in the cases involved insertions of mobile elements deep in following genes: COL4A4, ETFDH, GK, SHOC2 and intronic sequences, causing complex mapping issues. SPG7. The submissions were scored, reported to each Overall, our data suggest that RNA-seq is not only well participant and a summary report was issued. The report suited to the detection of intronic variants and rearrange- detailedtheexpectedvariantclassiﬁcationsandprovidedan mentsthatarenotcoveredbyWESbutisalsousefulforthe overview of all submitted results. A follow up webinar improved classiﬁcation of VUS identiﬁed using other summarised the evidence assessed, the expected variant molecular screens. RNA-seq is a useful adjunct to standard classiﬁcations and addressed participant queries. This trial molecular screens, leading to improved diagnostic yields scenario was used by 142 individuals, with 82 participants and more accurate variant classiﬁcation. completing the classiﬁcation of all variants. As G-TACT is T.J. van Ham: None. J.J. Saris: None. M. Nellist: web-based then participation is global and 34 countries None. W.G. de Valk: None. M. Hoogeveen-Westerveld: were represented worldwide. None of the participants None. L.M. van Unen: None. P. Elfferich: None. H. provided the expected classiﬁcation for all ﬁve variants, Douben: None. F.W. Verheijen: None. L.H. with only 10% of participants providing the expected Hoefsloot: None. classiﬁcationforfourvariants.Thisclearlydemonstratesthe challenges associated with variant classiﬁcation and the P14.104C need for education, competency assessment and standardi- Length and temperature dependent cleavage of sation worldwide. TaqMan-type probes R. Treacy: None. F. Khawaja: None. Z.C. Deans: None. W. M. M. Echwald, S. M. Echwald P14.103B Anapa Biotech A/S, Hoersholm, Denmark Diagnostic implementation of RNA sequencing in patients lacking a deﬁnite molecular diagnosis Due to its high speciﬁcity andsensitivity, PCR remains the cornerstone of clinical diagnostics. In particular, applica- T. J. van Ham, J. J. Saris, M. Nellist, W. G. de Valk, tionsutilizingaprobe-basedreadout,offerahigherlevelof M. Hoogeveen-Westerveld, L. M. van Unen, P. Elfferich, speciﬁcity given the additional, speciﬁc hybridization H. Douben, F. W. Verheijen, L. H. Hoefsloot required to generate a signal. TaqMan probes are particularly useful for such applica- Department of Clinical genetics, Erasmus MC, University tions and since their invention over 20 years ago, still Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands comprise the most used probe-type. TaqMan probes comprise dual-labeled probes, typically Whole exome sequencing (WES) identiﬁes a causative labeled with a 5’ ﬂuorophore and a 3’ located quencher. If variantleadingtoamoleculardiagnosis,inonly30-50%of the target sequence is ampliﬁed during PCR, the TaqMan cases. WES is not effective for the detection of deep, probe will bind and the 5’->3’ exonuclease activity of the intronic variants that affect pre-mRNA splicing. Further- progressing Taq polymerase will gradually degrade the more, WES does not provide direct insight into the effects probe, releasing the ﬂurophore from the quencher and of detected variants on pre-mRNA splicing. Recently, generating a signal. massively parallel mRNA sequencing (RNA-seq) wasAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1663 Extensive data and design-rules exist for the design of shows that while differences can exist between the telomere TaqMan probes, however, little emphasis has been put on lengths measured from different methods, it is important to predicting the speciﬁc process of degradation of TaqMan use the same method of DNA extraction for comparative probes. But with the advent of novel designs of TaqMan studies. Reliable and accurate RTL assessment is crucial for probes, multiplexing formats and use of e.g. internal epidemiological studies using this biomarker to avoid false quencher types, the length and temperature dependence of positive or negative associations. the TaqMan degradation process have become increasingly W. Naw: None. O. Yim: None. R. Ebstein: None. P. important. Lai: None. To investigate the dynamics of degradation, we have designed and tested a large number of TaqMan and P14.106A TaqMan-like designs and show clear dependence on the Detection of low fraction mosaics in brain surgical probe sequence and length as well as assay conditions on specimens of Type II Focal Cortical Dysplasia with the processing of the probes. By using a combination of Molecular Inversion Probes traditional designs and various internal labeling types we present a set of comprehensive and useful design-rules P.Dimartino1,V.Mariani2,3,C.Marconi1,M.A.Bramerio4, when the degradation parameters of a TaqMan probe is P. Magini5, R. Minardi6, L. Licchetta3,6, M. Cossu2, required to occur within a speciﬁc frame. M.Seri1,5,P.Tinuper3,6,L.Tassi2,F.Bisulli3,6,T.Pippucci5 W.M.M. Echwald: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Anapa Biotech A/S. S.M. Echwald: A. Employ- 1Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Anapa Biotech A/S. of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Claudio Munari Epilepsy Surgery Center, Niguarda Hospital, Milan, Italy, 3Unit of P14.105D Neurology, Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Assessing variations in telomere length quantiﬁcation Sciences (DIBINEM), University of Bologna, Bologna, for epidemiological studies Italy,4DepartmentofPathology,NiguardaHospital,Milan, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Unit, Polyclinic Sant'Orsola- W. Naw, O. Yim, R. Ebstein, P. Lai Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 6IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna, Bellaria National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore Hospital, Bologna, Italy Relativetelomerelength(RTL)hasbeenusedasabiomarker Introduction: Focal Cortical Dysplasia Type II (FCDII, forvariousdiseaseconditionsandstudiesinvolvingtelomere MIM: 607341) is a localized malformation of cortical biology, unhealthy lifestyle and behavioural choices, stress development leading to drug-resistant epilepsy that can be reduction and mindfulness relaxation programmes, and treated with surgical resection of the dysplastic area. genetic epidemiology. However, intra- and inter-laboratories Hyperactivated MTOR signaling is visible in FCDII, inconsistenciesinRTLmeasurementslimitthecomparisonof associated in up to 40% of cases with low allele fraction these values between studies. This study compared the (AF) mosaic gain of function mutations in MTOR itself or inﬂuenceof threecommonly used DNA extraction kits from other genes in the cascade. Here we describe the Qiagen, namely Blood and Cell Culture Mini Kit (GT), implementation of single molecule Molecular Inversion Gentra PureGene Blood Kit (PG) and QiaAmp DNA Blood Probes (smMIPs) as an accurate and cost-effective proce- Mini Kit (QA) on RTL measurements using qPCR. DNA dure to detect somatic, brain-speciﬁc pathogenic variants extracted by GT, PG and QA methods show mean RTLs of with AF as low as 1%. 1.09 (range 0.67-2.15), 0.83 (range 0.20-1.50) and 0.97 Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from For- (range 0.64-1.47) respectively. The results indicate that the malin Fixed, Parafﬁn Embedded (FPPE) or Fresh Frozen typeofextractionmethodscaninﬂuencemeanRTLs(n=65, (FF)samplesofforty-ﬁvesurgicallyresectedFCDIItissues. Wicoxon Signed Rank tests, p<0.05) and range of RTLs Whenever possible, matched DNA from non-dysplasia detected. RTL variance ranged between 0.97 and 0.039 FFPE specimens (gliosis) or from the marginal area of FF among the three methods. These differences could be tissue were also obtained. We used smMIPS to capture attributed to the different underlying principles in DNA MTOR mutational hotspot (FFPE) or all (FF) exonic extractionforeachmethod.Nonetheless,therewashighinter- sequences and sent samples to Illumina sequencing and assay reproducibility in RTL measurements within samples bioinformatics analysis. extractedbysamemethod(n=18,PCC=0.846,p<0.000)and Results: smMIPs showed median per-base error rate two-tailedpairedT-testshowednosigniﬁcantdifferencefrom 2.29e-03 (FFPE) and 1.16E-03 (FF). Thirty single or mat- multiple RTL assays (n=18, T-test pval= 0.65). This study ched samples achieved adequate sequencing coverage1664 thresholdforlowAFvariantcalling.In23%ofsamples,we interpret the variants that are most likely to impact identiﬁed and validated hotspot mutations including recur- patient care. rent p.Ser2215Phe (or p.Ser2215Tyr) and p.Leu1460Pro A.Schaffer:None.H.Elfarawi:None.C.M.Chisholm: with allele fraction ranging 3-6%. None. L. Huang: None. O. Jarinova: None. A. Smith: Conclusion:smMIPsenableaccuratedetectionofmosaic None. L. Bronicki: None. mutations, yielding diagnostic rate in line with literature. We also highlight technical issues hampering adequate P14.109D sequence coverage in FFPE samples. A third generation long-read sequencing approach for P. Dimartino: None. V. Mariani: None. C. Marconi: the analysis of genomic duplication variants, at None. M.A. Bramerio: None. P. Magini: None. R. Min- nucleotide resolution, using Cas9 target enrichment ardi:None.L.Licchetta:None.M.Cossu:None.M.Seri: None.P.Tinuper:None.L.Tassi:None.F.Bisulli:None. C. M. Watson1,2, L. A. Crinnion1,2, J. Bates1,2, S. Hewitt1, T. Pippucci: None. R. Robinson1, I. M. Carr2, E. Sheridan1,2, J. Adlard1, D. T. Bonthron1,2 P14.108C Variant re-interpretation in the context of familial 1The Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United cascade testing Kingdom, 2University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom A.Schaffer1,H.Elfarawi2,C.M.Chisholm1,L.Huang1,2, With the widespread use of low-cost genome-wide O. Jarinova1,2, A. Smith1,2, L. Bronicki1,2 diagnostic screening tests, unanticipated but possibly pathogenic dosage changes affecting single genes are 1CHEO, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of Ottawa, discoveredwithincreasingfrequency.Clinicalmanagement Ottawa, ON, Canada demands facile validation of such incidental ﬁndings, often necessitating the design of custom variant-speciﬁc assays. Rapid technological advances have led to a substantial Althoughdeletionvariantscanbereadilyconﬁrmedusinga increase in the number of sequence variants detected in range of next-generation sequencing strategies, characteris- probands.Adirectconsequenceofthisisincreasedrequests ing duplication variants, at nucleotide resolution, remains from providers to test family members. In familial cascade demanding.Wehaveaddressedthischallengebydeploying testing, the targeted testing of a known sequence variant is a novel Cas9 enrichment strategy combined with long-read offered to relatives of the proband to determine their own Oxford Nanopore MinIon sequencing. We used bulk risks of developing the pathology, and results may impact genomic DNA without the need for PCR ampliﬁcation. clinical management. Consequently, a consistent approach We present the diagnostic resolution of two problematic tomaintainup-to-datevariantclassiﬁcationinthecontextof cases in which incompletely characterised duplication familial testing is fundamental to provide appropriate variantshadbeenidentiﬁedbyarrayCGH.Theﬁrstpatient patient care and management. presented with learning difﬁculties and autism spectrum We surveyed 21 clinical laboratories across Canada and disorder, but had been found to have an incidental 1.7-kb the United States to identify variant re-interpretation imbalancewhichincludedapartialduplicationofVHLexon workﬂows when performing familial testing. We also ana- 3. This was inherited from the patient’s father, who had lyzed internal data of all familial testing performed by our renalcanceraged38years.Inthesecondcase,weidentiﬁed laboratory in one year. an incidental 200-kb duplication which included DMD While most laboratories agreed that ideally all variants exons 30-44. Parental testing was consistent with this should be re-interpreted every time they are detected in a variant having arisen de novo. In both cases, the single- patient, that is not a feasible goal given limited resources. molecule sequencing yielded sufﬁcient information to Our survey of laboratories found no clear consensus on deﬁne precisely the architecture of the rearranged region, when variant re-interpretation is performed; some variables enabling Sanger sequencing assays across the integration included the variant classiﬁcation, whether the variant was sites and surrounding homologous regions(that likelygave detected in the family member, and whether the original risetotheduplicatedsequences).Adoptionofthisapproach proband had been tested by the performing laboratory. The by diagnostic laboratories promises to enable rapid and review of our internal data showed that of the familial cost-effective characterisation of challenging duplication- variants re-interpreted (n=107), 11% had a clinically sig- containing alleles. niﬁcant change in classiﬁcation, highlighting the impor- C.M. Watson: None. L.A. Crinnion: None. J. Bates: tance of continuing to re-interpret variants tested in this None. S. Hewitt: None. R. Robinson: None. I.M. Carr: context. We have developed protocols to selectively re-Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1665 None. E. Sheridan: None. J. Adlard: None. D.T. A. Bertoli-Avella1, M. Calvo1, P. Guatibonza-Moreno1, Bonthron: None. M. E. Rocha1, O. Paknia1, C. Cozma1, S. Oppermann1, F. Hakami2, S. Alameer2, M. Alghamdi3, C. Beetz1, P14.110A P. Bauer1, A. Rolfs1 Breakpoint detection of balanced and unbalanced structural variants from low coverage WGS data 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2King Abdulaziz Medical City-WR, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 3King Saud I. Miceikaite, M. J. Larsen, C. B. Andersen University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Introduction:Wholeexomesequencingisanefﬁcienttool Hospital, Odense, Denmark for the study of monogenic disorders. However, incon- clusive resultsareoftenobtainedduetothelack ofspeciﬁc Introduction: Structural variants (SVs) are known to be clinical information and/or the identiﬁcation of variants of associated with severe genetic disorders. Currently used uncertain signiﬁcance, which do not allow to conﬁrm a methods to identify SVs include conventional karyotyping, genetic diagnosis in the absence of further testing. As a FISH and microarrays. Yet no method provides both high result, the "diagnostic odyssey" for patients may be resolution and identiﬁcation of balanced variants. We signiﬁcantly extended in time. This study focuses on the studied the potential of low coverage WGS for ﬁne- validation of genetic results by means of biochemical mapping breakpoints of SVs by comparing different SV analyses. analysis software. Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was Materials and Methods: Low coverage WGS was per- performed for 24 patients coming from different geo- formedon8sampleswithpreviouslydetecteddifferentSVs graphical regions.The resultsobtainedby sequencing were using KAPA HyperPlus PCR-free library preparation kit validated in parallel through biochemical analyses: quanti- (Roche) and NextSeq 550 (Illumina) sequencing platform. ﬁcation of the corresponding enzyme activity and/or Meangenomecoveragewas8.5X.Breakpointanalysiswas biomarker. done by manual genome exploration using IGV software Results: Sequencing analyses revealed the presence of and by automatic SV callers: VarSeq (Golden Helix) and variantswith knownclinical relevance (previouslyreported Delly2. in the literature) and previously undescribed variants in 14 Results: Delly2 software predicted breakpoints for all 8 genes associated with lysosomal storage disorders. The known SVs including complex variants. VarSeq aided in combination of genetic and biochemical results conﬁrmed ﬁnding better deﬁned breakpoints than microarray for all thepathogenicityofpreviouslyundescribedvariantsandthe SVs with copy-number variations, however it was not sui- pathogenicity of those variants previously known. In two table for balanced events. Furthermore, by manually cases, the diagnosis was conﬁrmed despite the lack of exploringtheregionofinterestusingIGVwecouldprovide speciﬁc clinical information and with only the detection of better characterization of known SVs and pinpoint break- intronic variants, which would have otherwise been classi- points at single-base precision. ﬁed as variants of uncertain signiﬁcance. Conclusion: Using currently available software, it is Conclusions:Thewholeexomesequencingapproachcan possible to detect breakpoints at single-base level if the begreatlyreinforcedbyperformingbiochemicalanalysesin approximateSVregionisknown.However,thebestresults parallel. The combination of these two methods increases were achieved when called breakpoints were manually the diagnostic yield of genetic disorders even at initial inspected on genome visualization software. For now, SV stages in which the clinical signs are still unspeciﬁc. This analysis from low coverage WGS data could be used to may also allow starting early pharmacological/non-phar- supplement conventional methods where identifying a pre- macological treatments. cise breakpoint can provide clinically relevant information. A. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment (full or part-time); I. Miceikaite: None. M.J. Larsen: None. C.B. Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. M. Calvo: A. Employment Andersen: None. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. P. Guati- bonza-Moreno: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- P14.111B niﬁcant;CentogeneAG.M.E.Rocha:A.Employment(full Whole exome sequencing and parallel biochemical or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. O. Paknia: A. analyses: an efﬁcient combination for the diagnosis of Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. genetic diseases C. Cozma: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. S. Oppermann: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. F. Hakami: None.1666 S. Alameer: None. M. Alghamdi: None. C. Beetz: A. mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis. The rearrange- Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. mentsidentiﬁedinthiscasewerebyfarmorecomplexthan P. Bauer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; what was suggested by traditional G-banding chromosome Centogene AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part- analysis, allowing for identiﬁcation of the underlying time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. E. Ownership Interest molecular diagnosis and implicating chromothripsis and (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); chromoanasynthesis in the formation of the balanced Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. translocations. M. Plesser Duvdevani: None. M. Pettersson: None. J. P14.112C Eisfeldt:None.A.Frumkin:None.A.Lindstrand:None. Wholegenomesequencingrevealscomplexchromosome T. Harel: None. rearrangement disrupting NIPBL in infant with Cornelia de Lange syndrome P14.113D From cytogenetics to cytogenomics: whole genome M. Plesser Duvdevani1, M. Pettersson2, J. Eisfeldt2,3, sequencing as a comprehensive genetic test in rare A. Frumkin1, A. Lindstrand2,4, T. Harel1 disease diagnostics 1Department of Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, D. Nilsson1,2,3, J. Eisfeldt1,2,3, J. Lundin1,4, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, M. Pettersson1,5,3, M. Kvarnung1,3,5, A. Lieden1,3,5, Israel, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, E. Sahlin1,3,5, K. Lagerstedt1,3,5, M. Martin6, S. Ygberg7,8, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institute, O. Bjerin7, H. Stranneheim3,8,2, A. Wedell3,8,2, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Science for Life Laboratory, M. Nordenskjöld1,3,5, M. Johansson Soller1,3,5, Karolinska Institutet Science Park, Solna, Sweden, A. Nordgren1,3,5, V. Wirta9,10, A. Lindstrand1,3,5 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 2SciLifeLab, Department of Introduction:Routinediagnosticwork-upofchildrenwith Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, suspectedmonogenicdisordersoftenincludeschromosomal Stockholm, Sweden, 3Center for Molecular Medicine, microarray and next-generation sequencing, and foregoes Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of classical cytogenetic analysis that can detect balanced Women´s and Children´s Health and Center for Molecular translocations. We identiﬁed an infant with Cornelia de Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, Lange syndrome (CdLS) who manifested with typical 5Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, dysmorphic facies and limb reduction defects, yet chromo- Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Department of somal microarray and exome sequencing from both whole Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Bioinformatics blood and buccal samples were noncontributory. Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Materials and Methods: G-banding chromosome ana- Stockholm University, Solna, Sweden, 7The Institution for lysis was followed by PCR-free whole genome sequencing Women's and Children's Health, Neuropediatric Unit, (WGS) at an average read depth of 30X. WGS data was Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Center for utilized to ﬁne map the rearrangement breakpoints. The Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska University disease-associated breakpoint junction was validated by Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 9SciLifeLab, School of breakpoint junction PCR. Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Results: Chromosome analysis revealed a de novo com- Health, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, plex balanced translocation, 46,XY,t(5;7;6)(q11.2;q32;q13) Sweden, 10SciLifeLab, Department of Microbiology, Tumor dn. The reported cytogenetic breakpoints did not involve and Cell biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden any of the known CdLS-associated genes, prompting us to perform breakpoint analysis by WGS. Twenty six break- Rare genetic diseases are caused by different types of points were identiﬁed by WGS, delineating segments genetic variants, from single nucleotide variants (SNVs) to derived from four chromosomes (5;6;7;21) in ancestral or large chromosomal rearrangements. Recent data indicates inverted orientation. One of the breakpoints disrupted that whole genome sequencing (WGS) may be used as a NIPBL, on 5p13.2, providing molecular correlation for the comprehensive test to identify multiple types of pathologic clinical diagnosis of CdLS. genetic aberrations in a single analysis. Conclusion: WGS provides a unique opportunity to WepresentFindSV,abioinformaticpipelinefordetection unravel the basis of genetic disorders not resolved by rou- of balanced (inversions and translocations) and unbalanced tine laboratory methods, and to shed light on the genomic (deletions and duplications) structural variants (SVs). First,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1667 FindSV was tested on 106 validated deletions and dupli- development of algorithms that enable comparing coverage cations with a median size of 850 kb (min: 511 bp, max: betweenprobandsandcontrols.Inthisstudy,weexpressthe 155 Mb). All variants were detected. Second, we demon- challenges and feasibility of analysing CNVs using WES strated the clinical utility in 138 monogenic WGS panels. data. We performed WES on patients with rare genetic SV analysis yielded 11 diagnostic ﬁndings (8%). Remark- disorders and analysed SNVs, using an in-house pipeline, ably, a complex structural rearrangement involving two andCNVs,usingGoldenHelix’sVarSeqsoftware.Probable clustered deletions disrupting SCN1A, SCN2A, and SCN3A causative CNVs were conﬁrmed by qPCR or MLPA. In was identiﬁed in a three months old girl with epileptic recessivedisorderswithacausativeheterozygousSNV,ﬁne- encephalopathy. Finally, 100 consecutive samples referred tuning of CNV analysis for each gene was performed on a for clinical microarray were also analyzed by WGS. The case-by-case basis. During 2017, we detected 12 CNVs as WGS data was screened for large (>2 kbp) SVs genome probably causative in 122 patients, but only one was wide, processed for visualization in our clinical routine conﬁrmed by qPCR, a rate of 91.7% false positives (FPs). arrayCGH workﬂow with the newly developed tool After optimising regions of interest and using CNVs of vcf2cytosure, and for exonic SVs and SNVs in a panel of healthy controls, from public and internal CNV databases, 700 genes linked to intellectual disability. We also applied many commonCNVsandFPs wereﬁltered. Then, over the short tandem repeat (STR) expansion detection and dis- past year, we detected 123 CNVs in 1251 patients as likely covered one pathologic expansion in ATXN7. The diag- causative, 41 of which were conﬁrmed by qPCR or MLPA nostic rate (29%) was doubled compared to clinical (66.7%FPs). We identiﬁed probable disease-causingCNVs microarray (12%). using WES data in 3.3% of patients. Conﬁrmation by Inconclusion,usingWGSwehavedetectedawiderange orthogonal methodologies validated the software analysis of structural variation with high accuracy, conﬁrming it a pipeline and the CNVs detected, showing that combining powerfulcomprehensivegenetictestinaclinicaldiagnostic SNVandCNVanalysisimprovesthemoleculardiagnosisof laboratory setting. patients with rare Mendelian diseases. D. Nilsson: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. J. Lundin: None. P. Silva: None. S. Sousa: None. S. Barbosa: None. S. M. Pettersson: None. M. Kvarnung: None. A. Lieden: Morais: None. A. Lopes: None. A. Brandão: None. R. None.E.Sahlin:None.K.Lagerstedt:None.M.Martin: Bastos: None. P. Arinto: None. J. Sequeiros: None. I. None. S. Ygberg: None. O. Bjerin: None. H. Stranne- Alonso: None. heim: None. A. Wedell: None. M. Nordenskjöld: None. M. Johansson Soller: None. A. Nordgren: None. V. P14.116C Wirta: None. A. Lindstrand: None. Increased efﬁciency with a new SNP panel for zygosity testing P14.114A Detection of copy number variants using whole-exome A. Rönn1, A. Fungmark1, C. Diaz Pohl1, G. Falk1, sequencing improves diagnostic yield of patients with P. Kiviluoma1, M. Linde1, M. Oladapo1, P. Magnusson2, rare Mendelian diseases K. Duvefelt1, J. Kere1 P. Silva1,2, S. Sousa1,2, S. Barbosa1,2, S. Morais1,2, 1Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, A. Lopes1,2, A. Brandão1,2, R. Bastos1,2, P. Arinto1,2, 2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden J. Sequeiros1,2,3, I. Alonso1,2 A requirement for performing robust genetic and statistical 1CGPP-IBMC, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, analysesontwinsiscorrectlyassigned zygosities.Wehave 2i3S – Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, developed a new and improved SNP panel for zygosity UniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal,3ICBAS–Instituto analysis,genotyping37autosomalSNPsand2sexmarkers de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do on the zinc ﬁnger X/Y chromosomes, using the Agena Porto, Porto, Portugal MassARRAY® system. The 37 SNPs were previously includedinalargerpanel,todateusedforzygosityanalysis Copy number variants (CNVs) are commonly observed in in 12800 twin pairs from the Swedish Twin Registry. The human populations and increasingly recognised as an goalforthenewpanelwastodevelopaone-reactionassay, important aetiology of disease. Whole-exome sequencing toreplace thelarger three-reaction assay, containing targets (WES) hasbecomea robustandcost-effectiveapproach for with the highest minor allele frequencies based on results clinicalgenetictestingofsmallsequencevariants;detection from 25000 investigated samples. of CNVs within WES data became possible with the1668 SalivaDNAfrom310twinpairswasanalyzedusingboth isolated from urine samples of ATS patients. Taking the new panel and the larger original panel. The genotypes advantage of disease-relevant cell lines, we employed an were 100% concordant between the two panels. The sex two-plasmid approach in order to achieve a mutation- markers scored 100% correctly in all runs. The zygosity speciﬁc correction, suitable for AAV infection. The ﬁrst score was calculated using odds ratios of monozygosity plasmid carries a Donor DNA, the template for the cor- (MZ),takingintoaccountanerrorrateof0.1%.Oddsratios rection, and a reporter system mCherry/GFP to track the forMZscoreusingthenewpanelandtheoriginalpanelwas activity of Cas9 in the cells. The second plasmid carries a greater than 6x106 and 6x107, respectively. Odds ratios for self-cleaving SpCas9 and the mutation-speciﬁc sgRNA. In dizygotic score (DZ) was 0 for both panels. Using the new two stable podocytes-lineage cell lines, harboring a muta- panel, 308 of the 310 twin pairs could be analyzed while tion in COL4A5 (p.(Gly624Asp)) and a mutation in 304 twin pairs could be analyzed with the original panel. COL4A3 (p.(Gly856Glu)), we achieved a reversion of the We found that a new panel could replace a well-used mutation greater than 30% and insertions/deletions, limited panel for zygosity analysis. The new panel is faster and to the mutated allele, lower than 40%. AAV2 turned to be easier to run, since it only uses one well per sample. the most effective serotype for in-vitro infection using a A. Rönn: None. A. Fungmark: None. C. Diaz Pohl: viral MOI of 105. In-vivo gene editing experiments, are None. G. Falk: None. P. Kiviluoma: None. M. Linde: ongoingonanaturallyoccurringdogmodel.Thedescribed None. M. Oladapo: None. P. Magnusson: None. K. approach,coveredbypatent102018000020230,opensupa Duvefelt: None. J. Kere: None. new era in the treatment of ATS, through an AAV perso- nalized corrective approach speciﬁcally designed for each patient. P15 S. Daga: None. F. Donati: None. S. Croci: None. K. Personalized/predictive medicine - Pharmacogenomics Capitani: None. F. Ariani: None. R. Tita: None. M. Mencarelli: None. M. Baldassarri: None. E. Benetti: P15.01D None. S. Furini: None. M. Nabity: None. A. Auricchio: CRISPR-Cas9 in Alport Syndrome: HDR in podocytes- None. S. Conticello: None. E. Frullanti: None. A. Pinto: lineage cells as new therapeutic frontiers in an None. A. Renieri: None. untreatable disorder P15.04C S. Daga1, F. Donati2,3, S. Croci1, K. Capitani2,3, A genome-wide functional genomics approach identiﬁes F. Ariani1,4, R. Tita4, M. Mencarelli4, M. Baldassarri4, susceptibility pathways to fungal bloodstream infection E. Benetti2, S. Furini2, M. Nabity5, A. Auricchio6,7, in humans S. Conticello3, E. Frullanti1, A. Pinto1,4, A. Renieri1,4 V. Matzaraki1,2, M. Jaeger2, R. Aguirre-Gamboa1, 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, M. Gresnigt2, X. Chu1, M. Johnson3, M. Oosting2, 2Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of S. Smeekens2, S. Withoff1, I.Jonkers1, J. Perfect3,F. van Siena, Siena, Italy, 3Core Research Laboratory - ISPRO, de Veerdonk2, B. Kullberg2, L. Joosten2, Y. Li1, Florence, Italy, 4Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera C. Wijmenga1,4, M. Netea2,5, V. Kumar1,2 Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 5Department of VeterinaryPathobiology,TexasA&MUniversityCollegeof 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, College Groningen(UMCG),Groningen,Netherlands,2Department Station, Texas, College Station, TX, United States, of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious 6Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Pozzuoli, Italy, 7Department of Advanced Biomedicine, Netherlands, 3Division of Infectious Diseases, Duke Federico II University, Naples, Italy University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA andDepartmentofClinicalResearch,CampbellUniversity Alport syndrome (ATS) is a clinically heterogeneous SchoolofPharmacy,BuiesCreek,NC,UnitedStates,4K.G. nephropathy characterized by Glomerular Basal Membrane Jebsen Coeliac Disease Research Centre, Department of abnormalities up to end-stage renal disease. ATS therapies Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 5Human are currently only delaying the progression of symptoms. Genomics Laboratory,Craiova University ofMedicine and We present here a stable approach using AAV-CRISPR/ Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania Cas9 technology. We have recently proven that podocytes- lineage cells - the key cells in ATS pathogenesis, the only Introduction: Candidaemia, one of the most common ones to express COL4 α3-α4-α5 heterotrimer - can be causes of fungal bloodstream infection, leads to mortalityAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1669 rates up to 40% in affected patients. Understanding genetic 3Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Soﬁa mechanisms for candidaemia susceptibility may aid in University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria designing host-directed therapies. Materials and Methods: We performed the ﬁrst Introduction: Common diseases are a serious cause of genome-wide association study on candidaemia using the mortality worldwide and in Bulgaria also. Centenarian’s largest patient cohort available today. By using a genomes/exomes contain clues to clarify the role of the population-based cohort of 500 healthy volunteers, we genes with unambiguous clinical signiﬁcance. The aim of proﬁled cytokines in Candida-stimulated peripheral blood our study is to investigate and compare the frequencies of mononuclear cells, whole blood, and macrophages. By variants in BG centenarians/controls predisposing to using these cytokine proﬁles and genetic data, we mapped common diseases used in different panel tests in medical Candida-response cytokine-QTLs, and tested if they are genetic counseling. associated with susceptibility. Finally, we tested if candi- Materials and Methods: Two pools were constructed: daemia loci modulating cytokines have an impact on the one with DNAs from 31 centenarians and the other with production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by using an DNAs from 61 young and healthy Bulgarian individuals. independent population-based cohort. WES analysis was performed and 177 130 variants were Results: We observed strong association between candi- found. We selected 79 variants considered as predisposing daemiaandageneticvariant,whichsigniﬁcantlyaffectsthe to common diseases: cardiovascular, inﬂammation, dia- expression levels of PLA2G4B in blood. We found that up betes, etc, from the commercially available genetic tests. to 35% of the susceptibility loci affect in vitro cytokine Results: From the 79 genetic variants 33 were identiﬁed production in response to Candida. Furthermore, potential in our samples. Seven variants are associated with sus- causal genes locatedwithin theseloci areenrichedfor lipid ceptibility to common diseases (ClinVar and Marrvel): and arachidonic acid metabolism. We also showed that the obesity (UCP2 rs660339- 0,314 in centenarians and 0,460 numbersofriskallelesattheselociarenegativelycorrelated in controls); apolipoprotein C-III deﬁciency (APOC3 with ROS and IL-6 levels in response to Candida. Finally, rs5128 0,925 and 0,847); MTHFR thermolabile poly- there was a signiﬁcant correlation between ROS and allelic morphism (MTHFR rs1801131; 0,280 and 0,396); hyper- scores based on 16 independent candidaemia-associated tension, essential (AGT rs699; 0,351 and 0,426); metabolic SNPs that affect monocyte-derived cytokines, but not with syndrome, asthma, nocturnal (ADRB2 rs1042713; 0,380 T-cell derived cytokines. and 0,329); coronary artery spasm 1 (NOS3 rs1799983; Conclusions: Our results prioritize the disturbed lipid 0,713and0,676);neuraltubedefects,folate-sensitive(MTR homeostasis and oxidative stress as potential mechanisms rs1805087; 0,195 and 0,175). that affect monocyte-derived cytokines to inﬂuence candi- Discussion: Тhe determination of predisposition to daemia susceptibility. common diseases requires analysis of the genetic proﬁle in V. Matzaraki: None. M. Jaeger: None. R. Aguirre- the context of the environmental impact. Further more Gamboa: None. M. Gresnigt: None. X. Chu: None. M. comprehensive research is needed to clarify the clinical Johnson: None. M. Oosting: None. S. Smeekens: None. signiﬁcance of the remaining variants. Acknowledgment to S. Withoff: None. I. Jonkers: None. J. Perfect: None. F. DN 03/7 from 18.12.2016 - National Science Fund of van de Veerdonk: None. B. Kullberg: None. L. Joosten: Bulgaria None.Y.Li:None.C.Wijmenga:None.M.Netea:None. M. Mihaylova: None. L. Balabanski: None. D. V. Kumar: None. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. D. Serbezov: None. V. Damyanova: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: P15.05D None. R. Staneva: None. O. Antonova: None. D. Niko- Genetic variants predisposing to common diseases in lova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D. Toncheva: None. whole exomes of Bulgarian healthy individuals P15.06A M. Mihaylova1, L. Balabanski1,2, D. Nesheva1, Response to adalimumab: can a genetic prediction Z. Hammoudeh1, D. Serbezov1, V. Damyanova1, proﬁle differentiate between responders and non- S. Karachanak-Yankova1,3, R. Staneva1, O. Antonova1, responders in Slovenian Crohn's disease patients? D. Nikolova1, S. Hadjidekova1, D. Toncheva1 M. Gorenjak1, S. Jurgec1,2, K. Repnik1,2, G. Jezernik1, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, P. Skok3,4, U. Potočnik1,2 MedicalUniversity of Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2 “Zdrave” s, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Hospital“Malinov", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 1Center for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine University of1670 Maribor,Maribor,Slovenia,2LaboratoryforBiochemistry, 1Center for human molecular genetics and Molecular Biology and Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine, University of and Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor, Maribor,Maribor,Slovenia,2LaboratoryforBiochemistry, Maribor, Slovenia, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Molecular Biology and Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, and Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor, 4Faculty of Medicine, University of Maribor, Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 3University Medical Centre Maribor, Slovenia Maribor, Slovenia, 4Department of Gastroenterology, Division of Internal Medicine, University Medical Centre Introduction: Non-response to anti-TNF therapeutics such Ljubljana, Maribor, Slovenia as inﬂiximab and adalimumab usually represents loss of diseasecontrolinsevereCrohn'sdisease(CD).Weaimedto Introduction:Inseveralautoimmunecomplexdiseases,an investigated whether a previously reported gene proﬁle for increased secretion of proinﬂammatory cytokine tumour inﬂiximab could also be applied to adalimumab response. necrosisfactor(TNF)playsanessentialroleintheinitiation Materials and Methods: Inﬂamed and non-inﬂamed and propagation of the disease. Therefore, anti-TNF colon biopsy samples from 47 Slovenian Crohn's disease monoclonal antibodies have shown an increased efﬁcacy patients indicated for adalimumab (ADA) were obtained over conventional therapies. However, therapy with TNF during routine colonoscopy prior to ADA treatment. inhibitors is ineffective in up to 30% of patients and the ResponsetoadalimumabwasdeterminedusingIBDQ.RT- variety of therapeutic effects may reﬂect individual genetic qPCR was employed to measure gene expression in colon backgrounds of patients. The aim of our study was to ﬁnd biopsy samples. Genotypes were extracted from previously new pharmacogenetics markers and mechanisms of availabledata.StatisticalanalysiswasperformedwithSPSS response to anti-TNF inhibitor adalimumab in well- software. Bootstrap aggregated support vector machines deﬁned cohort of Crohn’s disease (CD) patients. (SVM) were trained using R package e1071. Materials and Methods: We enrolled 102 CD patients Results: Pooled, non-inﬂamed colon tissue and inﬂamed onadalimumabforwhichresponsehasbeendeﬁnedafter4, colontissuegeneexpressiondatasets wereusedtotrainthe 12, 20 and 30 weeks of treatment. SNPs, previously asso- SVM prediction models using IBDQ response after 4, 12, ciated with response to anti-TNF treatment, were geno- 20 and 30 weeks of ADA treatment as prediction target. typed. Functional prediction has been performed for Pooledandinﬂameddatasetsachievedanaverageof75.5% signiﬁcantly associated genes. and90.5%ADAresponsepredictionaccuracy,respectively. Results:Afterfourweeksoftreatment,strongstatistically Non-inﬂamed tissue dataset achieved 100% ADA response signiﬁcant association has been conﬁrmed for SNP prediction accuracy. Moreover, SVM trained on selected rs3740691 in gene ARFGAP2. In a group of patients with SNPs and LD mates from analyzed genes had an average genotype AA or AG there were 59,6% of nonresponders accuracy of 92.8%, conﬁrming involvement of analyzed comparedto15,1%ofnonrespondersinagroupofpatients geneticregions.Finally,combinedexpressionandgenotype with genotype GG (p= 1,20E-05). Furthermore, after four data showed 100% ADA response prediction accuracy for weeks of treatment, average IBDQ value in patients with all datasets. genotypeAAorAGreachedonly158,3pointscomparedto Conclusions: Our results support the reported genetic 183,7 points in patients with genotype GG (p=2,74E-04). anti-TNF response proﬁle. Furthermore, it can be applied The difference remained signiﬁcant also after 12 weeks of for adalimumab prediction, warranting further targeted treatment. genetic proﬁling for response to adalimumab therapy. Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report that supports the M. Gorenjak: None. S. Jurgec: None. K. Repnik: association of SNP rs3740691 in gene ARFGAP2 with None. G. Jezernik: None. P. Skok: None. U. response to adalimumab in CD patients. Potočnik: None. K. Repnik: None. S. Jurgec: None. S. Koder: None. I. Ferkolj: None. U. Potočnik: None. P15.07B Missense variant rs3740691 in gene ARFGAP2 predicts P15.08C short-term nonresponse to anti-TNF inhibitor PlasmacirculatingtumorDNAasagenomicbiomarker adalimumab in Crohn’s disease patients for ovarian cancer K. Repnik1,2, S. Jurgec1,2, S. Koder3, I. Ferkolj4, Y. Nanki1, A. M. George2, Y. Chen2, C. Brueffer2, U. Potočnik1,2 A. Hirasawa3, T. Chiyoda1, T. Akahane1, D. Aoki1, L. H. Saal2Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1671 1Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 2Lund has the largest phenotypical variability among all CYP’s University,Lund,Sweden,3OkayamaUniversity,Okayama, duetothesubstantialnumberofpolymorphismsthatimpact Japan its activity. This gene shows population speciﬁc variation. Aim: to determine variation within CYP2D6 among three Introduction:Ovariancancer(OC)remainsthemostlethal socio-culturally and geographically distinct Croatian Roma diseaseamonggynecologicalmalignanciesasmostpatients groups (Balkan Roma and Vlax Roma from Baranja and arediagnosedinanadvancedstage.CirculatingtumorDNA Medjimurje) since their speciﬁc population history highly (ctDNA) liquid biopsy analysis holds promise as a inﬂuenced their gene pool. minimally-invasive multipurpose biomarker. In this pilot Methods: NGS method Genotyping-in-Thousands by study, we investigate ctDNA monitoring in OC. sequencing was used to sequence whole CYP2D6 gene on Material and Methods: Twelve OC patients from Keio 324 Croatian Roma DNA samples. Polymorphic positons Women’s Health Biobank at Keio University School of were phased using PHASE v2.1.1. Reconstructed haplo- Medicinewerestudied:thehistologicalsubtypescomprised types were translated into star alleles according to P450 eight serous, two clear cell, one mucinous and one endo- Allele Nomenclature Database. metrioid. Diagnostic tumor and serial peripheral blood Results:Sequencingidentiﬁed51polymorphicpositions. samples were collected. Following identiﬁcation of tumor Reconstructed haplotypes signiﬁcantly differed among the mutations,weperformedquantitativedetectionofctDNAin three Roma groups (p<0.05). The two most frequent hap- plasma from various timepoints using the ultrasensitive lotypesinBalkanRomabelongtothegroupsofCYP2D6*4 IBSAFE method. andCYP2D6*1alleles(9.7%and8.7%respectively),while Results: Concordant mutations in tumor DNA and inRomafromBaranjathemostfrequenthaplotypesbelong plasma DNA were detected in eleven patients (91%); only togroupsofCYP2D6*1andCYP2D6*2alleles(18.8%and onemutationinanon-recurrentpatientwasundetectablein 10.3%respectively).ThemostfrequenthaplotypesinRoma plasma. Among the ﬁve recurrent patients, all patients from Medjimurje belong to the groups of CYP2D6*1 and detected positive ctDNA prior to or simultaneously to CT CYP2D6*4 alleles (14.4% and 7.4% respectively). imaging. Positive ctDNA was detected earlier than high Conclusion: Our results provided basic information CA125 in 3/5 patients with a median of 86 days. ctDNA about CYP2D6 polymorphisms, suggesting that the enzy- also had sensitive reaction to tumor burden during che- matic activities of CYP2D6 might differ among Roma motherapy. ctDNA from all seven non-recurrent patients groups.Thisﬁndingmaybehelpfulforbettermodulationof turned negative after initial treatment and maintained pharmacotherapy in Roma population. The research was negative throughout the follow-up. funded by Croatian Science Foundation grant (HRZZ-IP- Conclusions: Detection of plasma ctDNA was feasible. 2014-09-4454) to MPS. ctDNAhasthepotentialofenhancingpresencediagnosisby A. Stojanovic Markovic: None. B. Puljko: None. Z. shortening the lead time than CA125 or CT imaging. Tomas: None. M. Zajc Petranovic: None. T. Skaric- ctDNA may be a clinically useful biomarker for OC Juric: None. M. Pericic Salihovic: None. patients. Y. Nanki: None. A.M. George: None. Y. Chen: None. P15.11B C. Brueffer: None. A. Hirasawa: None. T. Chiyoda: Exome sequencing allows detection of relevant None. T. Akahane: None. D. Aoki: None. L.H. pharmacogenetics variants in epileptic patients Saal: None. S. verdez1,2, P. Garret2,3,4, E. Tisserant1,3, A. Vitobello1,3, P15.09D F. Tran Mau-Them1,2,3, C. Philippe1,3,2, M. Bardou5, The CYP2D6 gene variation among three Croatian M. Luu5, A. Juliette6, C. Verstuyft7, P. Callier1,2,3, Roma groups C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3,8, L. Faivre1,2,3,8, D. Yannis1,3 A. Stojanovic Markovic, B. Puljko, Z. Tomas, M. Zajc 1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm, Dijon, France, 2UF Innovation Petranovic, T. Skaric-Juric, M. Pericic Salihovic en diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU- TRANSLAD,Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France, Introduction: CYP2D6 enzyme is involved in the 4LaboratoireCERBA,Saint-Ouenl’Aumône,France,5CIC- metabolism of approximately 25% of the most commonly EC, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire et Université de prescribed drugs metabolized in liver (opioids, beta- Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, France, 6Georges blockers, antidepressants, antitumor agent, etc.). CYP2D6 François Leclerc Cancer Center - UNICANCER, Dijon,1672 France, 7INSERM UMR-1178, CESP, "Depression and L. A. Condon, N. Qureshi, J. Kai Antidepressants" team, Faculté de Médecine Paris-Sud, Université Paris Sud, France; Service de Génétique Division of Primary Care, University of Nottingham, moléculaire, Pharmacogénétique et Hormonologie, Nottingham, United Kingdom AssistancePublique-HôpitauxdeParis,LeKremlinBicêtre, France, 8Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies Introduction: Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is one du développement et syndromes malformatifs », centre de of the most common inherited autosomal dominant génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital, disorders, causing elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL) Dijon, France cholesterol levels. Left untreated this causes premature coronary heart disease and mortality yet most cases remain Introduction: Beyond the identiﬁcation of pathogenic undiagnosed. Early detection and effective preventive variants for the diagnosis of Mendelian disorders, sequen- intervention is a national priority in the UK and other cing of individual genomes can detect numerous variants countries. This research formed part of a prospective potentially relevant for clinical care. Clinical interventions evaluation of the clinical utility and acceptability of a new canthusbeconductedtoimprovefuturehealthoutcomesin FH case ﬁnding tool (FAMCAT) applied to patient records patients and their at-risk relatives, such as predicting late- in routine clinical primary care practice. onset genetic disorders accessible to prevention or treat- Materials and Methods: Qualitative semi-structured ment, or identifying differential drug efﬁcacy and safety. interviews (n=20) were carried out with a purposeful Material and Methods: To evaluate the interest of sample of primary care health professionals (GPs, nurses, pharmacogeneticsinformation,wedesignedan«inhouse» heath care assistants) and practice managers selected from pipeline to determine the status for 122 PharmGKB (Phar- 10 UK primary care practices who had implemented and macogenomics Knowledgebase) variants, including struc- usedthe FAMCAT tool.Following case ﬁnding ofpatients tural variations for the genes of interest. This pipeline was at highest risk of FH, practices either initiated genetic appliedina cohort of82 epilepticpatients todeterminethe testing on site or referred to other services. All interviews frequency of pharmacogenetics variants of interest for were transcribed and analysed thematically. managing the treatment. Plasma concentrations and treat- Results and Conclusions: Primary care practitioners ment was retrospectively assessed by clinical history. recognised and welcomed the beneﬁt of adopting a more Results: For the PharmGKB class IA variants, the systematic approach to identiﬁcation of patients with CYP2C9 status for phenytoin’s prescription was the only undetected FH in their practice populations. They found relevant information. One low and twenty-three inter- application of the FAMCAT tool was acceptable and fea- mediate metabolizers were identiﬁed respectively in our sible in practice, and that genetic testing could be realised cohort, nineteen patients were treated by phenytoin. While on site. being treated with a standard protocol (15mg/kg loading However, implementing more routine identiﬁcation of, dosefollowedby5mg/kgmaintenancedose),3outofthe4 and genetic testing for, FH in primary care should ensure identiﬁed intermediate metabolizers had experienced adequate provision is made for increases in workload and plasma concentration above the toxic range (30 mg/L). resource use whilst taking into account the local organisa- Conclusion: Genotyping of CYP2C9 could have antici- tional infrastructure at each primary care practice. pated the risk of clinical toxicity caused by high phenytoin Grant Reference: NIHR SPCR FR12-333 plasma levels. Pangenomic sequencing can provide infor- L.A. Condon: None. N. Qureshi: None. J. Kai: None. mation about common pharmacogenetic variants in epilep- tic patients likely to be useful for their pharmacological P15.13D management. Plasma levels of Lyso-Gb1 correlate with HPO term- S. verdez: None. P. Garret: None. E. Tisserant: None. based estimates of disease severity in Gaucher disease A. Vitobello: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. C. Phi- lippe: None. M. Bardou: None. M. Luu: None. A. Juli- P. Baue ette: None. C. Verstuyft: None. P. Callier: None. C. r, C. Cozma, L. Demuth, S. Oppermann, M. Werber, Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None. D. G. E. Oprea, V. Weckesser, C. Beetz, A. Rolfs Yannis: None. Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany P15.12C Identifying undetected Familial Hypercholesterolaemia Introduction:Gaucherdisease(GD)isalysosomalstorage (FH)inthegeneralpopulation-perspectivesofprimary disorderwhichishighlyvariableasregardsageatonsetand health care professionals in the UK clinical manifestation. An enzymatic assay has long beenAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1673 used as a rather reliable diagnostic aid in GD, but we Saudi Arabia has high rate of consanguineous marriages recently revealed even better diagnostic performance of (around 60%) resulting in inherited disorders early in life dried bloods spot (DBS)-based quantiﬁcation of the affecting ~8% of births. Common diseases including sphingosine Lyso-Gb1. We were therefore interested in diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and others manifesting determining whether this biomarker can also be used to later in life affect over 20-30% of the population. In our reﬂect disease severity. experience in over 25 years using genomic variant has Materials and Methods: A large cohort of individuals helpedinimplementingpreventionprogramsincludingpre- with genetically conﬁrmed GD was compiled from Cen- implantationgeneticdiagnosis,prenataldiagnosis,newborn togene’s proprietary mutation database CentoMD®. Free- screeningandpre-maritalscreening.Ithasalsohelpedusin textclinicaldescriptionsfromtheinitialdiagnosticrequests establishing personalized therapeutic strategies. The Saudi (i.e. before genetic diagnosis and before initiation of treat- Human Genome Program targets the sequencing of ment) were translated into human phenotype ontology 100,000 samples. It has sequenced over 25,000 samples (HPO) terms. Lyso-Gb1 levels in the corresponding sam- from patients and family members with inherited diseases. ples were quantiﬁed by mass-spectrometry. ThishasresultedinalargeKnowledgeDatabaseofgenetic Result: A median of 4 HPO terms (range 1 to 19) had variants which identiﬁes pathological and normal variants been assigned per patient. Biomarker levels were lowest in present in the Saudi population. This database was used to patientswithasingleHPOterm,andincreasedby~15%per buildtwoproprietary“custommicroarrays”.Theﬁrstisthe additional term (up to n=5 terms). Stratiﬁcation of terms “Saudi Biobank Array” which may be used to study rare according to clinical categories revealed that patients with inherited diseases and common disorders. The second is a mild or sub-clinical corresponding signs (e.g. thrombocy- “premarital screening array”. These include diseases that topenia) had lower Lyso-Gb1 levels than patients with a resultinintellectual disability,inbornerrorsofmetabolism, more severe manifestation (e.g. thrombocytopenia + hearing and vision impairment, immunodeﬁciency, move- excessive bleeding, thrombocytopenia + epistaxis). ment disorders, among others. Based upon our experience Conclusion:Inadditiontoitsdiagnosticvalue,Lyso-Gb1 within the current pre-marital screening program, approxi- accurately reﬂects disease severity in GD. Considering mately 60% of couples with pathological variants, choose feasibility of DBS-based quantiﬁcation, it thereby lends not to proceed with marriage. This save healthcare cost of itself as the ideal biomarker for long-term follow up and more than SAR 3 billion on an annual basis with reduction therapeutic monitoring of GD patients. in social burden to the community. Therefore establishing P.Bauer:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; the SHGP was a must to provide the necessary infra- Centogene AG. C. Cozma: A. Employment (full or part- structure to solve cases to implement prevention and time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. L. Demuth: A. therapeutic strategies. Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. A.I. Al-Aqeel: None. S. Oppermann: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- niﬁcant; CentogeneAG.M. Werber: A.Employment (full P15.15B or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. G.E. Oprea: A. NEBNext Direct Custom Ready Panels overcome Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. challenges associated with targeted re-sequencing V. Weckesser: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- niﬁcant; Centogene AG. C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or A. J. Barry1, K. Patel2, A. B. Emerman2, S. Adams2, part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. A. Rolfs: A. S. Bowman2, E. Mauceli2, B. Desmond1, J. S. Dunn1, Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CentogeneAG. S. E. Corbett1, C. D. Elfe2, F. Stewart1, E. Dimalanta1, E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other S. Russello1, T. B. Davis1, C. L. Hendrickson1 intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Centogene AG. 1New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, United States, P15.14A 2Directed Genomics, Ipswich, MA, United States GenomicVariantsandPrecisionMedicine(personalized clinical Care) in Saudi Arabia Efﬁcient utilization of targeted gene panels for clinical research is challenged by the wide variation in gene A. I. Al-Aqeel1,2,3 constituents speciﬁc to a given study. While focused gene panels efﬁciently provide the necessary depth of coverage 1Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi for low frequency variant detection, the high costs and Arabia, 2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, design challenges associated with panel design present 3American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon challenges. NEBNext Direct Custom Ready Panels employ a novel approach to selectively enrich nucleic acid targets1674 ranging from a single gene to several hundred genes, genotoxic effect of escitalopram oxalate at DNA level was without sacriﬁcing speciﬁcity. The approach hybridizes investigated by UV-Vis spectrophotometer and agarose gel both strands of genomic DNA, prior to any ampliﬁcation. electrophoresis employing Copper reduction test. Following a 90-minute hybridization, captured molecules Results: In MTT assay, EO showed cytotoxic effect on are converted into Illumina sequencer compatible libraries NIH3T3 cells at a concentration of 50 μM. The absorption containing an 8 bp sample ID and a 12 bp Unique value of the UV-Vis spectrophotometer solution of EO at MolecularIdentiﬁer(UMI).Anoptionaldualindexmodule 238 nm is increased by the addition of DNA and showed a incorporates a second 8 bp sample ID for highly- hyperchromiceffectwithDNAbindingvalue(Kb)of0.035 multiplexed sequencing or to mitigate effects of “pad- M-1. Moreover, The CuCl / 2H O added to the DNA with 2 2 hopping”oncertainIlluminainstruments.Theresultisa1- EO, and no fracture was observed in the double stranded day protocol that enables preparation of sequence-ready DNA compared to the control DNA. libraries from puriﬁed genomic DNA speciﬁc to content Conclusion: In conclusion EO has a dose dependent included in the panel. NEBNext Direct Custom Ready cytotoxiceffectbutnogenotoxiceffect.Thisstudyhasbeen Panelscanbecustomizedtoincludethefullexoncontentof supported by Cukurova University Scientiﬁc Research humangenesassociatedwithcancer,neurologicaldisorders, Fund. Project Number: FYL-2017-9464 (Adana, Turkey). autism, cardiovascular disease, and other conditions. Baits R. Valipour: None. M.B. Yılmaz: None. E. Valipour: for these genes have been designed, balanced, and pooled None. S. Kocaturk-Sel: None. H. Oksuz: None. N.S. on a per gene basis, and can be combined into speciﬁc Ilgaz: None. customgenesubsets.Here,wedemonstratethecapabilityto deploy custom gene panels across panel sizes and content, P15.17D while maintaining high speciﬁcity, uniformity of coverage, Determining genetic predispositions using andsensitivitytodetectnucleicacidvariantsfromclinically CleanPlex®Hereditary Cancer Panel for a rapid and relevant samples. streamlined amplicon-based NGS workﬂow A.J. Barry: None. K. Patel: None. A.B. Emerman: None. S. Adams: None. S. Bowman: None. E. Mauceli: B. Simmons, K. Pendleton, L. Lee, C. Li, Y. Liu, L. Lin, None. B. Desmond: None. J.S. Dunn: None. S.E. Cor- G. Liu, Z. Liu bett: None. C.D. Elfe: None. F. Stewart: None. E. Dimalanta: None. S. Russello: None. T.B. Davis: None. Paragon Genomics, Inc., Hayward, CA, United States C.L. Hendrickson: None. Introduction: Genetic testing being widely accepted; P15.16C medical professionals are increasingly interested in screen- Cytotoxic and genotoxic evaluation of escitalopram ing for hereditary conditions. Popularly, hybrid capture- oxalate, a commonly used antidepressant based sequencing methods are used for screening large number of targets, which tend to be tedious, laborious, R. Valipour1, M. B. Yılmaz2, E. Valipour3, S. Kocaturk- requiring trained operators with specialized equipment and Sel2, H. Oksuz2, N. S. Ilgaz2 the complex protocols resulting in increased errors. To simplify screening, we developed amplicon-based Clean- 1University of Cukurova, Institute Of Natural and Applied Plex® technology, which enables high-quality genomic Sciences, Department of Biotechnology, Adana, Turkey, coverage using a fast, simple, and streamlined NGS library 2University of Cukurova Faculty of Medicine, Department preparation workﬂow. We present our Hereditary Cancer of Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey, 3University of Bulent panel to quickly detect mutations associated with increased Ecevit, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Department of hereditary cancer risks, covering full exons of 37 targeted Molecular Biology and Genetic, Zonguldak, Turkey genes in one reaction. Methods: CleanPlex technology has a 3-step workﬂow: Introduction: Escitalopram oxalate (EO), is one of the targeted multiplex PCR step, background cleaning step to most prescribed antidepressants in Turkey and in several remove by-products, and ﬁnally indexing PCR to add Illu- other European countries, but there is not enough research mina® adapter sequences and sample indexes. 10 ng of ontheeffects ofEOatacellular level,therefore, we aimed input genomic DNA per pool (40 ng total) was used and to investigate the effects of EO at the cellular and libraries sequenced at ~2,500 read depth using Illumina DNA level. NextSeq®. After demultiplexing, mapping-rates and on- MaterialsandMethods:ThecytotoxiceffectofEOwas target rates were calculated, and variants were identiﬁed determined by methylthiazolyl diphenyl-tetrazolium bro- using Paragon Genomics’ variant calling algorithm. mide (MTT) test in a dose dependent manner. TheAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1675 Results: The results exhibit >96% uniformity at 0.2X Pharmacogenetics plays a well-established role in both mean, and all exons were covered to provide accurate var- interindividual and interethnic variation in rosuvastatin iant calling. The assay ishighly reproducible and sensitive, plasma levels. Historically the pharmacogenetics of rosu- with an R2 value of 0.95 between independently prepared vastatinhasbeendominatedbythetransportergenes,Solute replicates, and a detection rate of >99% for single nucleo- Carrier Organic Anion Transporter Family member 1B1 tide variants. (SCO1B1) ATP Binding Cassette G2 (ABCG2). The single Conclusion: CleanPlex Hereditary Cancer Panel can be nucleotide polymorphisms SLCO1B1 c.521T>C used for rapid and accurate proﬁling of cancer risk with (rs4149056, p.Val174Ala) and ABCG2 c.421C>A very small DNA input. This panel, with an easy cost- (rs2231142,p.Gln141Lys),inparticularareassociatedwith effectiveworkﬂowandquickturnaround,canmakegenetic increased plasma levels of rosuvastatin. However, these monitoring efﬁcient. pharmacogenetic studies had minimal representation from B. Simmons:None. K.Pendleton: A.Employment (full individuals of African descent. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Materials and Methods: To investigate the pharmaco- Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other genetics of rosuvastatin in African populations; we ﬁrst intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. screened 785 individuals from nine ethnic African popula- L. Lee: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; tions for the SLCO1B1 c.521C and ABCG2 c.421CA var- ParagonGenomics,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock iants.Wethensequencedwholeexomesfromindividualsof options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; African Bantu descent, who participated in a 20mg rosu- ParagonGenomics,Inc.C.Li:A.Employment(fullorpart- vastatin pharmacokinetic trial in Harare Zimbabwe. time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Results: Frequencies of SLCO1B1 c.521C ranged from Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual 0.0%(San)to7.0%(Maasai),whilstABCG2c.421Aranged property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. Y. Liu: A. from 0.0% (Shona) to 5.0% (Kikuyu). Novel genetic var- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon iants showing signiﬁcant association with rosuvastatin Genomics,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, exposure were identiﬁed in SLCO1B1, ABCC2, SLC10A2, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon ABCB11, AHR, HNF4A, RXRA and FOXA3 and appear to Genomics, Inc. L. Lin: A. Employment (full or part-time); be African-speciﬁc. Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest Conclusions:ThevariantsSLCO1B1c.521CandABCG2 (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); c.421CA may play a minor role in interindividual variation Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. G. Liu: A. Employ- in rosuvastatin pharmacokinetics in African individuals. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Instead,Africanspeciﬁcpharmacogeneticvariantsmayplay Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or a major role. otherintellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;ParagonGenomics, N.D. Soko: None. E. Chimusa: None. C. Masimir- Inc.Z.Liu:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; embwa: None. C. Dandara: None. ParagonGenomics,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; P15.20C Paragon Genomics, Inc.. Novel polycistronic modiﬁed mRNA for generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells P15.19B African-speciﬁc pharmacogene variants affect B. Mahdavi1,2, N. Rezaei1, M. Nasr-Esfahani1, rosuvastatin pharmacokinetics in Africans K. Dormiani1 N. D. Soko1,2, E. Chimusa2, C. Masimirembwa3, 1Royan Institute for Biotechnology, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic C. Dandara2 Republic of, 2ACECR Institute of Higher Education, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic Republic of 1University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe, 2University of Cape Town,Cape Town, South Africa, 3AfricanInstitute Introduction: Cell biology and personalized regenerative of Biomedical Science and Technology, Harare, Zimbabwe medicineareenormouslyinﬂuencedbyinducedpluripotent stemcells(iPSCs).ModiﬁedmRNAs(mmRNA)hasshown Introduction: Rosuvastatin is used in the treatment of great potential to derive safe and high efﬁcient integration- hypercholesterolemia. Elevated plasma levels of rosuvasta- free iPSCs. However, low stability of mRNAs resulted in tin have been associated with increased risk of statin daily transfection, to overcome this limitation, we have induced myopathy, leading to non-adherence and compro- constructed a polycistronic mmRNA containing WPRE misingtreatmentandmanagementofhypercholesterolemia.1676 element, which improves the half-life of the produced Based on their molecular function we nominated three of mRNA in the target cells. thesevariantsforassociationwithlongevity-rs2526374in Materials and Methods: Four human pluripotency RNF43 (NP_060233.3:p.Leu418Met), rs956868 in WNK1 transcription factors along with EGFP were developed as a (NP_001171914.1:p.Thr1316Pro) and rs2276362 in NAD- single expression cassette through using 2A peptide SYN1 (NM_018161.4:c.264-26A>G). RNF43 is a regulator sequence. WPRE was cloned in downstream of described of WNT signalling - an important, highly-conserved polycistronic fragment, in a separate construct. These two pathway involved in cell proliferation, tissue homeostasis fragments were subcloned in an appropriate vector con- and stem cell maintenance in adults. WNK1 is a serine/ taining T7 promoter, UTRs and poly-A tail for in vitro threonine kinase that plays an important role in cell transcription(IVT).TranscriptswereproducedbyT7 RNA signalling, survival and proliferation. This gene is a polymerase, using modiﬁed nucleotides and cap analogs. downstreameffectorofinsulin/IGF-1signalling-apathway mmRNAs were transfected into target cells and EGFP involved in the regulation of ageing in many organisms. expression was assessed by ﬂuorescent microscopy and Moreover, WNK1 modulates the activity of the pro- ﬂow cytometry. The expression level of reprogramming longevity transcription factor FOXO4. Splicing prediction factors was determined by Western blotting. algorithms predict that this intronic variant in NADSYN1 Results: Analysis of transfected cells showed signiﬁcant would disrupt the consensus branchpoint between exons 3 improvement in mmRNA stability in presence of WPRE, and 4. This gene regulates NAD+ metabolism - an which in turn gave rise to a higher level of protein important cofactor involved in lifespan extension in some expression. Western blot assay demonstrated an equivalent model organisms and essential for the activity of sirtuins stoichiometric expression of 2a-mediated factors. and FOXO3A associated with ageing. Our whole-exome Conclusions: We developed a stabilized polycistronic pool analysis discovered novel genes involved in longevity mmRNA as a potential tool for safe and efﬁcient iPSCs that could serve as potential therapeutic targets for the induction.Theapplicationofcap,modiﬁednucleotidesand preventionortreatmentofage-relatedphysiologicaldecline. poly-A tail in the structure of mRNA, besides, utilized Grant reference: DN03/7(18.12.2016), NSF, Bulgaria WPRE element in the expression cassette, enhanced the L. Balabanski: None. D. Serbezov: None. R. Vazhar- mmRNA half-life and increased its translation efﬁciency. ova: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. R. Staneva: B. Mahdavi: None. N. Rezaei: None. M. Nasr-Esfa- None. M. Mihaylova: None. V. Damyanova: None. D. hani: None. K. Dormiani: None. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. O. Antonova: None. D. Nikolova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D. P15.21D Toncheva: None. New genetic variants and pathways associated with healthy longevity in Bulgarian centenarians P15.22A Personalized approach to the prevention and L. Balabanski1,2, D. Serbezov2, R. Vazharova1,3, management of colorectal cancer illustrated on family S. Karachanak-Yankova2, R. Staneva2, M. Mihaylova2, case of Lynch syndrome V. Damyanova2, D. Nesheva2, Z. Hammoudeh2, O. Antonova2, D. Nikolova2, S. Hadjidekova2, M. M. Litvinova1,2,3, D. A. Akhmedzyanova1, D. Toncheva1,2 G. V. Movsesyan1,2, T. S. Lisitsa2,4, N. A. Bodunova2 1Genomic Laboratory, Malinov Clinic, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 1FederalStateAutonomusEducationalInstitutionofHigher 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University - Education I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State, Moscow, Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Medical Faculty, Soﬁa University Russian Federation, 2The Loginov Moscow Clinical “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Scientiﬁc Center of Moscow Health Department (MCSC), Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Federal Budget Institution Around 25% of human longevity is attributed to genetic of Science "Central Research Institute of Epidemiology" of factors. Studies have shown that complex interaction of The Federal Service on Customers' Rights Protection and many variants with small effect and interplay of different Human Well-being Surveillance, Moscow, Russian pathwayspredisposetohealthyageing.Weperformeddeep Federation, 4Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology of whole-exome sequencing of a pool of 32 centenarians and RussianAcademyofSciences,Moscow,RussianFederation 61 young healthy controls from Bulgaria and after bioinformatic and statistical analysis we discovered 91 Introduction: Lynch Syndrome (LS) is a hereditary variants showing statistically-signiﬁcant allele frequency autosomal dominant disorder. Patients with LS have an difference between the two pools (p-value<5.0х10-8). increasedriskofcancerdevelopment.EstimatedriskbytheAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1677 age of 70y.o. for non-polyposis colorectal cancer (CRC) is Methods: We used GREML-LDMS (LD- and MAF- up to 82%, endometrial cancer-60%, gastric cancer-13%, Stratiﬁed)analysistoestimatetheheritabilityofCitalopram etc. LS is caused by mutations in MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, response and treatment-resistant status (TRD) in MDD PMS2,EPCAMgenes.PrevalenceofLSis1:1000.Thegoal patients from the STAR*D anti-depressants pharmacoge- istodeﬁnetheroleofmoleculargenetictestingandmedical netictrial.Weestimatedtheoverallgeneticcontributionfor genetic counseling in patients with CRC. genome-wide SNPs present in the dataset, as well as for MaterialsandMethods:Casereportof36-year-oldmale different groups of candidate SNPs from pharmGKB. patient with Non-polyposis CRC. The bowel obstruction Results: We detected a small, but signiﬁcant, proportion had occurred in 4 generations of his family. Patient’s of variance explained by SNPs associated with Citalopram brother developed CRC at 27y.o., mother-at 49 and at 60y. inpharmGKBwhenincludingthosewiththelowerlevelof o. Grandmother and grand-grandfather died of CRC at 62 evidence (V(G)/Vp 0.04; SE 0.02; p 2.23E-05). High her- and 45 years respectively. Meanwhile, proband has 4 chil- itability emerged when considering genome-wide SNPs for dren (4-10y.o.). Basing on the clinical signs and pattern of Citalopram response (V(G)/Vp 0.76; SE 0.23; p 0.026), inheritance, LS was assumed. The patient was tested for Citalopram symptoms improvement (V(G)/Vp 0.82; SE mutations in LS-associated genes by using target 0.22; p 0.046) and TRD phenotype (V(G)/Vp 0.81; SE NGS panel. 0.24; p 0.022). Results: Sequencing of proband’s DNA revealed non- Conclusions: Our preliminary results conﬁrm a little sensemutationp.Arg100Terintheexon3ofMLH1genein effect of single SNPs and suggest that taking into account heterozygousstate.ThegenetictestresultsprovedLSinthe the overall genetic variability of pharmGKB AD-related proband. Prophylactic genotyping was carried out in all SNPsand,evenmore,ofgenome-wideSNPscouldimprove proband’s relatives. 3 out of 4 proband’s children, brother antidepressant response/resistance prediction. and most of his children (3 out of 4), sister and mother M. Shoaib: None. E. Giacopuzzi: None. C. Magri: appeared to be carriers of the same mutation. None. A. Minelli: None. M. Gennarelli: None. Conclusions: Personalized medicine and molecular genetic testing, nowadays, allow to determine precisely the P15.24C cause of cancer and also to ﬁnd effective treatment and to Plasma detection of androgen receptor variant 7 in develop preventing program for presymptomatic proband’s metastatic prostate cancer relatives. M.M. Litvinova: None. D.A. Akhmedzyanova: None. P. Vázquez Cárdenas1,2,3, M. Ovejero-Sánchez1,2,3, G.V. Movsesyan: None. T.S. Lisitsa: None. N.A. F. Gómez-Veiga4,2, J. García-Hernández3, I. Misiewicz- Bodunova: None. Krzeminska3, Á. Vírseda4, R. García5, R. González- Sarmiento1,2,3 P15.23B Genomic restricted maximum likelihood (GREML) 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of analysis to estimate the heritability of response/ Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, resistance in major depressive disorder (MDD) Spain, 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), Salamanca, Spain, 4Deparment of M. Shoaib1, E. Giacopuzzi2, C. Magri1, A. Minelli1, Urology, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, M. Gennarelli1,2 Spain, 5Oncology Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain 1University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 2IRCCS Istituto CentroSanGiovannidiDioFatebenefratelli,Brescia,Italy Introduction: Liquid biopsy has the potential to provide information about cancers without invasive biopsy, using Introduction: MDD is the leading cause of disability circulatingbiomarkers.InmetastaticPCa,progressionfrom worldwide and lack of response to treatment is reported in a hormonesensitive state to castration resistance under ~30%ofsubjects.Pharmacogenomicsstudiesperformedso androgen deprivation therapy marks the transition to the farfailedtoidentifysingleSNPswithareplicableeffecton lethal phenotype of the disease. Previous studies suggested anti-depressants response (AD). Instead of focusing on the presence of AR-V7 transcripts in CTCs, in exosomes single SNPs, our study aims to evaluate the aggregated and as cell-free RNA in plasma. The aim of the present contributiononADresponseforgenome-widevariantsand study was to determinate the presence of Arv-7 in plasma currently known genetic variants from pharmGKB, the usingcapillarynano-immunoassayinmetastaticPCaandto main catalog of known pharmacogenetic variations. correlate with clinical and analytical data.1678 Methods:Thestudyincluded31patientswithdiagnostic Mutational analysis in MTOR, TSC1 and TSC2 was of metastatic PCa. Whole blood (10 mL) was collected in performed through targeted next-generation sequencing EDTA tubes. Plasma was removed after centrifugation at (NGS), and immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed 1,600rpmat4ºC,previouslytodeterminatethepresenceof forPTEN,pAKT,pS6K1,pS6andp21.Among89patients ARV-7 in plasma, Albumin and IgG depletion was per- with NGS data, 13.5% had mTOR pathway mutations (9% formed using the Pierce ™ Top 2 columns. Capillary MTOR, 1% TSC1, 3% TSC2), with the mutation rate Electrophoresis Immunoassay or SimpleWestern analyses decreasing to 8% when only considering pathogenic were performed using the WES™ according to the manu- variants, and with a multiregion NGS analysis in 14 facturer’s protocol. patients giving homogenous results. When comparing the Results: AR-V7 signal was detected in 11 cases (36%). molecular data with the RECIST response of the patients, Twenty samples (71%) were considered negative. All we found that partial response was more frequent in cases patients with AR-V7 expression, showed a Gleason score with mTOR pathway mutations than in those without ≥7, higher PSA and was associated with higher values mutations (67% versus 21%, P=0.020). Regarding IHC, for FA. negativePTENstainingwasdetectedin58%ofthetumors, Conclusions: Assessing the presence of AR-V7 in and it was more frequent in rapalog responder patients plasma from PCa patients is feasible by a novel capillary (P=0.024). Mutations and PTEN IHC were not mutually nano-immunoassay. AR-V7 was observed in 36% of the exclusive events and its combination improved response PCa metastatic patients. These ﬁndings lay the foundations prediction(P=0.013).Thestainingofotherproteinsdidnot for liquid biopsy as a means of obtaining biological data. showandassociationwithresponseandnoassociationwith This study was funded by AECCSal16/002. PFS was observed for none of the markers analyzed. In P. Vázquez Cárdenas: None. M. Ovejero-Sánchez: conclusion, our study supports mTOR pathway mutations, None. F. Gómez-Veiga: None. J. García-Hernández: negative PTEN IHC, and their combination, as markers of None.I.Misiewicz-Krzeminska:None.Á.Vírseda:None. rapalogresponse,provingastepforwardthepersonalization R. García: None. R. González-Sarmiento: None. of RCC treatment. J. Roldán-Romero: None. B. Beuselinck: None. M. P15.26A Santos: None. J. Rodriguez-Moreno: None. J. Lanillos: PTEN expression and mutations in TSC1, TSC2 and None. B. Calsina: None. A. Gutierrez: None. K. Tang: MTOR are associated with response to rapalogs in None. E. Caleiras: None. C. Montero-Conde: None. A. patients with renal cell carcinoma Cascón: None. M. Robledo: None. J. Garcia-Donas: None. C. Rodriguez-Antona: None. J. Roldán-Romero1, B. Beuselinck2, M. Santos1, J. Rodriguez-Moreno3, J. Lanillos1, B. Calsina1, P15.27B A.Gutierrez4,K.Tang5,E.Caleiras1,C.Montero-Conde1, Comprehensive genetic characterization and evaluation A. Cascón1,6, M. Robledo1,6, J. Garcia-Donas3, ofclinicalresponseinaneuroﬁbromatosistype2patient C. Rodriguez-Antona1,6 treated with bevacizumab 1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), E. Basenach1, A. Förster1, P. Raab2, S. Alzein3, Madrid, Spain, 2University of Leuven, Laboratory of G. Schmidt1, J. K. Krauss4, F. Heidenreich5, Experimental Oncology, Leuven, Belgium, 3HM Hospitales C. Hartmann6, B. Auber1, B. Wiese4,5, R. G. Weber1 – Centro Integral Oncológico HM Clara Campal, Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital HM Puerta del Sur, Madrid, Spain, 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical 5Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Madrid, Spain, School, Hannover, Germany, 2Department of Diagnostic 6Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de and Interventional Neuroradiology, Hannover Medical Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain School, Hannover, Germany, 3RVZ Ostwestfalen GbR, Minden, Germany, 4Department of Neurosurgery, mTORpathwayinhibitorsarekeydrugsforthetreatmentof Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, manytumortypes,however,nopredictivebiomarkershave 5Department of Neurology, Henriettenstift, Diakovere been identiﬁed so far. Here, we performed a molecular and Krankenhaus gGmbH, Hannover, Germany, 6Division of immunohistochemical characterization of key mTOR path- Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Hannover way components in a series of 113 renal cell carcinoma Medical School, Hannover, Germany (RCC) patients treated with everolimus or temsirolimus, aimed at identifying markers of treatment response.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1679 Neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2) is a tumor predisposition Mediterranean area by using the MassARRAY® method syndrome characterized by the development of schwanno- that simultaneously analyses 30 genes variations per mas, especiallybilateral vestibularschwannomas(VS),and sample.Thegenesinvestigatedinourstudywerepreviously meningiomas.HeterozygouspathogenicvariantsintheNF2 establishedtoincreasethelikelihoodofdevelopingobesity, geneareknowntocause NF2,wherebysomaticmosaicism CVD and T2D. Three groups of genes were then created ispresentin~25%ofsimplexpatients.Inschwannomatosis, from disease-related genes variants with at least one high- a disorder phenotypically similar to NF2, heterozygous risk allele (12 for obesity, 5 for T2D and 4 for CVD). Our SMARCB1 or LZTR1 variants may be causative. Recently, ﬁnding suggests that risk-alleles frequency for obesity- bevacizumab has shown efﬁciency as therapy for VS in dependent genes such as FTO, SH2B1 and ADRB2 have a some NF2 patients. We report on a thirty-three-year-old higherincidencewithinthetestedpopulationwithrespectto patient with bilateral VS, fourteen additional schwannomas the WT allele. CVD and T2D-related genes such as and one intracranial meningioma. Next generation sequen- MnSOD2 and TCF7L2 showed a similar incidence. We cing using the TruSight Cancer Panel and Sanger sequen- additionally ﬁnd that 65% of tested samples for FTO high- cingofLZTR1onbloodandoralmucosaDNArevealedno riskallelehadatleastonehigh-riskalleleforeitherorboth pathogenic variants in NF2, SMARCB1 or LZTR1. Sanger MnSOD2 and TCF7L2. Thus, people genetically predis- sequencingonDNAfromthreeschwannomasidentiﬁedthe posed to develop obesity can be also inclined to develop known nonsense variant c.784C>T;p.(R262*) of NF2 CVDor/andT2D.Theincidenceofthosediseasescouldbe (NM_000268.3, GRCh37/hg19) in all tumors, leading to decreased in the future by combining the genetic screens the diagnosis of NF2 mosaicism. Because of hearing with balanced diets and physical activity. Speciﬁcally, the impairment and tumor progression the patient underwent genetic screen can raise awareness of developing deadly an off-label therapy with 5mg/kg bevacizumab. Here, we diseases especially in high-risk people. evaluated MRI scans from ﬁve pre-therapeutic and two L. Walczer Baldinazzo: None. S. Caporilli: None. L. therapeutic years and pure-tone audiometry. After Gualdi: None. C. Lapucci: None. 25 months of treatment, the pure-tone average decreased by 7.5dB, indicating a hearing beneﬁt. Four of seven non- P15.31B vestibularschwannomasshowedvolumereductionof≥20% Genetic polymorphisms in dopaminergic pathway after 24 months of treatment while the growth rate of the inﬂuence the occurrence of adverse events of meningioma decreased. In conclusion, in a patient with dopaminergic treatment in Parkinson’s disease NF2 somatic mosaicism, an off-label therapy with bev- acizumabwasefﬁcientwithrespecttohearingimprovement S. Redenšek1, M. Trošt2, V. Dolžan1 and tumor shrinkage of some non-vestibular schwannomas over a period of two years. (EKFS 1Pharmacogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry, 2014_Promotionskolleg.22) Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, E. Basenach: None. A. Förster: None. P. Raab: None. Slovenia, 2Department of Neurology, University Medical S. Alzein: None. G. Schmidt: None. J.K. Krauss: None. Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia F. Heidenreich: None. C. Hartmann: None. B. Auber: None. B. Wiese: None. R.G. Weber: None. Introduction: Defects in dopaminergic pathway are the characteristic underlying processes of Parkinson’s disease P15.29D (PD). Genetic variability in this pathway may inﬂuence the Cardio Diabesity: Could genetics help us to raise outcome of dopaminergic treatment (DT), especially in awareness of the obesity-related risks? terms of adverse events (AEs). We have used pathway- based approach to comprehensively evaluate the inﬂuence L.WalczerBaldinazzo,S.Caporilli,L.Gualdi,C.Lapucci ofselectedsingle nucleotidepolymorphisms(SNPs)ofkey dopaminergic pathway genes on the occurrence of AEs of Synlab Italia SRL, Castenedolo, Italy DT in PD. MaterialandMethods:Werecruited231PDpatientson One of the leading causes of death in the west world is DT and collected data on their AEs: sleep attacks, visual linked to obesity. The world health organization has hallucinations, nausea/vomiting, orthostatic hypotension, estimated that in 2016 over 650 million adults were obese. peripheral oedema, impulse control disorders, motor ﬂuc- Those people are more inclined to develop cardiovascular tuations and dyskinesia. We genotyped patients for the diseases (CVD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) which are followingSNPs: COMT rs4680,rs165815,DDC rs921451, geneticandchronicmultifactorialdiseases.Weperformeda rs3837091, MAOB rs1799836, DRD2 rs1801028, genetic screen over 3000 patients tested in 2018 from the rs1799732, DRD3 rs6280, SLC6A3 rsrs393795, rs6347,1680 rs104209, SLC22A1 rs628031, SLC18A2 rs14240, and moderate drug-gene interaction identiﬁed. Of interest, 20% SV2C rs1423099. In logistic regression analysis, results of participants were intermediate metabolizers of clopido- were adjusted for signiﬁcant clinical parameters. grel, indicating a loss of function allele in CYP2C19. In Results: COMT rs165815 C allele decreased odds for addition,34%carriedtheSLC6A4S/Sgenotype,associated visual hallucinations (OR=0.34, 95%CI=0.16-0.72, with lowered tolerability of SSRIs, and 45% were carriers p=0.004), while DRD3 rs6280 CC genotype increased the of UGT1A1 variants, posing a severe risk of neutropenia risk for this AE (OR=3.31, 95%CI=1.37-8.03, p=0.008). and toxicity for those with certain chemotherapy regimens. DDC rs921451 CT genotype, DDC rs3837091 AGAGdel Conclusion: For PGx to become standard of care in genotype, and SLC22A1 rs628031 AA genotype increased medicine, it is imperative that different ethnic groups be odds for orthostatic hypotension (OR=2.30, 95%CI=1.26- represented in the literature and ultimately, in professional 4.20, p=0.007; OR=1.94, 95%CI=1.07-3.51, p=0.028, guidelines. Through this study, we have made strides to OR=2.57, 95%CI=1.11-5.95, p=0.028, respectively). characterizethelatinopharmacogenomicproﬁle,whichwill SLC22A1 rs628031 AA genotype increased odds for per- in turn help to stratify patients for PGx testing. ipheral oedema and impulse control disorders (OR=4.00, B. Esquivel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- 95%CI=1.62-9.88, p=0.003, OR=3.16, 95%CI=1.03- niﬁcant; Oneome. T. Koep: A. Employment (full or part- 9.72, p=0.045, respectively). SLC22A1 rs628031 GA gen- time); Signiﬁcant; OneOme. M. Donaldson: A. Employ- otypeprotectedpatientsagainstdyskinesia(OR=0.48,95% ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; OneOme. CI=0.24-0.98, p=0.043). Conclusion: We have identiﬁed a few new potential P15.33D predictive genetic biomarkers of AEs of DT in PD. Implementational insights from AZ/Medimmune’s Grant: ARRS, grant P1-0170 Genomics Initiative S. Redenšek: None. M. Trošt: None. V. Dolžan: None. H. E. Stevens P15.32C Allele and genotype frequencies of pharmacogenomic Centre for Genomics Research, Precision Medicine and markers in a latino population: ﬁndings from the Latin Genomics, IMED Biotech Unit, Astrazeneca, Melbourn, American Personalized Medicine Association United Kingdom B. Esquivel1,2, T. Koep1, M. Donaldson1 Introduction: In 2016 AstraZeneca launched a company- wide genomics initiative aiming to integrate genomics 1OneOme, MINNEAPOLIS, MN, United States, 2Latin throughout the drug discovery and development pipelines. AmericanPersonalized Medicine Association,MexicoCity, The initiative will analyse up to 2 million genomes, Mexico including sequencing of 500,000 patients participating in company sponsored clinical trials. Introduction: Latin Americansrepresentoneofthelargest To achieve this, novel processes and documentation had admixed populations in the world. They also represent to be rapidly embedded across therapeutic areas, replacing ~18%ofthetotalUSpopulation1.Whilepharmacogenomic restricted, study speciﬁc pharmacogenetic samples with (PGx) markers have been well characterized for certain broadly consented genomic samples allowing use across ethnicities, little has been published on the frequency of health-related research. relevant PGx genotype and phenotype rates in latinos. Methods: Three steps were employed to enable this MaterialsandMethods:Attendeesofthe2018ALAMP strategy:1)anovelrolewascreatedtooperationallysupport conference were asked to participate in this study and study teams and monitor implementation; 2) a dedicated subsequently consented to receiving pharmacogenomic mailbox was set-up as a primary point of contact for testingusingtheRightMed®Comprehensivetest(OneOme, genomics queries and advice; 3) training material, face to USA). 146 predominantly latino participants completed the face“workinggroups”andtrainingsessionswererolled-out study. Participants were tested for 27 pharmacogenes and across the organisation. To assess the impact of these received genotype-derived recommendations for more than measures,theinclusionofgenomicsamplecollectionacross 360 medications as well as a genotype and phenotype clinical studies was audited. summaries. Medications on each report were binned into Results: During 2018 over 1400 email items, addressing red (major drug-gene interactions), yellow (moderate) and queries from 53 different study teams were received and green (minimal). resolved in the genomics mailbox and 13 formal training Results: Participants averaged 8 red medications (major sessions were held with more than 250 attendees from interaction), and every participant had at least 1 major or multiple company functions including clinical teams,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1681 operational leads, data managers and process owners. undergo WES. The recommendation system is agnostic of Implementation of these measures resulted in 150% the genotyping method and designed to work with other increase in the number of studies collecting genomic sam- methods. ples (60% of all AZ studies) with over 14,000 patients References approached. [1] “Beneﬁt of Preemptive Pharmacogenetic Information Conclusion: A genomics initiative, collecting broadly onClinicalOutcome”,Rodenet.al.,ClinicalPharmacology consented samples, can be successfully embedded within a & Therapeutics, 2018 global organisation by dedicating resources that raise [2] https://www.z-index.nl/english awareness and provide a robust support structure for M.A. Santcroos: None. J.K. Vis: None. M. van der study teams. Lee: None. S.Y. Anvar: None. M. Kriek: None. L. H.E. Stevens: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Grandia:None.D.L.S.Sie:None.M.C.Cornel:None.P. niﬁcant; Astrazeneca. M. Bet: None. J.J. Swen: None. P15.35B P15.37D Implementing pharmacogenetics by repurposing next TNFAIP2 upregulation and VAMP8 downregulation generation sequencing data on a personalized card may be genetic biomarkers of metabolic Adverse Drug Reactions of antipsychotic treatments as detected by M. A. Santcroos1, J. K. Vis1, M. van der Lee1, RNA-seq expression analysis on a healthy volunteers’ S. Y. Anvar1, M. Kriek1, L. Grandia2, D. L. S. Sie3, study M. C. Cornel3, P. M. Bet3, J. J. Swen1 M. Ruiz-Rosario1, P. Lopez-Garcia2,3, R. Yildiz4, 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, D. Koller5, M. Monsalve4, F. Abad-Santos5,6,7, 2Z-Index, The Hague, Netherlands, 3Amsterdam UMC, J. C. Cigudosa1 Amsterdam, Netherlands 1Scientiﬁc & Innovation Department, NIMGenetics, Introduction: Pharmacogenetics is one of the ﬁrst clinical Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Psychiatry. Universidad applications of personalized medicine. However, in current Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de clinical practice it is often used retrospectively, while Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental. patients may beneﬁt most from preemptive testing [1]. CIBERSAM, Madrid, Spain, 4Instituto de Investigaciones Increasing use of Next Generation Sequencing offers new Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain, opportunities for large scale implementation of pharmaco- 5Clinical Pharmacology Department, Hospital genetics in clinical practice. Universitario de la Princesa, Instituto Teóﬁlo Hernando, Materials and Methods: Whole Exome Sequencing Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Instituto de (WES)forchildrenandtheirparentsisroutinelyperformed Investigación Sanitaria la Princesa (IP), Madrid, Spain, for diagnosis of certain medical conditions. We created a 6UICEC Hospital Universitario delaPrincesa,Plataforma post-processing procedure that phases all variants based on SCReN (Spanish Clinical Reseach Network), Instituto de trio analysis. The pharmacogenetics proﬁle is extracted Investigación Sanitaria la Princesa (IP), Madrid, Spain, from approximately 200 phased variants in 12 genes. 7Pharmacology Department, Facultad de Medicina, Patients are offered a personal card with a QR code that Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain contains the proﬁle. On access of their personal page, the drug metabolizer phenotype is predicted, and individual Introduction: Schizophrenia affects up to 2% of the drug recommendations are generated based on the monthly European population. Being a chronic and disabling updated national drug database G-Standaard [2]. disorder, it requires lifelong medication, that subsequently Results: In this multicenter project we developed a sys- triggers metabolic Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs). This tem thatreuses diagnosticWESdata for pharmacogenetics. project aims to identify novel biomarkers that may The systems consists of a platform to deliver pharmacoge- contribute to the short-term prediction of metabolic netic proﬁles extracted from diagnostic WES data, together dysfunctions associated with antipsychotic treatments. with a website that provides personalized drug recommen- Materials and Methods: A clinical trial with healthy dations established by the Dutch Pharmacogenetics Work- volunteers was carried out to evaluate the short-term effect ing Group. Preliminary analysis yields pharmacogenetic (5 days) of olanzapine and aripiprazole. Each volunteer recommendations for 1321 out of 1845 proﬁles (72%). received both treatments separated by one month of wash- Conclusions: Our system allows for large scale imple- out. Blood samples were collected before and after the mentation of clinical pharmacogenetics for patients that treatment. A total of 16 samples were analysed with1682 Illumina total RNA-Seq technology, followed by a differ- Results: We observed that type 2 diabetes (T2DM) PRS ential expression analysis. signiﬁcantlyassociateswiththeT2DMdiseaserisk(HR:1.5 Results: Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) showed per 1 sd PRS, p-value:<2*10-16). Also the top 8% of the that aripiprazole upregulated TNFα/NFKB signalling (p FINRISK population who had inherited the highest PRS <0.001), that controls inﬂammatory response, which also had fourfold increased risk for T2DM. Moreover, people became upregulated (p <0.05). Chronic inﬂammation is with >35 BMI and the highest PRS tend to get diabetes at associated with obesity, a feature of the metabolic syn- younger age. drome. TNFAIP2 that is regulated by proinﬂammatory Conclusions: FINRISK cohorts produced estimates on molecules, increased its expression with aripiprazole (p= theimpactofPRSandselectedcovariatesonriskofT2DM. 0.0001,Waldtest).OlanzapinetreatmentrepressedSNARE WeusetheseestimatestoassessthefutureriskofT2DMin proteins (p <0.005), that facilitates glucose uptake, which P5.ﬁ FinHealth participants. Participants will receive this disruption is also affected by insulin resistance. Among disease risk information including genetic risk via a web them, VAMP8 was the most downregulated gene (p= 0.01, portal.Wewill monitor thereception oftheinformationby Wald test). Other validations are ongoing. questionnaires and follow the participants for disease end Conclusions: Our results suggest that aripiprazole could points using registry data. be related to the upregulation of chronic inﬂammatory Grants: response, while olanzapine may induce insulin resistance The Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra throughSNAREproteinsrepression.TNFAIP2andVAMP8 The Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular Research couldbecandidatebiomarkersfortheshort-termprediction Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation of metabolic ADRs. This project was funded by the EU H. Marjonen: None. M. Marttila: None. T. Paajanen: Framework Horizon 2020 under GA 721236. None. N. Kallio: None. A. Haukkala: None. H. Kääriäi- M. Ruiz-Rosario: None. P. Lopez-Garcia: None. R. nen: None. K. Kristiansson: None. M. Perola: None. Yildiz: None. D. Koller: None. M. Monsalve: None. F. Abad-Santos: None. J.C. Cigudosa: None. P15.40C Partial polygenic scores for individuals of mixed P15.39B ancestries Genomics as a personalized medicine approach in disease risk prediction - P5.ﬁ FinHealth D. Marnetto1, K. Pärna1,2, L. Molinaro1, T. Haller1, R. Mägi1, K. Fischer1,3, L. Pagani1,4 H. Marjonen1, M. Marttila1, T. Paajanen1, N. Kallio1, A. Haukkala2, H. Kääriäinen1, K. Kristiansson1, 1Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, M. Perola1,3 2Department of Epidemiology, University of Groningen, UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Institute of Mathematics 1National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, and Statistics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Finland,2FacultyofSocialSciences,UniversityofHelsinki, 4epartment ofBiology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy Helsinki, Finland, 3Research Program for Clinical and Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, University of Polygenic Scores (PS) are a combined measure describing Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland an individual’s genetic component for a quantitative phenotype or his susceptibility for a disease with a genetic Introduction: In P5.ﬁ we utilize polygenic risk scores to basis. PS rely on contributions of many associated alleles provide personalized information on the individual disease extrapolated from GWAS, which are partly population- risk related to three common diseases (coronary heart dependent. This poses serious limitations to the applic- disease, type 2 diabetes and venous thromboembolism) for ability of PS to admixed individuals, where at least one of 3.400 volunteering participants. We hypothesize that the mixing ancestry comes from an understudied popula- genetic risk information would improve prevention, diag- tion.Inthiscase,differentportionsofthegenomeshouldbe nosis and treatment. treated differently, to account for the population-speciﬁc MaterialsandMethods:Wevalidatedthepolygenicrisk nature of the association signals. scores in whole genome genotyped population based FIN- Here we introduce Ancestry Speciﬁc Partial-PS, a novel RISK cohorts (N=20.000) using Cox regression models. approach that computes partial PS on ancestry-speciﬁc Follow up data from national health care registers allowed chromosomal segments, obtained through local ancestry ustomodeltheimpactofgeneticandtraditionalriskfactors deconvolution.Weﬁrstassesswhataretheeffectsoftaking suchassmoking,cholesterol, bloodpressureandBMIona onlyafractionofthegenometocomputeaPS,howtotake person's risk of disease within the next 10 years. intoaccounttheuncertaintyderivingfromthemissingpart,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1683 and Partial-PS behavior across populations. Then we apply Results: A total of 71 candidate genes were selected by thismethodonpopulationswithadmixedAfricanandWest comparing the cumulative effects of multiple coding var- Eurasian ancestry where, with a standard whole genome iants between patients with pulmonary edema and matched approach, no reliable PS can be computed for the reasons controls for 19729 protein-coding genes. Subsequent data mentioned above. Using Partial-PS we could retrieve in analysis selected only statistically signiﬁcant and deleter- simulated individuals part of the total PS predictivity in ious variants with a role compatible with ritodrine-induced proportiontotheEuropeanancestryfractionandupto80% pulmonary edema. Two ﬁnal candidate variants located in in modern Egyptians, whose West Eurasian component is CPT2 (carnitine palmitoyltransferase 2) and ADRA1A close to80%.Theseresultsmay inform theapplicability of (Alpha-1A adrenergic receptor) were selected. PStosubjectsthatarecurrentlyleft outofthepersonalized Conclusions: We identiﬁed new potential variants in medicinerevolutionduetotheircomplex,individualhistory genes that play a role in cAMP/PKA regulation, which of admixture. supports their putative involvement in predisposition to Funding: ERDF 2014-2020.4.01.16-0024, MOBTT53 ritodrine-induced pulmonary edema in pregnant women. D. Marnetto: None. K. Pärna: None. L. Molinaro: S. Lee: None. Y. Park: None. Y. Kim: None. H. None.T.Haller:None.R.Mägi:None.K.Fischer:None. Hwang: None. H. Seo: None. B. Min: None. S. Kim: L. Pagani: None. None. Y. Jung: None. J. Kim: None. J. Park: None. P15.41D P15.42A Identifying genetic variants associated with ritodrine Association between self-rated general health and induced pulmonary edema telomere length may be modiﬁed by genetic variants associated with telomere length S. Lee1, Y. Park2, Y. Kim3, H. Hwang4, H. Seo2, B. Min2, S. Kim1, Y. Jung1, J. Kim2, J. Park1 E.Ryu1,M.Lundberg2,B.R.Druliner1,P.Y.Takahashi1, C. Lavebratt2, M. Schalling2, J. M. Biernacka1, 1Department ofObstetricsandGynecology,SeoulNational M. A. Frye1, L. A. Boardman1 University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Division of Biomedical Informatics, Seoul National 1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 2Karolinska University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden 3DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology,EwhaWomans University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, Introduction: Self-rated general health is an important 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Konkuk predictor of various aging-related adverse health outcomes University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of such as comorbidities, mortality, and healthcare utilization. Telomere length (TL) is a biomarker of accelerated aging. Introduction:Ritodrineisoneofthemostcommonlyused WeaimedtoassesswhetherTLisassociatedwithself-rated tocolytics in preterm labor, as a ß2-adrenergic agonist generalheathandwhetherthisassociationdiffersbygenetic which reduces intracellular calcium levels and prevents predisposition to short TL. myometrial activation. Ridotrine infusion can result in Materials and Methods: Peripheral blood leukocyte serious maternal complication, and pulmonary edema is a samples from 99 subjects enrolled in the Mayo Clinic special concern among the complications. The cause of Biobank were used to measure TL and three TL-associated pulmonary edema following ritodrine treatment is multi- SNPs (rs7726159 [TERT]; rs1317082 [TERC], and factorial, but the contributing genetic factors remain under- rs2487999 [OBFC1]). Self-rated general health (excellent, studied. This study investigates the genetic variants very good, good, and fair/poor) was collected using a associated with ritodrine induced pulmonary edema. questionnaire. Adjusting for age and sex, linear regression Materials and Methods: In this case-control study, 16 models were used to test association of TL with self-rated patients who developed pulmonary edema during ritodrine general health and its interaction with the three SNPs. infusion [case] and 16 pregnant women who were treated Results:Thecohortwasrelativelyyoung(medianage:45 with ritodrine but did not develop pulmonary edema [con- years)with65%femalesand100%Whites.ThemedianTL trol] wereincluded.Controlpregnantwomen wereselected was 1.40 (25th-75th percentiles: 1.39-1.42). TL decreased after matching for plurality and gestational age at use of with worse self-rated health in a dose-response manner tocolytics. Maternal blood was taken at the time of admis- (e.g., 0.017 shorter TL in poor/fair health vs. excellent sion for tocolytics, and whole exome sequencing was per- health; p=0.002). The association may be modiﬁed by TL- formed with stored blood samples. associated SNPs (interaction p=0.001 with rs7726159, and 0.006 with rs287999).1684 Conclusions: Our pilot study demonstrates that TL is undertaken using the RD-Connect Genome-Phenome Ana- associated with self-rated general health, implying that TL lysis Platform (GPAP, https://platform.rd-connect.eu). may serve as a biomarker for self-rated general health. Our All samples were processed using the RD-Connect stan- study also suggests that this association may differ by dard analysis pipeline (Laurie et al, Human Mutation, genetic predisposition for shorter TL. Given that this study 2016), and reliable variants uploaded into the GPAP. lacks statistical power due to a small sample size, further Analysis and interpretation of cases was undertaken by a investigation of these ﬁndings in a larger sample is clinical genomics specialist and relevant disease-domain encouraged. experts.AdvancedGPAPtoolssuchason-the-ﬂygene-lists E. Ryu: None. M. Lundberg: None. B.R. Druliner: based upon gene-HPO relationships, Exomiser, homo- None. P.Y. Takahashi: None. C. Lavebratt: None. M. zygosity mapping, pathway associations, and matchmaking Schalling: None. J.M. Biernacka: None. M.A. Frye: helped facilitate causative variant identiﬁcation. None. L.A. Boardman: None. Despite the heterogeneous nature of the different pheno- types under investigation e.g. neuromuscular disorders, P15.43B albinism, inborn errors of metabolism, the molecular diag- Diagnosis of over one third of heterogeneous rare nosticratewasover33%overall.Thisisinlinewithsimilar diseasecasesfromtheBBMRI-LPC800WEScallusing studies which have focussed on a more restricted range of the RD-Connect Genome-Phenome Analysis Platform phenotypes. Furthermore, ten novel gene-disease relation- shipsarecurrentlyundergoingfunctionalvalidation,andwe S. Laurie1, L. Matalonga1, D. Piscia1, M. Bayes1, anticipate more cases will be resolved through inclusion in B. Fusté1, M. Gut1,2, J. Dawson3, R. Thompson3, the SolveRD project (http://solve-rd.eu/). E. López-Martín4,5, M. Posada de la Paz4,5, M. Wang6, S.Laurie:None.L.Matalonga:None.D.Piscia:None. L. Monaco6, G. B. van Ommen7, S. Sims8, E. Zeggini9, M. Bayes: None. B. Fusté: None. M. Gut: None. J. H. Lochmuller1,10, I. Gut1,2, S. Beltran1,2, BBMRI-LPC Dawson: None. R. Thompson: None. E. López-Martín: Consortium None. M. Posada de la Paz: None. M. Wang: None. L. Monaco: None. G.B. van Ommen: None. S. Sims: None. 1CentroNacionaldeAnálisisGenómico(CNAG-CRG),The E.Zeggini:None.H.Lochmuller:None.I.Gut:None.S. Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Beltran: None. Spain, 2Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institute of Genetic Medicine, MRC Centre for P15.44C Neuromuscular Diseases, Newcastle University,, Diagnosis of neurological rare disease patients through Newcastle, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Rare Diseases genomic reanalysis within the URD-Cat project on Research, IIER-ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 5Centre for personalised medicine Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 6Fondazione Telethon, Milan, G. Bullich1, L. Matalonga1, M. Pujadas2, D. Ovelleiro1, Italy, 7Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University G. Parra1, R. Tonda1, S. Laurie1, C. Luengo1, Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 8Twist Bioscience, A. Papakonstantinou1, D. Piscia1, M. Gut1, A. Macaya3, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 9Helmholtz Zentrum F.Palau4,5,A. Ribes4,6,L. Pérez-Jurado2,4,7,S.Beltran1,8, München, Munich, Germany, 10Childrens Hospital of URDCat Consortium Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada 1CNAG‐CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The We report the outcome of the BBMRI-LPC WES Call, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, undertaken in collaboration with RD-Connect (https://rd- Spain,2InstitutHospitaldelMard'InvestigacionsMèdiques connect.eu/) and EuroBioBank (http://www.eurobiobank. (IMIM), Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, org/). Over 800 whole exomes were sequenced free-of- Spain, 3Pediatric Neurology Research Group, Vall charge in seventeen distinct projects, each focusing on a d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma particular rare disease and involving PIs from at least two de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro de different countries. A requirement of the call was that a Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, specimen from each case be deposited within the Euro- CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 5Department of Genetic and BioBank network, to be available to the wider rare disease Molecular Medicine, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu and research community. Phenotypic information for each Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de affected case was collated with PhenoTips using standards Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain, 6Secció d’Errors suchastheHumanPhenotypeOntology(HPO),OMIMand Congènits del Metabolisme-IBC, Servei de Bioquimica i Orpha codes. Variant ﬁltration and prioritisation was Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1685 IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 7Women’s and Children’s T. Nikopensius1, A. Reigo1, M. Tammesoo1, T. Esko1,7, Health Network & University of Adelaide, Adelaide, A. Metspalu1, P. Padrik5,8 Australia, 8Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain 1Institute of Genomics / Estonian Biobank, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Dept. of Clinical Genetics, United The Undiagnosed Rare Disease Program of Catalonia Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, (URD-Cat) is a pilot project aiming to facilitate implemen- 3InstituteofMathematicsandStatistics,UniversityofTartu, tation of personalised medicine for rare diseases within the Tartu, Estonia, 4Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, Catalan Health System, focusing on rare neurological 5Hematology-Oncology Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, conditions as a use case. Genotypic and phenotypic data Tartu, Estonia, 6Oncology-Hematology Clinic, North- is collated, integrated and analysed using the URD-Cat Estonian Medical Centre, Tallinn, Estonia, 7Broad platform, based on the RD-Connect Genome-Phenome Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 8Institute of Analysis Platform. The URD-Cat platform integrates Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia previously available and newly generated clinical and genomic data from 1,454 individuals (835 probands). Breast cancer screening and management will move from Two-hundred and forty-eight probands (421 individuals age- to risk-based management. The genetic component of includingrelatives)forwhomgenomicdatawasavailablein breast cancer risk originates from monogenic variants, as 7 hospitals across Catalonia were reanalysed between 2-8 well as polygenic risk. In 2018, Estonian Biobank, years after initial data generation (mean 4 years). Standar- University of Tartu, Estonia, together with two central dised phenotypic and clinical information were collected hospitals in Estonia, Tartu University Hospital and North using the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) and the Estonia Medical Center have initiated a pilot study for Orphanet Rare Disease Ontology (ORDO). Genomic data genetics-based breast cancer screening and follow-up (63 gene panels, 356 whole exomes and2 wholegenomes) management in female participants of the biobank. were processed with the URD-Cat pipeline, including Thestudyconsistsofmonogenicandpolygenicarms.We detection of Copy Number Variants (CNVs) and runs of aimtoestimatethepossibleimpactofgeneticriskforbreast homozygosity (RoHs). Clinical and genomic data were cancer prevention and early detection, as well as to test the shared and reanalysed through the URD-Cat platform. subject compliance, psychosocial aspects, data transfer Reanalysis of genomic data revealed causative mutations logisticsfromresearchtoclinicalsetting,etc.Inmonogenic in 9.7% of probands (24/248) and candidate pathogenic arm, cascade screening of relatives will maximise the variantsin4.4%(11/248).Mostnewdiagnosesweredueto impactofexistinggeneticdata.Thestudygroupconsistsof novel gene-disease associations (n=8), technical improve- female participates 22-74 years. In monogenic arm, ments in variant calling (n=3), detection of CNVs (n=2) 128 subjects with class 4 and 5 variants in 11 genes and RoHs (n=1), and URD-Cat platform functionalities recurrently associated with moderate to high risk of breast such as ﬁlter by HPO-related genes or pathogenic variant cancer were identiﬁed. The clinical follow-up is based on prioritisation(n=2).Identiﬁcationofcausativevariantsalso adapted international guidelines. In polygenic arm, the enabled the diagnoses of three newly sequenced cases participants with top 5% threshold were selected as high- thanks to internal patient matchmaking enabled by sharing risk group (HR 2.73, 95% CI 1.92-3.9). The females (n data across the network. ~1300)willreceiveinformationabouttheirgeneticriskand G. Bullich: None. L. Matalonga: None. M. Pujadas: biennial mammography will be initiated from age 40. None. D. Ovelleiro: None. G. Parra: None. R. Tonda: We will present the data on study progress and com- None. S. Laurie: None. C. Luengo: None. A. Papakon- pliance, as well as discuss the ethical and communication stantinou: None. D. Piscia: None. M. Gut: None. A. lessons learned, along with perspective on public Macaya: None. F. Palau: None. A. Ribes: None. L. healthcare. Pérez-Jurado: None. S. Beltran: None. The study is funded from RITA1/01-42-01 grant from Estonian Research Council. P15.45D N. Tõnisson: None. L. Roht: None. M. Palover: None. Genotypeﬁrstfemalebreastcancerrisk-basedscreening L. Leitsalu: None. K. Läll: None. K. Fischer: None. K. and management, initial lessons from a national pilot Kruuv-Käo: None. E. Eelma: None. J. Lehtsaar: None. project H. Jürgens: None. R. Kütner: None. V. Valvere: None. T. Nikopensius: None. A. Reigo: None. M. Tammesoo: N. Tõnisson1,2, L. Roht2, M. Palover1, L. Leitsalu1, None. T. Esko: None. A. Metspalu: None. P. K. Läll1, K. Fischer1,3, K. Kruuv-Käo1,4, E. Eelma5, Padrik: None. J. Lehtsaar5, H. Jürgens5, R. Kütner6, V. Valvere6,1686 P15.46A 1Department of Heath Technology, Division of Digital Importance of SLC6A4 promoter Short and Long Health and Biological Modelling, Section for Allelle in predisposition and in determining the optimal Bioinformatics, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. drug dosage in patients with majör depression Lyng, Denmark, 2Department of Oncology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3SDC (Sino- C. S. Doğan1, S. Kapici1, K. Ulucan1, M. Konuk1, Danish Center for Education and Research), Copenhagen, N. Tarhan2 Denmark 1Uskudar University, Faculty Of Engineering And Natural Introduction: In industrialized countries, testicular cancer Sciences, Department Molecular Biology And Genetics, (TC) is the most common solid tumor in men between 20- Istanbul, Turkey, 2Uskudar University, Faculty Of 40years old. Besides being one of the most treatable types Engineering And Natural Sciences, Department Of ofcancer, thelong-termside-effects ofchemotherapy,such Psychology, Istanbul, Turkey as nephrotoxicity, are worrisome, since they are largely irreversible. The standard treatment for TC is 3 cycles of Introduction: Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) is cisplatin, etoposide and bleomycin (BEP). Here, we focus synthesized in serotonergic neurons, from tryptophan. on nephrotoxicity, measured as the drop in glomerular SLC6A4isthegenethatcodesfortheserotonintransporter ﬁltration rate after chemotherapy. (5-HTT), responsible of reuptaking 5-HT. Functional Materials and Methods: Clinical patient data on 420 insertion / deletion polymorphism found in the gene individuals was collected from hospital ﬁles, and saliva promoter region (5-HTTLPR) primarily effects 5-HT samples were used for genotyping using Illumina® Huma- metabolism; short (S) allele has been reported to be nOmniExpressExome-8-v1-2-B-b37 chip (nearly 1 million associated with less transcriptional efﬁciency compared to markers). allelewithlong(L)allele.Aimofthestudyistoinvestigate Machine learning (ML) models (random forests) includ- the distribution of L and S allelles in patients with major ing clinical and genomic features were built for classifying depression. patients at risk of developing nephrotoxicity given a treat- Materials and Methods: 49 patients were enrolled for ment of BEP-cycles. the study. All patients were informed about the study pro- Results: First, only clinical features, such as age at the tocol, each patient received written approval prior to the timeoftreatment,doseofcisplatin,patient’sprognosis,and registration. Conventional PCR methodology were carried number of cycles, were considered for training the model, out for the genotyping of 44 bp S/L allelles. and relevant features were selected (based on Gini coefﬁ- Results: The numbers of the patients and their percen- cient) to use in the classiﬁer (AUC 0.66 – sensitivity 0.59, tages were 7 (14%), 26 (53%) and 16 (33%) for the geno- speciﬁcity 0.61). The classiﬁer was then re-trained by typesLL,LSandSS,respectively.Alleliccountgaveriseto addinggenomicmarkers.AnAUCof0.75(sensitivity0.66, 40 (41%) and 58 (59%) for L and S allele, respectively. speciﬁcity 0.67) was obtained through ML combination Conclusion: Determining the genotype of patients with clinical and genomic features for nephrotoxicity prediction depression is important for treatment and also for the in patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy. The appropriate dose of anti-depressant SSRIs drugs. In addi- presentation willincludethetopclinical and GWAS SNPs. tion, the L allele with normal metabolic function compared Conclusions:ThestudyproposesaMLalgorithmwhich, to the S allele of SLC6A4 is less common in depressed by helping predicting nephrotoxicity in advance, can individuals. Having knowledge about the genotype of improve treatment efﬁcacy in TC patients by allowing a SLC6A4 will encourage both individuals and clinicians to more personalized treatment to each patient. have a life style protecting against depression. But studies S. Garcia: None. J. Lauritsen: None. Z. Zhang: None. with larger cohorts are needed to fulﬁll the role of this M.D.Dalgaard:None.R.L.Nielsen:None.G.Daugaard: polymorphism on the onset of depression. None. R. Gupta: None. C.S.Doğan:None.S.Kapici:None.K.Ulucan:None. M. Konuk: None. N. Tarhan: None. P15.48C Automated classiﬁcation of ~7,000 variants shows near P15.47B perfect concordance with expert panel assessments Prediction of nephrotoxicity associated with cisplatin- based chemotherapy in testicular cancer patients J. L. Poitras, D. Richards, H. Su, T. Love, R. Yip S. Garcia1, J. Lauritsen2, Z. Zhang1,3, M. D. Dalgaard1, QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA, United States R. L. Nielsen1,3, G. Daugaard2, R. Gupta1Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1687 Introduction: Gathering the most current and accurate benchmark datasets to VariBench (http://structure.bmc.lu. information is critical to variant interpretation. The QIA- se/VariBench/) and VariSNP (http://structure.bmc.lu.se/Va GEN knowledgebase includes a manually curated database riSNP/) and performed performance assessments for of variant speciﬁc publications, and data from public and disease-causing and benign variants, and variants in proprietary databases. This resource is the cornerstone of different regions in membrane proteins. Recently we QIAGEN Clinical Insight (QCI), which facilitates auto- investigated 63,160 common amino acid substitutions matedvariantclassiﬁcationusingall28ACMGrules,while (allele frequency >1% and <25%) in ExAC database to transparently providing the underlying evidence. Here, we determine the speciﬁcity for 10 variant interpretation tools. compare the concordance of QCI’s automated variant Inadditiontooverallspeciﬁcityofthetools,wetestedtheir classiﬁcationwith expert panel assessmentsacrossmultiple performance for variants in six geographical populations. disease indications. PON-P2 had the best performance followed by FATHMM Materials and Methods: Expert panel (ENIGMA) andVEST.Whilethesetoolshadexcellentperformance,the reviewed BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants (n=6154), and var- poorestmethodpredictedmorethanonethirdofthebenign iants reviewed by the ClinGen Inherited Cardiomyopathy variants to be disease-causing. The results allow choosing Expert Panel (n=102) were exported from ClinVar. reliable methods for benign variant interpretation, for both Resulting VCFs were uploaded into QCI, and concordance research and clinical purposes, as well as provide a of automated classiﬁcations was compared with expert benchmark for method developers. We have developed panel assessments in ClinVar. tools also for the mechanisms of variants including protein Results: With respect to clinical actionability, automated stability, solubility, steric clashes, disorder etc. Financial variant classiﬁcations were extremely concordant, reaching support: Swedish Research Council References: Niroula, 99.6% concordance with ENIGMA assessments of BRCA A.and Vihinen,M. Howgood arepathogenicitypredictors variants, and 96.1% concordance with cardiomyopathy indetectingbenignvariants?PLoSComput.Biol.(inpress). variants assessed by the ClinGen expert panel. The small Orioli, T. and Vihinen, M. Benchmarking membrane number of differences seen in the ENIGMA dataset could proteins: Subcellular localization and variant tolerance be attributed to functional studies used by the automated predictors. (revised). algorithm not considered by the expert panel. The 3.9% of A. Niroula: None. T. Orioli: None. M. Vihinen: None. discrepant classiﬁcations in the cardiomyopathy set likely result from differences in clinical case curation. Conclusions: Through updated content, and continued P16 alignment with professional guidelines, automated variant Omics - Bioinformatics classiﬁcationinQCIdemonstratesextremelyhigh accuracy across multiple disease contexts. This level of accuracy P16.01A speaks to the quality of the clinical, functional, and popu- Opioid, dopamine, and GABA receptor addiction and lation level data curation, as well as the robustness of the mentalhealthenrichedgenomicareasco-locatedwith16 underlying ACMG classiﬁcation algorithm. cancer, immunityandParkinson’sdiseasedrugbinding J.L.Poitras:None.D.Richards:None.H.Su:None.T. sites Love: None. R. Yip: None. L. Jackson P15.49D How good are variant pathogenicity predictors? Howard University, Washington, DC, United States A. Niroula, T. Orioli, M. Vihinen The adverse impact of opiate, dopamine, and alcohol addiction on human populations is well known and Lund University, Lund, Sweden exacerbated by mental health co-morbidities including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and depression. These Computational tools are widely used for interpreting disorders have deep genomic roots that modulate disease variants detected in sequencing projects. The choice of severity, duration, and potential therapeutic outcomes. Our these tools is critical for reliable variant impact interpreta- previous work demonstrates that using an in silico tion for precision medicine and should be based on functional genomics and evolutionary biology framework systematic performance assessment. The performance of can identify functionally relevant enriched genomic hot- the methods varies widely in different performance spots and variants with import for opioid, dopamine and assessments, for example due to the contents and sizes of alcoholaddictioncomplexpolygenictraits.Thisstudyseeks test datasets. To address this issue, we have collected toextendthisapproachtodetermineitsutilityinidentifying1688 pharmacogenomics therapeutic targets at addiction and age, as well as 529 genes with outlying individual mentalhealthhotspots.Toevaluatewhethertheintersection trajectories. Further, 7.8% and 9.6% of tested genes show of NCBI curated genes identiﬁed as participating in a reduction in genetic associations with expression and addiction phenotypes along with schizophrenia, bipolar splicinginolderage,withimpactedgenesenrichedinDNA disorder and depression (N=1968 genes), genes lists were repair pathways. In addition, we observed a high genetic projected onto the human genome to ﬁnd eight areas of correlation between ages (ρ = 0.96). In contrast, overall G addictionandmentalhealthgenesetenrichment.Functional allelicimbalancewithinanindividualincreaseswithageby annotations were conducted for core phenotype functions. 2.69%. These ﬁndings demonstrate that, although the Finally, drug binding annotations were conducted to transcriptome and its genetic regulation is mostly stable determine whether the binding sites sitting in these late in life, a small subset of genes is dynamic and is addiction and mental health hotspots were related to the characterizedbyreductioningeneticregulation.Thestrong functional or gene set enrichment. We found that 16 correlation of genetic effects and the increase in allelic pharmacogenomicdrugbindingsiteswereidentiﬁedinthis imbalance with age demonstrates that increasing environ- analysis which broadly fell into four categories: cancer, mental variance, as opposed to decreased genetic variance, addiction, immunity and mental health related drug effects. underlies the reduction in genetic regulation with age. The cancer drug target all had addiction, loss of immune B. Balliu: None. M. Durrant: None. O. de Goede: robustness, and anxiety as their side effects. These ﬁndings None. N. Abell: None. X. Li: None. B. Liu: None. M. suggest that this in silico approach can potentially inform Gloudemans: None.N.Cook: None.K.Smith:None.M. drug target effects and may be useful in informing novel Pala: None. F. Cucca: None. D. Schlessinger: None. S. and drug-repurposing pipelines. Jaiswal: None. C. Sabatti: None. L. Lind: None. E. L. Jackson: None. Ingelsson: None. S.B. Montgomery: None. P16.02B P16.05A Genetic dysregulation of gene expression and splicing CRISPY: a PYthon module for the analysis of gene during a ten-year period of human aging editing experiments by CRISPR B. Balliu1, M. Durrant2, O. de Goede2, N. Abell2, X. Li2, E. Benetti1, S. Croci2, S. Daga2, R. Tita3, A. Giliberti2, B. Liu2, M. Gloudemans2, N. Cook3, K. Smith2, M. Pala4, C. Fallerini2, I. Meloni2, A. Renieri2,3, S. Furini1 F. Cucca4, D. Schlessinger5, S. Jaiswal2, C. Sabatti2, L. Lind6, E. Ingelsson2, S. B. Montgomery2 1Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics 1Department of Biomathematics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, Laboratory, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy, United States, 2Stanford University School of Medicine, 3Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Palo Alto, CA, United States, 3Department of Medical Senese, Siena, Italy, Siena, Italy Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 5National Institute on Dedicated bioinformatic tools are essential to evaluate the Aging, Bethesda, MD, United States, 6Uppsala University, accuracy of CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing. Most of the web- Uppsala, Sweden based algorithms, such as Cas-Analyzer, focus on the frequency of correction rather than providing a detailed Molecular and cellular changes are intrinsic to aging and outcome of the experiment. On the other hand, command age-related diseases. Prior cross-sectional studies have line tools usually provide more details, but they are not investigated the combined effects of age and genetics on easily accessible to researchers that are not experts in geneexpressionandalternativesplicing;however,therehas bioinformatics. Inorder tocombinedetailed outcomes with been no long-term, longitudinal characterization of these easy-to-use, we implemented a self-contained python molecular changes, especially in older age. We performed module with a graphical user interface for the analysis of RNA sequencing in whole-blood from 65 healthy partici- gene editing experiments. CRISPY ﬁrst performs the pantsfromtheProspectiveInvestigationofUppsalaSeniors alignment against the reference genome starting from raw study at both age 70 and 80, a period of the aging process NGS reads, and then it considers all the experimental characterizedbyhighmorbidityandmortality.Weobserved sequences overlapping the region of interest, regardless of that 93% of individuals are more similar to their own theirlengths,withoutanysortofﬁltering.CRISPYassesses expression proﬁles later in life than proﬁles of other the editing accuracy by determining the amount of individuals their own age. We identiﬁed 1,291 and 294 successfully edited sequences in the treated samples with genesdifferentiallyexpressedandalternativelysplicedwith respecttothecontrolexperiment,classifyingaseditedonlyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1689 the identical sequences without mutations, therefore consensus method classiﬁed 59/98 as pathogenic and 7/98 indicating the true rate of Homology Directed Repair. It is as likely pathogenic, a result identical to the reference able not only to evaluate the rate of Non Homologous End classiﬁcation. Variant classiﬁcations were found to be Joining,bycomputingtheindelfrequencybutalsotoassess accurately associated to the corresponding hereditary the complessive biological efﬁcacy counting separately disease. Further reﬁnement of the methodology in close synonymous and nonsynonymous substitutions induced in collaboration with laboratory partners is in progress. the range of interest. From a clinical point of view, edited J. El Hokayem*: A. Employment (full or part-time); alleles containing unsolicited synonymous substitutions Modest; Molecular Health. U. Schmidt-Edelkraut*: A. contribute positively to the correction and it may be worth Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health. to be identiﬁed and counted. In conclusion, CRISPY is a A. Werner: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; PYthon based, easy-to-use but rafﬁnate tool for accurate Molecular Health. M. März: A. Employment (full or part- analysis of CRISPR induced gene editing. time); Modest; Molecular Health. X. Wang: A. Employ- E. Benetti: None. S. Croci: None. S. Daga: None. R. ment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health. S. Tita: None. A. Giliberti: None. C. Fallerini: None. I. Hettich: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Meloni: None. A. Renieri: None. S. Furini: None. Molecular Health. S. Brock: A. Employment (full or part- time); Modest; Molecular Health. C. Hülsewig: A. P16.06B Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health. Germline variants classiﬁcation using bioinformatic K. Stecker: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; tools fornextgenerationsequencing-basedclassiﬁcation Molecular Health. M. Hartenfeller: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health. J. Hermanns: A. J. El Hokayem*, U. Schmidt-Edelkraut*, A. Werner, Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Molecular Health. M. März, X. Wang, S. Hettich, S. Brock, C. Hülsewig, K. Stecker, M. Hartenfeller, J. Hermanns P16.07C Deciphering exome sequencing data: bringing Molecular Health, Heidelberg, Germany mitochondrial DNA variants to light Currently, genetic medicine is increasing in complexity, P. Garret1,2,3, C. Bris4,5, V. Procaccio4,5, P. Bonneau4,5, mainly due to the clinical implementation of next- P. Vabres1,6,7, N. Houcinat1,8,9, E. Tisserant1,2, generation sequencing (NGS). Genetic variants can be F. Feillet10,11,12, A. Bruel1,2, V. Quéré1,6, C. Philippe1,2, associated with unknown and/or complex phenotypes. A. Sorlin1,6,8, F. Tran Mau-Them1,2, A. Vitobello1,2, Missense variants regularly tend to be classiﬁed as variants J. Costa3, A. Boughalem3, D. Trost3, L. Faivre1,8,13, of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS) leading to inconclusive C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2,9, Y. Duffourd1,2 diagnostic ﬁndings. To meet the challenge of variant classiﬁcation, we developed two bioinformatic tools: one 1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm – Université Bourgogne-Franche supporting BRCA1/2 variants classiﬁcation and one Comté, Dijon, France, 2Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en supportingtheclassiﬁcationofvariantsfoundinMendelian Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU- disorders. The variant interpretation relies on two indepen- TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, dent classiﬁcation methods: Consensus and ACMG classi- 3Laboratoire CERBA, Saint-Ouen l’Aumône, France, ﬁcation based on public and proprietary data sources. To 4Institut MITOVASC, UMR CNRS 6015-INSERM1083, pre-validate the classiﬁcation methods, we compared our Université d'Angers, Angers, France, 5Centre de Référence BRCA tool results with classiﬁcations provided by three maladies mitochondriales, CHU Angers, Angers, France, published Japanese hereditary breast and ovarian cancer 6Centre de Référence maladies rares « maladies studies. The results of the automated, ACMG-guided dermatologiques en mosaïque », service de dermatologie, conservative interpretation of BRCA1/2 variants are FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, comparable to the referenced clinical classiﬁcation of 7Service Dermatologie, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, pathogenicity. Of 108 pathogenic variants, BRCA tool France, 8Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies classiﬁed 80 as pathogenic, 26 as likely pathogenic, and 2 du développement et syndromes malformatifs », centre de as VUS. Whereas 11/26 benign variants were classiﬁed as génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, VUS, a discrepancy due to lack of public population- Dijon, France, 9Centre de Référence maladies rares « frequency and patient-family history data. For the Mende- déﬁcience intellectuelle », centre de génétique, FHU- lian tool, we compared the consensus classiﬁcation with a TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, study, in which 98 germline variants spread over 95 genes 10Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital d'Enfants Brabois, CHRU with a large phenotypic spectrum were classiﬁed. The Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 11UMRS 12561690 NGERE, Inserm – Université de Lorraine – CHRU Nancy, support childhood cancer and structural birth defect Nancy, France, 12Centre de Références des maladies research héréditaires du métabolisme, CHRU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 13Centre de compétences des maladies Y. Guo1, A. P. Heath1, P. Raman1, Y. Zhu1, J. Lilly1, mitochondriales, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France D. M. Taylor1,2, P. B. Storm1,2, A. J. Waanders1,2, V. Ferretti3,4, M. Mattioni5, B. Davis-Dusenbery5, Introduction:MitochondrialDNA(mtDNA)mutationsare Z. L. Flamig6, R. L. Grossman6, S. L. Volchenboum6, responsible of various phenotypes, causing partial or S. Mueller7, J. Nazarian8, N.Vasilevsky9, M. Haendel9,10, entirely unexplained phenotypes concerning one or several A. Resnick1,2 organs. When suspected, mtDNA variants identiﬁcation requires targeted strategies on affected tissues. The 1Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Phiadelphia, PA, expanding use of exome sequencing (ES) in diagnosis United States, 2University of Pennsylvania, Phiadelphia, generates a huge amount of data, including untargeted PA, United States, 3Ontario Institute of Cancer Research, mtDNA sequences. We thus developed a bioinformatics Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Centre Hospitalier Universitaire pipelineonESdatainordertodetectmitochondrialvariants Sainte-Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Seven Bridges inparallelwiththeroutinelyused“in-house”nuclearexome Genomics, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6The University pipeline, in particular in patients with no initial clinical of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 7University of suspicion of mitochondrial disorders. California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United Methodology: Mitochondrial DNA data coming from States, 8Children's National Medical Center, Washington, off-target sequences (indirect sequencing) were extracted DC, United States, 9Oregon Health & Science University, from the BAM ﬁles in 928 individuals with developmental Portland, OR, United States, 10Oregon State University, (90%)and/orneurologicalanomalies(10%).Aftermerging, Corvallis, OR, United States the variants were ﬁltered out based on database presence, cohort frequencies, haplogroups and protein consequences. Introduction: Childhood cancers and structural birth In parallel, some patients with previously identiﬁed mito- defects present a huge burden to families as well as the chondrial variants were sequenced and tested as positive healthcare system. These diseases share a common context controls. of altered developmental biology, but the potential role of Results: Two homoplasmic pathogenic variants genetic alterations and/or pathways across them remains to (m.9035T>C and m.11778G>A) were identiﬁed in 2/928 be investigated. unrelated individuals (0.2%): the m.9035T>C (MT-ATP6) Materials and Methods: The NIH Common Fund variant in a female with ataxia and the m.11778G>A (MT- Gabriella Miller Kids First Program represents a national ND4)variantinamalewithacomplexmosaicdisorderand collaborative initiative focused on large-scale genomic and an unusual severe ophthalmological phenotype, uncovering clinical data sharing for childhood cancers and structural undiagnosed Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON). birth defects. As part of this program, the Kids First Data Seven secondary ﬁndings were also found, predisposing to Resource Center (DRC) is charged with empowering col- deafness or LHON, in 7/928 individuals (0.75%). laborative discovery across Kids First datasets. Through Conclusion: This study demonstrates the usefulness of newly developed platforms and cloud-based resources, including a targeted analysis strategy in ES pipeline to researchers are able to access standardized genomic and detect mtDNA variants, improving results in diagnosis and clinical data in a timely fashion. research, without resampling patients and performing tar- Results: Nearly 30,000 genomic and phenotypic ﬁles geted mtDNA strategies. generated for over 9,100 individuals from ~1,700 families P.Garret:None.C.Bris:None.V.Procaccio:None.P. are available now at DRC portal, making DRC one of the Bonneau:None.P.Vabres:None.N.Houcinat:None.E. largest pediatric data resources across a wide range of dis- Tisserant: None. F. Feillet: None. A. Bruel: None. V. eases. Cloud-based computing has greatly facilitated large- Quéré: None. C. Philippe: None. A. Sorlin: None. F. scale genomic harmonization and DRC is capable of run- Tran Mau-Them: None. A. Vitobello: None. J. Costa: ning 200 workﬂows simultaneously with considerable None. A. Boughalem: None. D. Trost: None. L. Faivre: scalability on demand. Additionally, there is a strong focus None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. Y. Duffourd: None. on harmonizing and structuring clinical data to make them more interoperable, discoverable and reusable by using P16.08D ontologies such as Human Phenotype Ontology. Gabriella Miller Kids First Data Resource Center: Conclusions: The combination of harmonized genomic Harmonizing genomic and clinical information to andclinicaldataacrosspediatriccancersandstructuralbirth defects provides a key foundation for exploring andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1691 developing new methods to better understand the relation- phagesequencesintheNIPTdatawhichareusuallymarked shipsbetweengermlinevariants,cancerrisk,andassociated as useless in common NIPT analyses. treatments and outcomes. D. Smoľak: None. J. Budiš: A. Employment (full or Y.Guo: None. A.P.Heath: None. P. Raman: None.Y. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton, Ltd.. M. Böhmer: None. Zhu: None. J. Lilly: None. D.M. Taylor: None. P.B. M. Haršányová: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Storm: None. A.J. Waanders: None. V. Ferretti: None. niﬁcant; Geneton, Ltd. M. Kajsík: B. Research Grant M. Mattioni: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and niﬁcant; Seven Bridges Genomics. B. Davis-Dusenbery: pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Seven Science Park, Comenius University Science Park, Bra- Bridges Genomics. Z.L. Flamig: None. R.L. Grossman: tislava, Slovakia. J. Turňa: None. T. Szemes: A. None. S.L. Volchenboum: None. S. Mueller: None. J. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton, Ltd.. Nazarian: None. N. Vasilevsky: None. M. Haendel: None. A. Resnick: None. P16.10B Sensitive detection of low allele fraction structural P16.09A variants in clinical cancer samples Identiﬁcation of bacteriophage-related sequences in carcinoma patients and NIPT data of pregnant women E.T.Lam1,A.W.C.Pang1,T.Anantharaman1,J.Wang1, J.Velazquez-Muriel1,T.Wang1,D.Zhang1,R.Massoud1, D. Smoľak1, J. Budiš2, M. Böhmer1, M. Haršányová1, S. Way1, A. R. Hastie1, M. Borodkin1, Y. Delpu2 M. Kajsík1, J. Turňa1, T. Szemes1 1Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States, 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University in 2BioNano Genomics, San Diego, CA, United States Bratislava,Bratislava,Slovakia,2Geneton,Ltd.,Bratislava, Slovakia Tumors are often comprised of heterogeneous populations of cells, with certain cancer-driving mutations at low allele Introduction: NIPT is ranked among most widespread fractions in early stages of cancer development. Effective genomictestinthewholeworldwithapprox.4milliontests detection of such variants is critical for diagnosis and carried out in 2017. On the other hand, bacteriophages are targeted treatment. However, typical short sequence reads the most widespread entities in the biosphere. In our are limited in their ability to span across repetitive regions previous work we tried to ﬁnd out phage-related sequences of the genome and to facilitate structural variant (SV) in standard NIPT data with 2x35bp sequence reads. Such analysis. Based on speciﬁc labeling and mapping of ultra- NIPTdatahasbeenshowninefﬁcientforacontigassembly high molecular weight (UHMW) DNA, we developed a or blast. In this study, we mined phage sequence from single-molecule platform that has the potential to detect genomic data of carcinoma patients and longer unmapped disease-relevant SVs and give a high-resolution view of NIPT reads of average length 2x100bp. tumor heterogeneity. MaterialsandMethods:WesequencedtotalDNAfrom We have developed a pipeline that effectively detects plasma of healthy people. We assessed presence of phage- structural variants at low allele fractions. It includes single- relatedsequencesbydifferentbioinformaticapproaches.At molecule based SV calling and fractional copy number ﬁrst, we removed human sequences by mapping to hg38, analysis. Preliminary analyses using simulated data and then we used tools based on k-mers identiﬁcation, contig well-characterized cancer samples showed high sensitivity mapping and gene-centric approaches, those utilizing our for variants of different types at as low as 5% allele frac- customphagedatabase.Samemethodswereusedtoanalyze tions with reasonable genomic coverage easily collectable blood samples from patients with solid tumor. ona Bionano SaphyrChip. Thecandidatevariants arethen Results: We detected the presence of phage-related annotated and further prioritized based on control data and sequences and assessed disparities of aforementioned sets publicallyavailableannotations.Thedataareimportedinto ofsamples.Forinstance,weidentiﬁedsequencesbelonging a graphical user interface tool that includes new visualiza- to Proteus phage, Escherichia phage PhiX174, Campylo- tion features (such as Circos diagrams) for interactive bacter phage B14. visualizationandcuration.Thestreamlinedpipelineisfully Conclusions: NIPT data are like mines, containing compatible with the new Direct Label and Stain (DLS) unbounded amount of unrevealed informations. Various chemistry. Together, these components allow for efﬁcient bioinformaticapproachescanbeusedlikemattocktoobtain analysis of any cancer genome of interest. additional results. Our results demonstrate the detection of E.T. Lam: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- niﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. A.W.C. Pang: A.1692 Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano 2) how gene expression changes driven by genetic Genomics. T. Anantharaman: A. Employment (full or variabilitytranslatetoalterationsinimmunologicalsynapse part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. J. Wang: A. regulatory network. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano We developed a computational method that infers gene Genomics. J. Velazquez-Muriel: A. Employment (full or interaction networks from expression proﬁles in large part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. T. Wang: A. cohorts of patients using unsupervised Bayesian machine Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano learningmodel.Ourmethodalsoreducesthedimensionality Genomics. D. Zhang: A. Employment (full or part-time); ofdataproducingfactors,thatrepresentdifferencesbetween Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. R. Massoud: A. Employ- cancer sub-types and individual patients. ment (full or part-time); Modest; Bionano Genomics. S. Inthisstudywecompareregulatorynetworksinsubtypes Way: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bio- of kidney carcinomas: clear cell adenocarcinoma, papillary nanoGenomics.A.R.Hastie:A.Employment(fullorpart- adenocarcinoma, and renal cell carcinoma. We found sig- time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomics. M. Borodkin: A. niﬁcantdifferencesbetweensubtypes,withsomekeynodes Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano of network being not expressed, while others being sig- Genomics. Y. Delpu: None. niﬁcantly up-regulated. These type-speciﬁc alterations of immunological synapse gene network may explain difﬁ- P16.11C culties in developing successful checkpoint inhibitors Bioinformatics approach to ﬁnding new drug targets in immunotherapy in kidney carcinomas. It also indicates that immunological synapse using gene expression as different subtypes may require targeting different check- biomarkers and unsupervised machine learning - a point proteins to facilitate an effective therapy. comparative study of immune response regulatory P. Stempor: None. P. Dobosz: None. networks in subtypes of kidney carcinoma P16.12D P. Stempor1,2, P. Dobosz3,4,5 Deciphering complex genomic rearrangements by traveling through 3rd generation sequencing in rare 1The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, diseases: two chromothripsis cases Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, S. verdez1,2,3, Y. Duffourd1,4, E. Tisserant1,4, N. Marle3, 3Cancer Research Centre, Oncology Department, Sheba A. Bruel1,4, F. Tran Mau-Them1,4,5, C. Philippe1,4,3, Medical Centre Hospital, Ramat Gan, Israel, 4Oncology C. Thauvin-Robinet1,4,5,6, L. Faivre1,4,5,6, N. Chatron7,8,9, Department, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv C. Schluth-Bolard7,8,9, P. Callier1,4,5,3, S. Damien7,8,9, University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 5School of Clinical Medicine, A. Vitobello1,4 University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom 1UF Innovation en diagnostic génomique des maladies Cancer immunotherapy, which utilizes immune system to rares,Dijon,France,2UMR1231GAD,Inserm–University selectively destroy cancer cells, becomes a safer and more of Burgundy-Franche Comté, Dijon, France, 3Genetics effective alternative for cancer patients’ treatment than department, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Unité traditional approaches. However, success rate is low: many Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des patients do not respond to treatment, whereas others suffer maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD,Dijon University from adverse effects. Hospital, Dijon, France, 5UF Innovation en diagnostic The immune response is mediated by immunological génomiquedesmaladiesrares,CHUDijon,Dijon,France, synapse – an interface between lymphocytes and antigen 6Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du presenting cells, which consists of co-inhibitory and co- développement et syndromes malformatifs », centre de stimulatorycheckpointproteins.Understandinginteractions génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital, withinimmunologicalsynapseiscrucialforbetterdesignof Dijon, France, 7Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de clinical trials and will provide better diagnostics and Génétique, Lyon, France, 8Equipe GENDEV INSERM therapeutics. U1028, CNRS, UMR5292, Lyon, France, 9Université de In our research we aim to improve cancer immu- Lyon, Lyon, France notherapies potential by understanding: 1) the complex regulatory network in immunological Background: Genome sequencing (GS) is rapidly becom- synapse that modulates the response; ingthestandardapproachtoidentifythemolecularcauseof rareMendeliangeneticdisorders,allowingthesimultaneous analysisofsinglenucleotideandstructuralgenomicvariantsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1693 (SV).However,technicallimitationsareassociatedwiththe identiﬁed new suggestive signals in speciﬁc genes. How- use of short reads (srGS) in the detection of SV, especially ever, risk to complex disorders may also be driven by in case of breaking points involving repetitive elements. multiple hits in a common pathway, or the scenario where Hence, long read sequencing (lrGS) represents a promising many genes can cause the same disease thereby making it tool expected to overcome this problem. difﬁcult tosigniﬁcantly detect individual genes in currently Method: We deployed 30X srGS and 20X SMRT available cohort sizes. sequencing (Paciﬁc Biosciences) to evaluate the utility of Wepresentheretheapplicationof“mega-gene”asanew lrGS to resolve complex SV in 2 patients with syndromic analytical approach to identify biologically relevant gene- intellectual disability and carrying respectively more than sets involved in disease. We achieve this by comparing the 30 and 70 chromosomal rearrangements (chromotripsis). caseandcontrolratesofgenesinagivengene-setthatcarry Results: Using 10 in silico generated datasets containing rareanddeleterious-predictedvariants.Thetestedgene-sets known SV, were tested a combination of 6 mapping tools include 10,161 from published databases such as KEGG, (blasr, bwa, nglmr, Lorfast, pbmm2, minimap2) and 3 SV Reactome, Gene Ontology and others. Applying the novel callers (PBhoney, snifﬂes, pbsv) to identify the out- approach to a cohort of individuals who were diagnosed performing pipeline. We then applied our pipeline to the 2 with chronic kidney disease and recruited into an Astra- chromothripsis and, using SV length and population fre- Zeneca clinical trial, we ﬁnd several gene-sets achieving a quencyinformationavailablefrompubliclydata,weﬁltered falsediscoveryrate(FDR) adjusted p-value<0.01.Further out common variants. Retained breakpoints were indepen- investigation is required to determine if and how the gene- dently validated by PCR, Sanger sequencing and/or FISH. sets,andtheunderlyingindividualgenes,mightberelevant Next, we tested 3 assembling tools (Falcon, Canu and to disease. This demonstrates an example of an ontology-, wtdbg2) to perform de novo derivative chromosome network- and pathway-centric approach to explore the reconstruction. Using outperforming parameters, we genetic architecture of heterogeneous genetic disorders. obtained 10238 contigs with a N50 at 13 Kb and a max- S.R. Cameron-Christie: A. Employment (full or part- imum contig length of 11Mb. time); Signiﬁcant; Astrazeneca. J. Fleckner: A. Employ- Conclusions: Overall the combination of srGS and lrGS ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Novo Nordisk. R.E. permitted to resolve, complex chromosomal breakpoints March: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; and to reconstruct the phasing of structural variations, not Astrazeneca. A. Platt: A. Employment (full or part-time); otherwise achievable by srGS alone. Signiﬁcant; Astrazeneca. C. Haeﬂiger: A. Employment S. verdez: None. Y. Duffourd: None. E. Tisserant: (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Astrazeneca. S. Petrovski: None. N. Marle: None. A. Bruel: None. F. Tran Mau- A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Astrazeneca. Them: None. C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. Faivre: None. N. Chatron: None. C. Schluth- P16.14B Bolard: None. P. Callier: None. S. Damien: None. A. mantis-ml: Disease agnostic gene prioritisation with Vitobello: None. automated machine learning P16.13A D. Vitsios, S. Petrovski Gene-set burden analysis detects novel signals in whole exome sequencing of a chronic kidney disease cohort AstraZeneca - Centre for Genomics Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom S. R. Cameron-Christie1, J. Fleckner2, R. E. March1, A. Platt1, C. Haeﬂiger1, S. Petrovski1 Facedwiththepetabytesofgenomicdatageneratedthrough our Genomics Initiative towards our ambition of analysing 1Centre for Genomics Research, Precision Medicine and up to two million genomes, we have implemented novel Genomics, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, multi-dimensional,multi-stepmachinelearningframeworks United Kingdom, 2Novo Nordisk, Copenhagen, Denmark toholisticallyand objectivelyassesstherelevanceofgenes across multiple therapeutic areas. Instead of laboriously Exome and genome sequencing of large disease cohorts triaging highly-ranked possible targets from high- allows researchers to investigate the role of rare variants in throughput genome-wide screens, we can now draw on complex, heterogeneous disorders, providing new under- Artiﬁcial Intelligence to cut the inevitable subjectivity out standing of disease and potentially identifying novel drug of conclusions from manual literature review of multiple targets.Usinggene-basedcollapsinganalysisofindividuals data sources. We sought to address this by exploring a sequencedthroughtheAstraZenecaMedimmuneGenomics plethora of gene-associated annotations (including HPO, Initiative,wepreviouslyvalidatedknowndiseasegenesand ExAC, GTEx, model-organism phenotypes and genic-1694 intolerance scores) to identify hidden patterns among analysis, aimed at correlating the genotypes of MS- disease-associatedgenesandpredictnovelgenesofinterest. associated variants with the expression levels of cir- We developed mantis-ml, an automated machine learning cRNAs, was performed using the FastQTL tool. (AutoML) framework, which employs Extremely Rando- Results: We detected 5,663 circRNAs, uniformly dis- mised Trees and Positive-Unlabelled learning to rank tributed on all chromosomes. The expression analysis knownandnoveldisease-associatedgenesthroughiterative revealed 166 differentially expressed circRNAs in MS training and prediction sessions on random balanced patients (P<0.05), 125 of which are downregulated. Nota- datasets across the entire gene set (n=18,225). We applied bly,thedysregulationofoneofthetophitshasalreadybeen thisframeworkontwomajordiseasecategories: cardiovas- conﬁrmedinanindependentcase-controlcohort.Moreover, cular and chronic kidney disease. mantis-ml successfully the eQTL analysis evidenced a signiﬁcant association ranked well-established disease-associated genes in the top between 58 MS loci and the expression of at least one 0.01-0.1% of all genes associated with each disease, circRNA. respectively, and achieved an average AUC performance Conclusions: This work established for the ﬁrst time a of 0.82-0.83. Notably, the most highly ranked novel genes complete proﬁle of circRNA expression in MS, suggesting werefoundtobeenrichedforcharacteristicsrelevanttothe that MS-associated variants may inﬂuence the expression respective disease, based on expression and pathway levels of circRNAs, acting as “circ-eQTLs”. analysis using the ‘Ingenuity Pathway Analysis’ tool. G. Cardamone: None. E.M. Paraboschi: None. G. Coupledwithhigh-throughputgenomicscreens,webelieve Liberatore: None. G. Soldà: None. C. Cantoni: None. F. that mantis-ml will enhance our understanding of complex Gallia:None.L.Piccio:None.E.NobileOrazio:None.S. disease genotype-phenotype associations, accelerating the Duga: None. R. Asselta: None. path to successful target identiﬁcation and validation. D. Vitsios: None. S. Petrovski: None. P16.16D A multi-site comparison of copy number variant callers P16.15C for germline next generation sequencing using targeted Deﬁning the landscape of circular RNAs in multiple capture sclerosis S. G. Piatek1,2, A. C. Davies2, P. Lombard1, H. Ahlfors1, G. Cardamone1, E. M. Paraboschi1, G. Liberatore2, L. Jenkins1 G. Soldà1,2, C. Cantoni3, F. Gallia2, L. Piccio3, E. Nobile Orazio2,4, S. Duga1,2, R. Asselta1,2 1North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, London, United Kingdom, 2The University of Manchester, 1Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, Milan, Italy, Manchester, United Kingdom 2HumanitasClinicalandResearchCenter,Rozzano,Milan, Italy,3WashingtonUniversitySchoolofMedicine,StLouis, Introduction: Using targeted Next Generation Sequencing MO, United States, 4University of Milan, Milan, Italy (NGS) to detect Copy Number Variants (CNVs) would allow for increased throughput and decreased costs in Introduction: Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a new class clinical genetics; however, this is challenging with small ofnon-codingRNAsthatareemergingasimportantplayers CNVs (affecting one or few exons). To date, a wide in the pathogenesis and progression of autoimmune and comparisonofCNV-callershasbeenlimitedbythepaucity neurological diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS). We of samples with known small CNVs. Here we carry out a previouslydemonstratedanenrichmentofcircRNAsatMS comprehensive comparison of CNV callers. genome-wide associated loci as well as a genotype- Materials and Methods: CNV-caller scripts and docker dependent regulation of a circRNA derived from the MS- containerswerecreatedtocarryoutaconsistentanalysisof associated STAT3 gene. Here, we aimed at exploring the data. These have been shared with 5 NHS genetics global proﬁle of circRNA expression in MS patients and laboratories, using local NGS-data with a known CNV- evaluating a possible correlation with their genetic status.Theﬁnaldatawillbepooled,with200CNV-positive background. samples expected. Preliminary analysis was done using the Materials and Methods: We performed RNA-seq ICR96 exon validation series dataset (with known CNV- experiments on RNAse R-treated RNAs, extracted from status). peripheral blood mononuclear cells of 10 MS patients and Results: In the preliminary results (Table 1) DECoN 10 matched healthy controls. The same patients/controls performed best, though there is little difference in the 95% were genotyped using the Inﬁnium HumanCore-24 v1.1 conﬁdence intervals between DECoN, ExomeDepth and BeadChip. An expression quantitative-trait loci (eQTL)Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1695 GATK. Canvas and WISExome were also tested but were version of another tool, reproducing data analyses in other not applicable for targeted NGS. computational clusters is often too troublesome. Table 1: Preliminary results using the ICR96 Exon Results: We propose a framework together with an Validation Series data implemented set of computational pipelines, called Snake- Lines, for processing of paired-end Illumina reads, includ- Caller(version) NumberofCNVs Sensitivity(95%conﬁdence detected interval) ing mapping, assembly, variant calling, viral identiﬁcation, transcriptomics, metagenomics, and methylation analysis. CNVkit(0.9.5) 11 0.20(0.11-0.34) Our framework implements a self-created virtual environ- CopywriteR 31 0.57(0.43-0.70) ment that contains required tools and libraries and isolates (2.14.1) them from host operating system, thus ensuring easy port- DECoN(1.0.2) 52 096(0.86-0.99) ability and reproducibility across different Unix-based EXCAVATOR2 0 0(0-0.08) systems. (1.1.2) Availability: The open-source code of the pipelines, ExomeDepth 51 0.94(0.84-0.99) together with test data, is freely available for non- (1.1.10) commercial use from https://github.com/jbudis/snakelines. GATKgCNV 51 0.94(0.84-0.99) (4.1.0.0) The presented work was supported by the APVV - XHMM(1.0) 4 0.07(0.02-0.19) “Slovak Research and Development Agency” projects APVV-16-0264 (50%) and APVV-15-0232 (50%). W. Krampl: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Conclusions:Acomprehensiveanalysisisunderwayand niﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. J. Budiš: A. Employment (full or will give a high-conﬁdence comparison of CNV-callers. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. M. Kucharík: A. These results will identify the most suitable CNV-caller in Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. R. clinical genetics. Hekel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; S.G. Piatek: None. A.C. Davies: None. P. Lombard: Geneton Ltd. M. Lichvár: A. Employment (full or part- None. H. Ahlfors: None. L. Jenkins: None. time); Signiﬁcant; Geneton Ltd. D. Smoľak: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd.. M. P16.17A Böhmer: None. A. Baláž: A. Employment (full or part- SnakeLines: integrated set of computational pipelines time);Modest;GenetonLtd.F.Ďuriš:A.Employment(full for paired-end sequencing reads or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. J. Gazdarica: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd.. K. W. Krampl1, J. Budiš1,2,3, M. Kucharík1, R. Hekel1,2,4, Šoltys: None. J. Turňa: None. J. Radvánszky: A. M. Lichvár1, D. Smoľak1,4, M. Böhmer4, A. Baláž1, Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Geneton Ltd. T. F. Ďuriš1,2, J. Gazdarica1,2,4, K. Šoltys4,3, J. Turňa2,4,3, Szemes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; J. Radvánszky1,5, T. Szemes1,4,3 Geneton Ltd.. 1Geneton Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Slovak Centre of P16.18B Scientiﬁc and Technical Information, Bratislava, Slovakia, Intraspeciﬁc tolerance of nonsynonymous variation is 3Comenius University Science Park, Bratislava, Slovakia, closely correlated between human and mouse 4Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural orthologues Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Institute of Clinical and Translational Research, G.Powell1,S.Pulit1,A.Mallon2,M.Simon2,C.Lindgren1 Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia 1Big Data Institute, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2MRC Harwell Institute, Mammalian Genetics Unit, Harwell, Introduction: Development of sequencing technologies United Kingdom with massive parallel throughput allowed laboratories around the world to analyze DNA fragments of various Genic constraint describes how tolerant a gene is to organisms.However,actualuseofDNAsequencingdatais nonsynonymous variation before it is removed from the impeded by two main obstructs. Firstly, DNA data population by negative selection. The recent abundance of processing and interpretation is often difﬁcult for research- sequence data has enabled the development of multiple ers and clinicians with small computational background. metrics to evaluate gene constraint in human populations, Secondly, due to the complexity of an available bioinfor- andsucheffortshavediscoveredanenrichmentfordisease- matic software, where one tool is dependent on speciﬁc associated genes amongst those genes that are most1696 constrained. Notably, genic constraint has not been for neuromuscular disorders. A logarithmic regression estimated for mouse, which is the most widely utilised modelwastrainedforpredictingtruepositiveCNVsamong mammalian model organism for biomedical research. As a variant detections from these samples. This model was result, the relationship between gene constraint in human validated with negative (N=30) and positive (N=52) con- and mouse orthologues remains poorly understood. Here, trol samples with real CNVs. we calculate constraint scores for mouse genes and show Results: CNV features, such as state or size, did not constraint is positively correlated between human and markedly affect the model performance. Therefore, the mouse orthologues (r = 0.806). We further assess the simpliﬁed model examines only program scores for detec- relationships between mouse gene constraint and knockout tions. Model with detections from all four programs pro- phenotypes,showinggeneconstraintispositivelycorrelated vided more accurate CNV detection results for the control with an increased number of phenotypic annotations, in samples than any other program combination or additiontoanenrichmentindevelopmental,morphological, program alone. and neurological knockout phenotypes amongst the most Conclusions: No single analysis program can capture all constrained genes. Finally, we show mouse constraint can CNV sizes and types with equal accuracy. Therefore, a be used to predict human genes associated with Mendelian combination of programs should be used to maximize disease, and is positively correlated with an increase in the sensitivity and speciﬁcity.Additionally,the variants should number of known pathogenic variants in the human be reviewed with a statistical model to streamline and orthologue.Ourresearchsupportstheroleofmousemodels standardize the process of ﬁltering of variants for variant for understanding the mechanistic basis of gene function annotation and clinical use. and human monogenic disease. Grant references: Foundations: Alfred Kordelin, Sigrid G. Powell: None. S. Pulit: None. A. Mallon: None. M. Jusélius, Jane and Aatos Erkko Simon: None. C. Lindgren: None. S. Välipakka: None. M. Savarese: None. L. Sagath: None. K. Kiiski: None. M. Arumilli: None. V. Nigro: P16.20D None. T. Giugliano: None. B. Udd: None. P. Efﬁcient pipelineforCNVdetectionfrom targeted NGS Hackman: None. data P16.21A S. Välipakka1, M. Savarese1, L. Sagath1, K. Kiiski1, DECIPHER:Enablingthesharingandinterpretationof M. Arumilli1, V. Nigro2,3, T. Giugliano2,3, B. Udd1,4,5, rare disease variants and associated clinical phenotypes P. Hackman1 J. Foreman1, A. P. Bevan1, S. Brent1, B. Hutton1, 1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 2Telethon D. Perrett1, K. Samocha1, M. E. Hurles1, H. V. Firth1,2 Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Medicina di Precisione, Università degli 1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Studi della Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Napoli, Italy, 2Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 4Neuromuscular Research Center, Tampere University and Cambridge, United Kingdom University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 5Department of Neurology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland DECIPHER (https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk) established in 2004 has grown to become a major global platform for the Introduction: Bioinformatic tool development for analysis visualization of phenotypic and genomic relationships and ofcopynumbervariants(CNV)fromNGSdatalagsbehind for sharing linked-anonymised rare disease patient records. that for other variant types. We present here an efﬁcient DECIPHER displays both the nuclear and mitochondrial bioinformatic pipeline for CNV detection from targeted genomes, and all scales of genomic variation, from single NGS data. This will increase the diagnostic yield in a cost- base to megabases, in a single interface. DECIPHER’s effective way in clinically and genetically heterogeneous mission is to map the clinically relevant elements of the disorders, such as neuromuscular disorders. genome and understand their contribution to human Materials and Methods: We chose four programs, development and disease. CoNIFER, XHMM, ExomeDepth and CODEX, since they DECIPHER stores both phenotype and genotype data. have complementary CNV detection ranges in sensitivity, Currentlytherearemorethan37,000variants(sequenceand speciﬁcity, and variant size and state. Heterozygous dele- copy-number) and more than 89,000 phenotypes (HPO tionsandduplicationsweregeneratedin-silicointosamples terms)thataresharedopenlyonthewebsite.Thewealthof sequenced with a gene panel of approximately 350 genes these data in DECIPHER allows the aggregation of dataAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1697 associatedwithpathogenicvariantsindiseasegenes.Toaid sequencesandthereforefailinGCrichorrepetitiveregions diagnosis aggregated phenotype data is used to identify the and cannot detect larger variants accurately. most discriminating phenotypes associated with disease Here we present the results of a small validation series genes.Quantitativephenotypedata,suchasanthropometric using Bionano’s Saphyr system, an optical mapping tech- measurements and developmental milestones, are aggre- nology that utilises single, megabase-size native DNA gated and visual/statistical tools are used to allow the molecules,identifyingacustomrecognitionsequencetouse comparison of a patient with other patients harboring ﬂuorescent labelling for alignment. The automated calling pathogenic variants in the same gene. Aggregating data in algorithms aim to detect all copy number and major struc- DECIPHER is extremely powerful in aiding diagnosis and tural variation types (including balanced rearrangements), discovery whilst harmonized with DECIPHER’s propor- potentially replacing the need for multiple analytical tionate data sharing approach. techniques. DECIPHERisdedicatedtothesharingofpatientdatafor Arangeofsamplewithknownabnormalities(analysedin discovery and diagnosis and is a pioneering partner in the house using a combination of microarray, G-banding and Global Alliance for Global Health (GA4GH) and founder FISH) were analysed using optical mapping to assess the member of the Matchmaker Exchange (MME) which clinical utility of the system. The Bionano optical mapping enables the federated discovery of similar entries in con- system not only detected all copy number variants with a nected databases. higher resolution than microarray, it also detected all WT206194 balanced structural variants. J. Foreman: None. A.P. Bevan: None. S. Brent: None. C.Keith:None.A.Hastie:A.Employment(fullorpart- B. Hutton: None. D. Perrett: None. K. Samocha: None. time); Signiﬁcant; Bionano Genomic Inc. J. Warner: M.E. Hurles: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, None. E. Maher: None. patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Con- genica. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; Con- P16.24D genica. H.V. Firth: None. Conserved clinical variation visualization tool (ConVarT) P16.23C Evaluation of the Bionano optical mapping technology O. I. Kaplan, F. M. Torun, H. Guner, S. Cevik as a replacement of conventional cytogenetics in a diagnostic setting School of Life and Natural Sciences, Abdullah Gul University, Kayseri, Turkey C. Keith1, A. Hastie2, J. Warner1, E. Maher1 Introduction: It is extremely challenging to visualize the 1South East Scotland Genetics Service, Edinburgh, United evolutionary conservation of amino acid substitutions Kingdom, 2Bionano Genomic Inc, San Diego, CA, United associated with diseases because there is no available tool States thatmapsthecoordinatesoftheseaminoacidsofhumansin common model organisms. Recent technological advances Thediagnosticremitofaclinicalcytogenomiclaboratoryis in DNA sequencing have led to a comprehensive list of to identify DNA copy number variations (CNVs) and human genetic variations, the functional effects of many of structural variations (SVs) that are likely to impact which are yet to be clariﬁed. Model organisms could be phenotype. employed to functionally assess the effect of genetic Current methodologies have signiﬁcant limitations. variations. Here, we designed a user-friendly tool that Within the South East Scotland Genetic Service, chromo- allows to visualize the comparability of human genetic somal microarray (Affymetrix 750k) is used to diagnose variationsacrossthespeciesandcurrentlywearetestingthe CNVs greater than 10 kilobase (Kb) in size, but cannot functional impact of disease associated amino acids with detect “balanced” aberrations such as translocations or CRISPR in C. elegans. inversions. G-banded chromosome analysis detects most Materials and Methods: We extracted the genes con- structural variation, but at a lower resolution of 3-5 Mega- sistingofalltypesofaminoacidsubstitutionsfromClinVar bases (Mb) and Fluorescent In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) database. We have performed multiple sequence alignment often requires prior knowledge of the variant. across most commonly used model organisms and inte- Sequencing technology has improved, with signiﬁcant grated amino acid substitutions into corresponding posi- progress in the detection of single nucleotide changes and tions. We are currently integrating the recently published short indels, but most methods produce short-read gnomAD databases into our database.1698 Results:ClinVardatahasrevealedthatwhileover50000 download andviaa GraphQLAPI, enabling users toeasily genetic variations are pathogenic, large portions of human prioritise genes at disease-associated loci and assess their genome variations (at least 40%) on genes are annotated potential as pharmaceutical targets. with uncertain clinical signiﬁcance, suggesting that the E. Mountjoy: None. functional assessment of these positions are needed. We are currently performing statistical analysis to ﬁnd the P16.26B comparability of human genetic variations among other Complete workﬂow for Discovery and Veriﬁcation of species. eQTLs in Lung Adenocarcinoma Conclusion: Our tool can serve to visualize the evolu- tionary conservation of disease causing amino acids H. Veereshlingam1, S. Jackson1, D. Tommaso2, O.I. Kaplan: None. F.M. Torun: None. H. Guner: F. Colombo2 None. S. Cevik: None. 1ThermoFisherScientiﬁc,SouthSanFrancisco,CA,United P16.25A States,2FondazioneIRCCSIstitutoNazionaledeiTumoridi Open Targets Genetics: An open-science resource for Milano, Milan, Italy improved drug target identiﬁcation and prioritisation using genetic data Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed associations between genotype,phenotypeandpathologies. E. Mountjoy1,2, Open Targets Genetics Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) have been mapped in many tumor types, such as breast, lung and 1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridgeshire, United prostatecancer.Thesestudiesmeasuredgenome-widegene Kingdom, 2Open Targets, Cambridgeshire, United expression in tumors and identiﬁed associations between Kingdom these gene expression levels and commonly inherited genetic variants proﬁled in the same patients. Since the Thediscoveryanddevelopmentofnewpharmaceuticalsisa majority of inherited cancer risk variants as identiﬁed by time consuming and expensive process. A major challenge GWASareinnon-codingregions,eQTLanalysisofcancer is high attrition, as a large proportion of drugs are found to tissues is becoming extremely important. In this study we be ineffective at clinical trial. However, drugs that have demonstrateastreamlinedworkﬂowtostudyeQTLsinlung genome-wide association study (GWAS) evidence support- adenocarcinoma. Previous GWAS have identiﬁed several ing a link between its target and indication are twice as lung cancer susceptibility loci, however functionality of likelytobeapprovedforclinicaluse.HerewepresentOpen mostoftheselociremainsunexplained.Herewefocusedon Targets Genetics, an open-science resource which makes SNPspreviouslyreportedtobeassociatedwithlungcancer robust connections between disease-associated loci and in different populations. We studied the association of likely causal genes, to enable the identiﬁcation and candidate SNPs with lung adenocarcinoma risk and overall prioritisation of new drug targets. survivalinacohortof96patientsandhealthycontrolsusing We combine GWAS associations curated from literature the Axiom genotyping arrays and Clariom D gene and the recently released NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog expressionarrays.ThefunctionoftheseSNPswasassessed summary statistics database (including over 3,000 UK as eQTLs, these results suggest that the candidate SNPs Biobank phenotypes) to locate over 100,000 disease- exert their effects on cancer risk/outcome through the associated loci. We then use statistical ﬁne-mapping (or modulation of mRNA levels of their target genes. linkage-disequilibrium expansion if no summary statistics H. Veereshlingam: A. Employment (full or part-time); are available) to identify a set of potentially causal variants Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. S. Jackson: A. ateachlocus.Lastly,variantsareintegratedwithfunctional Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher genomics data (e.g. promoter capture Hi-C, DNase hyper- Scientiﬁc. D. Tommaso: None. F. Colombo: None. sensitivity sites), molecular quantitative trait loci (e.g. eQTLs, pQTLs) and in silico functional predictions to link P16.27C each variant to its target gene(s) using a uniﬁed evidence Expanding GENCODE gene annotation to elucidate score. Most recently, we have added systematic disease- disease-linked variants molecular trait colocalisation analysis using the upcoming Open Targets-European Bioinformatics Institute eQTL J. M. Mudge1, T. Hunt1, J. M. Gonzalez1, I. Jungreis2, database. J. Lagarde3, R. Johnson4, C. Steward5, P. Flicek1, The results of Open Targets Genetics are made available A. Frankish1 through our web portal (genetics.opentargets.org), for bulkAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1699 1European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) is the key knowledge- Kingdom, 2MIT Computer Science and Artiﬁcial base for the laboratory mouse. MGI integrates mouse Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, United States, genotype-phenotypedatasetsfrombiomedicalliteratureand 3Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, large-scale projects with genomic, mutation, expression, 4University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 5Congenica, functional and human diseasemodel data toinform disease Hinxton, United Kingdom etiology and therapeutic design. Recent enhancements include newly established anatomical mappings between An investigation into the link between variant and the Mammalian Phenotype (MP) and Mouse Developmen- phenotype usually begins with gene annotation. However, tal Anatomy (EMAPA) ontologies and a user interface, co- most GWAS variants fall in non-transcribed regions, and deployedwiththeGeneExpressionDatabase(GXD),which even exon-focused catalogs such as ClinVar contain enables comparison of gene expression and phenotype thousandsofvariantsthatdonotoverlapknowntranscripts. annotations for mouse genes. The new Gene Expression + Here, we present efforts by GENCODE to improve the Phenotype Comparison Matrix, accessible from MGI’s scope and usability of our human gene annotation in a Gene Detail page, visually juxtaposes tissues where a gene disease-related context, along multiple lines. Firstly, our is normally expressed against tissues where mutations in public geneset is about to undergo a massive expansion, as thatgenecausephenotypeabnormalities.Theanatomyaxis tensofthousandsofnewtranscriptmodelsareincorporated ofthematrixcanbeexpandedandcollapsed,allowingusers based on long-read sequencing datasets. This work will to interactively explore correlations between gene expres- causethousandsofvariantstobereclassiﬁedastranscribed. sion and phenotype data at different levels of spatial However, even when variant transcription is established, resolution. An enhanced Mouse Developmental Anatomy uncertainties regarding ‘functional categorization’ - espe- Browserprovidesquick access to phenotypeannotationsin cially coding potential - can still undermine attempts to addition to expression data associated with a given prioritizevariantsorjudgepathogenicity.Thisexpansionis anatomical structure or substructures. The updated MP therefore being carried out alongside efforts to reappraise Browser links to mapped anatomical structures, enabling theCDS contentofourgeneset,incorporatingevolutionary access to wild-type expression data in tissues associated conservation, population genetics datasets and proteoge- with a given phenotype. Moreover, MGI’s Allele Detail nomicsmethods.Pertinently,ourcreationoftheﬁrstwhole- page features a link to affected anatomical structures, genomePhyloCSFdatasetallowedustoaddover230kbof facilitating retrieval of wild-type expression data in tissues novel high-quality CDS annotation, leading to the reclassi- afﬂicted by the underlying mutation. The MGI features ﬁcationof118GWASvariantsfromnon-codingtoprotein- presented here will enhance researchers’ ability to probe disrupting. Furthermore, we are now utilizing a fully gene function and gain critical mechanistic insights into integrated manual workﬂow to develop our novel annota- developmentalanddiseaseprocesses.SupportedbyNHGRI tions in a clinical context. For example, our targeted grant HG000330 and NICHD grant HD062499. reannotation of 191 genes linked to epilepsy led to the T.F.Hayamizu:None.A.V.Anagnostopoulos:None.S. identiﬁcation of 3 novel de novo SCN1A coding mutations M. Bello: None. C.L. Smith: None. M. Ringwald: None. within a panel of 122 patients with Dravet’s syndrome. Primarily supported by the National Human Genome P16.29A Research Institute under Award U41HG007234. DeconvolutingtheDementiaphenotypeusingfunctional J.M. Mudge: None. T. Hunt: None. J.M. Gonzalez: computational approaches None. I. Jungreis: None. J. Lagarde: None. R. Johnson: None. C. Steward: None. P. Flicek: None. A. D. Ivanov1, M. Hill1, N. Allen1, J. M. Thornton2, Frankish: None. J. Williams1, V. Escott-Price1 P16.28D 1UK Dementia Research Institute, School of Medicine, TheMouseGenomeInformatics(MGI)knowledgebase: College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Cardiff, United new features enhancing anatomical comparison of gene Kingdom, 2The European Bioinformatics Institute, expression and phenotype proﬁles European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Cambridge, United Kingdom T. F. Hayamizu, A. V. Anagnostopoulos, S. M. Bello, C. L. Smith, M. Ringwald, The MGI Software Team Introduction: The development of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) isa multi-causal process,with aninteractionbetween The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States components. In this respect, delineating the constituent biological components that play part will bring a greater1700 understandingoftheprocessesinaction.Wewillpresentan of F508del mutation in CFTE29o- cells using CRISPR/ integrative computational approach of linking gene- Cas9. expression to phenotypes and biological pathways in Materials and Methods: The work was performed in Drosophila and extend the methodology in individuals CFTE29o- cell - immortalized cell line of tracheal epithe- withAD.Webaseourapproachontheconceptthatabroad lium from a patient with CF (F508del/F508del). Three phenotype, such as AD, is composed of simpler inter- nucleases (eSpCas9(1.1), SpCas9(HF4), SaCas9) in com- mediate subphenotypes. bination with four sgRNAs were used. Two sgRNAs were Methods: By combining gene-expression data from targeted speciﬁcally to F508del (sgCFTR#1, single-gene mutants in Drosophila that exhibit a particular sa_sgCFTR#3); the other two were to downstream region subphenotype (biological replicates of this phenotype), (sgCFTR#2, sgCFTR#3). In addition, we used a plasmid genes/biological pathways that play a role in the sub- with an insert of CFTR fragment with F508del to study phenotype will be enriched. The goal is to enhance the potential inﬂuence of the genomic context on the editing signal from genes that play a role in a subphenotype and efﬁciency. Four single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides reducethenoise.Linearmixed-effectmodelwillbeusedto (ssODNs) were designed to repair double-strand DNA circumvent the inter-experiment variability and to combine breaks. Cas9+sgRNA plasmids were co-transfected with the gene-expression data and generate molecular signatures model plasmid and ssODN into CFTE29o- cells by lipo- from different experiments and accounting for differences fection. The editing efﬁcacy was evaluated by TIDE and that are not of interest. TIDER methods. Results: We will present preliminary, proof-of-concept Results and Conclusions: Indel formation efﬁcacy was results for several complex subphenotypes in Drosophila. 2.1-7.5% in the plasmid (the highest efﬁcacy with Cas9 We will also show how these molecular signatures can be (HF4)/sgCFTR#1) and 1.4-7.9% in the genomic locus (the used to describe the studied subphenotypes. highest efﬁcacy with Cas9(1.1)/sgCFTR#3). Then we co- Conclusions:Ourmethodologyhastheabilitytonotonly transfected cells with the most effective combination Cas9 assert the relationship of AD with already known sub- (1.1)/sgCFTR#3 together with ssODN, homologous repair phenotypes, but can also discover not yet tested sub- (CTT insertion) in genomic locus was 8.7%. This level of phenotypes and associated biological pathways. This efﬁciency makes reasonable development of treatment of methodology has also a potential to quantify the relation- CF by genome editing. Additional studies are necessary to ship between different subphenotypes and AD animal conﬁrm these results and increase efﬁcacy. This work was models. supported by Russian Science Foundation (Agreement No. Funding: ERDF through the Welsh Government 17-75-20095). D. Ivanov: None. M. Hill: None. N. Allen: None. J.M. S.A. Smirnikhina: B. Research Grant (principal inves- Thornton: None. J. Williams: None. V. Escott- tigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as Price: None. well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Russian Sci- ence Foundation. E.V. Kondrateva: None. A.A. Anu- P16.31C china: None. E.P. Adilgereeva: None. E.L. Amelina: F508del correction in CFTE29o- cell line by CRISPR/ None. K.D. Ustinov: None. M.I. Yasinovsky: None. K.S. Cas9 Kochergin-Nikitsky: None. I. Zainitdinova: None. V. Mozgovoy: None. A.V. Lavrov: None. S. A. Smirnikhina1, E. V. Kondrateva1, A. A. Anuchina1, E. P. Adilgereeva1, E. L. Amelina2, K. D. Ustinov1, P16.32D M. I. Yasinovsky1, K. S. Kochergin-Nikitsky1, Prospective interest in deploying multi-omics I. Zainitdinova1, V. Mozgovoy3, A. V. Lavrov1,3 approaches to solve unsolved patients with suspected monogenic developmental delay syndromes 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2The Research Institute of Pulmonology, Y. Duffourd1,2, E. Tisserant1,2, A. Plagos1, P. Callier3, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3The Russian National F. Mau Tran-Them1, A. Bruel1, A. Denommé-Pichon4, Research Medical University Named after N.I. Pirogov, C. Philippe4, B. Isidor5, S. Heide6, A. Afenjar7, Moscow, Russian Federation D. Rodriguez8, C. Mignot6, D. Heron6, M. Vincent5, P. Charles6, S. Moutton9, N. Jean9, S. Odent10, Introduction:Inmostcasescysticﬁbrosis(CF)isincurable C. Dubourg11, A. Faudet6, B. Keren6, B. Cogné12, disease, which makes the development of gene therapy an A. Boland13, R. Olaso13, C. Thauvin9,1, L. Faivre9,1, actualtask.Genomeeditingprovideswideopportunitiesfor J. Deleuze13,14, A. Vitobello1,14 modelingandtreatingCF.TheaimofthisworkwaseditingAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1701 1Inserm UMR 1231 GAD team, Genetics of Developmental The ﬁrst two variants had not been captured by the exome disorders,UniversitédeBourgogne-FrancheComté,Dijon, kit,whileCYFIP2wasnotyetamorbidgeneatthetimeof France, 2*, Equalcontribution, France, 3UFInnovationen theESanalysis.Theremainingones,hadnotbeenidentiﬁed diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, CHU Dijon, by the molecular diagnostic laboratory responsible for the France, Dijon, France, 4Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en ESanalysis.GShighlightedthepresenceofadenovo2Mb Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU- inversion located 400 Kb upstream MEF2C (conﬁrmed by TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, Franc, linked-read analysis), responsible for the disruption of the Dijon, France, 5CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique TopologicallyAssociatingDomainregulatingthisgene,and Médicale, Nantes, France, Nantes, France, 6AP-HP, a 9 Kb de novo complex structural variant, causing the Département de Génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, heterozygous loss of 3 exons of CASK resulting in a fra- 75013, Paris, France et Centre de Référence "déﬁciences meshift mutation (RNA-seq data). intellectuellesdecausesrares",75013Paris,France,Paris, Conslusions:Ourpreliminaryresultson10patientsshow France, 7APHP, Département de génétique et embryologie that a multi-omics approach allowed the identiﬁcation of 4 médicale, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, F-75012 Paris, additional molecular diagnoses not otherwise achievable France, Paris, France, 8Centre de Référence de with ES. Neurogénétique et Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, AP- Y. Duffourd: None. E. Tisserant: None. A. Plagos: HP, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, GHUEP ; Sorbonne None. P. Callier: None. F. Mau Tran-Them: None. A. Université, GRC n°19, pathologies Congénitales du Bruel: None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. C. Philippe: Cervelet-LeucoDystrophies, Paris, France, Paris, France, None.B.Isidor:None.S.Heide:None.A.Afenjar:None. 9Centre de Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du D. Rodriguez: None. C. Mignot: None. D. Heron: None. développement et syndromes malformatifs », centre de M. Vincent: None. P. Charles: None. S. Moutton: None. génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital, N. Jean: None. S. Odent: None. C. Dubourg: None. A. Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 10CHU de RENNES, Faudet: None. B. Keren: None. B. Cogné: None. A. Genetique; Univ Rennes, CNRS, IGDR (Institut de Boland: None. R. Olaso: None. C. Thauvin: None. L. Génétique et Développement de Rennes) UMR 6290, Faivre: None. J. Deleuze: None. A. Vitobello: None. Rennes, France, Rennes, France, 11Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique, BMT-HC « Jean Dausset », P16.34B CHU Pontchaillou, 2 rue Henri Le Guilloux, 35033 Matched annotation from the NCBI and EMBL-EBI RENNES Cedex 9, France, Rennes, France, 12L'institut du (MANE): Converging on a high-value, genome-wide thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, CHU de Nantes, transcript set Nantes, France, Nantes, France, 13Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de J. Morales1, J. Loveland1, S. Pujar2, A. Astashyn2, BiologieFrançoisJacob,CEA,Université Paris-Saclay,F- R. Bennett1, C. Davidson1, O. Ermolaeva2, C. Farrell2, 91057, Evry, France, and LabEx GENMED, Evry, France, L. Gil1, V. Joardar2, M. Kay1, K. McGarvey2, 14#, Equal contribution, France A. McMahon1, S. Rangwala2, G. Threadgold1, F. Cunningham1, A. Frankish1, T. Murphy2 Background: Exome sequencing (ES) represents the ﬁrst- tier diagnostic test in patients presenting with syndromic 1European Molecular Biology Laboratory - European developmental delay with suspected monogenic etiology. Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, Yet, 50-70% of these patients remain unexplained at the 2National Center for Biotechnology Information, National molecular level, arguing the interest to extend the genetic Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, investigations beyond protein-coding regions and to Bethesda, MD, United States integrate multi-omics approaches. Method:Welaunchedamulti-centricstudygathering30 Accurate annotation of the human genome is essential for unsolved patients, after trio ES and array-CGH analyses, genomicsresearchandclinicalapplications.RefSeq(NCBI) presenting with heterogeneous mild to severe syndromic and Ensembl/GENCODE (led by EMBL-EBI) produce intellectual disabilities. We performed trio genome independent human gene annotation. Since 2005, the joint sequencing (GS) combined with linked-read sequencing Consensus Coding Sequence (CCDS) project has deﬁned (10X Genomics) and blood-derived transcriptome analysis. over 30,000 CDS for 95% of coding genes. However, the Results: We present our results on the ﬁrst third of the largenumberofalternativelysplicedtranscriptsandthelack cohort. GS analysis identiﬁed 3 de novo pathogenic or of standardized default transcripts displayed across likely-pathogenic variants in PURA, FOXG1, CYFIP2 and resources present challenges, especially in the clinical KMT2D,aswellasaninheritedhemizygousFGD1variant. context. Building on our past collaboration, we have1702 launched a new initiative, the Matched Annotation from datasets, making it the largest repository of GWAS SS. To NCBIandEMBL-EBI(MANE)project,tojointlyconverge ensure SS are consistent across studies and interoperable on a high-conﬁdence, genome-wide transcript set. they are pre-processed and made available in a standard During phase-1, we will release the MANE Select tran- format. They are also harmonised, with respect to genome script set to include one well-supported transcript per build and strand. Each SS dataset is linked to the curated protein-codinglocus.Alltranscriptsinthesetwillperfectly data and metadata from the publication. Older GWAS align to the GRCh38 reference assembly and represent Catalogstudiesarere-curated,whererequired,toensurethe 100%identity(5’UTR,CDS,3’UTR)betweentheEnsembl study structure is correctly represented. (ENST) transcript and the corresponding RefSeq (NM) Access to SS is provided from the GWAS Catalog FTP transcript. MANE Select transcripts are identiﬁed using site (www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/downloads/summary-statistics), independent computational methods complemented by via API from a SS datastore (www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/summa manual review and discussion. The methods utilize evi- ry-statistics/docs/)andvialinkswithinourredesignedquery dence of functional potential such as expression levels, interface (www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/search).The query interface evolutionary conservation, and clinical signiﬁcance. Tran- alsoprovidesimprovedsearchanddisplayfunctionalityfor script ends are deﬁned using CAGE data from the FAN- all Catalog data. New pages provide access to structured TOM consortium and polyA site data from conventional information and visualisations that were previously una- andnextgenerationsequencing.Currently,wehavedeﬁned vailable,whileanewAPIprovidesprogrammaticaccessto MANE Select transcripts for 53% of human coding genes curated Catalog data (www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/docs/api). and are working towards genome-wide coverage. During We are working to increase the number of available SS, phase-2,weintendtoreleaseanexpandedset(MANEPlus) encouragingauthorstosubmittheirSSandcampaigningfor to include additional transcripts per locus that are well- data sharing. To ensure SS are accessible, usable, updated supported or of particular user interest. and relevant to the user community we are engaging with Funding: Wellcome Trust-WT200990/Z/16/Z; EMBL- thecommunitytodevelopstandardsfordatareporting.The Core-Funds; NIH-U41HG007234; NIH-Intramural- broad availability of SS will vastly extend the potential of Research-program. GWAS,allowinguserstoperformawiderangeofanalyses. J. Morales: None. J. Loveland: None. S. Pujar: None. Funding: National Human Genome Research Institute of A. Astashyn: None. R. Bennett: None. C. Davidson: the National Institutes of Health [U41-HG007823]; Open None. O. Ermolaeva: None. C. Farrell: None. L. Gil: Targets [OTAR2-045]; EMBL Core Funds. L.A.H., P.H. None. V. Joardar: None. M. Kay: None. K. McGarvey: and H.J. are employees of the NHGRI. None. A. McMahon: None. S. Rangwala: None. G. J.A.L. MacArthur: None. A. Buniello: None. M. Cer- Threadgold: None. F. Cunningham: None. A. Frankish: ezo: None. J. Hayhurst: None. P. Hall: None. L. Harris: None. T. Murphy: None. None.L.A.Hindorff:None.H.Junkins:None.E.Lewis: None. C. Malangone: None. A. McMahon: None. J. P16.35C Morales: None. E. Mountjoy: None. E. Sollis: None. D. Full p-value summary statistics in the GWAS Catalog Suveges:None.O.Vrousgou:None.P.L.Whetzel:None. T. Burdett: None. F. Cunningham: None. P. Flicek: J. A. L. MacArthur1, A. Buniello1, M. Cerezo1, None. H. Parkinson: None. J. Hayhurst1, P. Hall2, L. Harris1, L. A. Hindorff2, H. Junkins2, E. Lewis1, C. Malangone1, A. McMahon1, P16.36D J. Morales1, E. Mountjoy3, E. Sollis1, D. Suveges1, Genetic control of fatty acids in the isolated population O. Vrousgou1, P. L. Whetzel1, T. Burdett1, of Sardinia F. Cunningham1, P. Flicek1, H. Parkinson1 C. Sidore, M. Marongiu, M. Lobina, M. Piras, V. Orrù, 1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European E. Fiorillo, F. Cucca Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom,2DivisionofGenomicMedicine,NationalHuman Institute of Genetic and Biomedic Research (IRGB CNR), Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Cagliari, Italy Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Open Targets, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom Itiswellestablishedthatshortandlongchainfattyacidsare the main medium of interaction between immune system The NHGRI-EBI Catalog of published genome-wide and gut microbiota. Although there are preliminary results association studies (GWAS Catalog, www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas) on the genetic and environmental inﬂuence on the contains over 5,500 full p-value summary statistics (SS) metabolitelevels,theinteractionsbetweenimmunesystemsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1703 and microbiome are very complex and their mechanisms based haplotyping methods that make use of discrete bi- stillneedtobeunderstood.Herewepresentanomicanalysis allelic SNP genotypes (AA, AB and BB) to reconstruct of the fatty acid levels in the isolated population of the haplotypes, haplarithmisis uses continuous SNP genotypes Sardinia island. The cohort involves ~8,000 individuals values, which potentially harbor quantitative (haplotype) from the valley of Lanusei, deeply genotyped with >23M and qualitative (copy number) assessment of genomes. genomic variants imputed from a population-speciﬁc HiVA is a novel sequencing-based approach for whole- reference panel. In addition to >1,000 quantitative traits genomeSNPtypingofsinglecells,anddeterminegenome- biomedical parameters, the cohort is also deeply pheno- wide haplotypes, the copy number of those haplotypes as typed with >2,000 immune cell traits. We performed a well as the parental and segregational origin of chromoso- GWASanalysisonlevelsof8shortand29longchainfatty mal aberrations from sequencing- and array-based SNP acids in 2,000 volunteers of the SardiNIA cohort (ranging landscapes of single cells. from 19 to 103 years of age). The association results Work by A.A and Y.M was supported by KU Leuven showedsignalsintheACADS,SLC44A5andELOVL2gene CELSA/17/032, Flemish Government: IWT 150865, FWO regions. Furthermore, we observed a general increase of 06260, and VIB: ELIXIR. Work by J.R.V. and T.V. is fatty acid levels with age, with speciﬁc exceptions. supportedbyKULeuvenfunding(C1/018)andtheHorizon Additional analyses combining the immune proﬁle by 2020 WIDENLIFE: 692065 to J.R.V. and T.V. H.M. is means of correlations, colocalization, and mendelian supported by FWO (11A7119N). randomizationwillprovidehintsontheregulatoryfunctions A.Ardeshirdavani:None.M.ZamaniEsteki:None.D. of these important molecules. The results will help to Alcaide: None. H. Masset: None. J. Ding: None. A. elucidate thehost geneticregulation onfattyacids variance Sifrim:None.J.Aerts:None.T.Voet:None.Y.Moreau: and how and to what extent they interact with the host None. J. Vermeesch: None. immune system in health and disease state. C. Sidore: None. M. Marongiu: None. M. Lobina: P16.38B None.M.Piras: None.V.Orrù: None. E.Fiorillo:None. HADA: a resource for automated annotation of next- F. Cucca: None. generation sequencing data in hereditary angioedema studies P16.37A HiVA: a web platform for haplotyping and copy A. Mendoza-Alvarez1, I. Marcelino-Rodriguez1, L. Rubio- number analysis of single-cell genomes Rodriguez2, A. Muñoz-Barrera2, A. Callero3, J. Garcia- Robaina3, J. Lorenzo-Salazar2, C. Flores1,2,4,5 A. Ardeshirdavani1, M. Zamani Esteki2, D. Alcaide1, H. Masset3, J. Ding3, A. Sifrim3, J. Aerts1, T. Voet3, 1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Y. Moreau1, J. Vermeesch3 Candelaria,SantaCruzdeTenerife,CanaryIslands,Spain, 2Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías 1KU Leuven - STADIUS, Leuven, Belgium, 2Maastricht Renovables(ITER),GranadilladeAbona,Tenerife,Canary University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Islands, Spain, 3Department of Allergy, Hospital Genetics,Maastricht,Netherlands,3KULeuven,Centrefor UniversitarioNuestraSeñoradeCandelaria,SantaCruzde Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, 4CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias,InstitutodeSaludCarlosIII,Madrid,Spain, Haplotyping is imperative for comprehensive analysis of 5InstitutodeTecnologíasBiomédicas(ITB),Universidadde genomes, imputation of genetic variants and interpretation La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain oferror-pronesingle-cellgenomicdata.Wehavedeveloped a pipeline and user interface for single-cell analysis named Introduction: Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare HiVA (https://hiva.esat.kuleuven.be). HiVA (Haplarithm geneticdiseasecausedbydysfunctionoftheC1inhibitoror inference of Variant Alleles) is an interactive web platform dysregulation of the kinin cascade. Because of its non- for genome haplarithmisis of DNA samples derived from a speciﬁc signs, HAE is poorly recognized in the clinical large number of cells down to a single cell. HiVA ﬁeld,resultingindelayeddiagnosesthatincreasetheriskof automatically reconstructs parental haplarithms (i.e. hapla- morbidity and mortality. To adapt its diagnosis to next- rithm proﬁles indicating both haplotypes and copy number generationsequencing(NGS)-basedassessments,wedevel- states)andprovidesauser-friendlyinterfaceforscrutinizing oped Hereditary Angioedema Database Annotation allelic imbalances across the genome. We are showing that (HADA) tool. HiVA enables concurrent haplotyping and copy-number Materials and Methods: We performed a manual cura- proﬁling of single cells. In contrast to conventional family- tion and update to GRCh37/hg19 of the causal variants1704 describedtodateinHAEdbandVarSomeandclassiﬁedall reference sequences to estimate the most likely HLA ofthemtotheACMGguidelines.Theinformationwasused genotypes. to establish a database conﬁgured for ANNOVAR to be Materials and Methods: To assess the usefulness of seamlessly incorporated into the routine NGS bioinfor- population-speciﬁc HLA references in HLA calling, we matics annotation. have compared the performance of different sets of refer- Results:Currently, HADAincludesrecordsfor 416 sim- ences (with and without Japanese HLA sequences) across ple causal variants in the ﬁve genes underlying HAE. HLA-A,HLA-BandHLA-CallelesbyusingHLA-VBSeq, However, 25% of those were classiﬁed as non-pathogenic a ﬂexible software which allows the use of arbitrary refer- by current guidelines, suggestive of a gap in the inter- ence sequences. pretation of disease variants and a necessity to improve the Results: We evaluated their performances by using 418 classiﬁers of pathogenicity potential of genetic variants. Japanese samples as testing data, in which HLA genotypes Conclusions: To adapt the genetic diagnosis of HAE to were determined with Luminex technology. All of the tests the era of NGS-based genomic medicine, we have devel- were implemented based on 4-digit resolution. As a result, oped HADA as a freely available tool simplifying the theperformanceofHLA-callingintheJapanesepopulation identiﬁcation of point mutations and short indels causing signiﬁcantly increased with custom HLA panel HAE. Annotation of structural variation will be covered in Conclusions: We suggest that including the sequences future developments. Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, obtained from regional population samples is an effective InnovaciónyUniversidades(RTC-2017-6471-1;MINECO/ way to improve the accuracy of HLA calling from WGS AEI/FEDER, UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER to dataset. The software is available from (http://nagasakilab. strengthen scientiﬁc and technological education, training, csml.org/ja/hla-vbseq) as HLA-VBSeq v2. research, development and innovation in Genomics, Per- Y. Wang: None. T. Mimori: None. S. Khor: None. O. sonalized Medicine and Biotechnology, and a CajaSiete- Gervais: None. Y. Kawai: None. Y. Hitomi: None. K. ULL fellowship (to AMA). Tokunaga: None. M. Nagasaki: None. A. Mendoza-Alvarez: None. I. Marcelino-Rodriguez: None. L. Rubio-Rodriguez: None. A. Muñoz-Barrera: P16.40D None. A. Callero: None. J. Garcia-Robaina: None. J. Efﬁcient and high-throughput genotyping of elusive Lorenzo-Salazar: None. C. Flores: None. human polymorphic inversions mediated by inverted repeats P16.39C HLA-VBSeqv2:enhancementsofHLAcallingaccuracy M.Laplana1,S.Villatoro1,R.Zaurín1,J.Royo2,M.Puig1, from WGS data with full-length Japanese HLA M. Cáceres1,3 sequences 1Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Institut de Y. Wang1, T. Mimori1, S. Khor2, O. Gervais1, Y. Kawai2, Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina, Bellaterra, Spain, Y. Hitomi2, K. Tokunaga2, M. Nagasaki3 2Department of Surgery, Biochemistry and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of Malaga, Málaga, Spain, 1TohokuUniversity,Sendai,Miyagi,Japan,2TheUniversity 3ICREA, Barcelona, Spain of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan, 3Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, JAPAN, Japan Structural variants are large genomic rearrangements that affect a big number of bases, with the potential to have a Introduction:Thehumanleukocyteantigen(HLA)system, wide phenotypic impact. Among them, inversions are whichisthemostvariablegeneregionintheentiregenome, genomic regions that change orientation without gain or encodes the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) loss of DNA and many of them have highly identical proteinsinhumansonchromosome6andhasbeenreported inverted repeats (IRs) at the breakpoints. Moreover, they tobeassociatedwithnumerousimmune-mediateddiseases. tend to be recurrent and not linked to SNPs. Thus, the HLA calling from whole genome sequencing data (WGS) complexity of such regions has made inversion character- remains to be challenging due to the incompleteness of izationdifﬁcult.Previously,wedevelopedacombinationof population speciﬁc references. We have previously inverse PCR and MLPA to simultaneously interrogate 24 described the construction of Japanese reference sequences commonhuman inversionsmediated byIRsinhundredsof that fully covers the gene body region of HLA class I individuals.Here,wehaveoptimizedthismethodbytaking (JapaneseHLAsequences).Thisstudyaimstoevaluatethe advantage of the iPLEX technology to detect one single accuracy of HLA calling from WGS when the Japanese nucleotide change speciﬁc of each orientation using mass HLA sequences were combined with the IPD-IMGT spectrometry and extending the analysis to additionalAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1705 inversions. Also, we have improved genotype accuracy by reconstruction.Theincreaseinnewlyaddedproteinsisone- designing speciﬁc assays that take into account common third than that in newly determined PPIs, most of the latter polymorphisms affecting restriction-enzyme target sites. enriching the interactions of existing proteins, while, as Currently, we are able to genotype 37 inversions ampliﬁed predicted in PICKLE 1.0, most newly added proteins have in four different PCR reactions from as little as 400 ng of 1-4interactions.Theinteractomebecomesdenser,however, DNA. In order to test the performance of the method, we its expansion over the 15% of RHCP with no known PPIs havegenotyped95individualsfromthreepopulationsofthe may require targeted experiments. 1000 Genomes Project with 94.3% genotyping rate and an Conclusions: The study supports our previous statement error rate of ~3% for a single experiment. The new thatthehumanproteininteractomestructurewithrespectto genotypedatageneratedallowustohaveaﬁrstglimpseon its hubs has been largely deﬁned. Elucidating its dynamics the functional and evolutionary consequences of these is the next challenge for network medicine. inversions. In addition, having a high-throughput genotyp- Supported by: ELIXIR-GR(MIS_5002780)/ΒΙΤΑΔ-ΔΕ ing technique paves the way to unravel the role of (MIS_5002469)/EATRIS-GR(MIS_5028091)/INSPIRED inversions in complex traits and disease susceptibilities. (MIS_5002550). M. Laplana: None. S. Villatoro: None. R. Zaurín: G.N. Dimitrakopoulos: None. A. Gioutlakis: None. M. None.J.Royo:None.M.Puig: None.M.Cáceres:None. I. Klapa: None. N.K. Moschonas: None. P16.41A P16.42B Evaluating the expansion of the experimentally Gene co-expression network rewiring between pre- determined human protein interactome using the symptomatic and Huntington's disease human blood PICKLE meta-database samples G. N. Dimitrakopoulos1,2, A. Gioutlakis1,2, M. I. Klapa2, C. C. Christodoulou, E. Zamba Papanicolaou, N. K. Moschonas1,2 G. M. Spyrou 1General Biology Laboratory, Medical School, University Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, of Patras, Patras, Greece, 2Metabolic Engineering & Cyprus Systems Biology Laboratory, Institute of Chemical Engineering Sciences, Foundation for Research & Introduction: Huntington’s disease (HD) is a rare, Technology Hellas (FORTH/ICE-HT), Patras, Greece inherited autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease. Network based bioinformatics approaches are used to Introduction: The Protein InteraCtion KnowLedgebasE highlight the genes that participate in the co-expression (PICKLE; www.pickle.gr) isameta-database of thehuman network differentiation between pre-symptomatic and HD experimentally-determineddirectprotein-proteininteraction status. (PPI) network, integrating ﬁve primary datasets over the Materials and Methods: A microarray dataset “Human genetic information ontology network of the UniProtKB/ blood expression for Huntington’s disease versus control” Swiss-Prot reviewed human complete proteome (RHCP). (GSE1751), was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus. Its ontological PPI integration using RHCP as a standar- Differential expression and gene co-expression analysis dized reference node set constitutes PICKLE the only PPI took place with Limma, Parmigene and igraph packages. meta-database enabling the evaluation of the human DyNet, a Cytoscape plugin, was used to visualize the most interactome expansion at both the protein and gene levels rewired nodes and edges in pairwise network comparisons, through comparison of its successive releases; this evalua- namely control vs HD and control vs pre-symptomatic HD tion is the objective of this study. gene co-expression networks. The highlighted genes Methods: The default (“cross-checked”) Uniprot-level through DyNet were further analysed through Pathway- interactomes of PICKLE 2.1-2.3, integrating data from 02/ Connector, a post-pathway analysis tool developed by our 2015 to 11/2018, respectively, were compared. Default net- group, that provides clusters of connectedpathways related worksexcludePPIsoflowexperimentalconﬁdenceofbeing to the input genes. direct. Network analysis was performed using Cytoscape. Results:Fromthetopnetwork-baseddifferentiatedgenes Results: The current human experimentally-determined we kept the ones that correspond to each network and we directPPInetwork,asreconstructedbyPICKLE,comprises performed PathwayConnector analysis. Among the com- 178306 PPIs between 15823 UniProt IDs, twice more than mon pathways between HD and pre-symptomatic, we the largest primary datasets, emphasizing thus the need for highlight the dopaminergic synapse pathway. Furthermore, source database integration for reliable human interactome1706 there are 12 pathways found exclusively in the pre- This work was supported by the AWS Cloud Credits for symptomatic group and 6 in the HD group. Research program in the form of a computational credit Conclusion: The genes and pathways obtained through grant received by Philip A Ewels. the presented network-based approach may be further J. Alneberg: None. M.U. Garcia: None. A. Peltzer: investigated to understand which genes and proteins are None. T. Koch: None. M. Proks: None. A. Wilm: None. mostimportantineachstageprovidinginsightregardingthe P.A. Ewels: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equip- corresponding implicated mechanisms. ment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Grant references: European Commission Research Amazon Web Services. Executive Agency (REA) Grant BIORISE (Num. 669026), under the Spreading Excellence, Widening Participation P16.45A Science with and for Society Framework. Long read sequencing of patient-parent trios with C.C. Christodoulou: None. E. Zamba Papanicolaou: intellectual disability None. G.M. Spyrou: None. C. Gilissen1, A. M. Wenger2, M. Pauper1, M. van de P16.43C Vorst1, K. Yauy3, E. Kücük1, M. Kwint1, M. Nelen1, Analysis of genome sequencing data with a minimal K. Neveling1, P. Baybayan2, L. Hickey2, J. Korlach2, investment IT-infrastructure H. G. Brunner1,4, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, A. Hoischen1 J. Alneberg1, M. U. Garcia2, A. Peltzer3, T. Koch3, 1Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, M. Proks4, A. Wilm5, P. A. Ewels6 Netherlands, 2Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States, 3Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier, 1National Genomics Infrastructure Stockholm, Science for Montpellier, France, 4Maastricht University Medical Life Laboratory, School of Engineering Sciences in Center, Maastricht, Netherlands Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, Royal Institute of Technology KTH, Solna, Sweden, 2Department of Current short read whole genome sequencing (SRS) Oncology, Karolinska Institute, Solna, Sweden, approaches are unable to identify all genetic variation in 3Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), University of anindividual.Long-readsequencing(LRS)techniquesmay Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 4University of Southern resolvethisproblembyenablingmoresensitivedetectionof Denmark,Odense,Denmark,5A*STARGenomeInstituteof structural variants (SVs) and variation in low-complexity Singapore, Bioinformatics Core Unit, Singapore, regions. In order to conﬁrm the potential increased Singapore, 6National Genomics Infrastructure Stockholm, sensitivity of LRS, we selected 5 patients with intellectual Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry disability and their healthy parents and performed trio LRS and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden using the Paciﬁc Biosciences Sequel instrument. These samples had been previously analyzed extensively with Thecomputationalanalysisofgenomicdatahasbecomean CNV-microarrays, exome sequencing and by whole integral part of genome research. The sheer volume of the genome SRS, but no disease-causing variant was found. data produced by whole-genome sequencing requires Allsamplesweresequencedtoatleast15xcoverage,anda researchers to have access to sizeable IT-infrastructure in single trio was sequenced to more than 40x coverage. We order to interpret the data produced. While large high- found that more than 20Mb of the genome was covered performancecomputingmightbealreadyavailabletolarger only by LRS and not by SRS, of which 600kb within research groups, especially smaller research groups would coding regions. Per individual genome we identiﬁed up to greatly beneﬁt from a publicly accessible commercial 22,000 SVs >50bp and >40,000 indels of 20-50bp. alternative. Mendelian inheritance concordance was as high as 87- We demonstrate how to setup suchan infrastructure with 95%withintrios.Pertrioweidentiﬁedonly3-32candidate a small amount of time and a minimal initial investment denovoSVs.Additionally,weperformedsinglenucleotide using the Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud infra- variant (SNV) calling, giving rise to 3-4 million SNVs per structure. After a walkthrough of the technical solutions individual, with approximately 24,000 in the exome. used,thepowerofthis setup isdisplayedbydescribing the Mendelian inheritance concordance for SNVs was as high analysis of a human WGS sample using the open-source as 97%. Taken together this shows that current LRS analysis pipeline Sarek. Using Sarek on the AWS cloud performs better for identifying SVs and variation in low- infrastructure; mapping, germline variant calling and complexity regions, whereas results for SNVs are close to annotation for a human WGS sample (30X coverage) was those for SRS. These results highlight the potential of LRS performed for less than US-$ 50. to replace SRS for clinical purposes in the future.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1707 C. Gilissen: None. A.M. Wenger: A. Employment (full LOY in immune cells cause dysregulation of gene or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, expression with important functional consequences for California, USA. M. Pauper: None. M. van de Vorst: affected cells and individuals. Together with previous None.K.Yauy:None.E.Kücük:None.M.Kwint:None. ﬁndings that men with LOY in blood cells have a greater M. Nelen: None. K. Neveling: None. P. Baybayan: A. risk for mortality and disease, these new results helps Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Bios- explain why men live shorter lives compared to females. ciences, Menlo Park, California, USA. L. Hickey: A. Funded by ERC-StG#679744 and Swedish-Reseach- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Bios- Council#2017-03762. ciences, Menlo Park, California, USA. J. Korlach: A. J. Mattisson: None. J. Halvardson: None. B. Torabi Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Bios- Moghadam: None. M. Danielsson: None. H. Davies: ciences, Menlo Park, California, USA. H.G. Brunner: None. J. Dumanski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. A. Hoischen: None. options,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest;Cray Innovation AB. L.A. Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest P16.46B (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); LOY Associated Transcriptional Effect (LATE) in Modest; Cray Innovation AB. immune cells measured by single cell RNAseq and bulk RNAseq P16.47C Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) dynamics over J.Mattisson1,2,J.Halvardson1,2,B.Torabi Moghadam1,2, time, estimated with a new method M. Danielsson1,2, H. Davies1,2, J. Dumanski1,2,3, L. A. Forsberg1,2,4 M. Danielsson1, J. Halvardson1, H. Davies1, B. Torabi Moghadam1, J. Mattisson1, E. Rychlicka-Buniowska1, 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, J. Heintz1, L. Lannfelt2, V. Giedraitis2, M. Ingelsson2, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Science for Life J. P. Dumanski1, L. A. Forsberg1 Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Gdansk, 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Gdansk, Poland, 4Beijer Laboratory of Genome Research, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Public Health and Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden Caring Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) in blood cells is the The most common human somatic mutation is mosaic loss most common somatic human mutation and it is associated of chromosome Y (LOY), associated with many severe with all-cause mortality and increased risk for common diseases and outcomes i.e. all-cause mortality, non- disease such as cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, CVD, AMD, haematological cancers, Alzheimer’s disease and diabetes autoimmune conditions and diabetes. Genes located on the amongst others. The method of choice for LOY estimation Ychromosome,bothinthemale-speciﬁcregion(MSY)and isSNP-array,becausethegenerateddataoriginallyintended in the pseudoautosomal region (PAR), are involved in for GWAS is now used to for LOY studies. However one important processes such as transcription, translation, bigdrawbackwithSNP-arrayisthedata-unit(logRRatio), chromatin remodeling, ribosome assembly, transcription making it difﬁcult to interpret and compare with LOY factor binding and post translational modiﬁcations. LOY measurements using other methods. thereforehasthepotentialtocausegenomewidedysregula- HereIpresentanewmethodtotransformSNP-arraydata tion of gene expression in affected cells. Here we present into percentage of LOY cells. This method was derived results from transcriptome sequencing of freshly collected fromLOYmeasurementsfrom121menat93yearsofage, peripheral blood cells using two different technologies, i.e. usingthreedifferentmethodsi.e.SNP-array,wholegenome scRNA-seq and bulk RNA-seq, the latter performed on sequencing and droplet digital PCR targeting AMELY and selected immune cell fractions sorted using ﬂuorescence- AMELX. This standardization was applied to samples from activated cell sorting (FACS). The results shows that: 1) auniquecohortconsistingofLOYmeasurementsfrom276 LOY can be measured from RNA and that results are men,sampledatdifferenttimepointsoveraperiodofupto comparable with DNA-based measurements, 2) that the 22.2 years. Most of the individuals had an increase in expressionofgeneslocatedintheMSYandPARregionsof measured LOY over time but complex LOY dynamics chromosome Y follows predictable patterns with lower couldalsobeseen,likelyduetoaberrantclonalexpansions. expression as a consequence of LOY, and 3) that LOY The project is funded by an ERC-StG as well as other Associated Transcriptional Effect (LATE) can also be sources. identiﬁed in autosomal genes. The results indicate that1708 M.Danielsson:None.J.Halvardson:None.H.Davies: of MR to the routine clinical practice. Funding: ISCIII 16/ None. B. Torabi Moghadam: None. J. Mattisson: None. 00258 and GVSAN2018/111086 to JRB. E. Rychlicka-Buniowska: None. J. Heintz: None. L. N. Fernandez-Jimenez: None. J.R. Bilbao: None. Lannfelt:None.V.Giedraitis:None.M.Ingelsson:None. J.P. Dumanski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock P16.50B options,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest;Cray Gut microbiota abundances relate to gene methylation Innovation AB. L.A. Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest in blood in the Dutch LifeLines Deep cohort (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Cray Innovation AB. A. Demirkan1,2, A. Kurilshikov1, S. Jankipersadsing1,3, H. Westra1, M. Bonder1, J. Fu1,3, L. Franke1, P16.48D C. Wijmenga1,4, A. Zhernakova1 Mendelian Randomization analysis of celiac GWAS reveals a blood expression signature with diagnostic 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center potential in absence of gluten consumption Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2School of Biosciences and Medicine, N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, J. R. Bilbao1,3 Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom, 1University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, 3Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Spain, 2Biocruces-Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Barakaldo, Spain, 3Biocruces-Bizkaia Health Research Netherlands, 4K.G. Jebsen Coeliac Disease Research Institute - CIBERDEM, Barakaldo, Spain Centre, Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway Introduction:Celiacdisease(CeD)isanimmune-mediated enteropathy with a strong genetic component for which the Thegutmicrobiomeisunderinvestigationforitsimpacton main environmental trigger is dietary gluten. Being on a humanhealth.Sincegenemethylationcancapturethelong- gluten-containing diet is necessary for a correct diagnosis. term effects on gene regulation, its role as a determinant or We hypothesize that merging different levels of genomic targetofgutmicrobialcompositionisofspecialinterest.By information through Mendelian Randomization (MR) can integrating the population based data from the LifeLines- help discover genetic biomarkers useful in the diagnosis of Deep cohort, we investigated the relations between gene different conditions such as CeD. methylation in blood and gut microbiota abundances. The Methods: We apply a MR-based approach confronting microbiome data were generated by 16S (V4 region) results from the largest to-date genome-wide association sequencing of the DNA isolated from stool samples, and study (GWAS) on CeD and from expression and methyla- processed according to the MiBioGen pipeline available at tionquantitativetraitloci(QTL)databases.Particularly,we https://github.com/alexa-kur/miQTL_cookbook. 271 taxa searchfortheoverlappinghitsofthedifferentMRanalyses present in at least 10% of the individuals were selected. performed and interrogate the prioritized genes in inde- Methylation was detected by Illumina 450K methylation pendent expression databases to test their diagnostic array, and dasen-normalized M-values were calculated. For potential. each taxa we performed an epigenome-wide association Results:WeidentifyUBE2L3,anubiquitinligaselocated study correcting for environmental, intrinsic and host in a CeD-associated region whose expression is altered in genetic factors in the complete set of 702 individuals. peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of CeD patients on Although no CpG-taxa pair reached experiment-wide gluten-free diet (GFD). The relative expression of UBE2L3 signiﬁcance calculated as false discovery rate, 49 pairs isoformspredictsCeDwith100%speciﬁcityandsensitivity with P-value < 2.4 × 10-7 passed the signiﬁcance threshold andthuscouldbeusedasadiagnosticmarker,especiallyin set for a single test. At genus level the most striking the absence of gluten consumption. associations appear between Lachnospiraceae sp. abun- Conclusions:Theclinicalinterestofthisﬁndingisinline dance and methylation near gene RAB18 (3.68 × 10-9), with the rising frequency of both self-reported wheat sen- Coriobacteriaceae sp. with ARFGAP2 (1.86 × 10-9) and sitivity and auto-imposed GFD, a phenomenon that is hin- Bacteroides sp. with LRP3. When integrating the shot-gun dering the diagnosis of CeD. Additionally, our strategy metagenomics data from the same samples, we found that couldbeapplicabletootherdisordersinwhichdiagnosisin Bacteroides dorei is the species responsible for the the absence of the disease-provoking insult is challenging, association with LRP3 (6.15 × 10-7). We demonstrate the andisagooddemonstrationofthetranslationoftheresults potential impact of gut microbiome on the host epigeneticsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1709 and suggest candidate regulatory pathways which could be Project funded by National Science Center in Poland stimulated by distinct bacterial genera. (2016/23/P/NZ2/04251). This project has received funding A. Demirkan: None. A. Kurilshikov: None. S. Janki- from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and persadsing:None.H.Westra:None.M.Bonder:None.J. innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Fu: None. L. Franke: None. C. Wijmenga: None. A. grant agreement No 665778. Zhernakova: None. P. Sztromwasser: None. D. Skrzypczak: None. A. Michalak: None. W. Fendler: None. P16.51C Remus: a web application for prioritization of P16.52D regulatory variants in monogenic diseases An integrated bioinformatic pipeline for accurate and ﬂexible DNA copy-number analysis from next- P. Sztromwasser1, D. Skrzypczak2, A. Michalak1,3, generation sequencing platforms W. Fendler1,4 A.Mikulasova1,C.Ashby2,B.A.Walker2,G.J.Morgan2, 1Department of Biostatistics and Translational Medicine, M. J. Xavier3, F. K. Mastrorosa3, K. R. Engelhardt1, Medical University of Lodz, Łódź, Poland, 2Wroclaw A. Skelton4, D. Rico1, J. A. Veltman3,5, S. Hambleton1,6 University of Enviromental and Life Sciences, Wrocław, Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics, Diabetology, 1Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Endocrinology and Nephrology, Medical University of Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Myeloma Center, Lodz, Łódź, Poland, 4Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, AR,UnitedStates,3InstituteofGeneticMedicine,Newcastle Boston, MA, United States University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Bioinformatics Support Unit, Newcastle University, Introduction: Analysis of variants in distant regulatory Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 5Department of elements could improve current 25-50% yield of genetic HumanGenetics,DondersInstituteforBrainCognitionand testing for monogenic diseases. However, the vast size of Behavior, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands, the regulome, great number of variants, and difﬁculty in 6Great North Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne predicting their phenotypic impact make searching patho- Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, genic variants in the regulatory genome challenging. New United Kingdom tools for identiﬁcation of regulatory variants based on their relevance to the phenotype are needed. Introduction: DNA copy-number variations (CNV) are a Methods:Weusedtissue-speciﬁcregulatory locimapped part of the human genome variability as well as associated by ENCODE and FANTOM5, together with microRNA - withpathologies,includingcongenitalgeneticdisordersand gene interactions from miRTarBase and miRWalk, to tumors. DNA-microarraysstilldominateinCNVdetection, develop Remus - a system for identiﬁcation of tissue- however next-generation sequencing (NGS) is slowly speciﬁc regulatory regions (https://github.com/seru71/ taking over using coverage-based tools. In this study, we remus). Remus combines regulatory features linked to developedacomprehensivein-housebioinformaticpipeline known disease-associated genes, and ﬁlters them using that integrates CNV and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) activity status in target tissues. For user convenience, analysis from various NGS-platforms and provides exten- Remus provides a web interface and facilitates in-browser sive annotation for routine use in research and diagnostics. ﬁlteringofvariantﬁles,makingitsuitableforsensitivedata. Methods: GATK4 tools were used to process bam ﬁles Results:Toevaluateourapproach,weusedasetofdistal and data denoising. Allele-frequency (AF) data was regulatory mutations reported causative for 23 distinct obtained from gnomAD. CNV segments were called using monogenic disorders, and a manually curated list of tissues the in-house algorithm and annotated by Variant Effect affected by these disorders. Out of 23 mutated loci Predictor. Additional scripts were developed for AF (enhancers and promoters) located 100bp-120,000bp away denoising, visualization, QC and reporting. The pipeline from the regulated genes, Remus correctly identiﬁed 19. was evaluated in two WES datasets (male infertility and Conclusion:Remusfacilitatesidentiﬁcationofregulatory primaryimmunodeﬁciency)andtargeted-sequencingofcell regions potentially associated with a monogenic disease, line U266, focused on Ig-genes. and can supplement classical analysis of coding variation Results: Using the pipeline, we observed effective noise with an aim of improving diagnostic yield of WGS reductioneveninbam ﬁles previously tested byother tools experiments. and displaying GC-wave. Independent validation showed that CNV detection was accurate, even within the Ig-loci1710 with complex rearrangements. Incorporating AF, we con- samples to identify “hot spots” in the genome that may ﬁrmed losses/gains and identiﬁed CN neutral LOH pinpoint an as yet undiscovered disease gene. The homo- (cnnLOH) in addition to CNV. Our in-house segmentation zygositydatacanalsobeusedtoidentifycandidatesamples offered the ﬂexibility to adapt speciﬁcity and sensitivity, for more extensive sequencing. basedonqualityandcoverageconditions.Thevisualization SE and ATH are the recipients of a Wellcome Trust and data tables allowed reliable CNV interpretation. Senior Investigator award (grant number WT098395/Z/12/ Conclusions: We developed a robust and effective Z). pipeline for CNV and cnnLOH detection. The pipeline is M.N. Wakeling: None. E. De Franco: None. T.W. NGS-platform independent and can be adapted to match Laver: None. S.E. Flanagan: None. M. Johnson: None. data segmentation, based on experimental conditions. K. Patel: None. A.T. Hattersley: None. S. Ellard: None. A. Mikulasova: None. C. Ashby: None. B.A. Walker: None. G.J. Morgan: None. M.J. Xavier: None. F.K. P16.54B Mastrorosa: None. K.R. Engelhardt: None. A. Skelton: Analyses of olfactory related genes None. D. Rico: None. J.A. Veltman: None. S. Hambleton: None. T. Olender1, T. E. Jones2, E. Bruford2, A. Alkelai3, D. Lancet1 P16.53A HomozygositymappingfromsmalltargetedNGSpanels 1The Weizmann Instiute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, using SavvyHomozygosity - getting more from less 2European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3Columbia University M. N. Wakeling, E. De Franco, T. W. Laver, Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United States S. E. Flanagan, M. Johnson, K. Patel, A. T. Hattersley, S. Ellard We study genes that participate in the olfactory pathway. We previously published RNAseq from human olfactory University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United epithelium, a rarely studied tissue, and obtained a whole Kingdom transcriptome overview. The results were incorporated into astudyof8Israelifamilieswithcongenitalgeneralanosmia Diagnosis of monogenic diabetes and hyperinsulinism is (CGA). Identiﬁed mutations in olfactory developmental often achieved using targeted next generation sequencing genes suggest that the deﬁcit results from abnormal (NGS). For consanguineous patients without a genetic embryonic development of the olfactory neuronal pathway. diagnosis,theidentiﬁcationofregionsofhomozygositycan In parallel, we study the evolution of the olfactory assist with both diagnosis and gene discovery. This is receptor genes (ORs), GPCRs with a crucial role in odor usually obtained using a microarray, or it can be calculated detection. The ORs undergo many species-speciﬁc dupli- from genome sequencing data. cations/deletions, resulting in complex orthology relation- We aimed to develop a novel method to utilise the off- ships. While for human a widely accepted nomenclature is target reads from existing targeted NGS panel data to available, based on phylogenetic classiﬁcation into 18 identify regions of homozygosity genome-wide. families and further into subfamilies, for other mammals We developed SavvyHomozygosity, which uses off- different nomenclature systems are used, concealing target reads from targeted NGS data in combination with importantevolutionaryinsights.Wedevelopedasystematic linkage disequilibrium to calculate regions of homo- classiﬁerforassigningauniﬁedhuman-basednomenclature zygosity. We used data from 170 samples sequenced using toanyORgenebasedoninter-specieshierarchicalpairwise both targeted NGS (average 3.4M reads per sample) and similarities, and applied it to the OR repertoires of 7 genome sequencing (mean read depth 35) to estimate the mammals and zebraﬁsh (10,247 ORs). This nomenclature sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the method. generates a framework for evolutionary studies, where Regions of homozygosity larger than 3Mb were detected textual symbol comparison allows an immediate identiﬁ- with sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 77%, and 10Mb with cation of potential orthologs and species-speciﬁc expan- sensitivityandspeciﬁcityof93%.Detectionwasnotlimited sions/deletions, e.g. Or52e5 and Or52e5b represent a to regions of the genome that are targeted by the duplication of OR52E5 in rat. Another example is the sequencing panel. absenceofOR6ZsubfamilyamongprimateORsymbols.In SavvyHomozygosity identiﬁes regions of homozygosity other mammals, OR6Z members are disposed in one genome-wide in samples sequenced using a targeted NGS genomic cluster, suggesting a large deletion in the primate panel.Theresultingdatacanbeusedtoassistthediscovery lineage. of causative variants, and can also be used with manyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1711 This uniﬁed nomenclature is applied by the Vertebrate Ourdataindicate thatdifferentgenesbecomeactivatedand Gene Nomenclature Committee and its implementation is repressed in a time- and tissue-speciﬁc manner, which under consideration by relevant species-speciﬁc nomen- implies that the “one locus - one candidate gene” theory clature committees. might be too simplistic, at least for nsCL/P. Support: U41HG003345 (NHGRI) J. Welzenbach: None. N. Hammond: None. M. Bar- T. Olender: None. T.E. Jones: None. E. Bruford: tusel: None. E. Mangold: None. A. Rada-Iglesias: None. None. A. Alkelai: None. D. Lancet: None. M.J. Dixon: None. M. Knapp: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. P16.56D Systematic integration of genetic and epigenetic data P16.57A yields novel insights into craniofacial development and When the outlier is the signal: Denoising autoencoders orofacial clefting to pinpoint causes of rare diseases from RNA-seq data J. Welzenbach1, N. Hammond2, M. Bartusel3,4, C. Mertes1, I. Scheller1, F. Brechtmann1, E. Mangold1, A. Rada-Iglesias3,4, M. J. Dixon2, A. Matusevičiūtė1, V. A. Yépez1,2, H. Prokisch3,4, M. Knapp5, K. U. Ludwig1 J. Gagneur1,2 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof 1Department of Informatics, Technical University of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Munich, Garching, Germany, 2Quantitative Biosciences 2Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, University of Munich, Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Center for Munich,Germany,3InstituteofHumanGenetics,Helmholtz Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Institute of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Cologne Excellence Cluster Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical forCellularStressResponsesinAging-AssociatedDiseases University of Munich, Munich, Germany (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and For most individuals with a suspected rare Mendelian Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany disorder,noclearpathogenicvariantcanbepinpointedafter undergoing genome sequencing. A promising complemen- Craniofacial development (CD) is a complex embryonic taryavenueistoidentifycausesofrarediseasesasaberrant process that shapes the human face. Defects in CD might regulatory events (RNA level or splicing) in RNA lead to forms of orofacial clefting, such as nonsyndromic sequencing data. However, existing methods for detecting cleft lip with/without cleft palate (nsCL/P). Despite recent aberrant regulatory events in RNA-seq data either lack success by GWAS, the biological interpretation has largely assessments of statistical signiﬁcance or rely on subjective been hampered by the lack of relevant tissue and the manualcorrectionsforconfounders.Here,weaddressthese location of risk loci within non-coding regions. Here, we issues by using denoising autoencoders as generic tool to generated a new multi-ethnic meta-analysis on nsCL/P by detect outliers while automatically controlling for co- combiningthreerecentnsCL/PGWAS.Subsequently,these variation resulting from technical, environmental, or data were systematically integrated with epigenetic data commongeneticvariations.Ourmodeltodetectexpression from human neural crest cells (NCC) and embryonic facial outliers, implemented in the Bioconductor package OUT- tissue(eFT),coveringtheentireperiodofCD.Inourmeta- RIDER, uses the negative binomial distribution to model analysis, ﬁve novel risk loci were identiﬁed, increasing the RNA-seqreadcounts.OUTRIDERimprovesuponstate-of- numberofnsCL/Prisklocito45.Forabout50%,available the-art expression outlier methods for detecting simulated data on histone modiﬁcations and chromatin accessibility outliers,geneswithrarevariantspossiblycausingnon-sense revealed distinct epigenetic activity patterns in NCC and mediated decay in the GTEx dataset, and pathogenic rare eFT. The Combination with interaction data revealed novel expression events in a rare disease cohort. We will also candidate genes with yet unknown roles in CD. For present unpublished results on splicing outlier detection instance, at the 1p22 locus, we conﬁrm the presence of based on the beta-binomial distribution. We use an active enhancers within ABCA4 that regulate ARHGAP29 annotation-free approach to detect novel splice sites, and expression. However, our data also suggest that another consider both exon-exon junction reads and reads over- gene,ABCD3,becomesactivatedatlaterstagesofCD.This lapping exon-intron boundaries to detect intron retention ﬁrst systematic integration of functional data from relevant events. Application to a mitochondrial disease cohort embryoniccelltypesprovidesnewinsightsintotheetiology demonstrated increased sensitivity over our previous of nsCL/P and the biological impact of associated variants. splicing outlier method and led to a new diagnostic by1712 identifying an aberrant exon truncation in the gene TAZ. observations, we propose a series of guidelines to call Altogether, these results indicate that employing denoising somatic mutations and describe a set of high conﬁdence autoencoders may become a general strategy to identify calls from 10 PD patients. causes of rare diseases in omics data. Conclusions: The use of multiple tissues or replicates as C. Mertes: None. I. Scheller: None. F. Brechtmann: well as awareness of the error sources are of great impor- None. A. Matusevičiūtė: None. V.A. Yépez: None. H. tance to call somatic mutations. Prokisch: None. J. Gagneur: None. I. Lobon: None. D. Juan: None. J. Ávila: None. T. Marques-Bonet: None. E. Soriano: None. P16.58B Guidelines for the detection of somatic mutations from P16.59C whole exome sequencing data: a case study of ThegutmicrobiomeofKashmiriwomenwithpolycystic Parkinson's disease patients ovary syndrome shows signiﬁcant enrichment at multiple genera, including Biﬁdobacterium I. Lobon1,2, D. Juan1, J. Ávila3,4, T. Marques-Bonet1,5,6, E. Soriano2,4,6 M. Kaakinen1,2, A. Demirkan3,2, S. Hassan1,4, M. A. Ganie5, J. Selvin4, P. Vogazianos6,7, C. Shammas8, 1Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (Consejo Superior de A. Antoniades6, I. Prokopenko1,2 Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas‐Universitat Pompeu Fabra), Barcelona,Spain,2DepartmentofCellBiology,Physiology 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, and Immunology, Institut de Neurociències, Universitat de 2University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Biología 3University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, Molecular "Severo Ochoa", CBMSO, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, 4Pondicherry University, Puducherry, India, 5Sheri Spain, 4Center for Networked Biomedical Research on Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences, Srinagar, India, neurodegenerative diseases (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain, 6Stremble Ventures Ltd, Limassol, Cyprus, 7European 5CNAG‐CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), University Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 8AVVA Barcelona, Spain, 6ICREA Academia, Barcelona, Spain Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Limassol, Cyprus Introduction: Accurate calling of somatic mutations from Polycysticovarysyndrome(PCOS)isacommonendocrine bulk sequencing data still poses a challenge outside the condition in women of reproductive age characterized by scenario of clonal expansion in cancer. Low frequency polycystic ovaries, hyperandrogenism, oligo- or amenor- mutations present in a tissue have been shown to exist in rhea, and a constellation of metabolic derangements. Gut other tissues, even of different germ layer origin. Conse- microbiome composition might contribute to PCOS sus- quently, deﬁning tissue-speciﬁc variants is an inefﬁcient ceptibility. We proﬁled the microbiome in DNA isolated strategy for detecting these mutations, which increases the from faecal samples by 16S rRNA sequencing of 19/20 need to identify the confounding factors hampering the Kashmiri (India) women with/without PCOS. We excluded discrimination of true somatic variants from noise. As a bacteria not detected in at least 1/3 of the subjects or with case study, we assessed the detection of somatic mutations less than 0.1% average relative abundance. We compared in sporadic Parkinson’s disease (PD). the relative abundances of 40/58 operational taxonomic Methods:Wesequencedthewholeexomesofsubstantia units infamily/genus levelbetweencases andcontrols, and nigra, striatum, neocortex, cerebellum and peripheral blood in relation to 33 hormonal and metabolic factors, by from 10 PD patients. Conﬁdence of detected variants was multivariate analyses adjusted for stool consistency, day of assessed by comparative analyses. menstrualcycleatsamplecollection,sequencingreaddepth Results: Inter-tissue and inter-individual comparisons and age, and corrected for multiple testing. For the ﬁrst showed high variability of variant allele frequency (VAF) time, we detected a positive signiﬁcant link between the even for high conﬁdence heterozygous variants (21.1% of butyrate production-related Eubacterium and follicle- calls with a VAF <0.4 or >0.6). Moreover, we found that stimulating hormone levels. We identiﬁed signiﬁcant on-target calls VAFs are signiﬁcantly shifted towards the enrichment in Biﬁdobacteriaceae (median 6.07% vs. reference allele, demonstrating a probe bias in exome 2.77%) and Aerococcaceae (0.03% vs. 0.004%), whereas sequencing data relevant for this application. Remarkably, we detected lower Peptococcaceae levels (0.16% vs. we also observed that alignment artifacts derived from 0.25%) in PCOS cases. Additionally, seven genera were unresolved regions still emerge even after removing geno- signiﬁcantly enriched in PCOS cases: Sarcina, Alkalibac- mic regions difﬁcult to align, such as low mappability terium and Megasphaera, and the previously PCOS- regions or segmental duplications. Based on these associated Biﬁdobacterium, Collinsella, ParaprevotellaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1713 and Lactobacillus. We observed enrichment of Collinsella eleven PCs and the GRS for CAD with ﬁrst and third PC, and Paraprevotella with higher fasting blood glucose but both GRSs were associated with the cluster levels, and Paraprevotella and Alkalibacterium with larger membership. hip and waist circumference, and weight. We show a Conclusions:Ourresultsindicate thatalthoughPCsmay relationship between gut microbiome composition and help to adjust for population stratiﬁcation, a genetic cluster PCOS, and link it to speciﬁc metabolic and hormonal indicator may be more efﬁcient in capturing the con- predictors of reproductive health in Indian women. founding due to geographic variation. Funding: Newton Bhabha (BT/IN/UK/DBT-BC/2015- R. Mägi: None. N. Pervjakova: None. S.E. Ojavee: 16), WT205915. None. K. Läll: None. M. Mändul: None. A.P. Morris: M. Kaakinen: None. A. Demirkan: None. S. Hassan: None. K. Fischer: None. None.M.A.Ganie:None.J.Selvin:None.P.Vogazianos: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Stremble P16.61A Ventures Ltd. C. Shammas: A. Employment (full or part- GENETIC DETERMINANTS OF time); Signiﬁcant; AVVA Pharmaceuticals Ltd. A. Anto- TRANSCRIPTIONAL VARIATION IN PRIMARY niades: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; HUMAN MONOCYTES ACROSS MULTIPLE Stremble Ventures Ltd. I. Prokopenko: None. CONTEXTS P16.60D I. Nassiri1, S. Danielli1, E. Lau2, J. Gilchrist1, H. Al- Genetic clusters and population stratiﬁcation in the Mossawi3, E. Mahe1, J. C. Knight2, B. P. Fairfax1 EstonianBiobankanditsassociationwithcomplextraits 1Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, R. Mägi1, N. Pervjakova1, S. E. Ojavee2, K. Läll1, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, M. Mändul1, A. P. Morris1,3, K. Fischer1 UniversityofOxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,3NDORMS, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom 1Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, Tartu, Estonia, Inter-individual variation in the regulation of gene expres- 3Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, sion is a key driver of phenotypic diversity. Monocytes Liverpool, United Kingdom formsentinelcellswithintheinnateimmunesystemandare implicated in numerous inﬂammatory disease processes. Introduction:Ithasbeenshownthatprincipalcomponents We have previously found a signiﬁcant proportion of (PCs) mainly indicate individuals’ geographic ancestry. monocyte eQTL to be detectable only after activation. The Therefore, the PCs have often been used for adjusting degree to which activation state modulates genetically genome-wide association analyses for population stratiﬁca- determined gene-splicing events and differential transcript tion.It canbeassumedthatthis isparticularlyrelevantina usage is unclear however. Here we use 100bp paired-end genetically heterogeneous population. Large-scale popula- RNA-sequencingtosystematicallyexploregeneticdetermi- tion-based biobanks have increased the potential to study nants of gene-expression and isoform usage across mono- theimpactofﬁne-scalestratiﬁcationandcrypticrelatedness cytes from 192 individuals in the naive state and post- also in small and homogeneous populations. exposuretoIFNγorlipopolysaccharide(LPS).Weobserve Methods: We analysed 49,363 participants from the novel splicing effects and unappreciated complexity at EGCUT cohort genotyped using various Illumina arrays. many loci associated with a high degree of chromatin The individuals are sampled from all counties of Estonia. accessibility. We similarly replicate and extend previous We calculated the ﬁrst 250 PCs using 61,044 independent observations of trans acting master-regulatory regions (e.g. variants. NFE2L3, IRF2, IFNB1). Speciﬁcally, we identify 7,275 Results: As most of the ﬁrst 250 PCs were signiﬁcantly lead eQTL for 7,631 transcripts. We ﬁnd isoform QTL associated withthe county of birth, we show that it is most showahighdegreeofcontextspeciﬁcity,withthemajority efﬁcient to use all of them in the k-means algorithm. Next, being unique to one treatment state. We apply an empirical we tested the association of cluster membership, actual Bayesian approach to model context-speciﬁc eQTL and countyofbirthaswellastheindividualPCswithprevalent facilitate the identiﬁcation and prioritization of the most coronary heart disease (CAD) and type 2 diabetes (T2D), likely causal variants. We integrate these results with and polygenic risk scores (GRS) for the same diseases. genomicregulatoryfeatures,chromatininteractiondatasets, ThreeﬁrstPCsaswellascountyofbirthweresigniﬁcantly and summary-statistics from 761 UK-Biobank traits to associated with prevalent CAD status, but not with T2D. further our understanding of the biological role of context- TheGRSforT2Dwassigniﬁcantlyassociatedwiththeﬁrst eQTL.Ourﬁndingsprovidenovelinsightsintothecontext-1714 speciﬁc role of genetic effects in the regulation of the Conclusion: Platelets in PC having led to clinical ATRs transcriptional machinery in primary immune cells and in the transfused patients were found to exhibit profound identify new potential insights into complex disease transcriptome changes. This study contributes to better processes. understand the pathophysiological aspect of ATRs that I. Nassiri: None. S. Danielli: None. E. Lau: None. J. appeartobeassociatedwiththemodiﬁcationoftheplatelet Gilchrist: None. H. Al-Mossawi: None. E. Mahe: None. cytoskeleton. Grant EFS- APR-2016-32, ART-INTS, “Les- J.C. Knight: None. B.P. Fairfax: None. Amis-de-Rémi”, France. D. Awounou: None. C. Barlier: None. C. Aloui: None. P16.62B J. Fagan: None. F. Salin: None. C. Boury: None. I. Whole platelet transcriptome proﬁling conﬁrms a Lesur: None. C. Mounier: None. E. Tavernier: None. F. cytoskeleton remodeling in platelet components Cognasse: None. O. Garraud: None. L. Sandrine: None. associated with adverse transfusion reactions P16.63C D. Awounou1, C. Barlier1, C. Aloui1, J. Fagan1,2, Finding the diagnosis for rare disease patients in F. Salin3, C. Boury3, I. Lesur4, C. Mounier5, southern Sweden by coordination of high-resolution E. Tavernier5, F. Cognasse1,2, O. Garraud6,2, genomic arrays (CytoScan HD/XON, Thermo Fisher L. Sandrine1,2 Scientiﬁc) and massive parallel sequencing (CREv2, Agilent/NextSeq500, Illumina) 1French Blood Establishment (EFS) Auvergne-Rhône- Alpes, Saint-Etienne, France, 2GIMAP-EA3064, University S. Samuelsson1,2, M. Bidgoli3, S. Gruvberger-Saal1, of Lyon, Saint-Etienne, France, 3UMR Biodiversity of K. Karrman3,2, H. Ehrencrona3,2, L. Olsson-Arvidsson3,2, Genes and Ecosystems, Genomics Platform, INRA, Cestas, C. Montén1, M. Sundberg1, J. Laustsen1, E. Futoma- France, 4Helixventure, Mérignac, France, 5ICLN- Kazmierczak1, P. Piccinelli1, B. Hallström1, P. Storm1, Cancerology Institute Lucien Neuwirth, Saint-Priest en V. Henmyr1, E. Eklund4, M. Heidenblad1, T. Jonson1,2 Jarez, France, 6INTS - Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, Paris, France 1Clinical Genomics Lund, Dep. of Clinical Genetics & Pathology, Lund, Sweden, 2Dep. of Laboratory Medicine, Introduction:Plateletsaresmallanucleatecellsthatplaya Division of Clinical Genetics, Lund University, Lund, key role in hemostasis and thrombosis. Blood platelets Sweden, 3Dep. of Clinical Genetics & Pathology, Lund, destined for the transfusion release panoply of molecules Sweden, 4Dep. of Clinical Sciences, Section for Pediatrics, duringpreparationandstorage.Theleukoreductionprocess Lund University, Lund, Sweden made the transfusion safer but did not abolish the adverse events. The purpose of this work was to study the whole Introduction: Until recently, it was difﬁcult to identify platelet transcriptome when found in association with genetic causes of heterogeneous diseases and syndromes. adverse transfusion reactions (ATRs). Today, advances in two crucial techniques, high resolution Methods: Total RNA isolated from six buffy-coat- genomic arrays and massive parallel sequencing, makes it derived pooled platelet components (PPC) were sequenced possible to investigate essentially all genes in parallel. A using the Ion-Proton® technology. The alignment of the consensus has been established that parallel or sequential reads to the hg19 reference genome were done with STAR genomicarrayandexomeanalysis,shouldbeconsideredas software. The genes were quantiﬁed, using the EM algo- ﬁrst-line tests in the evaluation of children with e.g., rithm method implemented in Partek Flow® software. unexplained intellectual disability and/or congenital DESeq2,EdgeRandLimmavoom(threeRpackages)were anomalies. used for differentially expressed (DE) gene identiﬁcation. Methods and Results: The main objective of the pre- Gene-Gene interactions and clustering analyses were per- sented workﬂow is to provide a smooth and ﬁnancially formedwithSTRINGdbtoidentifyhubsgenesandclusters viablepipelinetodiagnoserarediseasepatientsinsouthern of interests. PANTHER allowed performing the functional Swedenbycombininggenomewidecopynumberdetection enrichment analysis. and innovative SNP/UPD-analysis of genomic arrays with Results: Among 79 dysregulated DE genes (common exome sequencing. The presented results and analysis with the 3 methods), 6 transcripts (score conﬁdence: 90%) pipeline, including regionally developed bioinformatic and encoding proteins were found to be related to the dysre- visualization tools, are based on comprehensive clinical gulated network of the cytoskeleton remodeling, associated validation and experience from 9 years of genomic array with a cellular reorganization. RhoC was strongly present, and 4 years of exome sequencing. A complementary with DE genes involved in the signaling of chemokines.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1715 method, CytoScan XON, was implemented in 2018 to discriminative accuracy in identifying repeat expansions detect copy number variants down to 1 exon. from paired-end sequence data, and application genome- Conclusions: We conclude that genomic arrays and widecanbeusedinaninitialscreentoinferthelocationsof exome sequencing are broad and powerful methods which other repeat expansions, thus accelerating the discovery of complement each other, and we believe these methods novel disease-relevant genetic variation. provide a strong foundation throughout the foreseen tran- Funding: MND Association (957-799); Science Founda- sition towards whole genome sequencing. We further con- tion Ireland (17/CDA/4737) clude that, in a clinical setting, together with careful R.L. McLaughlin: None. standardized phenotyping and local expert interpretation and bioinformatic teams, the described workﬂow can deli- P16.65A ver a diagnostic yield of >50% at a sustainable cost to the SPiP: a Splicing Prediction Pipeline addressing the regional health care system. diversity of splice alterations, validated on a curated S. Samuelsson: None. M. Bidgoli: None. S. Gruvber- diagnostic set of 2,468 exonic and intronic variants ger-Saal: None. K. Karrman: None. H. Ehrencrona: None. L. Olsson-Arvidsson: None. C. Montén: None. M. R. Leman1,2,3, B. Parfait4, D. Vidaud4, E. Girodon4, Sundberg: None. J. Laustsen: None. E. Futoma-Kaz- L. Pacot4, G. Le Gac5, C. Ka5, C. Ferec5, Y. Fichou5, mierczak:None.P.Piccinelli:None.B.Hallström:None. C. Quesnelle2, E. Muller2, D. Vaur2, L. Castéra2, P.Storm:None.V.Henmyr:None.E.Eklund:None.M. A. Ricou2, H. Tubeuf1, O. Soukarieh1, P. Gaildrat1, Heidenblad: None. T. Jonson: None. F. Riant6, M. Guillaud-Bataille7, V. Caux-Moncoutier8, N. Boutry-Kryza9, F. Bonnet-Dorion10, I. Schultz11, P16.64D M. Rossing12, M. Parsons13, A. Spurdle13, A. Martins1, Detecting pathogenic repeat expansions from genome C. Houdayer1, S. Krieger1,2,3 sequence data 1Inserm U1245 Genomics and Personalized Medecine in R. L. McLaughlin Cancer and Neurological Disorders, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Smurﬁt Institute of Genetics, Dublin, Ireland Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 2Laboratoire de biologie et de génétique du cancer, Centre François Repeat expansions are an important class of genetic Baclesse, Caen, France, 3Normandie Université, variation in neurological diseases and may represent a UNICAEN, Caen, France, 4Service de Génétique et convergent aetiological molecular mechanism. However, Biologie Moléculaires, APHP, HUPC, Hôpital Cochin, the identiﬁcation of novel repeat expansions using conven- Paris, France, 5Inserm U1078, Genetics, Functional tionalsequencingmethodsisachallengeduetotheirtypical Genomics and Biotechnology, Université de Bretagne, lengths relative to short sequence reads and difﬁculty in Brest, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique, AP-HP, GH producing accurate and unique alignments for repetitive Saint-Louis-Lariboisière-Fernand Widal, Paris, France, sequence. However, this latter property can be harnessed 7Gustave Roussy, Université Paris-Saclay, Département de when using paired-end short read sequencing data to infer Biopathologie, Villejuif, France, 8Service de Génétique, the possible locations of repeat expansions and other Institut Curie, Paris, France, 9Unité Mixte de Génétique structural variation. Constitutionnelle des Cancers Fréquents, Hospices Civils HerewepresentREscan,afastandlightweightcommand de Lyon, Lyon, France, 10Institut Bergonie - INSERM line utility that infers the possible locations of repeat U1218 Departement de Biopathologie Unité de Génétique expansions from paired-end short read sequencing data by Constitutionnelle, Bordeaux, France, 11Laboratoire reportingtheproportionofreadsorientatedtowardsalocus d’Oncogénétique, Centre Paul Straus, Strasbourg, France, that do not have an adequately mapped mate. A high 12Centre for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, University number for this statistic relative to a population of data of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 13Department of indicatesthelocationofapossiblerepeatexpansionthatcan Genetics and Computational Biology, QIMR Berghofer be cross-referenced against structural variant calls derived Medical Research Institute, Herston, Australia from alternative algorithms and brought forward for experimental follow-up. We validate this approach using Variant interpretation is recognized as the major challenge whole-genome sequence data for 259 cases of amyotrophic in genetic diagnosis. Spliceogenic variants exemplify this lateral sclerosis, of which 25 are positive for a large hex- issueasalltypesofnucleotidevariationscanbepathogenic anucleotide repeat expansion in C9orf72, determined by by affecting normal pre-mRNA splicing via disruption/ repeat-primed PCR. We show that REscan has good creation of splicing signals such as splice sites (ss),1716 branchpoints (BPs) or splicing regulatory elements (SREs). consequently lead to allele dropout in the sequencing Unfortunately, most in silico prediction tools are dedicated results. Given the large amount of primers managed by a tospeciﬁcsignals(eg5’/3’ss,BPsorSREs).Wedeveloped laboratory and their quality depending on continually the Splicing Prediction Pipeline (SPiP) to allow compre- updated data, an automated reassessment is needed. hensive assessment of variant effect on the different Methods: A web application has been developed using regulatory motifs involved in splicing. SPiP runs a cascade python and the Django web framework. To determine the of different and complementary tools, chosen on their location of the primers on the reference genome we use efﬁciency, i.e. Splicing Prediction in Consensus Element Blast. The variants present at the location of the primers is (SPiCE) for physiological 5’/3’ss, Branch Point Prediction recovered through the Ensembl REST API. We imple- (BPP) for BPs, ΔtESRseq for SREs. Moreover, we mentedconﬁgurablevalidationchecksfortheprimers,such embedded a new score for the prediction of cryptic/de as a maximum MAF for any variant found inside the pri- novo ss, after training and validation on more than 200 mer. Primers can be reanalyzed at any time to take into million of ss obtained through Ensembl data. SPiP was consideration updated external databases. evaluated on a curated diagnostic collection of 2,468 Results: We developed an open-source web based solu- variants (19.8% unpublished) in 345 genes, with their tion to validate primers, accessible at https://genetic.tools. corresponding experimental RNA splicing data. These Users canbeorganizedinlaboratories,sharingprimersand variants were scattered along the exonic and intronic validating them whenever public databases such as Gno- sequences up to 36,947 bp from the ss. SPiP achieved an mad,TOPMedorothersupdatetheirvariantinformation,or accuracy of 80.5 %, with a speciﬁcity of 71.3 % and a the reference genome is updated. Those updates can be sensitivityof91.07%.Asaresult,SPiPisacomprehensive automated, with automatic alerts to the users if the updated prediction pipeline which properly deals with the diversity information on their primers. ofpossiblesplicingalterations.Itcanbeeasilyimplemented J. Stoppani: None. B. Wolf: None. A. Zaum: None. P. in any diagnostic laboratory as a routine decision making Kuonen: None. tool for prioritizing RNA studies. R. Leman: None. B. Parfait: None. D. Vidaud: None. P16.67C E. Girodon: None. L. Pacot: None. G. Le Gac: None. C. A SMARTer solution to stranded single-cell RNA-seq Ka: None. C. Ferec: None. Y. Fichou: None. C. Ques- nelle:None.E.Muller:None.D.Vaur:None.L.Castéra: S. Gandlur1, M. Pesant2, N. Bolduc1, S. Lee1, C. Hardy1, None. A. Ricou: None. H. Tubeuf: None. O. Soukarieh: A. Das1, M. Bostick1, A. Farmer1 None. P. Gaildrat: None. F. Riant: None. M. Guillaud- Bataille: None. V. Caux-Moncoutier: None. N. Boutry- 1Takara Bio USA, Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States, Kryza:None. F.Bonnet-Dorion: None.I.Schultz:None. 2Takara Bio Europe, Saint Germain en Laye, France M.Rossing:None.M.Parsons:None.A.Spurdle:None. A.Martins:None.C.Houdayer:None.S.Krieger:None. Introduction: With the growing need for low-input and single-cell NGS library prep solutions, we see that P16.66B researchers recognize the value in revealing transcriptome PrimerBench: A modern framework for continuous proﬁles from damaged cells as well as noncoding informa- primer validation tion from extremely low cell numbers (1-1,000). We have previously released several RNA-seq solutions based on J. Stoppani1, B. Wolf1, A. Zaum2, P. Kuonen1 oligo(d)T priming that push the limits of sensitivity and reproducibilityfromultra-lowinputsaswellassinglecells. 1iCoSys, University of applied sciences and arts western Oligo(d)T priming is a very efﬁcient way to capture the switzerland, Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland, 2Department transcriptome, only the polyadenylated fraction can be of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Biozentrum captured.Inaddition,foroligo(dT)-primedcDNAsynthesis Am Hubland, Würzburg, Germany, Würzburg, Germany to generate high-quality libraries, one needs to start with high-quality RNA, which excludes the use of this Introduction: The usage of primers of Sanger sequencing technology with samples damaged or degraded due to the is essential in molecular diagnostics. The quality of those nature of theprocessing (e.g., FFPE samples) or method of primers is critical for a good analysis of the targeted isolation. Additionally, these earlier single-cell kits do not genomicregionsduringsequencing.Thequalityofaprimer preserve strand-of origin information. depends on many factors, as for example, the absence of Methods and Results: SMART-Seq Stranded Kit now variantsontheregioncoveredbytheprimersthemselves.A allows the generation of sequencing-ready, stranded Illu- primer with variants would fail to amplify both alleles and mina® libraries directly from 1-1,000 sorted cells or anAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1717 equivalent amount (10 pg-10 ng) of puriﬁed total RNA of S. Roskosch: None. D. Beyter: A. Employment (full or any quality. This kit integrates an innovative technology, part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen Inc. H. alreadyincorporatedinourSMARTerStrandedTotalRNA- Jónsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; SeqKitv2-PicoInputMammalian,whichenablesremoval deCODE genetics/Amgen Inc. H.P. Eggertsson: A. ofribosomalcDNAfollowingcDNAsynthesis,asopposed Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE todirectremovalofcorrespondingrRNAmoleculespriorto genetics/Amgen Inc. B.V. Halldórsson: A. Employment reverse transcription. The SMART-Seq Stranded Kit pro- (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE genetics/Amgen tocol can be completed within seven hours, and a con- Inc.. B. Kehr: None. venient pooling option for inputs between one to ten cells facilitates greater ease-of-use by minimizing the number of P16.70B samples being handled. Enrichment and Clustering of Rare Genetic Variants S. Gandlur: None. M. Pesant: None. N. Bolduc: None. using Shared Protein Structure Domains S.Lee:None.C.Hardy:None.A.Das:None.M.Bostick: None. A. Farmer: None. J. D. Stephenson1,2, R. A. Laskowski1, J. M. Thornton1, M. E. Hurles2 P16.69A PopDel calls medium-size deletions jointly in tens of 1EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Sanger thousands of genomes Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom S.Roskosch1,D.Beyter2,H.Jónsson2,H.P.Eggertsson2, Introduction: The spatial distribution of variants in B. V. Halldórsson2, B. Kehr1 proteins can suggest mechanisms of disruption and can help to differentiate benign from damaging changes. 1Berlin Institute of Health / Charité, Berlin, Germany, However, in rare diseases the sparsity of variants per 2deCODE genetics/Amgen Inc., Reykjavík, Iceland protein reduces the power of spatial distribution analysis. We overcome this by enriching rare variant data and Catalogs of genetic variation for large numbers of aligning shared structural domains from different proteins. individualsareafoundationforresearchonhumandiversity We then analyse the domains together and uncover spatial and disease. Creating such catalogs for small variants from patterns using DBSCAN 3D clustering. whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data is now commonly Materials and Methods: The variants are mapped from donewithjointcallingapproaches.Wehavetransferredthe DNA coordinates to the position on the most appropriate joint calling idea to larger deletion variants and developed protein structure. They are then grouped by CATH struc- the ﬁrst joint calling tool, PopDel, that can detect deletions tural domain and protein structures within each domain in WGS data of tens of thousands of individuals containing a variant are aligned. DBSCAN clustering is simultaneously. In the joint analysis of hundreds of thenperformedonthe3Dcoordinates ofthevariantsinthe simulated genomes, PopDel shows similar recall and aligned structure space for each CATH domain family. precision to existing deletion callers while being faster Results: Firstly, comparing the locations of clusters with and requiring less memory. On data of the extensively those of known disease-associated variants and those con- studiedgenomeNA12878,PopDelidentiﬁesmoredeletions sidered benign can help to assign a pathogenicity prob- containedinGiaB andPacBioreferencecall setscompared ability to variants of unknown signiﬁcance. Secondly, the to its competitors Delly and Lumpy. On Illumina Polaris locationoftheclusterintheproteinorcomplexcansuggest data, PopDel’s deletions distinguish individuals from potential mechanisms of action such as the interruption of different populations indicating that the callset reﬂects ligand binding, catalysis or structure destabilization/mis- biological differences. In PopDel’s output for 49 Polaris folding.Thirdlybycomparingmembersofthesamespatial trios, we identiﬁed a de novo deletion in the individual clusterswithgenelistsofknowndiseaseassociationwecan HG01763 conﬁrmed by multiple SNPs that further indicate uncover new disease gene candidates. itsoriginonamaternalhaplotype.ApplicationtoWGSdata Conclusion: Enrichment and spatial clustering of rare of tens of thousands of Icelanders including 778 Icelandic variants on protein structures can allow disease-sensitive triosyieldsapreliminaryMendelianinheritanceerrorrateof regionsofproteinstobeuncovered,newdiseaseassociated 0.05%(28,210,207trio-deletion-pairs)usingonlyaﬁlteron genes to be found and can help to characterise variants of genotype likelihoods. Based on these results, we believe unknown signiﬁcance. that PopDel will enable more routine scans for deletions in ESPOD fellowship: EMBL/Wellcome Trust. large sequencing cohorts. J.D. Stephenson: None. R.A. Laskowski: None. J.M. Thornton: None. M.E. Hurles: None.1718 P16.71C Introduction:Uniparentaldisomy(UPD)istheoccurrence Using multiple sequencing platforms to identify and of two homologous chromosomes, or segments originating characterise disease-causing genome alterations fromthesameparent.AlthoughthemajorityofUPDs does not have phenotypic consequences, particular events may G. Gallone1, R. Schöpﬂin1, H. Moeinzadeh1, D. Heller1, lead to disease due to imprinting effects, an underlying M. Spielmann1, M. Vingron1, S. Mundlos1,2 homozygous pathogenic disease variant or a low mosaic trisomyoftherespectivechromosome.UPDweretypically 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, identiﬁed by SNP microarrays during routine genetic Germany,2Charité–Universitätsmedizin,Berlin,Germany diagnostics. Here we present a validated method to detect UPDs in both trio and single whole exome sequencing Genomic alterations, including single nucleotide poly- (WES) data. morphisms (SNPs), small insertions/deletions (InDels) and Material and Methods: We applied UPDio for the structural variants (SVs) are a major determinant of detection of UPD based on Mendelian inheritance errors to congenital disease. Whereas coding SNPs and InDels have a cohort of 4,912 WES trios and used identiﬁed regions of beenthefocusofintensestudy,andraresmallvariantshave homozygosity(ROH)byH3M2forisodisomyUPD(iUPD) beenimplicatedinabout40%ofraregeneticdevelopmental detection to a cohort of 29,723 single WES samples. We disorder diagnoses, little is known about the mechanisms calculatedperchromosome whether the ROHsize deviated and disease impact underlying non-coding variation. Non signiﬁcantly from the log-normal distribution and we coding SNPs can affect regulatory elements and have been reported cases with ROH involving a whole chromosome. causally linked to Mendelian disorders. SVs can alter the Results: Among the 4,912 WES trios we identiﬁed 9 genome by duplicating, deleting, inverting or translocating (0.18%)UPDevents,3ofwhichinvolved isodisomyand6 genomic segments. SVs, in particular, are poorly under- heterodisomy.Inthecohortof29,723singlecaseswefound stood, mainly because of the difﬁculties inherent with their 13 (0.04%) iUPD events, including the 3 found in trios. At reliable detection and phasing via short read sequencing least 11/22 UPD ﬁndings had previously been reported. technology. Genomic alterations that remain cryptic to Twoinvolvedaknownimprintedchromosomedisorderand current sequencing technology are likely to represent a in at least four patients a homozygously mutated disease signiﬁcant source of disease-causing variation in unsolved gene was identiﬁed. Mendelian disorders. Conclusions: UPD can be identiﬁed using both single Here, we aim to comprehensively discover, phase and and trio WES. UPD can be clinically relevant and may characterise the spectrum of genomic variation for a cohort affect genetic counseling, given the reduced risk of recur- of several individuals affected by rare congenital disorders, rence for affected families. usinganarrayofgenomicresources:deepshortreadwhole K.Yauy:None.N.deLeeuw:None.C.Gilissen:None. genome sequencing (WGS), in situ Hi-C, long read R. Pfundt: None. sequencing (PacBio), optical mapping (Bionano) and linked-read (10x Genomics) technologies. P16.75C G.Gallone:None.R.Schöpﬂin:None.H.Moeinzadeh: An ultrafast amplicon-based targeted library None. D. Heller: None. M. Spielmann: None. M. Vin- preparation method using double-stranded unique gron: None. S. Mundlos: None. molecularidentiﬁersfordetectingraremutationsincell- free DNA P16.74B Identiﬁcationofuniparentaldisomyeventsinacohortof T. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Lee, K. Pendleton, C. Li, L. Lin, 29,723 whole exome sequencing samples G. Liu, Z. Liu K. Yauy1,2, N. de Leeuw2, C. Gilissen2, R. Pfundt2 Paragon Genomics, Inc., Hayward, CA, United States 1Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies Rares et Introduction: Liquid biopsy is a noninvasive easily Médecine Personnalisée, Génétique clinique, CHU obtainable sample with diagnostic value, especially using Montpellier,UniversitédeMontpellier,Centrederéférence cell-free DNA (cfDNA). But it presents challenges toward anomalies du développement SORO, INSERM U1183, accurate variant detection, as low fractions of mutant DNA Montpellier, France, 2Department of Human Genetics, present can be masked by artifacts or background noise Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud fromPCRandsequencingerrors,leadingtofalsenegatives. University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands Progress has been made using hybrid capture-basedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1719 sequencing methods using unique molecular identiﬁers P16.77A (UMIs), but can be time-consuming with complicated and Combining ACMG guideline and multiple public tediousworkﬂows,resultinginpoorresults.Largeamounts databases identiﬁes misclassiﬁed HGMD variants ofcfDNAfortheseprotocolsarenotrealistictoobtainfrom patients. To provide a fast (4-hour) and reliable NGS K. Park1,2, W. Lee3 solution for low-frequency variant detection, we developed the CleanPlex® UMI technology. 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Myungji Hospital, Methods:CleanPlex®UMItechnologyfeatures3stepsto Goyang-Si, Gyeonggi-Do, Korea, Republic of, 2Tomocube generatemolecular-barcodedNGSlibraries:multiplexPCR Co.1, Ltd., Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Department of for molecular barcoding, background cleaning step to Laboratory Medicine, University of Ulsan College of remove PCR by-products, and indexing PCR to add Illu- MedicineandAsanMedicalCenter,Seoul,Korea,Republic mina® adapters and sample indexes. Here we present a of panel targeting frequently mutated hotspots in 23 genes in lungcancer.LibrarieswerepreparedwithreferencecfDNA Background: Discordant variant classiﬁcations between (SeraCare)at0.1%to0.5%minorallelefrequencies(mAF) public databases is one of the well-documented limitations and sequenced using Illumina® NextSeq®. wheninterpretingpathogenicityofvariants.Theaimofthis Results: With CleanPlex UMI Lung Cancer panel at study is to investigate the level of variant misclassiﬁcation input of 50ng cfDNA nearly all mutations are detected at fromtheHumanGeneMutationDatabase(HGMD)andthe 0.1%mAFandat0.25%mAFwith100%PPV.Withinput annotation concordance between databases in depth. of20ngofcfDNA,themethodcanachieve100%detection Materials and Methods: We used a total of 166,834 at 0.5% mAF. classiﬁed variants [disease-causing mutations (DM, Conclusion: The CleanPlex® UMI technology demon- n=157,874) and disease-associated polymorphisms (DP, strates high sensitivity with low false positive rate, for the n=3,275; DFP, n=2,009; FP, n=3,676)] from the HGMD. detectionoflow-frequencyalleles,evenatlowDNAinputs All variants were reanalyzed based on the American Col- with an easy cost-effective workﬂow. legeofMedicalGeneticsandGenomics(ACMG)guideline T. Chen: None. Y. Liu: A. Employment (full or part- and compared to ClinVar variants. Misclassiﬁcation types time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership were categorized into major discordance (from pathogenic Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual to benign or vice versa) and minor discordance (from property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. L. Lee: A. pathogenic to variants of unknown signiﬁcance or vice Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon versa). Genomics,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, Results: According to variant classiﬁcation based on patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon ACMG guideline, major discordance were observed in Genomics,Inc.K.Pendleton:A.Employment(fullorpart- 0.1% (559/157,874) of DMs and 6.2% (129/3,676) of time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership polymorphisms. Major discordance was frequently Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual observed in nonsense (41.3%), splicing (10.6%), or frame- property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. C. Li: A. shift (29.8%) variants, while minor discordance was Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon occurred in nonsynonymous variants (84.9%). Overall Genomics,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, concordance between HGMD and ClinVar were 89.9% patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paragon (39,792/44,772) variants studied. The remaining 10.1% of Genomics, Inc. L. Lin: A. Employment (full or part-time); variants was discordant classiﬁcation, most of which are Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest nonsynonymous variants. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Conclusions:Variant classiﬁcationfrom databases needs Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, Inc. G. Liu: A. Employ- to use with caution when interpreting pathogenicity of ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paragon Genomics, variants. We found that signiﬁcant number of loss of Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or function variants, which was reported pathogenic in data- otherintellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;ParagonGenomics, basesmaynotbepathogenic.Thisistheﬁrststudytoreveal Inc.Z.Liu:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; misclassiﬁcation burden of the HGMD variants and anno- ParagonGenomics,Inc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock tation concordance at the genome-wide level. options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; K. Park: None. W. Lee: None. Paragon Genomics, Inc.. P16.78B Loqusdb: the value of a local frequency database1720 M. Magnusson1,2,3, J. Eisfeldt1,2, H. Stranneheim1,2,3, 1AmsterdamUMC,Amsterdam,Netherlands,2Universityof D. Nilsson4,2,5,1, A. Lindsdtrand1,5,4, A. Wedell1,3 Florence, Florence, Italy, 3MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, Imperial College London, London, 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, United Kingdom, 4National Heart & Lung Institute, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Science for Life Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet Science Park, Solna, 5Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Sweden, 3Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Radcliffe Department of Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University 7Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 8Duke- Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Center for Molecular National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Guidelines for variant interpretation in Mendelian disease Variant frequencies are essential when differing between set stringent criteria to report a variant as (likely) benign and potentially disease causing variants in rare pathogenic, prioritising control of false positive rate over disease cases. After analysis and annotation of exomes and test sensitivity and diagnostic yield. For genetically whole genomes we are presented with thousands of heterogeneous diseases where missense variants constitute candidate variants that calls for further investigation. One the preponderance of disease-causing variants, this leads to of the most effective and unbiased way to reduce this high rates of variants of uncertain signiﬁcance in known numberistoassesstherarityofavariantinanypopulation. disease genes and false negative test results, as many This approach is especially powerful when working in the variants detected in patients will be novel or poorly ﬁeld of rare diseases. Currently there are a number of characterised. reliable sources of information for major population We compared rare variants in large case cohorts of frequencies when considering single nucleotide variants inherited cardiac conditions to reference populations to (SNV) and small indels, with gnomAD as the most identify variant classes with high prior likelihoods of prominent public resource available. In contrast, for pathogenicity,deﬁnedbyetiologicalfraction(EF).Analysis structural variation (SV), the background frequency in the of variant distribution using a bespoke unsupervised clus- general population is more or less unknown mostly due to teringalgorithmidentiﬁedgeneregionswherecasevariants challengesincallingSVsinaconsistentway.Keepingtrack are signiﬁcantly clustered. Non-truncating variant cate- oflocalvariationcanreducethenumberofpotentialdisease gories with EF≥0.95 were identiﬁed in 5 established causingvariants,bothforSNVsandSVs,inaconsiderable hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) genes and high EF way.Here,wepresentloqusdb,atooltosolvetheproblem regions deﬁned in major arrhythmia genes (RYR2/SCN5A). of keeping track of any type of variant frequencies. We propose adaptations to ACMG/AMP guidelines to Loqusdb was designed to handle a large ﬂow of samples incorporate this quantitative evidence and demonstrate and unlike other solutions samples can be added con- substantial increases in diagnostic rates, e.g. a 14-20% tinuously to the database without rebuilding which relative increase in HCM cases with actionable variants. simpliﬁes the situation. We show both how powerful SV Particularvariantsclassesareempiricallyshowntohavea analysis can be when considering population frequencies sufﬁciently high probability of pathogenicity to support a and also how the number of SNV/INDELS can be reduced “likely pathogenic” classiﬁcation when found in patients, byaddinglocalpopulationfrequencyinformationevenafter even without segregation or functional evidence. Our pro- annotating with gnomAD. posed adaptations to ACMG/AMP guidelines can be M. Magnusson: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. H. Stranne- seamlessly incorporated into clinical genetics laboratory heim:None.D.Nilsson:None.A.Lindsdtrand:None.A. workﬂows for diseases with large genetic datasets. This Wedell: None. approach could increase the yield of high conﬁdence actionable variants in many Mendelian diseases, consistent P16.79C with the framework and recommendations of current Quantitative approaches to variant classiﬁcation guidelines. increase the yield and precision of genetic testing in R. Walsh: None. F. Mazzarotto: None. N. Whifﬁn: Mendelian diseases None.R.Buchan:None.N.Li:None.L.Felkin:None.K. L. Thomson: None. H. Watkins: None. P.J.R. Barton: R. Walsh1, F. Mazzarotto2, N. Whifﬁn3, R. Buchan4, None.I.Olivotto:None.S.A.Cook:None.C.R.Bezzina: N. Li3, L. Felkin4, K. L. Thomson5, H. Watkins6, P. J. R. None. J.S. Ware: None. Barton4, I. Olivotto7, S. A. Cook8, C. R. Bezzina1, J. S. Ware4Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1721 P16.80D P16.81A An Artiﬁcial Intelligence Engine for High-Throughput Enhanced access to extensive phenotype and disease Matching of Genetic Variants to their ACMG/AMP annotation of genes and genetic variation in Ensembl Classiﬁcation for Inherited Disease Gene Panels I. M. Armean, L. Gil, D. Lemos, A. Parton, E. Frise, S. Nohzadeh-Malakshah, M. Falcioni, H.Schuilenburg,A.Thormann,S.Hunt,F.Cunningham E. Kiruluta, F. M. De La Vega European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Fabric Genomics, Oakland, CA, United States Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom The ACMG/AMP evidence-based guidelines for variant pathogenicity assessment deﬁne several criteria assessing The accurate annotation and interpretation of genes and particular supporting evidence information. Criteria are geneticvariationisparamountinbasicresearchandclinical combined to classify a variant as either pathogenic (P), diagnostics. Critical information such as population allele likely-pathogenic (LP), benign (B), likely-benign (LB), or frequencies, the predicted molecular consequences of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS). Although widely adopted in variants and observed associations with phenotype often clinical interpretation of variants this process has remained lie in decentralized large-scale resources and are time largely manual and time-consuming. Current informatics consuming to integrate. tools aimed to ease the application of the guidelines do not We import and harmonize phenotype and disease anno- completely automate the entire process. Therefore, we tations from sources including ClinVar, DGVa/dbVar, the developed an artiﬁcial intelligence method to automatically NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog, DDG2P, Orphanet, MIM infer the classiﬁcation of variants that utilizes a forward- morbid and the Cancer Gene Census into a standard struc- chaining inference engine at its core to implement the ture and provide simple tools for data access. ACMG-AMPcriteriareturningapredictedclassiﬁcationfor To facilitate improved querying across conditions each variant. The engine is able to incorporate criteria and described differently in different studies and support rule reﬁnements for speciﬁc genes by separating the rule aggregatedviewsintheEnsemblgenomebrowser,wemap speciﬁcation from the code that executes them. Natural the phenotype descriptions used in these projects to ontol- language generation provides explanatory text with the ogy terms. We have recently updated the Ensembl Variant rationale of the classiﬁcation attained for reference by Effect Predictor (VEP) to provide enhanced phenotype and clinical geneticists. To evaluate the performance of our disease annotations alongside predicted molecular con- method,we analyzedasetof19,990variants fora15-gene sequence and frequency data. We have also recently hereditary breast and ovarian cancer panel with prior extended our REST API to support detailed querying of classiﬁcationsfromClinVar(2+stars)andColorGenomics these data. database used as ground truth. We show automatic In Ensembl release 96 (April 2019) we have 54,859 classiﬁcation of 91.6% of P/LP and 60% of B/LB ClinVar humanphenotype/diseaseannotationsassociatedwithgenes variants with essentially no misclassiﬁcations. Unclassiﬁed and 5,910,851 associated with variants from 15 different variants are annotated with resolved guideline criteria for sources.Thesecanbeextractedusingavarietyofinterfaces rapid manual assessment to ﬁnalize classiﬁcation. In and are available for variant annotation with VEP. addition, we show the ability to reclassify 76% previously We import an extensive range of phenotype and disease VUSvariantsoftheColordatabase.Weareintegratingthis annotationsinto one uniﬁedresource.Here wedescribethe engine into our cloud-based software platform for clinical datatypesweholdandthemultipleaccessmethodswehave genomic interpretation. developed to simplify the use of these essential data within E. Frise: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; the community. Fabric Genomics, Inc. S. Nohzadeh-Malakshah: A. I.M.Armean:None.L.Gil:None.D.Lemos:None.A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fabric Geno- Parton: None. H. Schuilenburg: None. A. Thormann: mics, Inc. M. Falcioni: A. Employment (full or part-time); None. S. Hunt: None. F. Cunningham: None. Signiﬁcant; Fabric Genomics, Inc. E. Kiruluta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Fabric Geno- P16.82B mics,Inc.F.M.DeLaVega:A.Employment (fullorpart- Implementation of WGS in diagnosis through extensive time); Signiﬁcant; Fabric Genomics, Inc.. computational optimization1722 E. Souche1, C. Herzeel2, P. Costanza2, D. Decap3, M. Holtgrewe, O. Stolpe, M. Nieminen, D. Beule L. Dehaspe1, A. Cortes Calabuig1, F. Vervloesem4, G. E. Maes1, R. Wuyts2, W. Bossuyt1, J. Vermeesch1 Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany 1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, VarFish is an easy-to-use web-based database system 2ExaScience Life Lab, IMEC, Leuven, Belgium, designed for empowering geneticists in the analysis of 3DepartmentofInformationTechnology,GhentUniversity- clinical and whole exome sequencing variant data sets for IMEC, Ghent, Belgium, 4Western Digital, Ghent, Belgium individuals and families. It provides a set of tools for supporting the full workﬂow from (i) variant data quality Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) is becoming the control,(ii)variantﬁltrationand(iii)efﬁcientassessmentof standard of care to diagnose rare hereditary diseases as it variants based on visual alignment inspection and annota- promises to deliver more information than the current tion data such as functional and frequency annotation. standard of care, namely arrayCGH and whole exome The system allows to organize data into a project folder sequencing (WES). Its implementation in a diagnostic structurewithaccesscontrol.Variantqualitymetricscanbe settingwillhomogenizethemolecularlaboratoryworkﬂow, displayed project- (and thus cohort-) wise or for single offer a single test for multiple conditions, and may cases/families.Thevariantsthemselvescanbeﬁlteredbased ultimately decrease cost and time to diagnosis. Although on genotype, population frequency, variant effect, quality the bioinformatics pipelines used for analyzing WGS and metrics, and annotation such as membership in ClinVar or WES are very similar, implementing WGS analysis in HGMD Public. A special ClinVar-centric view allows for routine diagnosis is hampered by the huge amount of data the easy screening of variants based on pathogenicity generated. In the ICON-GAP project, we developed and annotation in ClinVar. evaluated new solutions for WGS data analysis. First, we After ﬁltration of the variants, their quick and efﬁcient implemented GATK Base Quality Score Recalibration in assessment is supported by various tools: color ﬂags and the new version of elPrep, a high-performance tool for commenting allows for simple yet effective note-taking, preparingBAMﬁlesforvariantcalling.TheuseofelPrepto remote-controlling the genome viewer IGV to display a sortBAMﬁles,removeduplicatesandperformbasequality variant’s locus, and some important database excerpts are score recalibration produces the same output as the available directly within the system. Further, link-out to traditional samtools/Picard/GATK approach but runs seven external databases (e.g., ENSEMBL or NCBI), allow the times faster on WGS data. Second, we integrated this assessment of variants using MutationTaster, SIFT, or version of elPrep in Halvade, a framework for executing varioussplicesiteassessmenttools.Filtereddatasetscanbe pipelines in parallel. Halvade’s efﬁcient parallelization downloadedasVCForExcelﬁles(includingcommentsand enabled to complete the analysis of a 30X WGS in three ﬂags) or submitted to external tools such as hours. Finally, we compared the results obtained using MutationDistiller. elPrep and Halvade to those obtained using the Broad VarFish is available under a permissive open source Institute production pipeline run on the Google Genomics license and ships with comprehensive documentation and cloud using well-characterized cell lines. In conclusion, we installation instructions. developed and optimized a software infrastructure that M. Holtgrewe: None. O. Stolpe: None. M. Nieminen: signiﬁcantly minimizes the computational needs for WGS, None. D. Beule: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock henceenablingtheshort-termimplementationofWGSinto options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; full diagnostic use. MicroDiscovery GmbH. E. Souche: None. C. Herzeel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ExaScience Life Lab, IMEC. P. P16.84D Costanza: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Detecting and sizing short tandem repeat expansion ExaScienceLifeLab,IMEC.D.Decap:None.L.Dehaspe: mutations in whole genome sequence data None. A. Cortes Calabuig: None. F. Vervloesem: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Western Digi- I. Rajan Babu1, R. Chiu2, M. Couse1, I. Birol2, tal. G.E. Maes: None. R. Wuyts: A. Employment (full or J. Friedman1 part-time); Signiﬁcant; ExaScience Life Lab, IMEC. W. Bossuyt: None. J. Vermeesch: None. 1The University of British Columbia, and Children’s & Women’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Michael P16.83C Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, VarFish - ﬁshing for causative variants Vancouver, BC, CanadaAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1723 Introduction: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) has sequencing chemistry have increased length, accuracy, and unprecedented potential to identify disease-causing genetic throughputofPacBiocircular consensussequencing(CCS) variants. However, most clinical WGS bioinformatic reads, resulting in 10-20kb reads with average read quality pipelines overlook variations in short tandem repeat above 99%. (STR) regions, which constitute ~3% of our genomes. Materials and Methods: We sequenced a 12kb library SeveralalgorithmstoanalyzeSTRsinWGSdatahavebeen from human reference sample HG002 to 18-fold coverage developedrecently,yetacomprehensivecharacterizationof onthePacBioSequelIISystemwiththreeSMRTCells8M. their reliability in detecting and sizing STR expansions is The CCS algorithm was used to generate highly-accurate lacking. (average 99.8%) 11.4kb reads, which were mapped to the Methods: We compared the performance of eight avail- hg19 reference with pbmm2. We detected small variants able STR algorithms (lobSTR, RepeatSeq, HipSTR, using Google DeepVariant with a model trained for CCS TREDPARSE, ExpansionHunter, STRetch, exSTRa and andphasedthevariantsusingWhatsHap.Structuralvariants GangSTR) on the European Genome-phenome Archive were detected with pbsv. Variant calls were evaluated dataset of 118 Coriell genomes with known repeat expan- against Genome in a Bottle (GIAB) benchmarks. sion mutations in one of eight different disease-associated Results: With these reads, DeepVariant achieves SNP STR loci. We evaluated the sensitivity of the tools in and Indel F1 scores of 99.82% and 96.70% against the detecting the disease-associated full-mutation (FM) expan- GIAB truth set, and pbsv achieves 95.94% recall on struc- sions in this gold standard dataset and ascertained the tural variants longer than 50bp. Using WhatsHap, small concordance between estimated and actual repeat lengths. variants were phased into haplotype blocks with 105kb Results:lobSTR,RepeatSeqandHipSTRfailedtodetect N50. The improved mappability of long reads allows us to STR expansions altogether, while TREDPARSE, Expan- aligntoanddetectvariantsinmedicallyrelevantgenessuch sionHunter, STRetch, exSTRa and GangSTR exhibited as CYP2D6 and PMS2 that have proven "difﬁcult-to-map" 100%sensitivityindetectingFMsatARandATN1loci,and with short reads. identiﬁed FMs in 94-100%, 85-100% and 50-100% of Conclusions: These highly-accurate long reads combine DMPK, HTT and ATXN1 expansion-positive samples, the mappability and ability to detect structural variants of respectively. Only ExpansionHunter, GangSTR and long reads with the accuracy and ability to detect small STRetch identiﬁed the single ATXN3 FM sample, whereas variants of short reads. none of the algorithms reliably detected FMR1 FMs. W.J. Rowell: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- TREDPARSE and GangSTR did not identify the homo- niﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, zygous FXN FM expansions, while STRetch, Expansion- stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig- HunterandexSTRaexhibitedsensitivitiesof79%,57%and niﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. A.M. Wenger: A. Employ- 29%, respectively. While most callers appeared to perform ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. well in sizing non-expanded alleles, ExpansionHunter’s Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other repeat size estimates, in general, were closer to the actual intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. A. lengths of both non-expanded and expanded STR alleles. Kolesnikov:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; I.RajanBabu:None.R.Chiu:None.M.Couse:None. Google Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, I. Birol: None. J. Friedman: None. patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Google Inc. P. Chang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- P16.85A niﬁcant; Google Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Comprehensive variant detection in a human genome options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; with highly accurate long reads GoogleInc.A.Carroll:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant;GoogleInc..E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock W.J.Rowell1,A.M.Wenger1,A.Kolesnikov2,P.Chang2, options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; A. Carroll2, R. J. Hall1, P. Peluso1 Google Inc. R.J. Hall: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest 1Paciﬁc Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States, (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); 2Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States Signiﬁcant;PaciﬁcBiosciences.P.Peluso:A.Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. E. Introduction: Long-read sequencing has been applied Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other successfully to assemble genomes and detect structural intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Paciﬁc Biosciences. variants. However, due to high raw-read error rates (10- 15%), it has remained difﬁcult to call small variants from longreads.Recentimprovementsinlibrarypreparationand1724 P17 GWAS have identiﬁed >600 genetic risk loci for male- Epigenetics - Gene regulation pattern baldness (MPB). However, for the majority of loci, the biological mechanisms through which the associated P17.01B variants exert their functional effects remain elusive. Methylome-wide association study of amyotrophic Among them, the 4q21.21 risk locus located intronically lateral sclerosis case-control cohorts inFGF5,aknowninhibitorofhumanhairgrowth.Ofnote, premature termination of hair growth is a key pathophy- M. F. Nabais, Australian ALS Methylation Consortium siological sign of MPB. To gain a deeper understanding of the regulatory architecture at the FGF5-locus and its effect Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Brisbane, Australia on MPB development a HaploRegv4.0 query was per- formed. The database research revealed that the lead SNP Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common rs4690116 is located in an estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) subtype of the motor neuron diseases. The clinical bindingsite.Thisisofparticularinterest,asestrogenshave heterogeneity of ALS may reﬂect a complex disease a reported role in hair growth control and act as opponents etiology, caused in part by large genetic heterogeneity of androgens, the key hormonal mediators in MPB. To test amongpatients.DespiteacleargeneticcontributiontoALS, if the risk allele may affect ESR1 binding afﬁnity, which epigenomic molecular events such as DNA methylation mighteventuallyresultinaninsufﬁcientinhibitionofFGF5 (DNAm) may also play a role in ALS. DNAm differences we designed a luciferase assay where we co-transfect (i) a betweencasesandcouldreﬂectbothcauseorconsequences luciferase vector containing the FGF5 promoter and the ofdisease.HereweappliedtheOmicS-data-basedComplex 4q21.21-ESR1 binding site with either the risk or the traitAnalysis(OSCA)softwaretonewALS(782casesand alternate allele and (ii) an ESR1-expression vector. 613 controls). OSCA implements mixed linear model Estrogen-stimulationisusedtoinduceESR1function.First approaches to account for unknown confounders by ﬁtting resultsinHEK293TcellsindicateaninhibitionoftheFGF5 arandomeffectofgenome-widemethylationwithvariance- promoter under estrogen stimulation. Additional experi- covariance structure estimated from the data and thus ments are currently performed and the results will be controls for the high false positive rate in standard linear presented at the conference. These data will elucidate the models with little loss of power. We identiﬁed 10 sig- molecular mechanism at the FGF5-locus and will even- niﬁcantly differentially methylated CpGs between ALS tually contribute to a deeper understanding of MPB cases and controls and estimate the proportion of variance pathobiology. explained by all probes to be ρ2 = 16.1%. Finally, out-of- L.M. Hochfeld: None. C. Walter: None. S. Schoch: samplepredictionwithALSderivedBLUPsolutionsofthe None. M.M. Nöthen: None. S. Heilmann- probes effects, gives signiﬁcant predictive accuracy (AUC Heimbach: None. = 62%,CI = [0.59-0.64], p-value = 9.3x10-14). Given a 95% reported genetic relationship between ALS and schizo- P17.03D phrenia, we also assessed the predictive accuracy of ALS epigenome wide association studies in asthma: a derived BLUP scores in an independent schizophrenia systematic review targetsampleandreportasmallerbutsigniﬁcantprediction (AUC = 54%, CI = [0.51-0.57], p-value = 7.1x10-3). A. Edris Mohamed1, H. Den Dekker2, E. Melen3, 95% M.F. Nabais: None. L. Lahousse1 P17.02C 1Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Erasmus MC, Estrogen-mediated regulation of FGF5 and its role for Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, male-pattern baldness Sweden L. M. Hochfeld1, C. Walter1, S. Schoch2, M. M. Nöthen1, Objective:Asthmaisacommon,chronicrespiratoryairway S. Heilmann-Heimbach1 disease inﬂuenced by environmental factors and possibly theirinteractionwiththehumangenomecausingepigenetic 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof changes.Epigenomewideassociationstudies(EWAS)have Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, mainly investigated DNA methylation and its association 2Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn with disease or traits, exposure factors or gene expression. Medical Center, Bonn, Germany This systematic review aimed to identify all EWAS assessing differentially methylated sites associated with asthma in humans.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1725 Design: Structured systematic literature search following Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, PRISMA guidelines, Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for cohort 6Department of Gastroenterology and Interdisciplinary studies was used for bias assessment. Endoscopy, Vivantes Wenckebach-Klinikum, Berlin, Data Sources: We searched PubMed and Embase data- Germany,7CenterforHumanGenetics,UniversityHospital bases from 2005 through 2019. of Marburg, Marburg, Germany, 8Department of Visceral, Eligibility Criteria: EWAS studies testing association Transplant, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University between differential methylation and asthma in humans. Hospital of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 9Department of Results: Overall, we identiﬁed sixteen EWAS studies Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, complying with our search criteria. Twelve studies were Otto-von-Guericke University Hospital, Magdeburg, conducted on children and ten were conducted on sample Germany, 10Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Bayreuth, sizes less than 150 subjects. Four hundred and nineteen Bayreuth,Germany,11DepartmentofGeneral,Visceraland CpGs were reported in children studies after correction for Transplantation Surgery, University of Heidelberg, multipletesting.Inadultstudies,thousandsofdifferentially Heidelberg, Germany, 12Department of General, Visceral, methylatedsiteswereidentiﬁed.Differentialmethylationin and Cancer Surgery, University of Cologne, Cologne, inﬂammatory related genes correlated with higher levels of Germany,13DepartmentofGeneral,Visceral,andThoracic gene expressions of inﬂammatory modulators in asthma. Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Differentially methylated genes associated with asthma UniversityofHamburg,Hamburg,Germany,14Department included SMAD3, SERPINC1, PROK1, IL13, RUNX3 and of General, Visceral, and Transplant Surgery, University TIGIT. Fourty-one CpGs were replicated at least once in Medical Center, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, blood samples, and 28 CpGs were replicated in nasal 15Department of General, Visceral, and Thoracic Surgery, samples. Klinikum Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, 16Department Conclusion: Although many differentially methylated of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, Elisabeth CpGs in genes known to be involved in asthma have been Hospital, Essen, Germany, 17Gastroenterologie am identiﬁedinEWAStodate,weconcludethatfurtherstudies Burgweiher, Bonn, Germany, 18Department of General, of larger sample sizes and analyses of differential methy- Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center lation between different phenotypes are needed. Hamburg-Eppendorf, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, A. Edris Mohamed: None. H. Den Dekker: None. E. Germany, 19Kantonsspital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland, Melen: None. L. Lahousse: None. 20Department of General, Visceral, and Thorax Surgery, RoMed Klinikum Rosenheim, Rosenheim, Germany, P17.04A 21Gastroenterologische Gemeinschaftspraxis, Koblenz, Statisticalﬁnemappingandfunctionalannotationofrisk Germany, 22Centre of Urban Epidemiology, Institute of loci for Barrett’s esophagus and esophageal Medical Informatics, Biometry, and Epidemiology, adenocarcinoma University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 23Department of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Faculty J. Schröder1, V. Schüller2, A. May3, C. Gerges4, of Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany M. Anders5,6, J. Becker1, T. Hess1,7, N. Kreuser8, T. Noder5, M. Venerito9, L. Veits10, T. Schmidt11, Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA) and its precancerous C.Fuchs12,J.R.Izbicki13,A.H.Hölscher12,D.Dakkak8, condition Barrett’s esophagus (BE) are multifactorial B. Jansen-Winkeln8, Y. Moulla8, O. Lyros8, S. Niebisch8, diseases with rising prevalence rates in Western popula- M. Mehdorn8, H. Lang14, D. Lorenz15, B. Schumacher16, tions.ArecentGWASmeta-analysisidentiﬁed14riskloci, R. Mayershofer17, Y. Vashist18,19, K. Ott11,20, M. Vieth10, which are all located in non-coding genomic regions. J. Weismüller21, E. Mangold1, S. Moebus22, M. Knapp23, Therefore, our understanding of the biological mechanisms H. Neuhaus4, T. Rösch5, C. Ell3, M. M. Nöthen1, underlyingtheseassociationsisincomplete.Theaimofthis I. Gockel8, R. Thieme8, J. Schumacher1,7, A. C. Böhmer1 studywas(i)tostatisticallyﬁnemapand(ii)tofunctionally annotate all known risk loci for BE/EA. 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof First,wecalculatedcredibleSNPsetsforeveryrisklocus. Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, This resulted in sets of variants that most likely included 2Department of Medical Biometry, Informatics and true causal variants. The credible SNPs were cross- Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, Bonn, Germany, referenced with Roadmap chromatin states associated with 3Department of Medicine II, Sana Klinikum, Offenbach, enhancer activity from esophageal tissue. We functionally Germany, 4Department of Internal Medicine II, annotated variants located in enhancers and investigated Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Düsseldorf, Germany, nearby genes regarding their function. Based on this 5Department of Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, University1726 information, the risk loci were prioritized for subsequent cognitive abilities. Interspecies divergence of regulatory functional follow-up analyses. elements as well as trans-acting factors are likely to As a ﬁrst result, two credible SNPs at the 5p15 locus are contribute to human traits. Here we used bulk and single- locatedinanenhancerupstreamSLC9A3,whichencodesan cell RNA-seq in combination with in-depth proteomics to epithelial brush-border Na-H-exchanger. Both SNPs, as compare human and chimpanzee iPSC-derived forebrain well as the best-associated SNP at 5p15, are eQTLs for progenitors. We found that interspecies differences in SLC9A3. Interestingly, upregulation of SLC9A3 has been protein levels exceeded the differences in transcript levels. associated to gastroesophageal reﬂux disease - a major risk Lowly and moderately expressed proteins were found to factor for BE/EA. contribute to most of the human-chimpanzee expression In order to unveil regulatory mechanisms that are differences, while highly expressed proteins remained at involved in the development of BE/EA, we are now per- similar levels. Our data indicate that post-transcriptional forming functional analyses. This includes 4C-sequencing mechanismsandtrans-actingelementsplayacrucialrolein and dual-luciferase assays in cells of all stages of BE/EA the evolution of the human forebrain. development. Altogether, our systematic approach of Funding: the Swedish Research Council, the Swedish functional characterization of genetic risk factors will con- Foundation for Strategic Research, the Swedish Brain tribute to the elucidation of pathomechanisms involved in Foundation, the Swedish excellence project Basal Ganglia the development of BE/EA. Disorders Linnaeus Consortium (Bagadilico), and the J. Schröder: None. V. Schüller: None. A. May: None. SwedishGovernmentInitiativeforStrategicResearchAreas C. Gerges: None. M. Anders: None. J. Becker: None. T. (Multipark & StemTherapy), the Swedish National Infra- Hess: None. N. Kreuser: None. T. Noder: None. M. structure for Biological Mass Spectrometry (BioMS) and Venerito: None. L. Veits: None. T. Schmidt: None. C. ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc, San Jose USA. Fuchs: None. J.R. Izbicki: None. A.H. Hölscher: None. D.A. Grassi: None. P. Brattås: None. J.G. Valdés: D.Dakkak:None.B.Jansen-Winkeln:None.Y.Moulla: None. M. Rezeli: None. M.E. Jönsson: None. S. Nol- None. O. Lyros: None. S. Niebisch: None. M. Mehdorn: brant:None.M.Parmar:None.G.Marko-Varga:None. None.H.Lang:None.D.Lorenz:None.B.Schumacher: J. Jakobsson: None. None. R. Mayershofer: None. Y. Vashist: None. K. Ott: None. M. Vieth: None. J. Weismüller: None. E. Man- P17.07D gold: None. S. Moebus: None. M. Knapp: None. H. Identiﬁcation of CFTR cis-regulatory variants Neuhaus: None. T. Rösch: None. C. Ell: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. I. Gockel: None. R. Thieme: None. J. M. Collobert1, K. Rouault1,2, C. L’Hostis1,3, Schumacher: None. A.C. Böhmer: None. M. Audrézet1,2, C. Férec1,2, S. Moisan1,2 P17.06C 1UnivBrest,Inserm,EFS,UMR1078,GGB,Brest,France, Post-transcriptionalmechanismsdistinguishhumanand 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et chimpanzee forebrain progenitors d'Histocompatibilité, CHRU de Brest, Brest, France, 3Association Gaétan Saleün, Brest, France, Brest, France D. A. Grassi1, P. Brattås1, J. G. Valdés2, M. Rezeli3, M. E. Jönsson1, S. Nolbrant4, M. Parmar4, G. Marko- Although, more than 2000 mutations have been discovered Varga3, J. Jakobsson1 in Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane conductance Regulator (CFTR) gene, some patients with cystic ﬁbrosis or CFTR- 1Lab of Molecular Neurogenetics, Department of relateddisorders(CFTR-RD)haveincompletegenotypesor Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience, present extreme phenotypes. Development of chromatin Lund, Sweden, 2Oncology and Pathology, Kamprad Lab, conformation study techniques has identiﬁed several long- Lund University, Lund, Sweden, Lund, Sweden, 3Clinical range regulatory elements as involved in this control Protein Science and Imaging, Department of Biomedical expression. The objective of this project is to study the Engineering, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, Lund, involvementof‘cis-ruption’,thatisthedysfunctionofacis- Sweden, 4Lab of Developmental and Regenerative regulatory element, in cystic ﬁbrosis and CFTR-RD Neurobiology, Department of Experimental Medical (Congenital Bilateral Absence of Vas Deferens, CBAVD). Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, Lund, Sweden In a homogeneous group of 25 CBAVD patients carrying only one F508del mutation, 17 cis-regulatory regions of The human forebrain has increased in size and complexity CFTR gene were sequenced. By comparing to European sincethesplitbetweenthehumanandchimpanzeelineages population, some variants display a frequency signiﬁcantly and these changes are thought to underlie human-speciﬁc different. In particularly, one variant located in cis-Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1727 regulatory region of intron 21 encompassing an important main sub-groups consist of 120 Kabuki syndrome patients, transcription factor binding site EP300, is 40 times more 33 (28%) of them carrying KMT2D or KDM6A pathogenic frequent in this group. Enhancer tests are realised to variants, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients, with 12/47 measuretheeffect oftheintron21regionontheactivityof (25%) subjects carrying EP300 or CREBBP pathogenic CFTR promoter in intestinal and airway cells. By combin- variants and Floating Harbor syndrome patients, with 3/19 ingtheenhancer ofintron 21andtheenhancerofintron11 (16%) subjects carrying SRCAP pathogenic variants. Con- (strong enhancer described in intestinal cells), a strong sidering the clinical overlapping and shared molecular cooperative effect is observed on the CFTR promoter mechanisms among the Chromatinopathies, we extended activity in intestinal cells. These two enhancers have the in silico variants analysis to all patients. 42/193 (22%) common transcription factor binding sites which some of patients showed pathogenic variants in genes not asso- interact together (EP300/TCF12 and EP300/CEBPB). ciated with the original clinical suspicion. A re-evaluation Enhancer tests with the insertion of the variant of interest of the clinic signs in part conﬁrmed the molecular data. in the combination of intron 11 and 21 enhancers are in Some examples include KS patients found mutated in progresstodeterminetheimpactofthevariantontheCFTR KMT2A,CTCFandARID1B;RSTSpatientswithframeshift promoter activity. and nonsense variants in KMT2A. M. Collobert: None. K. Rouault: None. C. L’Hostis: Conclusion:Thestudyofchromatinopathiesmay offera None. M. Audrézet: None. C. Férec: None. S. unique opportunity to learn about epigenetics in health and Moisan: None. disease.ThisstudyhighlightstheneedtoanalyzewithNGS approaches these diseases that show molecular and clinical P17.08A overlap. NGS-panel for Chromatinopathies: implications in G.Squeo:None.B.Augello:None.T.Mazza:None.S. diagnosis and research Castellana: None. M. Castori: None. E. Di Fede: None. N. Malerba: None. E. Colombo: None. V. Massa: None. G. Squeo1, B. Augello1, T. Mazza2, S. Castellana2, D. Milani: None. C. Gervasini: None. G. Merla: None. M. Castori1, E. Di Fede3, N. Malerba1,4, E. Colombo3, V. Massa3, D. Milani5, C. Gervasini3, G. Merla1 P17.09B Expression study of candidate miRNAs and evaluation 1Division of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della of their potential use as biomarkers of diabetic Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy, neuropathy 2Bioinformatics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy, 3Medical A. Latini1, C. Ciccacci1,2, A. Colantuono1, C. Politi1, Genetics, Dept. Health sciences, Università degli Studi di V. Spallone3, G. Novelli1, P. Borgiani1 Milano, Milano, Italy, 4PhD Program in Experimental and Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Univ. of 1Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Genetics Foggia,Foggia,Italy,5UOSDPediatriaadaltaintensitàdi Section, University of Rome Tor Vergata, It, Rome, Italy, cura, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore 2UniCamillus, International University of Health and Policlinico, Milano, Italy Medical Science, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Systems Medicine, Endocrinology Section, University of Rome Tor Introduction: The regulation of the chromatin state by Vergata, It, Rome, Italy epigenetic mechanisms plays a central role in gene expression,development,function,andmaintenanceofcell Diabetic polyneuropathy (DPN) and Cardiovascular Auto- identity.Defectsincomponentsoftheepigeneticmachinery nomic Neuropathy (CAN) are common forms of diabetic lead to a highly heterogeneus group of syndromic neuropathyinpatientswithtype 2diabetes(T2D).Thereis conditions, we termed “Chromatinopathies” characterized anincreasingevidencethatmicroRNAsmaybeinvolvedin by intellectual disability, growth abnormalities, and typical many disorders as also in diabetes and its complications. facial features. Our aim was to evaluate the expression of candidate Material and Methods: We designed a NGS-targeted miRNAsinpositiveandnegativepatientsforbothformsof panel containing 68 genes associated with chromatino- diabetic neuropathy. We recruited 50 T2D patients with pathies including Kabuki, Kleefstra, Cofﬁn Lowry, Wie- neurologicalevaluation.WeextractedRNAfromperipheral demann Steiner, Rubinstein-Taybi, Floating Harbor, and blood mononuclear cells and quantiﬁed the expression of 6 Cornelia de Lange syndromes. miRNAs (miR-499a, miR-27a, miR-146a, miR-128a, miR- Results: Driven by clinical diagnosis, we analyzed 253 155, miR-21) by TaqMan assays. The expression in patients and found pathogenic variants in 60 (24%). The different groups was compared by ANOVA test. In1728 addition,weextractedDNAfromthepatients’wholeblood, methylationofmiR-146apromoterinOAsynoviocytesand analyzedcommonpolymorphismsoftheMIRNAgeneand weaker binding afﬁnity of NF-kB on this hypermethylated evaluated the possible correlation between genetic variants region in OA synoviocytes. Signiﬁcant upregulation of andmiRNAlevelsexpression.PatientswithDPNshoweda miR-146a was observed in 5-AzadC-treated OA synovio- higher expression of miR-128a compared to those DPN- cytes compared with untreated, which was associated with negative (P=0.015). In contrast, miR-155 and miR-499 demethylation of miR-146a promoter. Inhibition of NF-kB seem to be down-expressed in patients with DPN (P=0.04 reversed the effect of 5-AzadC on miR-146a expression in andP=0.05,respectively).Weobservedalowerexpression OA synoviocytes. ofmiR-155(P=0.05)eveninpatientswithCANrespectto Conclusion: We demonstrated, for the ﬁrst time to our CAN-negative patients. Genotypic analysis showed that knowledge, that DNA methylation regulates miR-146a rs767649 polymorphism variant allele in the miR-155 expression in OA synoviocytes, by preventing NF-kB promoter region is associated with a higher expression of from binding to miR-146a promoter. These data provide this miRNA (P=0.003) compared to the wild-type allele. strong evidence that epigenetic mechanisms could regulate Our data suggest the involvement of miRNAs in the the expression of miRNAs linked to OA pathogenesis. developmentofdiabeticcomplications.Ifthesepreliminary Fellowships: The study was co-ﬁnanced by Greece and the results will be validated in more numerous cohorts, these European Union (European Social Fund- ESF) through the miRNAs could be considered potential biomarkers for the Operational Program «Human Resources Development, development of diabetic neuropathy. Education and Lifelong Learning» in the context of the A. Latini: None. C. Ciccacci: None. A. Colantuono: project“ReinforcementofPostdoctoralResearchers”(MIS- None. C. Politi: None. V. Spallone: None. G. Novelli: 5001552) implemented by the State Scholarships Founda- None. P. Borgiani: None. tion (ΙΚΥ). I. Papathanasiou: None. E. Mourmoura: None. M. P17.10C Tzetis: None. A. Tsezou: None. DNA methylation regulates miR-146a expression in osteoarthritic synoviocytes by altering NF-kB binding P17.11D afﬁnity on promoter Enzymatic Methyl-Seq: Next Generation Methylomes I. Papathanasiou1, E. Mourmoura1, M. Tzetis2, B.Sexton,L.Williams,V.Ponnaluri,L.Saleh,K.Marks, A. Tsezou1,3 M. Samaranayake, L. Ettwiller, S. Guan, H. Church, N. Dai, E. Tamanaha, E. Yigit, B. Langhorst, Z. Sun, 1University of Thessaly, School of Medicine, Laboratory of T. Evans, R. Vaisvila, E. Dimalanta, T. Davis Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Larissa, Greece, 2National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Dept. of New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, United States Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 3University of Thessaly, School of Medicine, Department of Biology, Larissa, DNA methylation is important for gene regulation. The Greece abilitytoaccuratelyidentify5-methylcytosine(5mC)and5- hydroxymethylcytosine(5hmC)givesusgreaterinsightinto Introduction: Abnormal expression of miR-146a has been potential regulatory mechanisms. Bisulﬁtesequencing (BS) linked to osteoarthritis (OA) pathogenesis. We aimed to is traditionally used to detect methylated C's, however, BS investigate the role of DNA methylation on miR-146a does have its drawbacks. DNA is commonly damaged and expression in OA synoviocytes. degraded by the chemical bisulﬁte reaction resulting in Material and Methods: miR-146a expression levels librariesthatdemonstratehighGC-biasandareenrichedfor were investigated in OA (n=16) and normal synoviocytes methylated regions. To overcome these limitations, we (n=9)usingqRT-PCR.ThemethylationstatusofmiR-146a developed an enzymatic approach, NEBNext® Enzymatic promoter was analysed using quantitative methylation- Methyl-Seq (EM-Seq™), for methylation detection. speciﬁc PCR (qMSP) and bisulﬁte DNA sequencing Illumina libraries were prepared using bisulﬁte and EM- assay.Theeffectof5’-Aza-2-deoxycytidine(5-AzadC)and Seq methods. Libraries generated with NA12878 DNA siRNA against NF-kB on miR-146a expression was inves- inputs ranging from 10 ng to200 ng weresequencedusing tigated. In addition, NF-KB binding to miR-146a promoter Illumina’s NovaSeq 6000. EM-Seq libraries have longer was assessed by ChΙP. inserts, lower duplication rates, a higher percentage of Results: miR-146a expression levels were signiﬁcantly mapped reads and less GC-bias compared to bisulﬁte con- reduced in OA compared with normal synoviocytes. verted libraries. Global methylation levels are similar DownregulationofmiR-146awascorrelatedwithincreased between EM-seq and whole genome bisulﬁte librariesAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1729 (WGBS) indicating overall detection of methylated C's is Introduction: NSCLC constitutes the most common similar. However, CpG correlation plots demonstrated cancer-related cause of death. Adenocarcinoma (AC) and higher correlation coefﬁcients indicating that EM-Seq squamouscellcarcinoma(SCC)arecharacterizedbyunique libraries are more consistent than WGBS across replicates molecular features. Recent studies have revealed that and input amount. GC-bias and dinucleotide distribution cancer-relatedchangesinDNAmethylationarenotrandom, showed that EM-Seq has more even dinucleotide repre- andsubsetsofgenesareselectivelyaffected.Theaimofthe sentation compared to the AT-rich representation observed research was to characterize methylome proﬁles of AC and for WGBS. EM-seq’s more even coverage allows for a SCC tumors, and to develop novel prognostic biomarkers higher percentage of CpG's to be assessed leading to more speciﬁc for both sub-types. consistent evaluation of methylation across key genomic Materials and Methods: For large-scale methylome features (TSS, CpG island, etc.). EM-seq is more robust proﬁling, reduced representation bisulﬁte sequencing than WGBS, works over a wide range of DNA input (RRBS) in 123 patients with NSCLC was carried out. The amounts,hassuperiorsequencingmetrics,anddetectsmore pairedanalysesoflungtumorandadjacentnormaltissueof CpG's. patients grouped into several comparison sets was per- B. Sexton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- formed. Then, using binary segmentation algorithm, dif- niﬁcant; New England Biolabs. L. Williams: A. Employ- ferentially methylated regions (DMRs) were identiﬁed. ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NEB.V.Ponnaluri:A. Results: Hundreds of DMRs were identiﬁed in NSCLC; Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;NEB.L.Saleh: vastmajorityofthemexhibitedhypomethylationinpatients A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. K. with relapse or who died. In tumors of SCC patients with Marks: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; relapse, several DMRs were detected within GATA2 gene, NEB. M. Samaranayake: A. Employment (full or part- playing a role in an aggressiveness of lung cancer and time);Signiﬁcant;NEB.L.Ettwiller:A.Employment(full especially important in patients with KRAS mutations. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. S. Guan: A. Employment Interestingly,adistinctivemethylationlevelswereobserved (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. H. Church: A. for RUVBL1-related DMRs in SCC and AC patients with Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. N. Dai: relapse. Hypomethylation of PRKCA, which exhibits sup- A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. E. pressor activity in lung cancers, was identiﬁed in AC Tamanaha:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; patients who eventually did not survive. NEB. E. Yigit: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Conclusion: Obtained results allow for better under- niﬁcant;NEB.B.Langhorst:A.Employment(fullorpart- standing of speciﬁc epigenetic pathways dysregulated in time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. Z. Sun: A. Employment (full or different sub-typesofNSCLC.Wehaveprovidedacatalog part-time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. T. Evans: A. Employment of methylation-related biomarkers predictive in terms of (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. R. Vaisvila: A. tumor relapse and survival. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NEB. E. The study was funded within the MOBIT project Dimalanta:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; (STRATEGMED2/266484/2/NCBR/2015). NEB. T. Davis: A. Employment (full or part-time); K. Chwialkowska: None. M. Niemira: None. A. Signiﬁcant; NEB. Bielska: None. A. Szalkowska: None. A. Kretowski: None. J. Nikliński: None. M. Kwasniewski: None. P17.12A DNA methylation signatures as potential novel P17.13B prognostic biomarkers in sub-types of Non-Small Cell Anintegratedchromatinaccessibilityandtranscriptome Lung Cancer (NSCLC) landscape of human pre- and post-implantation embryos K. Chwialkowska1, M. Niemira2, A. Bielska2, A. Szalkowska2, A. Kretowski2, J. Nikliński3, Z. Shang1, L. Liu1, L. Leng2, C. Liu1, Y. Yuan1, X. Dai1, M. Kwasniewski1 Q. Wang1, S. Wang1, F. Chen1 1Centre for Bioinformatics and Data Analysis, Medical 1BGI-Shenzhen,Shenzhen,China,2InstituteofReproductive University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland, 2Center for and Stem Cell Engineering, School of Basic Medical Clinical Research, Medical University of Bialystok, Science, Central South University, Changsha, China Bialystok, Poland, 3Department of Clinical Molecular Biology,MedicalUniversityofBialystok,Bialystok,Poland Introduction: The human pre- and post-implantation development is a delicately balanced and orchestrated process that involves extensive changes in chromatin1730 structure and transcriptional activity. However, a genome- wide survey of chromatin structure and its association with Gene expression is to a large degree regulated by distal molecular regulation in this process have been impeded by genomic elements referred to as enhancers, which recruit a the scarcity of the required materials. combination of different factors to activate transcription Materials and Methods: For pre-implantation develop- from a targeted core promoter. The activity state of mentstudy,weadoptedLiCAT-seq,atechniquethatallows enhancers may change dynamically across distinguishable simultaneous proﬁling of chromatin accessibility and gene conditions, for instance across varying time-points, cell expression with ultra-low input of cells, cell stages includ- lines or disease states. However, it remains a challenge to ing oocytes, 1-cell, 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, morula and blas- identify these regulatory elements in a cell-type or even tocyst. For post-implantation development study, we disease-state dependent manner. Thus, rather than compar- generated single-cell RNA and single-cell ATAC-seq data ing separated epigenetic signature tracks we propose an fromE6,E7,E8,E9,E10,E12,E13.5cellsusinganinvitro approach to computationally map and compare enhancers culture system. Here, combined with transcriptome and acrossdifferentsamplesandconditions.Additionally,toget epigenome maps of human pre- and post-implantation a glimpse of the underlying causative regulatory mechan- invitroculturesystem(beforeE14)allowedustorevealthe ism, these dynamic enhancer elements need to be further underlying regulatory mechanism of cell fate decision associated with promoter activity across the same during this complex developmental time. conditions. Results: Integrative analysis between the two omics Here we present the three-step framework CRUP (Con- layers revealed a strong association between the establish- dition-speciﬁc Regulatory Units Prediction) to collapse ment of accessible chromatin and the related genes up- differentlayersofepigeneticinformationintoasinglelistof regulated during embryonic genome activation (EGA) and regulatory units consisting of dynamically changing epiblast development. Furthermore, combined analysis of enhancers and target genes. The workﬂow includes a pre- transcription factor accessibility identiﬁed putative novel trained enhancer classiﬁer that can be applied across dif- transcription factors in regulating EGA and cell fate deci- ferent cell lines and species, solely based on histone mod- sion. In addition, we identiﬁed massively expressed endo- iﬁcation ChIP-seq data. Enhancers are subsequently genous retrovirus (ERVs) during EGA and epiblast disc. assigned to different conditions and correlated with gene Conclusions:wemappedthechromatinaccessibilityand expression to derive regulatory units within the same transcriptomeproﬁlesforhumanpre-andpost-implantation topologically associated domain. embryos. Our results thus offer new mechanistic insights We thoroughly test and then apply CRUP to murine into the molecular events inherent to human pre- and post- embryonic stem cells to capture dynamic enhancer regions implantation embryo development. that are associated with retinoic acid signaling. Finally, we Z. Shang:None.L. Liu: None. L. Leng: None. C.Liu: identify trait-associated regulatory elements in a mouse None. Y. Yuan: None. X. Dai: None. Q. Wang: None. S. study of rheumatoid arthritis and identify enhancer-gene Wang: None. F. Chen: None. pairs comprising known disease genes as well as new candidate genes. P17.14C V. Heinrich: None. A. Ramisch: None. L.V. Glaser: CRUP: A comprehensive framework to predict None.A.Fuchs:None.X.Yang:None.P.Benner:None. condition-speciﬁc regulatory units R. Schöpﬂin: None. N. Li: None. S. Kinkley: None. A. Hillmann: None. J. Longinotto: None. S. Heyne: None. V. Heinrich1, A. Ramisch1, L. V. Glaser1, A. Fuchs1, B. Czepukojc: None. S.M. Kessler: None. A.K. Kiemer: X. Yang1, P. Benner1, R. Schöpﬂin1, N. Li1, S. Kinkley1, None. C. Cadenas: None. L. Arrigoni: None. N. Gas- A. Hillmann2, J. Longinotto3, S. Heyne3, B. Czepukojc4, paroni: None. T. Manke: None. T. Pap: None. A. Pos- S. M. Kessler4, A. K. Kiemer4, C. Cadenas5, L. Arrigoni3, pisilik: None. J. Hengstler: None. J. Walter: None. S.H. N. Gasparoni4, T. Manke3, T. Pap2, A. Pospisilik3, Meijsing: None. H. Chung: None. M. Vingron: None. J. Hengstler5, J. Walter4, S. H. Meijsing1, H. Chung1, M. Vingron1 P17.15D Deletion of FOXG1 transcriptional enhancers is 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, associated with Rett-like syndrome Germany, 2University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and R. Y. Birnbaum1, R. Eshel1, E. D’haene2, S. Vergult2, Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany, 4University of Saarland, B. Callewaert3, T. Kaplan4 Saarbrücken, Germany, 5Leibniz-Institut für Arbeitsforschung (ifADo), Dortmund, GermanyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1731 1DepartmentofLifeSciences,Ben-GurionUniversity,Beer- 2Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Sheva, Israel, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent Epidemiology, University of Bonn, School of Medicine & University, Ghent, Belgium, 3Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Center for Ghent University, Beer-Sheva, Belgium, 43The Hebrew Human Genetics, University Hospital of Marburg, University in Jerusalem, School of Computer Science and Marburg, Germany, 4Department of Medicine II, Sana Engineering, Jerusalem, Israel Klinikum, Offenbach, Germany, 5Department of Internal Medicine II, Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Düsseldorf, Gene regulatory elements such as enhancers dynamically Germany, 6Department of Visceral, Transplant, Thoracic regulate gene expression in a tissue-speciﬁc manner. and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital of Leipzig, However, the transcriptional regulatory elements during Leipzig, Germany, 7Department of General, Visceral and human inhibitory interneuron differentiation and their role Transplantation Surgery, University of Heidelberg, in neurodevelopmental disorders are unknown. Here, we Heidelberg, Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, Klinikum generated gene regulatory element maps of human Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany, 9Department of General, inhibitory-like interneurons derived from embryonic stem Visceral, and Cancer Surgery, University of Cologne, cells (H9-ESC), permitting large-scale annotation of Cologne,Germany,10DepartmentofGeneral,Visceral,and previously uncharacterized regulatory elements relevant to Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg- inhibitory interneuron differentiation. Our analyses identify Eppendorf, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, neuronal progenitor enhancers that likely regulate the 11Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, expression of transcription factors that are essential for Elisabeth Hospital, Essen, Germany, 12Department of interneuron differentiation. One of these transcription Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, University Hospital factors is FOXG1 that is speciﬁcally expressed in Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany interneuron progenitors. Haploinsufﬁciency of FOXG1, is associatedwithRett-likesyndrome.Usinginvivoenhancer Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a premalignant lesion that assay, we identiﬁed eight transcriptional enhancers in the predisposes to esophageal adenocarcinoma (EA). Both FOXG1locus withactivity patterns thatresembled FOXG1 diseases are multifactorial, and GWAS meta-analyses have expression. Using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing, we identiﬁed14 risklocisofar. All risk variants arelocated in deleted two FOXG1 enhancers which reduced FOXG1 non-coding genomic regions and therefore our under- expression in human U251 cells and altered cell prolifera- standing of biological mechanisms underlying these tion. Furthermore, a microdeletion proximal to FOXG1 associations is incomplete. Here, we aimed at (i) character- encompassingtheseneuronalFOXG1enhancerswasfound izing BE/EA genetic associations using eQTL data from in patient with Rett-like syndrome, supporting the role of two relevant tissues, and (ii) investigating the biological FOXG1 enhancers in this syndrome. Our study provides a function of eQTL genes. For this, we generated two eQTL framework for understanding the impact of non-coding datasets from biopsies derived from healthy gastric cardia regulatory elements during inhibitory interneuron differ- tissue (n=148), and from esophageal metaplasia tissue entiation, and highlights novel mechanisms underlying (n=83). The eQTL analysis revealed 145,011 signiﬁcant neurodevelopmental disorders. cis-eQTLs in cardia and 50,517 signiﬁcant cis-eQTLs in R.Y. Birnbaum: None. R. Eshel: None. E. D’haene: metaplasia tissue. We cross-referenced the eQTL data with None. S. Vergult: None. B. Callewaert: None. T. genetic association data of BE/EA. Here, we identiﬁed cis- Kaplan: None. eQTL effects for genome-wide signiﬁcantly associated BE/ EA risk variants regulating the expression of C2orf43/ P17.16A LDAH (2p24) in cardia tissue. In metaplasia, only Barrett’s esophagus - functional annotation of genetic suggestively associated variants (P<5×10-04) represented associationsusingtissue-speciﬁcgeneexpressionandthe cis-eQTLs, with regulating effects on SMPD2 (6q21) and FUMA platform NADSYN1 (11q13). Next, we performed a functional enrichment analysis with eQTL genes present in cardia A. C. Böhmer1, J. Schröder1, V. Schüller2, J. Becker1, tissue only (n=2,557), metaplasia tissue only (n=1,028), T. Hess3, A. May4, C. Gerges5, N. Kreuser6, T. Schmidt7, and both tissues (n=585). We observed an enrichment of L. Veits8, C. Fuchs9, J. R. Izbicki10, B. Schumacher11, metaplasia eQTL genes in immunological pathways, M. Vieth8, H. Neuhaus5, T. Rösch12, C. Ell4, whereas cardia eQTL genes were enriched in metabolic M. M. Nöthen1, I. Gockel6, J. Schumacher3 processes. eQTL genes expressed in both tissues were enriched in pathways involved in degradation of extra- 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof cellular matrix. In summary, our results point towards Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, speciﬁc biological pathways that play a role in healthy and1732 disease states of tissues that are involved in the ccfDNA. Our data demonstrated that ddPCR can be a pathophysiology of BE. valuabletoolforthepreciseandaccuratedetectionofESR1 A.C. Böhmer: None. J. Schröder: None. V. Schüller: promoter methylation on clinical samples, allowing the None.J.Becker:None.T.Hess:None.A.May:None.C. assessment ofsmallpercentage ofmethylated DNA,witha Gerges: None. N. Kreuser: None. T. Schmidt: None. L. limit of detection of 2% methylation. Veits: None. C. Fuchs: None. J.R. Izbicki: None. B. C. Mio: None. F. Baldan: None. E. Bregant: None. A. Schumacher: None. M. Vieth: None. H. Neuhaus: None. Franzoni: None. N. Passon: None. L. Gerratana: None. T. Rösch: None. C. Ell: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. I. F. Puglisi: None. D. Fabbro: None. G. Damante: None. Gockel: None. J. Schumacher: None. P17.18C P17.17B New insights on the role of noncoding RNAs in the Droplet digital PCR-mediated evaluation of ESR1 pathology of Fragile X-associated disorders promoter methylation in cell-free DNA A. A. Dolskiy, N. A. Lemskaya, D. V. Yudkin C. Mio1, F. Baldan1, E. Bregant2, A. Franzoni2, N. Passon2, L. Gerratana3, F. Puglisi3, D. Fabbro2, FBRI SRC VB “Vector”, Rospotrebnadzor, Koltsovo, G. Damante1 Russian Federation 1DepartmentofMedicine,UniversityofUdine,Udine,Italy, Introduction: Currently, based on the size of the CGG 2Institute of MedicalGenetics, ASUI University Hospitalof repeat in the FMR1 gene and the methylation status of its Udine, Udine, Italy, 3Department of Clinical Oncology, promoter region, the variation in symptom severity in IRCCS CRO Aviano - National Cancer Institute, Udine, Fragile X-associated disorders cannot be explained. In this Italy study,ourhypothesisassumedthatnon-codingRNAs,such asmiRNAsandFMR1antisensetranscripts,areinvolvedin Introduction: The use of circulating cell-free DNA the pathology of Fragile X-associated disorders. (ccfDNA) is gaining momentum offering the possibility to Materials and Methods: Immortalized B-lymphocyte assess disease progression and therapeutic response in a cell lines from patients with different FMR1 gene alleles non-invasive manner. Tumor expression of estrogen were used. The expression of genes and miRNAs were receptor is an important marker of prognosis and is analyzed by SYBR and TaqMan PCR, respectively. predictive of response to endocrine therapy in luminal MicroRNAs were selected using the miRBase, microRNA breast cancer (BC). Indeed, promoter hypermethylation and TargetScan databases. could lead to a change in ESR1 gene expression proﬁle, Results: Using the databases, a number of miRNAs that which interferers with endocrine therapy, leading to bindtothe3’-UTRoftheFMR1genewereselected.Itwas resistance. shownthattheexpressionofsomemiRNAsingroupswith Materials and Methods: ccfDNA was isolated from different FMR1 gene activities changes relative to control plasma samples from 11 metastatic breast cancer patients cell lines. Next, it was shown that the expression of the and 8 healthy volunteers. For absolute quantiﬁcation of antisensetranscript,ASFMR1,whichcontainsaGCCrepeat ESR1 promoter methylation levels, bisulﬁte-converted and is a potential source of miRNA, as well as the general ccfDNA was used and ddPCR was performed with two expressionofallisoforms,alsochangesrelativetocontrols. probes, one speciﬁc for methylated DNA and one speciﬁc Based on the results, a new model is proposed for the for un-methylated DNA. participation of noncoding RNAs in Fragile X-associated Results:ESR1promotermethylationstatuswastestedon pathologies. The reported study was funded by Russian ccfDNA samples using ddPCR. To avoid any effect of Science Foundation project 18-15-00099. incomplete bisulﬁte conversion on accuracy of methylation A.A. Dolskiy: None. N.A. Lemskaya: None. D.V. detection, primers pairs were designed to target only con- Yudkin: None. verted cytosine residues. ESR1 promoter resulted un- methylated in all healthy donors’ ccfDNA samples. A P17.20A variable degree of methylation was assessed between Dissecting the gene regulatory landscape of human patients’ samples. adipose tissue Conclusions: Droplet digital PCR methodology is an endpointPCRmethodthatdoesnotrequirestandardcurves K. Rouskas1, E. Katsareli2, C. Amerikanou2, S. Glentis1, for absolute quantiﬁcation and can be easily optimized to A. C. Dimopoulos1, D. Bielser3, A. Planchon3, assess low-amount and fragmentated samples such as L. Romano3, N. Panousis3, O. Delaneau3, H. Ongen3,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1733 I.Griniatsos4,T.Diamantis4,P.Moulos1,E.Dermitzakis3, None. E. Dermitzakis: None. J. Ragoussis: None. G. J. Ragoussis5, G. Dedoussis2, A. S. Dimas1 Dedoussis: None. A.S. Dimas: None. 1Biomedical Sciences Research Center Al. Fleming, Vari, P17.21B Greece, 2Harokopio University of Athens, Department of A complete strategy for characterizing on- and off- Nutrition and Dietetics, Athens, Greece, 3Department of target CRISPR/Cas9 editing events via target Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva enrichment and high-resolution NGS analysis MedicalSchool,Geneva,Switzerland,4FirstDepartmentof Surgery, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, A. Jacobi, G. Rettig, M. McNeil, R. Turk, M. Schubert, Medical School, Laiko Hospital, ATHENS, Greece, M. Behlke, E. Gustafson-Wagner 5Genome Quebec Innovation Centre and Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, IntegratedDNATechnologies,Coralville,IA,UnitedStates Canada Genome editing with the CRISPR/Cas9 system is moving Introduction: Subcutaneous (S) and visceral (V) fat share towards therapeuticapplications, which drives anincreased extensive biology, but a fraction of molecular processes needforin-depthcharacterizationofbothon-andoff-target remains particular to each tissue. Given the contribution of genome editing events. Here we present a workﬂow and adipose tissue to disease risk, we aimed to uncover useful guidelines for prediction, validation, quantiﬁcation, biological signatures characteristic of each tissue, and to and analysis of on- and off-target editing events. First, we explore ﬁne-scale gene regulation. provide comparison of several commonly-used off-target MaterialsandMethods:Bloodandbiopsies ofSandV prediction tools for in silico selection of target sites fat were collected for 106 Greek individuals (GM study), throughout the genome. Then, using previously-published, spanning the BMI range. We explored gene expression unbiasedmethodsforexperimentaloff-targetvalidation,we (RNA-Seq) and chromatin accessibility (ATAC-Seq) in are able to compare these algorithm-based selections to both tissues, and applied QTLtools software to identify bona ﬁde sites exhibiting editing mediated by more than regulatory variants (eQTLs). We explored replication of twelve guide RNAs. The unbiased detection methods are ﬁndings in GTEX (pi1, bootstrapping) and across tissues carried out with experimental and bioinformatics advance- (pi1, RTC, linear models) to uncover associations char- ments to improve the efﬁciency of empirical off-target acteristicoftheGMsampleandofeachtissuerespectively. validation. A multiplexed, amplicon-based enrichment Results: Gene expression and chromatin accessibility method (rhAmpSeqTM) for next-generation sequencing is differences across S and V fat reveal processes linked to then employed for strict quantiﬁcation of editing events at development, cell signaling, and immune and nervous validated as well as predicted off-target sites. The systems. Notably, we detected signiﬁcant downregulation rhAmpSeq technology enables interrogation of >1000 of metabolic processes in S fat from obese individuals. We genomic loci in a single reaction using RNase H2- report that ~90% of associations replicate in GTEX, but cleavableprimerswhichfacilitatealmostcompletesuppres- deﬁne a subset of GM-detected ﬁndings likely driven by sion of non-target location and primer dimer ampliﬁcation. environmental effects. Although ~95% of eQTLs are com- Moreover, amplicon coverage is uniform and reproducible, mon acrosstissues, we uncover generegulatory differences removingtheneedforprimerre-balancing.Therelationship at the ﬁne-scale, and highlight subtle differences in gene between coverage depth and statistical conﬁdence in regulation across tissues. We also report that ~30% of quantiﬁcation of editing events was characterized. Finally, eQTLs explain disease association signals. we developed and rigorously validated a data analysis Conclusions: Our ﬁndings contribute to a better com- packagetoconﬁdentlydetectCas9editsviasyntheticreads prehension of fat depot-speciﬁc biology providing insights that contain diverse editing events and varied genomic into biological mechanisms underlying adipose-related target complexities. disease pathogenesis. Funding sources: Marie Curie IEF, A. Jacobi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; EMBO, Greek Ministry of Education “Thales” grant, Integrated DNA Technologies. G. Rettig: A. Employment Stavros Niarchos Foundation. (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. K. Rouskas: None. E. Katsareli: None. C. Amer- M. McNeil: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; ikanou:None.S.Glentis:None.A.C.Dimopoulos:None. Integrated DNA Technologies. R. Turk: A. Employment D.Bielser:None.A.Planchon: None.L.Romano:None. (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. N.Panousis:None.O.Delaneau:None.H.Ongen:None. M. Schubert: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; I. Griniatsos: None. T. Diamantis: None. P. Moulos: IntegratedDNATechnologies.M.Behlke:A.Employment1734 (full or part-time); Modest; Integrated DNA Technologies. C. Kayabasi1, S. Yilmaz Susluer1, T. Balci Okcanoglu2, E. Gustafson-Wagner: None. B.OzmenYelken1,A.Asik1,Z.Mutlu1,C.CaliskanKurt1, B. Goker Bagca1, R. Gasimli1, C. Celebi1, E. Tayfur1, P17.23D C. Biray Avci1, F. Sahin3, G. Saydam3, C. Gunduz1 Functional characterization of a lncRNA in the autoimmune disease-associatedRGS1 region 1Ege University, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey,2NearEastUniversity,VocationalSchoolofHealth A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia1,2, N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, Sciences, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Ege University, Division of J. R. Bilbao1,2,3, A. Castellanos-Rubio1,2,3,4 Haematology, Izmir, Turkey 1BioCruces, Barakaldo, Spain, 2UPV-EHU, Leioa, Spain, Chronic myeloid leukemia-(CML) is characterized by cells 3CIBERDEM, Madrid, Spain, 4IKERBASQUE, Basque carryingBCR-ABL1,sotyrosinekinaseinhibitors-(TKIs)are Fundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain ideal for selective treatment. Although many studies are conducted related to the mechanisms of action for TKIs like Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have helped in Dasatinib and Ponatinib, their effects on long non-coding the identiﬁcation of SNPs associated to different disorders. RNAs-(lncRNAs) expression proﬁles which are associated However, many of those variants are intergenic and some with malignancies with their oncogenic/tumor suppressor arelocatedonfunctionallyuncharacterizedlongnon-coding properties are largely unknown. In this study, we aimed to RNAs (lncRNAs), several of which have been described to deﬁne lncRNAs involved in the treatment of CML with play crucial roles in many inﬂammatory disorders. DasatinibandPonatinib.Cytotoxicity,apoptosisandlncRNA rs2816316 (chr1:192567683) is located near the gene expression proﬁles were evaluated by WST-8 assay, APO- RGS1 (regulator of G protein signalling 1) that has been DIRECT in ﬂow-cytometry and qRT-PCR, respectively. related to the immune response. The variant has been Ponatinib exhibited higher cytotoxic and apoptotic activity associatedwithCeliacDisease(CD)andMultipleSclerosis than Dasatinib in K562-cells. Apoptosis-regulating lncRNAs (MS), while RGS1 has been related to CD, MS and Type 1 HULC, HOTAIR, HOXA3AS and ANRIL that suppresses Diabetes (T1D). The aim of this study is to functionally theDNA-damageresponsegenesweredown-regulated,while characterizetheregionunderthisassociatedSNPinorderto transcription-controller7SKwasup-regulatedwithbothTKIs. explain its implication in autoimmune disorders. The Among lncRNAs associated with the pathways that are expression of RGS1 is altered in the immune cells of activatedbyBCR-ABL1;BCMSandPTENP1wereregulated rs2816316-associated diseases. According to GTEX with both TKIs, while GAS5 was only regulated with rs2816316 is an eQTL for RGS1 in gastroesophageal and Ponatinib. In addition to the up-regulation of WT1-AS that brain tissues. The UCSC Genome Browser features a suppresses WT1 oncogene by binding to its promoter, a functionallyuncharacterizedlncRNAthatcontainstheSNP prominentincreaseinZeb2NATanddevastatingdecreasesin andisclosetoRGS1.WehaveobservedthatthislncRNAis PSF-inhibiting-RNA, BC017743, SCA8, and HOTTIP were expressedboth inimmuneandepithelialcellsandlocalizes speciﬁc to Ponatinib treatment. NCRMS, HOTAIRM1, to the nucleus, suggesting a transcription regulatory role. Gomafu alterations were associated with Dasatinib-speciﬁc Additionally,CRISPR-Cas9editionofcellsshowedthatthe response. Our study reveals that numerous lncRNAs are lncRNA and RGS1 present opposite expression trends. involvedinanti-leukemicactivitiesofDasatinibandPonatinib Stimulation of Jurkat T cells with PMA and ionomicyn treatment. These results will contribute to understanding provoked a time-shifted activation of RGS1 and the signalizationoccurringinCMLcellsafterstandardtreatment. lncRNA. Our results suggest that the region around rs2816316 is involved in RGS1 regulation, probably ExpressionproﬁleoflncRNAsinK562celllineaftertreatmentwithDasatiniborPonatinib through a nearby nuclear lncRNA. Funding: PI16/00258 lncRNAssimilarlyregulatedwith lncRNAsregulatedwith lncRNAsregulatedwith (JRB), EJ-2017111082 and ACM (ACR) and DasatinibandPonatinib Dasatinib Ponatinib PRE_2017_1_0306(AOG). lncRNA FoldChange FoldChange lncRNA FoldChange lncRNA FoldChange Symbols with with Symbols with Symbols with A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia: None. N. Fernandez- Dasatinib Ponatinib Dasatinib Ponatinib (Log2 (Log2 (Log2 (Log2 Jimenez: None. J.R. Bilbao: None. A. Castellanos- Transformed)Transformed) Transformed) Transformed) Rubio: None. Zeb2NAT 2.13 15.91 TEA 18.63 WT1-AS 5.27 ncRNAs PTENP1 3.08 2.15 H19 16.44 HAR1B 4.88 P17.24A 7SK 3.11 2.14 NCRMS 16.20 21A 3.55 (RMST) Comparative effects of Dasatinib and Ponatinib on PCAT-43 -13.29 -2.46 DLG2AS 12.42 LUST 2.60 lncRNA expression in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia BCMS -2.29 -2.55 PRINS 6.69 BACE1AS 2.26 (DLEU1)Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1735 LincRNA- -4.56 -2.61 DHFR 2.30 GAS5 2.21 Results: We assessed the expression levels of 2549 VLDLR upstream transcripts human mature miRNAs and found 13 to be signiﬁcantly HOTAIR -3.83 -2.77 ST7OT1 -2.00 NDM29 2.06 differentially expressed (fold change (FC)>2.0 and HULC -2.88 -2.92 HAR1B -2.09 TEA -2.11 ncRNAs FDR<0.005)betweentheADCandadjacentnormaltissues. MER11C -4.98 -5.53 Sox2OT -2.52 aHIF -2.58 Hsa-miR-210-3p, hsa-miR-21-3p and hsa-miR-130b-3p LincRNA- -4.19 -5.76 ST7OT2 -2.53 BC200 -2.73 SFMBT2 were upregulated. One hundred twenty eight miRNAs HBEO8X7A333A47S -4.34 -6.76 LUST -2.60 IPW -2.97 were signiﬁcantly differentially expressed (FC>2.0 and PCAT-29 -5.12 -7.16 BIC -2.68 TU_0017629 -3.35 FDR<0.001) between the SCC and adjacent normal tissues ANRIL -12.64 -11.46 NEAT1 -2.83 DLG2AS -4.71 of which 56 were upregulated and 72 downregulated.Hsa- PCAT-1 -9.04 -12.36 anti-NOS2A -3.21 ST7OT4 -6.13 PCAT-14 -7.56 -12.40 PR-AT2 -3.35 PRINS -6.77 miR-30a-5p(FC=-6.48) and hsa-miR-195-3p(FC=-21.07) ST7OT3 -3.05 -14.47 L1PA16 -3.37 SCA8 -9.87 were signiﬁcantly downregulated in ADC,whilehsa-miR- PCAT-32 -8.90 -16.16 LIT -3.39 HOTTIP -11.17 30a-3p(FC=-210.94) and hsa-miR-195-5p(FC=-154.26)in PSF -2.25 -17.29 HOXA3AS -4.11 AAA1 -14.29 inhibiting BI823151 SCC.InSCCwealsoidentiﬁed6aberrantlyexpressedmiR- RNA 5p/-3p pairs that potentially modulate the gene expression NDM29 -5.23 BC017743 -16.53 HOTAIRM1 -6.01 of proteins:hsa-miR-140-3p/hsa-miR-140-5p,hsa-miR-143- Gomafu -9.12 3p/hsa-miR-143-5p,hsa-miR-145-3p/hsa-miR-145-5p,hsa- (MIAT) Air -18.14 miR-29c-3p/hsa-miR-29c-5p,hsa-miR-30b-3p/hsa-miR- 30b-5p and hsa-miR-532-3p/hsa-miR-532-5p. Conclusions: The expression patterns of miRNAs and C. Kayabasi: None. S. Yilmaz Susluer: None. T. Balci their target genes revealed both common and subtype spe- Okcanoglu: None. B. Ozmen Yelken: None. A. Asik: ciﬁcsignalpathwaysforADCandSCC.Ourresultswerein None. Z. Mutlu: None. C. Caliskan Kurt: None. B. agreement with previous suggestions that miR-5p/-3ppairs Goker Bagca: None. R. Gasimli: None. C. Celebi: None. coregulated protein interaction networks critical to lung E. Tayfur: None. C. Biray Avci: None. F. Sahin: None. cancer development. However further analysis of enlarged G. Saydam: None. C. Gunduz: None. sample and validation of the microarray results by qRT- PCR is necessary to ascertain their diagnostic potential in P17.25B NSCLC. Analysis of miRNA expression in non-small cell lung Acknowledgements: This work was supported by Grants cancer DH03/16/19.12.2016, DUNK01/2/2009,NSF/MES/Bulgaria. V.Y. Petkova: None. S. Giragosyan: None. D. Kacha- V. Y. Petkova1, S. Giragosyan1, D. Kachakova1, kova: None. A. Mitkova: None. D. Marinova: None. Y. A. Mitkova1, D. Marinova2, Y. Slavova-Marinova2, Slavova-Marinova: None. V. Mitev: None. R. V. Mitev1, R. Kaneva1 Kaneva: None. 11Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical P17.26C Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, Soﬁa, PeripheralbloodDNAmethylationasprognostictoolin Bulgaria,2UniversityHospitalforPulmonaryDiseases“St. Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma Soﬁa",DepartmentofBronchology,Soﬁa,Bulgaria.,Soﬁa, Bulgaria G. Cugliari1,2, S. Guarrera1,2, C. Viberti1,2, F. Grosso3, D. Ferrante4,5, A. Aspesi6, C. Casadio7, R. Libener8, Introduction: MicroRNAs(MiRNAs) canhelpunderstand- E. Piccolini9, D. Mirabelli10,11,12, C. Magnani4,5,12, ingthecarcinogenesisoflungcancerandserveaspotential I. Dianzani6,12, G. Matullo1,2,12,13 diagnostic biomarkers for differentiating adenocarcinoma (ADC)andsquamouscelllungcarcinoma(SCC).Тheaimof 1ItalianInstituteforGenomicMedicine,IIGM,Turin,Italy, the present study is to analyse and compare the expression 2Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, patterns of miRNAs in ADC and SCC samples Turin, Italy, 3Division of Medical Oncology, SS. Antonio e Materials and Methods: Fresh frozen tissue samples Biagio General Hospital, Alessandria, Italy, 4Medical from 24 non-small cell lung cancer(NSCLC) patients Statistics and Cancer Epidemiology Unit, Department of (12ADC,12SCC) and adjacent normal tissues were exam- Translational Medicine, University of Piemonte Orientale, ined. The expression of miRNAs was evaluated by Sur- Novara, Italy, 5CancerEpidemiologyUnit,CPO-Piemonte, ePrint human miRNA microarrays (Agilent Technologies). Novara, Italy, 6Department of Health Sciences, University The normalization of data and the statistical analysis were of Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy, 7Thoracic Surgery performed by GeneSpring GXsoftware. Unit, AOU Maggiore Della Carità, Novara, Italy,1736 8Pathology Unit, SS. Antonio e Biagio General Hospital, A. Kashef1, S. Börno2, M. Renn3, J. Hausen4, T. Tüting5, Alessandria, Italy, 9Pneumology Unit, Santo Spirito M. Hölzel6, B. Timmermann2, P. Krawitz4, J. Landsberg1 Hospital, Casale Monferrato (AL), Italy, 10Cancer Epidemiology Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, 1Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Bonn, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 11Cancer Epidemiology Bonn, Germany, 2Sequencing Core Facility, Max-Planck- Unit, CPO Piemonte, Turin, Italy, 12Interdepartmental Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, Center for Studies on Asbestos and Other Toxic 3Rigontec GmbH, Planegg, Germany, 4Institute for Particulates "G. Scansetti", University of Turin, Turin, Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, Italy, 13Medical Genetics Unit, AOU Città della Salute e Bonn, Germany, 5Department of Dermatology, University della Scienza, Turin, Italy Hospital of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 6Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, Introduction:Malignantpleuralmesothelioma(MPM)isa University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany rare and aggressive neoplasm, with limited systemic therapeutic options and median survival time of approxi- Background: Therapy resistance limits the efﬁcacy of mately12months.Theaimofthisstudywastoevaluatethe immunotherapy in melanoma patients. We have reported clinical value of DNA methylation (DNAm) in predicting that phenotypic tumor cell plasticity in a pro inﬂammatory overall survival (OS) as compared to the lymphocyte-to- microenvironment drives therapy resistance to adoptive T monocyte ratio (LMR), which is the most used cell therapy (ACT). We suggest that pro-inﬂammatory inﬂammation-based prognostic score in MPM. responses induce a dedifferentiated phenotype and therapy MaterialsandMethods:Weinvestigatedacohortof163 resistance by changing the epigenetic landscape. Here, we incident cases of MPM diagnosed between 2000 and 2010 performedanintegrativeanalysisofexome,methylomeand in the municipalities of Turin, and Casale Monferrato transcriptomeproﬁlesofprimaryandACTtherapyresistant (Piedmontregion,Italy),anareawithanexceptionallyhigh cell lines in transgenic mouse model of melanoma. incidenceofmesotheliomacausedbyasbestosoccupational Methods: To detect if ACT selects for common muta- exposure and contamination in the general environment tions in resistant cell lines, we performed whole exome from the asbestos-cement Eternit plant that was operational sequencing (WES) in primary and therapy resistant cell until 1986. Genome-wide methylation array (Human- lines. We used Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation Methylation450 Beadchip) to identify novel blood DNAm coupled with next generation sequencing (MeDIP- Seq) to markers related to overall survival in MPM was used. track the distribution of methylation alterations in target Results: Kaplan-Meier survival curves highlighted genomes.Genomewideexpressiondataaregeneratedusing methylation levels at a single-CpG in a gene on 6p21.31 RNA sequencing. (DNAmcut-off=0.45,HR=2.14,MedianSurvival=243 Results: We did not ﬁnd a driver alteration in somatic vs 534, days; P = 2.4 × 10−05) as related to OS. mutation patterns. Differential methylation (DM) analysis Conclusions: Our study is the ﬁrst to demonstrate that a for all samples shows profound clustering for primary cell single-CpGDNAminageneon6p21.31isanindependent lines against therapy resistant cell lines. Differential marker of prognosis in patients with MPM and performs expression (DE) analysis results are consistent with pro- better than other inﬂammation-based scores as prognostic found DM clustering in our cell lines. Gene set enrichment factor. DNAm evaluation will enable clinicians to better and biological pathways analyses for signiﬁcant DE and predict clinically meaningful outcomes such as response to DM genes show the highest enrichment scores for devel- systemic treatment and to select patients who are most opmental pathways and differentiation proteins. likely to beneﬁt from intensive therapy. Outlook: Our results supports the hypothesis that sig- G. Cugliari: None. S. Guarrera: None. C. Viberti: niﬁcant changes in methylation marks drive melanoma cell None. F. Grosso: None. D. Ferrante: None. A. Aspesi: plasticity and immunotherapy resistance in our experi- None. C. Casadio: None. R. Libener: None. E. Piccolini: mental model. Further functional studies would shed light None. D. Mirabelli: None. C. Magnani: None. I. Dia- on the correlation of “inﬂammatory tumor microenviron- nzani: None. G. Matullo: None. ment” and epigenetically driven “resistant phenotypes” in melanoma. P17.27D A. Kashef: None. S. Börno: None. M. Renn: None. J. Methylation alterations in developmental and Hausen: None. T. Tüting: None. M. Hölzel: None. B. differentiation genesdriveresistancetoimmunotherapy Timmermann: None. P. Krawitz: None. J. in a melanoma model Landsberg: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1737 P17.28A C. Ruiz: None. S. Marí: None. M. Vives: None. C. Identiﬁcation of blood cis expression quantitative trait Hernandez-Ferrer: None. L. Maitre: None. E. Martí: methylations (eQTMs) in children None. X. Estivill: None. Á. Carracedo: None. G. Escar- amís: None. M. Vrijheid: None. J. González: None. M. C. Ruiz1,2,3, S. Marí1, M. Vives4,2,3, C. Hernandez- Bustamante: None. Ferrer5,6, L. Maitre1,2,3, E. Martí7,3, X. Estivill8, Á. Carracedo9, G. Escaramís7,3, M. Vrijheid1,2,3, P17.29B J. González1,2,3, M. Bustamante1,2,3, Human Early Life Methylation anticipation extends to the outside of ICR1 Exposome (HELIX) in familial Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome patients with ICR1 mutation 1ISGlobal, Barcelona Institute for Global Health, Barcelona, Spain, 2University Pompeu Fabra (UPF), F. Sun1,2, K. Higashimoto1, H. Soejima1 Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), 1Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Saga University, Madrid, Spain, 4Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Saga, Japan, 2Department of Ultrasound, Shengjing Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China Spain, 5Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 6Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Introduction: Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 7University of animprintingdisorder.GainofmethylationatICR1(ICR1- Barcelona(UB),Barcelona,Spain,8SidraMedicine,Doha, GOM),oneofthecausativealterationsforBWS,isfoundin Qatar, 9University Santiago de Compostela (USC), 5% of patients, and 20% of ICR1-GOM patients have Santiago de Compostela, Spain mutations of OCT-binding motif within ICR1. Methylation anticipation of ICR1 upon maternal transmission of the The identiﬁcation of expression quantitative trait methyla- mutationinfamilialBWSpatientswaspreviouslyreported. tions (eQTMs), deﬁned as correlations between gene However, the extent of anticipation within IGF2/H19 expression and DNA methylation levels, might help the imprinting domain is still unclear. biological interpretation of epigenome-wide association Materials and Methods: Members of BWS family with studies (EWAS). Here, we aimed to identify cis-eQTMs anOCTmutationweresubjectedtothisstudy.Methylation in child blood using data from 832 children of the Human statusesof10differentiallymethylatedsites,suchasIGF2- Early Life Exposome (HELIX) project. DMR0, IGF2-DMR2, CTS1-7, and H19-promoter, were Blood DNA methylation and gene expression were analyzed by quantitative bisulﬁte-pyrosequencing. assessed with the 450K and the HTA v2 arrays, respec- Results: A patient, mother, and aunt with the mutation tively. The relationship between methylation levels and showed ICR1-GOM, however, grandmother with the expression of nearby genes (transcription start site within 1 mutation and other normal family members did not. CTS2, Mb window from CpG) was tested by ﬁtting 13,615,882 the second nearest CTS to the mutation, was the most linear regressions adjusting for sex, age, cohort and cell highlymethylatedsiteamongallsites.Notonlysiteswithin type composition. ICR1 (CTS 1-6) but also sites outside ICR1 (IGF2-DMRs, AfterBonferronicorrection,wefound15,403cis-eQTMs, CTS7, and H19-promoter) were more methylated in the 9,477 (61.5%) of them showing an inverse association. patient than in mother and aunt, indicating the methylation Theyincluded8,907uniqueCpGsand3,790uniquegenes, anticipation. Furthermore, the extent of anticipation was and mean distance between them was 240 kb. Cis-eQTMs greater outside ICR1 than inside ICR1. In addition, IGF2- were enriched for distant promoters, N and S CpG island DMR0washypomethylatedinnormalyoungadultsthanin shores, and transcriptional and enhancer blood chromatin normal children, and it was maintained to middle-aged states. Genome-wide genotypic data is available for these adults. same children and it will be used, in future steps, to Conclusions: Methylation anticipation of ICR1 might be investigate to which extend cis-eQTMs are determined by duetofailureofmaternalmethylationerasureduringfemale genetic variants. gametogenesis.Theextentofanticipationwasgreateratthe This catalogue of cis-eQTMs will be useful for under- sites far from the mutation. Hypomethylation of IGF2- standing DNA methylation effects on blood gene expres- DMR0 normally occurred in people underage. sion during childhood. F. Sun: None. K. Higashimoto: None. H. Funding: ISCIII PI17/01225; FP7-ENVIRONMENT Soejima: None. 308333; HORIZON2020 7332061738 P17.30C P17.33B Genome-wideDNAmethylationanalysisintwodifferent Mitoepigenetics and neurodegenerative diseases types of pituitary tumors A. Stoccoro1, V. Nicolì1, R. Gallo1, L. Mosca2, F.Polito1,V.D’argennio2,M.Capasso2,F.Ferrau1,F.Di F. Baldacci3, C. Del Gamba3, C. Cereda4, I. Palmieri4, Maggio2, R. Oteri1, F. Angileri1, R. Di Giorgio1, S. Gagliardi4, A. R. Smith5, K. Lunnon5, F. Coppedè1, F. Esposito1, A. Asmundo1, L. Pastore2, S. Cannavò1, L. Migliore1 M. Aguennouz1 1Department of Translational Research & New 1University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 2University of Technologies in Medicine & Surgery, Medical Genetics Naples, Naples, Italy Laboratory, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 2ASST Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Niguarda, Milan, Italy, Pituitary neuroendocrine tumor (PitNETs), are benign 3Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, tumors,distinguishedin"functioning"(secretinghormones, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 4IRCCS Mondino causing a hormonal hyperfunction syndrome) such as Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 5University of Exeter Medical Growth hormone (GH) - secreting and "non-functioning School, Exeter, United Kingdom pituitaryadenoma"NFPA.Usually,PitNETsareassociated with many health and mortality complications when not Introduction: In recent years growing evidence on a adequately treated. Transphenoidal surgery is considered potential role of altered mitochondrial epigenetic mechan- the treatment choice of PitNETs, followed by medical isms(mitoepigenetics)inseveraldiseaseshaveemergedbut therapy. Sometimes the treatment is limited to selected until now little attention has been given to neurodegenera- cases, whereby, somatostatin analogs (SSA) are used in tivediseases(NDs).Recently,wereportedthatmethylation GH-PitNET. However, 10-30% of patients are not respon- levels of the mitochondrial displacement loop (D-loop) der to SSA, suggesting that other molecular mechanisms region are impaired in peripheral blood of late-onset may be essential for the response to drug treatment. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) patients, and in amyotrophic Therefore, the identiﬁcation of these mechanisms, allows lateralsclerosis(ALS)patientswith mutations intheSOD1 to classify into subgroups PitNET patients (responders vs. gene. The major aim of this research is to further improve non-responders). Epigenetic mechanisms can play a our knowledge on the potential role of mitoepigenetic dynamic role in complex diseases such pituitary cancer. imbalance in neurodegeneration. These mechanisms, including DNA methylation, inﬂuence Materials and Methods: Blood samples have been col- the regulation of genome and the cell function. Our goal is lected from a new cohort of 80 AD and 50 ALS and in 80 to identify the differential methylation between GH- Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients as well as from matched secreting and NFPA tissues. controls. DNA methylation analyses have been performed Methods: We analyze DNA methylation data across the by means of MS-HRM and pyrosequencing and mtDNA genome using (a) traditional coupled t-tests to identify copy number by means of quantitative PCR. signiﬁcantly differentiated methylated loci (P ≤ 1 × 10-7 Results: DNA methylation analysis showed that D-loop adjusted with Bonferroni) and (b) new combinatorial algo- methylation is able to discriminate disease patients and rithms to identify loci that distinguish between types of control subjects, and that it is also sensitive to the stage of fabrics. thedisease.Moreover,D-loopmethylationlevelshavebeen Results: We obtained 178 target regions that were dif- foundtobeinverselycorrelatedwithmtDNAcopynumber ferentially methylated (corrected P value ≤0.05). Further- andtobehighlyrelatedtoageandgenderoftheindividuals more, only two regions were signiﬁcantly hypomethylated enrolled. in GH compared to NFPA. We have also elucidated gene- Conclusions: Results presented in the current study centric annotations (with ANNOVAR software) to obtain suggest a potential involvement of mitoepigenetics imbal- distances from the closest genes and other genomic infor- ance in NDs detectable in peripheral blood. Moreover, mation relative to the priority regions to fuse these 3 dif- current results suggest that mtDNA methylation could be ferent pituitary diseases. sensitivetodifferentdiseasestages,thusaddinganewlayer F. Polito: None. V. D’argennio: None. M. Capasso: of interest in the search of peripheral mitoepigenetic bio- None. F. Ferrau: None. F. Di Maggio: None. R. Oteri: markers for neurodegeneration. None. F. Angileri: None. R. Di Giorgio: None. F. Espo- A.Stoccoro:None.V.Nicolì:None.R.Gallo:None.L. sito: None. A. Asmundo: None. L. Pastore: None. S. Mosca: None. F. Baldacci: None. C. Del Gamba: None. Cannavò: None. M. Aguennouz: None. C. Cereda: None. I. Palmieri: None. S. Gagliardi: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1739 A.R.Smith:None.K.Lunnon:None.F.Coppedè:None. N. Farhangdoost, C. Horth, B. Hu, E. Bareke, L. Migliore: None. J. Majewski P17.34C McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada Polymorphisms in folate metabolic genes contribute to MTHFR promoter methylation levels Introduction: DNA alterations and the cell-signaling pathways involved in HPV(-) HNSCC have been studied F. Coppedè, P. Tannorella, A. Stoccoro, R. Gallo, extensively, but we are far from understanding the under- V. Nicolì, L. Migliore lying mechanisms of tumorigenesis. Recently, a subgroup of HPV(-) HNSCC has been characterized by mutations in Dept of Translational Research and New Technologies in the Nuclear Receptor-binding SET Domain protein 1 Medicine and Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy (NSD1), suggesting a possible epigenetic etiology of those tumors. Introduction: The MTHFR gene codes for methylenete- Method:WeusedtwoHNSCCcelllinescarryingNSD1 trahydrofolatereductase,oneofthemajorenzimesinvolved truncating mutations (SKN-3 and SCC-4) and compared in folate metabolism. Impaired MTHFR methylation levels them with two NSD1-wildtype cell lines (Detroit562 and are increasingly recognized to contribute to several human Cal27). In the next step, I produced isogenic cell lines by pathological conditions, including male infertility, miscar- knockingoutNSD1geneinthreeNSD1-wildtypeHNSCC riage, congenital heart defects, stressful events, cancer, and cell lines (FaDu, Detroit562, and Cal27) using CRISPR- diabeticcomplicationsamongothers.Previousstudieshave Cas9 method to see the same result was observed or not. clearly shown a correlation between circulating folate or Finally,Ichose2samplesfrommyCal27NSD1-knockouts homocysteinelevelsandMTHFRpromotermethylationand and knocked out NDS2using the same method, but with gene expression, but little is still known concerning the differently designed primers. contribution ofpolymorphisms infolate metabolicgenes to Results: Firstly, disruption of NSD1— in HNSCC sam- MTHFR promoter methylation levels. ples where NSD1 is naturally disrupted— leads to a global Materials and Methods: Two published datasets con- reduction in the H3K36me2 histone modiﬁcation at the tainingdataonMTHFRpromotermethylationandofmajor intergenic regions, which is accompanied by a reduction in polymorphisms in folate metabolic genes have been inves- DNAmethylation.Secondly,itwasshownthatthedecrease tigated searching for correlation between those poly- ofH3K36me2mark inintergenic regionsiscorrelated with morphisms and MTHFR promoter methylation levels, for a increased H3K27me3 in those same regions. total of 300 subjects. Both datasets had been previously Conclusion: So far, we demonstrated that a drastic and generatedinourlaboratoryintheframeofadementiacase- globaldecreaseinDNAmethylationatintergenicregionsis controlstudyandofascreeningformaternalriskfactorsfor directly associated withthelack ofH3K36me2 mark inthe Down syndrome, respectively. same regions. This study will more speciﬁcally investigate Results:Inbothdatasetsunderinvestigation,aswellasin theroleofNSD1andH3K36me2markandwilluncoverits the merged samples, we observed a correlation between correlation with H3K27me3 in HNSCC. MTHFR promoter methylation levels and both TYMS N.Farhangdoost:None.C.Horth:None.B.Hu:None. 1494del6(P=0.007) andDNMT3B-149C>T (P=0.004) E. Bareke: None. J. Majewski: None. polymorphisms. Conclusions: Present results reveal that certain poly- P17.36A morphisms of folate metabolic genes contribute to MTHFR Identiﬁcation of aberrantly expressed long non-coding methylation, suggesting that the expression levels of the RNAs in osteoblastic cells from osteoporotic patients MTHFR gene are tightly regulated by both dietary and genetic factors. F. Centofanti1, M. Santoro2, M. Marini3, V. Visconti4, F. Coppedè: None. P. Tannorella: None. A. Stoccoro: A. Rinaldi3, M. Celi5, G. Novelli4, A. Orlandi1, None. R. Gallo: None. V. Nicolì: None. L. V. Tancredi3, U. Tarantino5, A. Botta4 Migliore: None. 1Dep. of Biomedicine and Prevention, Anatomic Pathology P17.35D Section, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, NSD1 Mutation in Head and Neck Squamous Cell 2Don Gnocchi Foundation, Milan, Italy, 3Dep. of Systems Carcinoma and its effects on histone modiﬁcation and Medicine, Centre of Space Bio-Medicine, University of DNA methylation Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy, 4Dep. of Biomedicine and Prevention, Medical Genetics Section, University of1740 Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 5Dep. of Orthopedic 1Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Surgery, University of Rome "Tor Vergata Rome", PTV UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,2Women’sClinic,Tartu Foundation, Rome, Italy University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Introduction:Osteoporosis(OP)isamultifactorialdisease Estonia, 4Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, inﬂuenced by both genetic and environmental factors. The University of Exeter Medical School, University of Exeter, major cause of the bone homeostasis alteration is inﬂam- Exeter, United Kingdom mation. Epigenetic factors represent a link between individual genetic susceptibility and environmental inﬂu- Introduction: The knowledge of genetic variants shaping ences associated with osteoporosis risk. In particular, long placental transcriptome is limited as only one whole non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), have a crucial role in genome analysis of placental expression quantitative trait regulating many important biological processes in bone, loci (eQTLs) by Peng et al. (Human Molecular Genetics, including inﬂammation. 2017) has been published. Current study aimed to Materials and Methods: We designed our study to investigate the extent of placental eQTLs implicated in the identify lncRNAs misregulated in bone cells from OP programming of fetal development, postnatal metabolism patientswiththeaimtopredictpossibleRNAand/orprotein and disease susceptibility. targets implicated in this multifactorial disease. Total RNA Materials and Methods: RNA sequencing and whole was extracted from osteoblast primary cultures derived by genome genotyping datasets of 40 placental samples from OP (n=5), and CTRs (n=5) individuals. Gene expression REPROMETA cohort (Sõber et al., 2015; Kasak et al., hasbeenfocusedon84lncRNAs,validatedorpredicted,to 2015) wereusedforthecis-eQTL analysisinMatrix eQTL regulate the expression of inﬂammatory genes and miR- (goo.gl/wHPxxf). Selected eSNP-eGenes pairs were vali- NAs. In silico analysis using validated bioinformatics tools dated by Taqman RT-qPCR and tested for the association hasbeenutilizedtopredicttheinteractionoflncRNAswith with birth parameters. The association testing utilized miRNAs, mRNAs and proteins targets. REPROMETA (n=336), HAPPY PREGNANCY (n=408) Results: Seven lncRNAs were signiﬁcantly down- and ALSPAC (n=7669) cohorts. regulated in OP patients compared to controls: GRM5- Results: Analysis of cis-eQTLs identiﬁed 199 (88 inde- AS1;CEP83-AS1;CTC-487M23.5;GAS5;RP11-84C13.1; pendent) placental cis-eSNPs (FDR <5%). Six identiﬁed NCBP2-AS2 and SDCBP2-AS1. Bioinformatics analyses eSNP-eGenes pairs have been directly associated with identiﬁed two lncRNAs prediction targets that are impli- bloodmetabolites,Parkinson’sandAlzheimer’sdiseaseand cated in bone homeostasis and in OP: CTC-487M23.5 that colorectal cancer. Overall, 58/63 eGenes were located interacts with HDAC2 mRNA (a key positive regulator of within 100kb of loci associated with in (auto)immunity, bone resorption) and GAS5 a regulator of miR-21-5p, anthropometric parameters, blood parameters, neu- whichitselfinteractwithPTX3mRNA(anovelregulatorof ropsychiatric diseases. In the REPROMETA study, a sug- bone homeostasis). gestive association was detected between the AA-genotype Conclusions: Altogether, these data open a new reg- of rs11678251 (ALPG c.-318 G>A) and reduced placental, ulatory mechanismofgeneexpressioninbonehomeostasis newborn’s and infant’s weight, but this ﬁnding did not and could direct the development of future therapeutic replicate in other cohorts. approaches. Conclusions: This is the second report cataloguing pla- This work was supported by PRIN grant #201528E7CM cental cis-eQTL landscape and addressing its potential link F. Centofanti: None. M. Santoro: None. M. Marini: to the fetal development and postnatal disease program- None. V. Visconti: None. A. Rinaldi: None. M. Celi: ming.Funding: IUT34-12 (Estonian Research Council); None. G. Novelli: None. A. Orlandi: None. V. Tancredi: HAPPY PREGNANCY, 3.2.0701.12-0047 (European None. U. Tarantino: None. A. Botta: None. Regional DevelopmentFund);102215/2/13/2(UK Medical Research Council, Wellcome Trust), Sir Henry Dale Fel- P17.37B lowship (WT104150). Human placental expression quantitative trait loci T.Kikas:None.K.Rull:None.R.N.Beaumont:None. (eQTL) identiﬁed among genetic variants linked to R.M. Freathy: None. M. Laan: None. complex traits and disease susceptibility P17.39D T. Kikas1, K. Rull1,2,3, R. N. Beaumont4, R. M. Freathy4, Introducing miR-885-5p as a potential biomarker for M. Laan1 preeclampsia diagnosis: emphasizing the role of WNT signaling pathwayAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1741 H. Saei Ahan1, M. Abiri1, M. Nourbakhsh2, S. Talebi1 Whole genome sequencing (WGS) variant analysis and interpretation requires an exploration of non-genic func- 1Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biology, tional genomic elements such as promoters and enhancers, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, involved in development and implicated in disease. The Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Department of comprehensive identiﬁcation of regulatory elements and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Iran University of their gene targets is a signiﬁcant challenge. We created Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of GeneHancer (PMID:28605766), a regulatory element database within the GeneCards Suite (https://www.geneca Introduction: Preeclampsia is a heterogeneous condition rds.org/), with 250,000 enhancers and promoters. Informa- that can be challenging to diagnose, given the wide tionisamalgamatedfromENCODE,Ensembl,FANTOM5, spectrum of presentation and the current lack of a robust VISTA, dbSUPER, EPDnew, UCNEbase and GTEx. diagnostic test. Aberrant placental miRNA expression GeneHancer creates a unique non-redundant and compre- might be associated with preeclampsia. One of the most hensive view of regulatory elements, including their target upregulated miRNA in the serum of PE patients is miR- gene associations, transcription factor binding sites, tissue 885-5p. Catenin-beta (CTNNB1) is the predicted target of speciﬁcity and super-enhancer mapping. We recently focus miR-885-5p, which has been reported to have a relatively onphenotype/diseaseannotationofsuchelements,basedon low expression level in the placenta of PE patients. This variant-trait mappings from the GWAS Catalog, and study was conducted to determine the aberrant expression literature-curated evidence from DiseaseEnhancer and of miR-885-5p in women with preeclampsia vs. matched NCBI Entrez Gene. GeneHancer is now used by a healthy control. Also, the target and function of the considerable fraction of GeneCards’ 4 million user base to candidate miRNA was evaluated in HTR-8 and JEG-3 cell annotate non-coding variants, and was recently included as lines. Study design: Quantitative comparison of miR-885- a native regulation track at the UCSC genome browser, 5pexpressioninplacentaandserumof20pregnantwomen where it is the only source for explicit regulatory regions vs.controlwasconducted.miRNAtargetanalysiswasdone and gene associations. GeneHancer provides an indispen- by in silico and functional assay. Expression analysis of sable augmentation for the GeneCards’ NGS disease miRNA was veriﬁed by studying cell proliferation, and interpretation tools: VarElect, a phenotype interpreter, and apoptosis by ﬂow cytometry, invasion, and migration by TGex, a VCF-to-report analyzer (PMID:27357693), used Transwell assay. by major clinical sequencing centers. Non-coding variants Results: miR-885-5p and its target CTNNB1 was sig- are mapped to regulatory regions, and then prioritized with niﬁcantly up and down-regulated in the placenta of PE respect to diseases and phenotype keywords via direct and patients respectively. Forced expression of miR-885-5p target gene-mediated links. Such capacities provide a suppressed CTNNB1 protein expression in HTR-8 cells. comprehensiveroutetodecipheringtheclinicalsigniﬁcance The functional assay suggested that the over-expression of of non-coding single nucleotide and structural variations, miR-885-5p alter invasion,migration, andcell proliferation thus helping to elucidate unsolved disease cases. Support: capacity of JEG-3 cells and induce apoptosis of HTR- LifeMap Sciences grant 8 cells. S. Fishilevich: None. R. Barshir: None. M. Twik: Conclusion:miR-885-5pinvolvedinthepathogenesisof None. I. Bahir: None. T. Iny Stein: None. M. Safran: preeclampsia by targeting CTNNB1 and regulating the None.D.Lancet:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator, invasion and apoptosis of trophoblast cells. It can be sug- collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as gested as a potential biomarker for risk assessment of grants already received); Signiﬁcant; LifeMap Sciences. preeclampsia. H.SaeiAhan:None.M.Abiri:None.M.Nourbakhsh: P17.41B None. S. Talebi: None. Understanding Epigenetic relevance by evaluating Genetic underpinnings of One Carbon metabolism in P17.40A Intracranial Aneurysm Disease interpretation of regulatory variants with GeneHancer S. CM1, S. Sathyan1, S. KR1, P. S2, M. Banerjee1 S.Fishilevich,R.Barshir,M.Twik,I.Bahir,T.InyStein, 1Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, M. Safran, D. Lancet Thiruvananthapuram, India, 2Calicut Medical College, Calicut, India Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel1742 Introduction: Intracranial aneurysm (IA) leads to a regulatory RNAs in ischemia has exceptional importance devastating consequence called subarachnoid hemorrhage for the development of new strategies for neuroprotection. andit iscrucialtohaveanearly detection. Possiblegenetic The circular RNAs (circRNAs) have closed structure, orepigeneticbiomarkeridentiﬁcationisimportanttohavea predominantly brain-speciﬁc expression and remain highly proper management in case of IA. promisingtargetsofresearch.CircRNAscanactasmiRNA Material and Methods: Ethnically and geographically spongesforprotectionoftheencodingmRNA.Theworkis matched subject were selected and subjected to genomic devoted to the study of the circRNA functioning in the rat DNA isolation from peripheral blood using phenol- brain after temporary middle cerebral artery occlusion chloroform method. Genotyping was carried out by San- (tMCAO). ger’sdideoxymethod.Variousstatisticalandcomputational Materials and Methods: tMCAO model, magnetic methods like chi-square, LD analysis, Haploview were resonance imaging, histological examination, high- performed.Evaluationofgeneexpressionforriskallelewas throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), real-time RT- carried out using In-silico approach by mining GTEx data. PCR, bioinformatics. Functional relevance of the associated SNPs were further Results: Using RNA-Seq 11,134 circRNAs were ana- carried out by retrieving data from Ensembl and Haploreg lysed in the subcortical structures of the rat brain. We to identify possible mode of impact of SNP on the regula- revealed395circRNAsthat changed theirexpression (Fold tion of the gene. change>1.5, padj<0.05) at 24h after tMCAO. They were Results: MTHFRrs1801131 (A1286C) present in C- encoded by glutamate receptor (Gria1, Grm3), catalytic terminal regulatory domain, was found to be signiﬁcantly (Adcy5, Ntrk2), transporter (Kcnd2, Kcnq2) and other associated with IA. Another variant MTRRrs10380 present genes associated mainly with neurotransmission signaling neartoFADH2bindingpocket,whichisinanactivesitefor pathway. Bioinformatic analysis predicted circRNA- the co-factor vit-B12 was also found to be signiﬁcantly miRNA-mRNA network which may determine the neuro- associated. BHMT involves with the direct conversion of transmission signaling regulation for stroke. The largest homocysteine (HCy) back to methionine with the help of number of competitive interactions with miRNAs was betaine and choline, here SNP rs3733890 was associated found between circRNAs of Marf1, Ppp4r4 and Plcb1 with Aneurysm. GTEx data for the associated alleles do genes, as well as mRNAs of Stx1a and Ccnd1 genes that indicate altered expression proﬁle suggesting a possible changed their expression after tMCAO. accumulation of HCy. Conclusion: Genome-wide circRNA proﬁling reveals Conclusions: Risk alleles in one carbon metabolism novelinsighttotheneurotransmissionregulationinratbrain genes are associated with IA indicating increased HCy aftercerebralischemia.WeassumedthatcircRNAsmaybe accumulation. Understanding this role of one carbon keynodesoftheregulationoftheneurotransmissiongenetic metabolism in IA may suggest a genotype speciﬁc vitamin response and therapeutic targets for stroke. intervention in IA prevention. This work was supported by grant from the Russian S. Cm: None. S. Sathyan: None. S. Kr: None. P. S: Science Foundation 17-74-10189. None. M. Banerjee: None. I.B. Filippenkov: B. Research Grant (principal investi- gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell P17.42C asgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;GrantfromtheRussian Genome-wide circular RNA analysis of tMCAO rat Science Foundation 17-74-10189. V.V. Stavchansky: model:novelinsighttotheneurotransmissionregulation None. A.E. Denisova: None. N.S. Ionov: None. L.V. in rat brain after cerebral ischemia Valieva: None. S.A. Limborska: None. L.V. Dergunova: None. I. B. Filippenkov1, V. V. Stavchansky1, A. E. Denisova2, N. S. Ionov2, L. V. Valieva3, S. A. Limborska1,2, P17.43D L. V. Dergunova1,2 The T1D-associated lncRNA Lnc13 modulates pancreatic beta cell inﬂammation by allele-speciﬁc 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of stabilization of STAT1 and STAT2 mRNA Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian I. Gonzalez-Moro1,2, A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia3,2, Federation, 3D. Mendeleyev University of Chemical I. Santin1,2, A. Castellanos-Rubio3,2 Technology of Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation 1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Introduction: Ischemic brain stroke is one of the most UniversityoftheBasqueCountry,Leioa,Spain,2Biocruces serious and socially signiﬁcant diseases. The study of Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Barakaldo, Spain,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1743 3Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Instituto de Biociências Universidade de São Paulo, São Animal Physiology, University of the Basque Country, Paulo, Brazil Leioa, Spain Introduction: During Colonial Period, about four million Themajorityoftype1diabetes(T1D)associationsignalslie Africans were brought to Brazil as slaves. Throughout this innon-codingregionsofthehumangenomeandmanyhave period,manyrunaway,abandonedandfreedslavesfounded been predicted to affect the expression and secondary small isolated rural communities, the Quilombos. In the structure of lncRNAs. However, the mechanisms by which state of São Paulo, most Quilombo remnants are located in these molecules contribute to the pathogenesis of T1D the Vale do Ribeira region. remain to be clariﬁed. Objective: To shed light on the admixture dynamics of Preliminary results of our group have demonstrated that 12 Quilombo communities in Vale do Ribeira, we used a the expression of several T1D-associated lncRNAs is genomics approach. modiﬁed by diabetogenic stimuli, such as viral infections MaterialandMethods:665individualsweregenotyped and pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, in pancreatic β cells. Of with ~600K SNP array (Axiom Human Origins, Affyme- special interest are the results obtained in the characteriza- trix), and analyzed to estimate ancestry and effective tionofLnc13,alncRNAexpressedandupregulatedbyviral population sizes (Ne). dsRNA in β cells that harbors a SNP associated with T1D Results: African, European and Native American ances- (rs917997). tries contribute, respectively, 44%, 40%, and 16% for Overexpression of Lnc13 in human β cells led to an autosomes,49%,2%,and49%formtDNAand32%,63%, increaseinSTAT1/2pathwayactivationthatcorrelatedwith and 6% for the Y chromosome. This reveals directional increased production of pro-inﬂammatory chemokines. mating involving European men with African and Native Interestingly, when the Lnc13 harboring the risk allele for women. We further dissected timing of admixture and T1D(rs917997*C)wastransfected,theincreaseinSTAT1/ ﬂuctuation in effective population sizes. Using ancestry 2 signaling was more pronounced than in cells transfected estimatesofNebasedonIBD,wefoundthesmallestNe~7 with the plasmid encoding the Lnc13 with the protection generations ago, coinciding with the origin of these com- allele (rs917997*T). In addition, the effect of Lnc13 upre- munities.We inferred that admixture between Africans and gulation on chemokine production was also allele-speciﬁc. Europeans occurred with greatest intensity 13 generations Our studies have shown that intracellular PIC induces ago (± 8-18), prior to the origin of these Quilombos. Lnc13 translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, However, admixture with Native Americans occurred 7 increasing STAT1/2 mRNA stability by promoting its generations ago (±3-12). interaction with a protein named PCBP2. Conclusion:TheQuilombopopulationshaveahistoryof Inconclusion, ourresultsshowthatLnc13participatesin directionalmatingbetweenEuropeanmenwithAfricanand pancreaticβcellinﬂammationviaregulationoftheSTAT1/ Native women, involving two main periods of admixture, 2 signaling pathway, suggesting a functional effect of this 13 (involving Africans and Europeans) and 7 (involving lncRNA in T1D pathogenesis. Native Americans) generations ago. This work was funded by Basque Health Department Financial Support: FAPESP 12/18010-0, FAPESP- and SED. CEPID 13/08028-1 and NIH grant GM-075091 I. Gonzalez-Moro: None. A. Olazagoitia-Garmendia: K. Nunes: None. L. Kimura: None. M.A. Silva: None. None. I. Santin: None. A. Castellanos-Rubio: None. R.B.Lemes:None.D.Rincon:None.D.Meyer:None.R. C. Mingroni-Netto: None. P18 P18.02B Genetic epidemiology - Population genetics - Statistical Digenic autosomal Alport syndrome in the context of methodology - Evolutionary genetics isolated population P18.01A A. Zupan1, G. Grubelnik1, A. Momirovska2 The demographic history of Afro-descendants in the Vale do Ribeira region (São Paulo, Brazil), revealed by 1Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana, genomic data Slovenia, 2Synlab laboratories, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of K. Nunes, L. Kimura, M. A. Silva, R. B. Lemes, D. Rincon, D. Meyer, R. C. Mingroni-Netto Introduction: Studying population isolates in the context ofgeneticandphenotypicvariationcanprovideusaunique1744 insight into genetic differentiation and phenotypic expres- Materials and Methods: In this pilot phase we focused sions. One of the isolated communities is the Galičnik on population isolates to capture a broad swath of genetic population. It is one of the oldest villages in Macedonia, diversity across the continent. We have characterized the foundedbytheSlavicethnicgroupcalledMijaksaroundthe genomes of 1,739 individuals, including 1,236 newly 10thcentury.AmongtheindividualsofGaličnikpopulation, sequenced high coverage whole genomes, representing 64 the nephropathy was detected with clinical manifestations countries and more than 200 ethnic groups. linked to the Alport syndrome. Results: We identiﬁed 63 million SNPs, 29 million of Materials and Methods: In total, 111 saliva samples which have not been previously described, and nearly 4 were collected from Macedonian individuals with paternal million indels. The underlying samples have GIS coordi- and/or maternal origin from the Galičnik village. For the natesindicatingtheirorigin,allowingvariantfrequenciesto purpose of population analysis, 44 unrelated male samples bedisplayedgeographically.Toevaluatetheeventualvalue were obtained from the dataset. A total of 16 Y- of a population-scale catalogue of Asian variants to preci- chromosome biallelic markers and 17 Y-STR markers sion medicine and molecular diagnostics, we generated were analysed using a high-resolution melt analysis and pharmacogenomic predictions, identiﬁed Asian speciﬁc or capillary fragment analysis. For detection of the COL4A3, enricheddiseaseallelesanddemonstratedthevalueofusing COL4A4, and COL4A5 mutations, custom-made NGS Asianallelefrequencyﬁltersindiseasegenediscoverysuch panel was used. as MODY, familial disease and cancer. Results and Conclusions: Analysis revealed two muta- Conclusions: The dataset provides resources that will tions, both affecting autosomal chromosome 2. First muta- greatly increase the ability to carry out genetic studies in tionwasdetectedinexon38oftheCOL4A3gene,resulting Asianpopulationsandprovidesareferencepointforscaling inanin-framedeletionofthreeaminoacidsandthesecond efforts towards a much larger catalogue of Asian genetic mutation in exon 13 of the COL4A4 gene, resulting in a variation. glycine substitution within Gly-X-Y triple helical domain. E. Stawiski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Segregation analysis revealed that the two mutations were niﬁcant; MedGenome. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock inherited together on the same chromosome, like in cis options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; followingdigenicautosomalinheritancepattern.Population MedGenome. A. Peterson: A. Employment (full or part- analysis of the Galičnik population showed a high level of time); Modest; Genentech. E. Ownership Interest (stock, genetichomogeneitywithinGaličnikpopulationandstrong stockoptions,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest; geneticafﬁliationsofGaličnikpopulationwithWest-Slavic Genentech. populations, especially the Polish population. A. Zupan: None. G. Grubelnik: None. A. P18.04D Momirovska: None. EstimatedautozygosityinNorwegianfamilytriosandits relation to the timing of birth P18.03C The GenomeAsia 100K Pilot Project: Enabling P.Sole-Navais1,J.Bacelis1,G.Zhang2,3,Ø.Helgeland4,5, Medically Relevant Genetic Discoveries Across Asia D. Modzelewska1, M. Vaudel5,6, S. Johansson5,6, P. R. Njølstad5,7, L. J. Muglia2,3, B. Jacobsson1,4 E. Stawiski1, GenomeAsia100K Consortium, A. Peterson2 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of 1MedGenome, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Genentech, Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of South San Francisco, CA, United States Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, Introduction: Population-scale genome sequencing pro- 3Human Genetics Division, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital jects designed to lay the foundation for furthering our MedicalCenter,Cincinnati,OH,UnitedStates,4Divisionof understanding of the genetic basis of disease are underway Health Data and Digitalization, Department of Genetics in the US and Europe, but large-scale and in-depth and Bioinformatics, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, characterization of Asian genome variation has not yet Oslo, Norway, 5KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, been attempted despite the incredible diversity across the Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, continent. We describe here the ﬁrst stage of a project to Bergen, Norway, 6Center for Medical Genetics and characterizegeneticvariationacrossAsianpopulationswith Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, the ultimate goal of providing a rich resource for precision Bergen, Norway, 7Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland medicine. University Hospital, Bergen, NorwayAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1745 Inbreeding leads to autozygosity in long segments of the variantsandhumantraits.However,theseassociationsonly genome, and increases the probability of carrying deleter- explain a limited fraction of the heritability of most traits. ioushomozygousmutationswithrecessiveeffects.Because Additionally,thecontributionofrarevariantsisstilllargely heritability of birth timing has a strong dominant compo- unknown,onereasonbeingthattheyusuallyarenottagged nent, we hypothesized that genes involved in parturition by common tagSNPs used in GWAS. A powerful resource would display higher recessive effects, driving estimated foridentifying trait-associatedvariantsisbywholegenome autozygosity to shorten gestational duration. sequencing (WGS) in cohorts comprised of families or We investigated runs of homozygosity (ROH) in relation individuals from a limited geographical area. to spontaneous delivery in 13000 family trios. Materials and Methods: GWAS were performed in a Weestimatedmaternal,fetalandpaternalautozygosityas kinship-structured population-based cohort from northern the percentage of autosomal SNP mappable distance cov- Sweden (N=1021) with WGS data. Genetic associations ered by ROH (F ) and mapped ROHs to protein-coding were tested for 85 inﬂammatory biomarker proteins mea- ROH genes by the percentage of overlapping length between sured in blood plasma samples. ROH and gene coordinates (ROH ). We used survival Results: We identiﬁed 44 independent associations, that gene analysistoestimatetheeffectofF andROH ontime- comprised 5813 single nucleotide variant-protein associa- ROH gene to-spontaneous delivery in ~9000 (discovery) and ~4000 tions for 42 inﬂammatory markers. Six of the lead variants (replication) triads of Norwegian ancestry from the MoBa were low frequency variants (MAF<5%), and one associa- cohort. tionwithararevariant(MAF<1%)wasidentiﬁed.Here,we While we observed a correlation between parental and report 19 novel regions as well as 25 loci that were not fetal F (R= 0.14), the correlation was not detected detected in the same cohort in analyses on genotyped and ROH between maternal and paternal F (R= 0.06). Evidence imputed SNPs. ROH from estimated autozygosity analysis suggests an effect of Conclusions: Even in a GWA approach, we gain power maternal F on spontaneous delivery risk (HR, 1.008; and precision by using WGS data. This is suggestive of a ROH 95%CI,1.003-1.014),despitefailingthereplicationattempt more accurate determination of genotypes using WGS (1.003; 0.994-1.011). Consistent with our hypothesis, comparedtoimputations.However,thelimitedsamplesize maternal ROH mapping revealed six protein-coding did not allow for identifying further associations with rare gene genes associated with higher spontaneous delivery risk variants. (pvalue<7.3x10-6,noreplication)andarightskewnessofz- The research was funded by SSMF, VR and SciLifeLab, scores(>55%ofgenesincreasedspontaneousdeliveryrisk; as well as the Kjell and Märta Beijers, the Göran Gus- χ2 pvalue<2.2x10-16). tafssons,theBorgström/Hedström,theÅkeWiberg,andthe Estimated autozygosity highlights the role of maternal Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation. genome on, and the dominant component of gestational J. Höglund: None. N. Rafati: None. M. Rask-Ander- duration. Whether this is due to speciﬁc genes or homo- sen: None. T. Karlsson: None. W.E. Ek: None. Å. zygous segments spread throughout the genome remains Johansson: None. unknown. P. Sole-Navais: None. J. Bacelis: None. G. Zhang: P18.07C None. Ø. Helgeland: None. D. Modzelewska: None. M. Genome-Wide Association Study of Body Fat Vaudel:None.S.Johansson:None.P.R.Njølstad:None. Distribution identiﬁes Novel Adiposity Loci and Sex- L.J. Muglia: None. B. Jacobsson: None. Speciﬁc Genetic Effects P18.05A M. Rask-Andersen, T. Karlsson, W. E. Ek, Å. Johansson Whole genome sequencing data increases power and precision to genome wide association studies Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden J. Höglund, N. Rafati, M. Rask-Andersen, T. Karlsson, In this study, we performed genome-wide association W. E. Ek, Å. Johansson studies (GWAS) for the distribution of body fat to the arms, legs and trunk. Fat mass for each compartment were Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, estimatedfromsegmental bio-electrical impedance analysis Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, (sBIA) for 362,499 individuals from the UK Biobank. A Sweden total of 98 loci, were identiﬁed to be associated with body fat distribution, 29 of which have not previously been Introduction: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) associated with an anthropometric trait. A high degree of have identiﬁed associations between thousands of genetic sex-heterogeneity was observed and associations were1746 primarily observed in females, particularly for distribution carriers with varyingnumbersofBOLA2copies,andfound of fat to the legs and trunk. Enrichment analysis indicates an association between low BOLA2 dosage and anemia involvement ofmesenchymederived tissues andcell types. (P=1e-4). In particular, 8 out of 15 (53%) individuals with In conclusion, GWAS of sBIA-determined body fat three copies needed iron supplementation and/or were distribution revealed a genetic architecture that inﬂuences anemic. To conﬁrm our ﬁndings, we analyzed hematolo- thedistributionofbodyfatthroughoutthehumanbodyand gical traitsand plasma iron level inmouse modelscarrying showedthatgeneticvariationhasastrongerinﬂuenceonthe the 16p11.2 orthologous deletion and, more speciﬁcally, proportion of fat stored in the trunk and legs in females. Bola2+/- and Bola2-/- mice. Agreeing with human data, all Determining the genetic determinants and mechanisms that models showed signiﬁcantly lower blood iron and hemo- leadtoafavorabledistributionofbodyfatmayhelpinrisk globin levels and smaller red blood cells than wild-type assessmentandinidentifyingnovelvenuesforintervention littermates, with a linear relation with Bola2 dosage when to prevent or treat obesity-related disease. The work was comparing Bola2+/+, Bola2+/- and Bola2-/- mice. supported by grants from the Swedish Society for Medical Our results show that BOLA2 participates in iron home- Research (SSMF), the Kjell and Märta Beijers Foundation, ostasisandalowerdosageisassociatedwithanemia.These Göran Gustafssons Foundation, the Swedish Medical data highlight a potential adaptive role of the human- Research Council (Project Number 2015-03327), the speciﬁcexpansionofBOLA2inimprovingironmetabolism. Marcus Borgström Foundation, The Swedish Heart-Lung G. Giannuzzi: None. E. Porcu: None. G. Willemin: foundation, and the Åke Wiberg Foundation. None. X. Nuttle: None. D. Risso: None. J. Chrast: None. M. Rask-Andersen: None. T. Karlsson: None. W.E. K. Hoekzema: None. Y. Herault: None. R. Bernier: Ek: None. Å. Johansson: None. None. Z. Kutalik: None. E. Eichler: None. A. Reymond: None. P18.08D The human-speciﬁc BOLA2 duplication modiﬁes iron P18.09A homeostasis and anemia predisposition The variety of genetic variants of the CFTR gene accordingtothe2017RegisteroftheRussianFederation G. Giannuzzi1, E. Porcu1,2, G. Willemin1, X. Nuttle3, D.Risso3,J.Chrast1,K.Hoekzema3,16p11.2Consortium, E. Kondratyeva1, S. Krasovsky1,2, N. Kashirskaya1, Y. Herault4, R. Bernier3, Z. Kutalik1,2, E. Eichler3,5, E. Amelina2, A. Chernyak1, A. Polyakov1, A. Reymond1 T. Ivashchenko3, A. Pavlov4, R. Zinchenko1, E. Ginter1, O. Odinokova5, L. Nazarenko5, N. Kapranov1, 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss V. Sherman1, A. Voronkova1, M. Starinova1, Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, V. Izhevskaya1, A. Zodbinova1, Y. Melyanovskaya1, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, S. Kutsev1 4Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch, France, 5Howard Hughes Medical 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Institute, Seattle, WA, United States Federation, 2FMBA Research Institute of Pulmonology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute of Recurrent pathogenic copy-number variation (CNV) at Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Medicine them. chromosome 16p11.2 is mediated by human-speciﬁc D.O. Otta, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Parsek duplications under positive selection. This duplication is Lab, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5Tomsk National copy-number variant and includes 3 to 8 copies of BOLA2, Research Medical Center, Tomsk, Russian Federation whichencodesaproteininvolvedinthematurationofiron- sulfur cytosolic proteins. Objective: To determine the diversity and frequency of the To investigate the potential human advantage of BOLA2 identiﬁed CFTR pathogenic variants in the Russian duplication, we assessed hematological traits and iron- Federation (RF) based on 2017 CF Registry data. relatedphenotypesof379385controls,8916p11.2deletion Material and Methods: Information used from the and 56 duplication carriers in the UKBiobank, as deletion national CF Register 2017. The CF Register included data and duplication individuals have, respectively, less and about3096CysticFibrosis(CF)patients.Genetictestswere more copies of BOLA2 than controls. We found that performed in 92.4% of patients (92.6% of adults, 87.0% of 16p11.2 deletion is strongly associated with anemia (18/89 children). carriers, 20%, P=3e-10), particularly iron-deﬁciency ane- Results: 196 genetic variants were identiﬁed. 44 genetic mia. To gauge whether this phenotype was due to BOLA2, variants are not described in the CFTR data bases. The ten we collected clinical information of 16p11.2 deletion most common genetic variants are F508del (52.8%),Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1747 CFTRdele2.3(6.2%),E92K(3.0%),2143delT(2.1%),3849 results, 69.6% (32 of 46) reported SNPs are signiﬁcantly +10kbC->T (2.0%), W1282X (1.9%), 2184insA (1.8%), associatedwithheight,and69.2%(9of13)SNPsforBMI. 1677delTA (1.8%), N1303K (1.5%), G542X (1.3%). Two Our study extended the main conclusions of the previous pathogenic alleles were identiﬁed in 80.2%, one in 16.1%, study to all genders and showed the potential of self- and no allele could be detected in 3.7% of patients. The reported data for population study and phenotypic associa- proportion of F508del homozygotes was 29.6%, hetero- tion study in China. zygotes - 46.4%, genotypes without F508del - 24.0%. The X. Yao: None. A. Lan: None. L. Wang: None. H. distributionofvariantsaccordingtothemutationtypeswas Weng: None. S. Tang: None. G. Chen: None. as follows: in frame deletions/insertions prevailed (61.3%); frameshift deletions/insertions -10.3%; missensemutations P18.11C - 6%(more common inadults); nonsense mutations- 6.6% Human genetic determinants of chronic low-grade (morefrequentinchildren);splicingdisorders-8.3%(twice inﬂammation in the general population asofteninadults);largein/del-7.5%(foundwiththesame frequency in both adults and children). F. Hodel1,2, P. Marques-Vidal3, P. Vollenweider3, Conclusion: The most common genetic variant is J. Fellay1,2,4 F508del - 52.8%. There have been identiﬁed genetic var- iants that are not found in international CFTR bases, their 1Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, EPFL, clinical signiﬁcance is further conﬁrmed. The work was Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, performedaspartofthestateassignmentoftheMinistryof Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Service of Internal Medicine, Education and Science of Russia. DepartmentofMedicine,LausanneUniversityHospitaland E. Kondratyeva: None. S. Krasovsky: None. N. University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Precision Kashirskaya: None. E. Amelina: None. A. Chernyak: Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital and None. A. Polyakov: None. T. Ivashchenko: None. A. University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Pavlov: None. R. Zinchenko: None. E. Ginter: None. O. Odinokova: None. L. Nazarenko: None. N. Kapranov: Chronic low-grade inﬂammation plays an important role in None. V. Sherman: None. A. Voronkova: None. M. the initiation and clinical course of many complex human Starinova: None. V. Izhevskaya: None. A. Zodbinova: diseases. To better understand the contributions of human None. Y. Melyanovskaya: None. S. Kutsev: None. genetic variation to chronic inﬂammation, we performed genome-wide association studies of plasma levels of four P18.10B inﬂammatory biomarkers (CRP, IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α) Phenotypic trait association study and population using data collected in the context of the CoLaus study, a history inference from 90, 737 Chinese individuals large population-based cohort including >5,000 individuals in Lausanne, Switzerland. Using general linear models, we X. Yao, A. Lan, L. Wang, H. Weng, S. Tang, G. Chen searchedforassociationsbetween9milliongeneticvariants and the natural log-transformed plasma levels of the four WeGene, Shenzhen, China biomarkers.Weidentiﬁedmultiplegenome-widesigniﬁcant associations (p<1.25E-8) with CRP levels at 5 previously Arecentstudyoflargescalenon-invasiveprenataltestingin identiﬁed genomic loci, encompassing the genes APOE Chinesewomenhasyieldednewinsightsofphenotypictrait (p=2.01E-16), CRP (p=3.11E-12), HNF1A (p=1.83E-11), associations and population history by extremely low IL6R(p=2.04E-09)andLEPR(p=3.95E-09).Interestingly, coverage sequencing data. Extending to microarray data we observed that people carrying the ApoE4 genotype, from 90,737 samples with all genders, population genetics known as the leading genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s and association studies were performed on self-reported disease, have lower CRP levels, suggesting that the phenotypes of both men and women. In all minorities and modulating role of APOE variants in Alzheimer’s patho- randomly selected Han Chinese, a principal component genesis is not mediated through chronic inﬂammation. On analysis showed similar genetic population structure with the other hand, we did not identify any genome-wide the previous study. We also replicated the private allele signiﬁcant association with IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α levels sharing patterns, where levels of allele sharing with CEU after correction for multiple testing, which suggest that andITUfrom1000genomeprojectarehigherinnorthwest these cytokines are less tightly genetically controlled than and southwest respectively. In the genetic adaption of CRP and that common genetic variants of large effect do Chinese population, all the 14 adaptive reported SNPs are not play a major role in their regulation. Together, the validated signiﬁcantly differentiated from north to south results of this study provide further insights into human China. And for replicated genome-wide association study genetic control of chronic inﬂammation, which could lead1748 to better disease prediction models and to the identiﬁcation consequences of lower SES of individuals with inherited of potential novel targets for diagnostics or therapeutic CNVs. These results have important implications for plan- development. ning of medical and social services and provide unique F. Hodel: None. P. Marques-Vidal: None. P. Vollen- insights into determinants of SES. weider: None. J. Fellay: None. G.J.Burghel:None.U.Khan:None.W.Lin:None.W. Whittaker: None. S. Banka: None. P18.12D Copy number variants correlate with socio-economic P18.13A status Higher polygenetic predisposition for asthma in cow’s milk allergic children G. J. Burghel1,2, U. Khan1, W. Lin3, W. Whittaker4, S. Banka1,5 P. Henneman 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location AMC, United Kingdom, 2School of Health Science, Faculty of Amsterdam, Netherlands Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Northern Institute for Cow’smilkallergy(CMA)isanearly-onsetallergyofwhich Cancer Research, Medical School, Newcastle University, the underlying genetic factors remain largely undiscovered. Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Division of CMA has been found to co-occur with other allergies and Population Health, Health Services Research & Primary immunologicalhypersensitivitydisorders,suggestingashared Care, University of Manchester, Manchester, United genetic etiology.Weaimedto(1)investigate and(2)validate Kingdom, 5Division of Evolution and Genomics, School of whetherCMAchildrencarryahighergeneticsusceptibilityfor Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and other immunological hypersensitivity disorders using poly- Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United genic risk score analysis (PRS) and prospective phenotypic Kingdom data. Twenty-two CMA patients of the Dutch EuroPrevall birthcohortstudyand307referencesubjectsweregenotyped Introduction:Socioeconomicstatus(SES)isameasureofan using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array. Differen- individual’sorafamily’seconomicandsocialstatusbasedon tiallygeneticsusceptibilitywasestimatedusingPRS,basedon multiplefactorsincludingincome,education,andoccupation. multiple P-value thresholds for SNP inclusion of previously SES is a major determinant of health and related outcomes. reportedgenome-wideassociationstudies(GWAS)onasthma, Lower SES confers increased risk for stroke, cardiovascular autism spectrum disorder, atopic dermatitis, inﬂammatory disease,hypertension,hyperlipidaemiaandobesity.Earlylife bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis. These associations adversity produces lasting and deleterious effects on devel- were validated with prospective data outcomes during a six- opmental outcome. The correlation of genetic variants and year follow-up in 19 patients. We observed robust and SES is only beginning to be understood. signiﬁcantly higher PRSs of asthma in CMA children Results: We curated an anonymised database of results compared to the reference set. Association analyses using from over 17,000 postnatal clinical array comparative the prospective data indicated signiﬁcant higher PRSs in genomic hybridisation (aCGH) performed at the Manche- formerCMApatientssufferingfromasthmaandrelatedtraits. sterCentreforGenomicMedicinebetween2010and2017. Our results suggest a shared genetic etiology between CMA From this database we identiﬁed 473 unique cases of and asthma and a considerable predictive sensitivity potential pathogenic or likely-pathogenic autosomal copy number forsubsequentonsetofasthmawhichindicatesapotentialuse variants(CNVs)withcompleteinheritancestatus(218cases for early clinical asthma intervention programs. with inherited and 255 cases with de novo CNVs) and P. Henneman: None. postcode information. We obtained indices of deprivation associated with each of these postcodes. We found that P18.14B individuals with inherited pathogenic/likely-pathogenic AssociationofAMPD1andCKMMpolymorphismswith CNVsweresigniﬁcantlymorelikelytobelivinginareasof physical performance phenotype of Lithuanian elite higher deprivation when compared to individuals with de athletes novo CNVs (p 2 = 2.1x10-6) or with the general popu- x trend lation of North-West England (p 2 = 4.3x10-14). V. Ginevičienė1, K. Milasius2, A. Utkus1 x trend Conclusions: We show that inheritance of pathogenic CNVs and lower SES are correlated. Our results demon- 1Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of stratetheneedtoquantifythesecondarysocialandmedical Biomedical science, Department of Human and MedicalAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1749 Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vytautas Magnus University 1Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Education Academy, Vilnius, Lithuania Brazil, 2Instituto Oswaldo Cruz - Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3Universidad Privada Franz Tamayo - UNIFRANZ, Introduction: Adenosine monophosphate deaminase 1 Cochabamba, Bolivia, Plurinational State of, 4Instituto (encoded by AMPD1 gene) and muscle-speciﬁc creatine NacionaldeInfectologiaEvandroChagas-Fiocruz,Riode kinase (encoded by CKM gene) involved in regulation of Janeiro, Brazil muscular energy metabolism. The aim of this study was to determine the impact of AMPD1 (c.133C>T, p.Gln45Ter, Introduction: Dengue is an arthropod-borne viral disease rs17602729) and CKM (c.*800A>G, rs8111989) poly- with clinical manifestations varying from asymptomatic to morphisms on physical performance of Lithuanian elite severe forms including dengue shock syndrome (DSS). An athletes. increasing number of genetic studies have outlined the Materials and Methods: The study involved 150 association between host genetic variations and dengue Lithuanian athletes (60 females, 90 males; stratiﬁed into: severity. Mannose-binding lectin acts in ﬁrst line response endurance-oriented (n=63), sprint/power-oriented (n=65), to dengue virus (DENV). However, data regarding the mixed (n=22) groups) and 150 controls (60 females, 90 association between MBL2 gene and dengue severity are males, healthy unrelated non-athletes). Anthropometric still controversial. measurements and muscle strength (grip strength, short- Materials and Methods: We have investigated the term explosive muscle power (STEMP), anaerobic alactic association between 7 single nucleotide polymorphisms muscle power (AAMP)), and maximum oxygen uptake (SNPs) at MBL2 gene (rs7095891, rs1800450, rs1800451, (VO max) were measured. Genotyping was performed by rs4935047, rs930509, rs2120131, rs2099902) and dengue 2 RT-PCR (for CKM polymorphism) and RFLP-restriction severity in children from Rio de Janeiro. The case group enzyme digestion (for AMPD1). (N=87) included children with severe disease (DSS) and a Results:Thephenotypicmeasurementsweresigniﬁcantly control group (N=197) was selected among neighbors and different and speciﬁc to each sports groups (p<0,05). The cases’ household members matched by age. Statistical frequencies of the CKM genotypes were signiﬁcantly dif- analyses were performed using conditional logistic regres- ferent between the male and female sprint/power-oriented sion models. Proportions of European, African and Native athletes (AA/AG/GG: 37.8/54.1/8.1% vs 50.0/25.0/25.0%, American ancestries were also determined to adjust for p=0.035). CKM AA and AG genotyped athletes had sig- confounding. niﬁcantly higher STEMP than GG genotyped athletes Results: No associations were observed in single SNP (p=0.005). AMPD1 CC genotyped endurance-oriented analysis. However, when MBL2 SNPs were combined in males athletes had signiﬁcantly lower values of AAMP haplotypes, the allele rs7095891G/rs1800450C/rs1800451C/ than the heterozygous athletes (p=0.04). Moreover, rs4935047A/rs930509G/rs2120131G/rs2099902C was sig- AMPD1 CC genotyped endurance-oriented female had niﬁcantly associated with risk of severe dengue (OR=4.02; signiﬁcantly higher VO max than heterozygous female CI:1.23-13.09;p=0.02)ascompared tothemostfrequent 2 95% (p=0.01). haplotype (A/C/C/A/G/T/T). A second haplotype carrying Conclusions: CKM and AMPD1 genetic variants have rs4935047G and rs7095891G alleles was also associated to different effect on Lithuanian male and female physical risk (OR=1.91; CI:1.02-3.6; p=0.04). 95% capacity. CKM AA genotype confers ability to achieve Conclusion: MBL2 haplotypes are associated to dengue better muscle efﬁciency in short-term, maximum-effort severity in Brazilian children even after adjustment for requiring physical activity and AMPD1 CC genotyped geneticancestry.Theseresultsreinforcetheroleofmannose athletes have better aerobic capacity. binding lectin in immune response to DENV and suggest V. Ginevičienė: None. K. Milasius: None. A. that variations at MBL2 gene may help predict disease Utkus: None. course. Financial support: CNPq, CAPES. A.M.M.Ornelas:None.C.Xavier-de-Carvalho:None. P18.15C L. Alvarado-Arnez: None. M. Ribeiro-Alves: None. A. Association between MBL2 haplotypes and dengue Tanuri: None. R.S. Aguiar: None. M.O. Moraes: None. severity in children from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil C.C. Cardoso: None. A. M. M. Ornelas1, C. Xavier-de-Carvalho2, L. Alvarado- P18.16D Arnez3, M. Ribeiro-Alves4, A. Tanuri1, R. S. Aguiar1, Inﬂuence of genetic ancestry on the human serum M. O. Moraes2, C. C. Cardoso1 proteome1750 J. Sjaarda1, H. C. Gertsein1, P. Mohammadi-Shemirani1, grants already received); Signiﬁcant; CIHR. C. Other M. Pigeyre1, S. Hess2, G. Pare1 Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Signiﬁcant; Sanoﬁ. F. Consultant/ 1McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 2Sanoﬁ Advisory Board; Modest; Sanoﬁ, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Aventis, Frankfurt, Germany Lexicomp, Amgen. Background: Disease risk varies signiﬁcantly between P18.17A ethnicities,however,itisunknowniftheseobservationsare IncreasingincidenceoftheDownsyndromeintheCzech a consequence of environmental or genetic factors. Republic: Long-term population-based study Investigatingethnicdifferenceswithinthehumanproteome may shed light on the impact of ancestry on health and A.SipekSr1,2,3,4,V.Gregor1,2,J.Horacek4,J.Klaschka5,6, disease. M. Maly5,7, A. Sipek Jr1,8 Methods: Admixture mapping was used to explore the impact of ancestry on a panel of 237 cardiometabolic bio- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer Hospital, markers in 2,216 Latin American participants within the Prague,CzechRepublic,2DepartmentofMedicalGenetics, ORIGIN-trial. We developed a variance component model PronatalSanatorium,Prague,CzechRepublic,3Instituteof to determine the proportion of variance explained by local Medical Genetics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles ancestral differences, and applied this model in ORIGIN. University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4GENNET, Prague, Multivariable linear regression was used to identify genetic CzechRepublic,5InstituteofComputerScienceoftheCzech loci affecting biomarker variability between ethnicities. AcademyofSciences,Prague,CzechRepublic,6Instituteof Results: Variance component analysis revealed 5% of Biophysics and Informatics, First Faculty of Medicine, biomarkers to have a signiﬁcant effect of ancestry, including Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 7National C-peptide and apolipoprotein-E. We also identiﬁed 46 local Institute of Public Health, Prague, Czech Republic, ancestry associations across 40 biomarkers. Independent 8Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of analyses revealed 34 of these regions were associated at Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic genome-wide signiﬁcance with their respective biomarker in either ORIGIN Europeans (n=1,931) or Latins. Finally, we Introduction: Down syndrome is the most common found that a genetic risk score in Latins based on ancestral chromosomal aneuploidy syndrome, therefore it is one of differences of C-peptide levels, was associated with an the main targets for the prenatal screening/diagnostics increasedriskofdiabetes(OR=4.47perSD,95%CI1.70to programmes worldwide. The main goal for this study was 11.76, p=0.002) and measures of insulin resistance. toinvestigatetheeffectofincreasingmaternalage(theresult Discussion: Our results demonstrate the importance of oftheknownandongoingdemographicchangeintheCzech ancestry on biomarker levels, suggesting some of the Republic) on the population incidence of Down syndrome. observed differences in disease prevalence likely has a Methods: Data were obtained from the ofﬁcial National biological basis, and that use of reference intervals should Registry of Congenital Anomalies of the Czech Republic. be tailored to ancestry. Speciﬁcally, our results suggest a We evaluated the incidence of Down syndrome (ICD-10 role of ancestry in insulin metabolism and diabetes risk. code Q90) in the livebirths and in the prenatally diagnosed Supported by Sanoﬁ and CIHR. cases (time period 1994-2017). We were also investigating J.Sjaarda:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; other related variables (like maternal age, diagnostic/ CHUV. H.C. Gertsein: A. Employment (full or part-time); screening methods). The registration process is country- Signiﬁcant; McMaster University. B. Research Grant (prin- wide and compulsory by national law. cipal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending Results: The overall incidence of Down syndrome in grantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;CIHR. livebirths decreased from 7.79 in 1994 (relative incidences C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of per 10.000 live births) to 3.48 in 2017 (p<0.05). The inci- drugs or other in-kind support); Signiﬁcant; Sanoﬁ. F. Con- dence of prenatally diagnosed (and electively terminated) sultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;Sanoﬁ,NovaNordisk,Lilly, cases increased rapidly from 5.35 in 1994 to 25.53 in 2017 AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline. P. (p<0.05). The average maternal age increased from 22.9 in Mohammadi-Shemirani: None. M. Pigeyre: A. Employ- 1994 to 30.2 in 2017. ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;McMasterUniversity.S. Discussion: The overall incidence of Down syndrome in Hess:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Sanoﬁ. the Czech Republic is increasing (the incidence is increas- G. Pare: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ing in prenatally diagnosed and terminated cases, the inci- McMaster University. B. Research Grant (principal investi- dence in births is decreasing). We identiﬁed two main gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellas reasons: 1) gradual implementation of combined screeningAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1751 of the ﬁrst trimester; 2) rapidly increasing maternal age in the short heterology (6A/7A) was observed in contrast to the Czech Republic during the last 30 years. the deletion bias for the long heterology (9A/19A). One Acknowledgments:SupportedbytheMinistryofHealthof donor was of particular interest, showing in addition 12x the Czech Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A more complex COs (unconverted SNPs between converted A. Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, ones). Whole Exome sequencing of this donor showed a collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as missensemutationc.1196A>GatXRCC1involvedinbase- grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Ministry of Health of excision repair and a synonymous mutation c.354T>C at theCzechRepublic,grantnr.AZV17-29622A.V.Gregor: ERCC1 involved in nucleotide excision repair. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Discussion: This indicates that mismatch repair has a consultant and pending grants as well as grants already major impact in the transmission of microsatellites during received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech meiotic recombination and that mutations in repair genes Republic,grantnr.AZV17-29622A.J.Horacek:None.J. can lead to aberrant recombination products and a massive Klaschka: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, col- increase in complex events. laboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrants This work was funded by the FWF30867000, alreadyreceived); Modest; MinistryofHealthofthe Czech FWF27698000 and by the OeAW. Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. M. Maly: B. A. Heissl: None. A.J. Betancourt: None. I. Tiemann- Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Boege: None. consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech P18.19C Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. A. Sipek Jr: B. Whole exome proﬁle of Bulgarians Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already S. K. Karachanak-Yankova1,2, L. Balabanski1,3, received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech D. Serbezov1, R. Vazharova3,4, O. Antonova1, Republic, grant nr. AZV 17-29622A. D. Nikolova1, M. Mihaylova1, R. Staneva1, V. Damyanova1, D. Nesheva1, Z. Hammoudeh1, P18.18B S. Hadjidekova1, D. Toncheva1,3 XRCC1 and ERCC1 DNA repair gene deﬁciency leads to an increase in complex conversion frequency during 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, meiosis Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Soﬁa University "St. Kliment A. Heissl1, A. J. Betancourt2, I. Tiemann-Boege1 Ohridski", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 1InstitutofBiophysics,Linz,Austria,2InstitutofIntegrative 4Department of Biology, Medical genetics and Biology, Liverpool, United Kingdom Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Soﬁa University “St Kliment Ohridski”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria Introduction: The repair of DNA lesions, mismatches or doublestrandbreaks(DSBs)duringmeiosisplaysacritical Introduction: In order to further characterize Bulgarian roleformaintaininggenomestabilityandintegrity.Meiotic exome structure we have performed whole exome sequen- recombination is initiated via programmed DSBs in cing of healthy unrelated Bulgarian subjects and analyzed hotspots, which are repaired as crossovers (COs) or non- the obtained results in different contexts. crossovers(NCOs).RegionsofheteroduplexDNA,formed Materials and Methods: We have studied two DNA during strand invasion in DSB repair, can lead to pool samples of 32 Bulgarian centenarians and 61 healthy transmission biases. Of particular interest is this bias in controls (aged 18 to 30). Samples were sequenced at BGI. termsofrepeatinstability,suchasmicrosatellites,whichare Statistical analyses were undertaken with the R package on often linked to genetic disorders. Unfortunately, the frequencies of ﬁltered variants from the present study - association between meiotic recombination and repeat biallelic autosomal single nucleotide variants and gnomAD instability is not well understood. genome data. GnomAD genome data were chosen for Method: Therefore, thousands of single COs and NCOs comparison, since our results include many non-coding collected via pooled sperm typing in nine different donors variantsandfurthermore,gnomADexomeincludesexomes wereanalyzedfortransmissionbiasesoftwodifferentpoly- of 1335 Bulgarians out of 7718 non-Finish A repeats: a 6A/7A and a 9A/19A. Europeans (NFE). Results: Heterologies between heterozygous poly-As Results: The Bulgarian exome contains 131 private var- strongly inﬂuenced the transmission: an insertion bias for iants, with frequency >20%, not included in the gnomAD1752 genome database. Principal component analysis clusters consequenceofthesevariantswithinthelargerlandscapeof Bulgarians with NFE, Finns and Ashkenazi Jews setting variation of this region remains unclear. Here, we assay them apart from Americans, Africans and East Asians. The FCGR2B sequence variation using targeted paralogue- pair-wise correlation/Fst values between populations in the speciﬁc high throughput sequencing, and place this clusterareasfollows:Bulgarians/NFE-0.95/0.0021;Finns/ variation in the context of recently-identiﬁed gene conver- NFE-0.98/0.001andBulgarians/Finns-0.95/0.0034.The sionvariants,expressionvariationofFCGR2B,andGWAS greatest differences between Bulgarians/Fins (populations association signals. marking the northwest/southeast genetic gradient of Eur- H. Ozturk: None. E.J. Hollox: None. ope) are mostly due to variants in genes of the immune system; lipid, protein and carbohydrate metabolism; cell P18.21A cycle and cell-cell communication. Genetic epidemiological study of hereditary ophthalmic Conclusions: The peculiarities of the Bulgarian exome pathology in children of the Karachay-Cherkess will require the establishment of a Bulgarian National Republic, Russia Genome Project for more precise characterization of the phenotypic effect of genetic variants. Acknowledgment - V. V. Kadyshev1, A. V. Marakhonov1, T. A. Vasilyeva1, DN 03/7 from 18.12.2016 - National Science Fund of S. I. Kutsev1,2, R. A. Zinchenko1,3 Bulgaria. S.K. Karachanak-Yankova: None. L. Balabanski: 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian None. D. Serbezov: None. R. Vazharova: None. O. Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical Antonova: None. D. Nikolova: None. M. Mihaylova: University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow None. R. Staneva: None. V. Damyanova: None. D. Regional research and clinical Institute, Moscow, Russian Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. S. Hadjidekova: Federation None. D. Toncheva: None. Objectives:Clinicalandmoleculargeneticepidemiological P18.20D study of non-syndromic hereditary ophthalmic pathology Resolvingthecomplexvariationofthehumaninhibitory (NSHOP) is one of the promising areas of genetics due to Fc receptor FCGR2B the high ﬁtness and survival of genotypes and the possibility of treatment and rehabilitation when the disease H. Ozturk, E. J. Hollox is detected in childhood. To our best knowledge, these studies are conducted in a limited format, within the University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom framework of individual diseases or generalized data from individual sources. Segmental duplications in the human genome are enriched Materials and Methods: 90,793 children from the for genes involved in immunity and host defence. Karachay-Cherkess Republic (KChR) were examined. 121 Characterisation of sequence variation within these regions patientsfrom109familiesfromtheKChRwereincludedin usinghighthroughputsequencingcanbechallengingdueto the clinical, molecular, epidemiological analysis. Genetic extensive copy number variation, gene conversion, and epidemiological, clinical, paraclinical, molecular genetic, mismapping of sequence reads to alternative paralogues. and statistical methods were used in the work. Fc-gammaReceptors(FcγRs) areafamilyofglycoproteins Results: The total prevalence of NSHOP in child popu- that bind to the Fc portion of the Immunoglobulin G (IgG) lation of KChR appeared to be 1:671 children. 45 clinical and mediate the response of effector cells to immune and genetic forms were revealed, frequent of which are complexes. The genes encoding the low-afﬁnity FcγRs congenital ptosis (1:11342), microphthalmia (1:22685), (FCGR2A, FCGR2B, FCGR2C, FCGR3A, and FCGR3B) aniridia (1:30246), congenital cataract (1:5671), retinal are located in an 82.5‐kb segmental tandem duplication on pathology (1:22685), optic nerve pathology (1:11342). chromosome 1q23.3 and characterized by extensive copy DNA diagnosis revealed a novel nucleotide variants in the number and sequence variation and high sequence similar- PAX6 gene: c.607C>T, (p.Arg203Ter), c.747_750del (p. ity. There is a 92%-96% sequence homology among Pro250Lysfs*21) associatedwithcongenitalaniridia; inthe FCGR2A,FCGR2BandFCGR2Cgenes.FCGR2Bencodes CHST6 gene: c.610C>T (p.Pro204Ser) and c.1124delT (p. the Fc gamma receptor IIb (FcγRIIb) (CD32B), the only Val375Glyfs*6) associated with corneal dystrophy; as well inhibitory FcγR that leads to the downregulation of B-cell as in the gene PRPF8 gene: c.428A>G, (p.Gln143Arg) activation and immunoglobulin production. Genomewide associated with retinal pathology. association studies have highlighted variants in FCGR2B Conclusions: Occurrence of NSHOP in child population associated with disease phenotypes, but the context and of KChR was 1:671. Congenital malformations andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1753 pathology of the posterior segment of the eye are prevalent evidencefordifferentialarchitectureamongAfrican,Indian, in the structure of pediatric disorders spectrum. DNA and British individuals. We also ﬁnd evidence that these diagnosis revealed several novel variants in the genes associations contain heterogeneous signals for epistatic associated with NSHOP. Supported by RFBR grant №18- effects. Lastly, we ﬁnd preliminary evidence that complex 015-00090. trait regulatory architecture may be enriched for epistatic V.V. Kadyshev: None. A.V. Marakhonov: None. T.A. interactions. Vasilyeva: None. S.I. Kutsev: None. R.A. M.C. Turchin: None. I. Tung: None. L. Crawford: Zinchenko: None. None. S. Ramachandran: None. P18.22B P18.23C Differences in complex trait architecture between Doesthedoubly-weightedgeneticriskscoreimprovethe multiple ethnic human populations revealed by prediction of type 2 diabetes in the Lifelines&Estonian pathway-based epistatic interactions Biobank cohorts? M. C. Turchin1,2, I. Tung1,3, L. Crawford1,4,5, K. Pärna1,2, H. Snieder1, K. Läll2, K. Fischer2,3, I. Nolte1 S. Ramachandran1,2 1DepartmentofEpidemiology,UniversityMedicalCenterof 1Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, University, Providence, RI, United States, 2Department of Netherlands, 2Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Mathematics and Statistics, Providence, RI, United States, 3Department of Computer University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, United States, 4Department of Biostatistics, Brown University, Introduction: It is speculated that up to half of T2D cases Providence, RI, United States, 5Center for Statistical are undiagnosed since it mostly starts without acute Science, Brown University, Providence, RI, United States symptoms. Developing a powerful tool for early detection of high-risk individuals would allow postponing or even Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have identiﬁed preventing T2D. Since genetic markers are ﬁxed for life, thousands of signiﬁcant genetic associations in humans they have high potential for early detection. Therefore, it is across a number of complex traits. However, the vast important to ﬁnd the optimal genetic prediction method. majority of these studies use datasets of predominantly Ouraimistotesttheperformanceoftherecentlydeveloped European ancestry. It has generally been thought that doubly-weighted genetic risk score (dwGRS) for incident complex trait genetic architecture should be transferable T2D in two European cohorts. across populations of different ancestries, but recent work Materials and Methods: Data from Lifelines has shown a number of differences between ethnic groups, (n=12,027) and the Estonian Biobank (n=41,107) were includingheterogeneityinboththeidentiﬁedcausalvariants used.ThedwGRSforT2Dusesanadditionalweightbased andestimatedeffectsizes.Here,werevealfurtherevidence on the probability for the SNP to belong to the top 1,000 that complex trait genetic architecture is fundamentally associatedonesthuscorrectingfor theWinner’scursebias. different between human ethnic groups by jointly lever- The additional value of dwGRS to the incident T2D pre- aging pathway and epistasis analysis. diction model was tested using survival analyses on top of Undertheassumptionthatagivencomplextraitmayhave predictors from the FINDRISC model. Hazard ratios and differentialpolygenicarchitecturesacrosshumanancestries, corresponding 95% conﬁdence intervals (CI) were calcu- we hypothesize that human populations may also be enri- lated. The net reclassiﬁcationindex was used toinvestigate ched for differences in epistatic effects. However, since the value of dwGRS. polygenic traits tend to have smaller GWA effect sizes, Results: Preliminary results in Lifelines show that every combining variants via pathway analysis may allow us to standard deviation higher dwGRS increased the risk for better reveal these signals. To accomplish this, we build on T2Dby1.25(95%CI1.10−1.44)comparedto1.20(95%CI a recently published method for identifying marginal epis- 1.05−1.37)forthetraditionalGRS.Similaranalyseswillbe tasis (MAPIT), moving from testing single variants to applied in the Estonian Biobank. testing groups of variants for nonlinear association with a Conclusion: The dwGRS has a signiﬁcant additional trait of interest. value to the prediction of incident T2D. Implementation of We apply our new method to multiple ancestries present suchriskscoresinpersonalizedriskpredictioncouldleadto in the UK Biobank and explore many pathway-related early detection of high-risk individuals, resulting in better- interaction models. Using morphometric traits we ﬁnd targeted preventive measures.1754 K. Pärna: None. H. Snieder: None. K. Läll: None. K. FoundationofBasicResearch(grants#17-29-06016-oﬁ_m, Fischer: None. I. Nolte: None. #18-54-16004_NCNIL_a, #18-015-00212_А, #18-013- 00738_А, #18-05-60035_Arctica). P18.25A A.V. Solovyev: None. N.A. Barashkov: None. F.M. Evidence of thicker epidermal layer in individuals Teryutin: None. V.G. Pshennikova: None. G.P. Roma- heterozygous for mutation c.-23+1G&gt;A in GJB2 nov:None.A.M.Rafailov:None.N.N.Sazonov:None.O. gene (Cx26) L. Posukh: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova: None. S.A. Fedorova: None. A. V. Solovyev1,2, N. A. Barashkov1,2, F. M. Teryutin1,2, V. G. Pshennikova1,2, G. P. Romanov1,2, A. M. Rafailov1, P18.26B N. N. Sazonov1, O. L. Posukh3,4, E. K. Khusnutdinova5, Heritability and genome-wide association study of S. A. Fedorova1,2 orbital telorism 1Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Natural N. Terzikhan1, T. E. Evans1,2, E. Hofer3,4, M. J. Knol1, Sciences, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal U, L. Pirpamer3, R. Schmidt3, M. A. Pawlak5, H. H. H. Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Yakut Scientiﬁc Center of Adams1,2,6 Complex Medical Problems, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and 1Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Netherlands, 2Department of Radiology and Nuclear Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 4Novosibirsk Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Clinical State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 5Ufa Division of Neurogeriatrics, Department of Neurology, Federal Research Center of Russian Academy Sciences, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Institute for Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Medical Informatics, Statistics and Documentation, Federation Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 5Department of Neurology and Cerebrovascular Disorders Poznan Mutations in the GJB2 gene encoding transmembrane gap University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, junction protein connexin 26 (Cx26) are known to account 6DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusMC,Rotterdam, for a signiﬁcant proportion of recessive genetic deafness. Netherlands TheCx26expressesnotonlyintheinnerearbutalsointhe skinepidermisandothertissues.Thehighcarrierfrequency Background: The interocular distance, or orbital telorism, of the GJB2 mutations in many ethnic populations may be is a clinically informative measure. While its extremes, explained by a heterozygous advantage of the GJB2 hypo- and hypertelorism, have been linked to genetic mutations carriers due to their thicker epidermal layer that disorders, little is known about the genetic determinants of may provide a protective mechanism against pathogen interocular distance within the general population. We invasion and hostile environment. We analyzed (by skin aimed to study the heritability and perform a genome-wide ultrasonography) the epidermis thickness in 152 Yakut association study (GWAS) of telorism. individuals with different GJB2-genotypes ([Wt];[Wt], Methods: Telorism was deﬁned as the distance between [Wt];[Mut], [Mut];[Mut]) for mutation c.-23+1G>A (Mut) the eyeball center of gravity identiﬁed on cranial MRI that was found with extremely high carrier frequency images. First, we used a population-based and a family- (10.3%) in the indigenous Yakut population of Eastern based cohort studies to estimate the narrow-sense herit- Siberia. Individuals who were homozygous (genotype ability (h2) and broad-sense heritability (H2). Second, we [Mut];[Mut]) and heterozygous (genotype [Wt];[Mut]) for performed a GWAS using HRC-imputed genotypes. Mod- c.-23+1G>A have the thicker epidermal layer (0.245 mm els included adjustment for age, sex, height and head size. and 0.269 mm, respectively) compared with individuals Results:Heritabilityoftelorismrangedbetweenh2=31% with genotype [Wt];[Wt] (0.193 mm) (p<0.05). These data and H2=74% in the fully adjusted model (Table1). GWAS maysupportthehypothesisabouttheselectiveadvantageof of telorism identiﬁed an intronic genetic variant on chro- the GJB2 mutant alleles carriers and partly explain the mosome 15 (rs62357458, MAF = 0.19, P-value = 5.00E- extremely high carrier frequency of the c.-23+1G>A 08). mutationinYakutpopulationinEasternSiberia.Thisstudy Conclusion: Telorism is a heritable polygenic trait. We wassupportedbytheMinistryofEducationandScienceof identiﬁed an intronic variant on chromosome 15 that was the Russian Federation №6.1766.2017, the Project NEFU signiﬁcantly associated with telorism. Replication is ongo- M.K.Ammosov,theProgramsofBioresourcecollectionsof ing in ~20,000 individuals, with subsequent genetic corre- the FASO Russia BRK: 0556-2017-0003 and the Russian lation and enrichment analyses planned next. IdentiﬁcationAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1755 of the underlying genetics of normal variation of telorism the m/M values of a gene and the genotype of the indivi- mighthelpusunderstandthepathophysiologyoftherelated dualsforeachin-cisgeneticvariantwasevaluatedbylinear genetic disorders. regression. Table Narrow-sense and broad-sense heritability of Results: We identiﬁed 2,530 genes with alternative orbital telorism polyadenylation quantitative trait loci (apaQTLs) and we subsequentlyperformedadeepinvestigationofthepossible mechanisms of action of these variants. In addition, we Population-basedstudy Family-basedstudy observedthatapaQTLsaresigniﬁcantlyenrichedinGWAS N=3,222unrelated N=364withknownfamilial hits, in particular those associated to immune-related and individuals relationships neurological disorders. Orbitaltelorism Conclusions: Our results suggest that genetic variants h2(SE) P-value H2(SE) P-value have a widespread effect on the relative expression of alternative 3’UTR isoforms in human. In addition, they Model10.31(0.10) 9.72E-04 0.76(0.12) 1.79E-08 point to an important role for genetically determined APA Model20.32(0.11) 9.55E-04 0.75(0.12) 1.37E-08 in affecting predisposition to complex diseases and suggest Model30.31(0.11) 1.17E-03 0.74(0.13) 1.00E-07 new ways to extract functional information from h2: Narrow-sense heritability. H2: Broad-sense heritability. Model 1: GWAS data. Adjustedforageandsex.Model2:Adjustedforage,sexandheight. E.Mariella:None.F.Marotta:None.E.Grassi:None. Model 3: Adjusted for age, sex, height and head size. SE: S. Gilotto: None. P. Provero: None. Standarderror. P18.28D N. Terzikhan: None. T.E. Evans: None. E. Hofer: Genome-wideassociationanalysisof350,000Caucasians None.M.J.Knol:None.L.Pirpamer:None.R.Schmidt: from the UK Biobank identiﬁes novel loci for asthma, None. M.A. Pawlak: None. H.H.H. Adams: None. hay fever and eczema P18.27C W. E. Ek, M. Rask-Andersen, T. Karlsson, Å. Johansson The length of the expressed 3' UTR is an intermediate molecularphenotypelinkinggeneticvariantstocomplex Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, diseases Uppsala, Sweden E. Mariella1, F. Marotta1, E. Grassi1, S. Gilotto1, Introduction: Even though heritability estimates suggest P. Provero1,2 thattheriskofasthma,hayfeverandeczemaislargelydue to genetic factors, genetic variants identiﬁed previous 1University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 2San Raffaele Scientiﬁc studieshavefailedtoexplainedamajorpartofthegenetics Institute IRCCS, Milan, Italy behind these diseases. Material and Methods: In this GWAS, we include Introduction:Theinvestigationofthegeneticdeterminants 346,545CaucasiansfromtheUKBiobanktoidentifynovel of intermediate molecular phenotypes can provide useful loci for asthma, hay fever and eczema. We further investi- insights about the mechanisms of action of genetic variants gate if associated lead SNPs have a signiﬁcantly larger that have been identiﬁed by genome wide association effect for one disease compared to the other diseases, to studies (GWAS). We propose a computational strategy to highlight possible disease speciﬁc effects. discovergeneticvariantsaffectingtherelativeexpressionof Results:Weidentiﬁed141loci,ofwhich41arenovel,to alternative3'untranslatedregion(UTR)isoforms,generated beassociated(P≤3x10-8)withasthma,hayfeveroreczema, through alternative polyadenylation (APA), a post- analysedseparatelyorascombinedphenotypes.Thelargest transcriptional regulatory mechanism known to have number of loci were associated with the combined pheno- relevant functional consequences. type (asthma/hay fever/eczema). However, as many as 19 Material and Methods: We analyzed whole genome loci had a signiﬁcantly larger effect on hay fever/eczema- sequencingandRNAsequencing(RNA-Seq)datathatwere only compared to their effects on asthma, while 24 loci obtained for 373 European individuals (GEUVADIS data- exhibited larger effects on asthma compared with their set). RNA-Seq data were used, together with an annotation effects on hay fever/eczema. At four of the novel loci, of alternative 3’UTR isoforms, to compute the expression TNFRSF8, MYRF, TSPAN8,andBHMG1, the lead SNPs ratio between the short and long isoform (m/M value) of were in LD (> 0.8) with potentially casual missense eachgeneineachindividual.Then,theassociationbetween variants.1756 Conclusions:Ourstudyshowsthatalargeamountofthe P. Jansen: None. M. Nagel: None. T. Polderman: genetic contribution is shared between the diseases. None- None.M.vandenHeuvel: None.S.vanderSluis:None. theless, anumber ofSNPs havea signiﬁcantlylarger effect D. Posthuma: None. ononeofthephenotypessuggestingthatpartofthegenetic contribution is more phenotype speciﬁc. P18.30B Grants: SSMF, VR, the Borgström Hedström Founda- Prevalence and distribution of human knockouts in tion, Kjell and Märta Beijers Foundation Middle Eastern populations with a high rate of W.E. Ek: None. M. Rask-Andersen: None. T. Karls- consanguinity son: None. Å. Johansson: None. H. Mor-Shaked, D. Rahat, T. Harel P18.29A Cross-trait analysis of brain volume and intelligence Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, identiﬁes shared genomic loci and genes Israel P. Jansen, M. Nagel, T. Polderman, M. van den Heuvel, Introduction: Homozygous loss of function (HLOF) S. van der Sluis, D. Posthuma variants, or naturally occurring “human knockouts (KO)”, provide an invaluable opportunity to gain scientiﬁc and Centre for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, clinical insights into gene function, as well as an inventory Amsterdam, Netherlands of human genes that are dispensable inhealthy individuals. Genomic data obtained from consanguineous and bottle- Introduction: The phenotypic correlation between human necked populations, as found in the Middle East, are intelligenceandbrainvolume(BV)isconsiderable(r≈0.40) particularly useful for HLOF analyses, as they are enriched and has been shown to be due to shared genetic factors. in homozygous variants. Large-scale GWAS for these traits have identiﬁed many Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing data novel loci and genes that explain their genetic architecture. from 2663 Middle-Eastern individuals were queried for However, it is unknown which shared loci and genes HLOF variants. Stop-gain, high-quality frameshift, and explain the genetic overlap between these traits. splice-site variants, with a read depth of 15X or greater in Materials and Methods: To further examine the nature canonicaltranscripts,wereincluded.Noﬁlterwasplacedon of this correlation, we present genomic analyses of the minor allele frequency. geneticoverlapbetweenBVandintelligenceusinggenome- Results:QueryingHLOFvariantsin2663exomes(2030 wide association study (GWAS) results. We conducted a affected, 633 healthy) yielded 107,393 variants, represent- GWASmeta-analysisofacollateddatasetonmeasurements ing 1155 unique variants in 952 genes. These included of BV (N=54,407), followed by extensive functional 378 stop-gain, 520 frameshift, and 257 splice-site variants. annotationandgene-mapping,andstudyoftheoverlapwith An average of 40.33 HLOF variants were identiﬁed per GWAS results of intelligence (N=269,867) performed by exome. 413/952 (43.4%) of the unique genes identiﬁed in our group. this study were previously reported as human KO genes. Results: GWAS meta-analysis identiﬁed 35 genomic Rare HLOF variants in affected individuals included pre- loci, 362 genes and 23 biological pathways for BV. We viously published disease-associated genes, such as estimated the genetic correlation between BV and intelli- WDR16, SNX10, PLD1, CARD11, and several candidate gence of. r =0.24. This overlap is driven by physical disease genes. g overlap in 5 genomic loci. By using several gene-mapping Conclusion: Rare HLOF variants in affected individuals strategies (including FUMA), we observed 67 overlapping are potentially disease-causing variants, whereas HLOF genes for both traits. Of these, several are involved in cell- variants in healthy individuals may have beneﬁcial effects cycle regulation (ERBB3, USP19), neuron morphology and thus are potential drug discovery targets. Reassuringly, (INA), or genes involved in neurodegenerative disorders only43.4%ofthegenesidentiﬁedinthisstudyoverlapwith (MAPT). We highlight cortical areas of the brain where previously reported human KO genes, underscoring the these genes are expressed. potential utility of the current research. Conclusions: These results provide new information on H. Mor-Shaked: None. D. Rahat: None. T. thegeneticsofBVandinsightintothebiologyofitsshared Harel: None. genetic aetiology with intelligence. These results illustrate how large-scale GWAS and subsequent gene-mapping aid P18.31C in understanding the genetic cross-section between see- Heritability estimates in recently admixed populations: mingly distinct traits. insights from the Greenlandic populationAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1757 G. Athanasiadis1, D. Speed2, A. Albrechtsen1 to call HLA alleles from BAM ﬁles, followed by con- cordance to determine the ﬁnal HC set (minimum of n-1 1University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, software calls the same four digit allele). The population 2Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark frequency of HC alleles was compared to published Swedish lab typed values where available, and eight gene Findinganefﬁcientframeworkforestimatingnarrow-sense haplotypes contrasted to Caucasian cohorts. heritability in admixed populations with high relatedness Results: The complete set of classical eight HC alleles remainsanopenquestion.Weusedextensivesimulationsto were typed in 608 samples, improved to 926 when con- evaluate the performance of existing classical and linear sidering only Class I alleles (A, B, C). This was due to a mixed model frameworks in estimating narrow-sense combination of software and IMGT/HLA availability. heritabilityintwopopulation-basedcohortsfromGreenland Comparison with the lab typed cohort showed the HC and compare it to data from unadmixed individuals from allelesreﬂectedexpectedvalues(r2=0.81-0.99,ﬁvegenes), Denmark. When our analysis focused on Greenlandic sib with minor differences perhaps due to reference versions. pairs, the model with two relationship matrices, one Four of the top ﬁve haplotypes found in the HC set were capturing identity by state and one capturing identity by also top ranked in the Caucasian cohorts. descent, returned heritability estimates close to the true Conclusion: The Swedish HC HLA dataset adds to the simulatedvalue,whileusingeachofthetwomatricesalone growing setofpopulationresourcesavailabletointerrogate returned more biased estimates. When phenotypes corre- variation within the MHC. The HC allele frequencies (and lated with ancestry, heritability estimates were inﬂated. individual calls at request), plus calls from each software, Based on these observations, we propose a PCA-based will be made available via https://swefreq.nbis.se/. adjustment in order to recover the true simulated herit- Funding: Knut och Alice Wallenbergs Stiftelse, Swedish ability.Finally,weestimatedheritabilityoftenquantitative Research Council FORMAS traits from the two Greenlandic cohorts and report J. Nordin: None. A. Ameur: None. K. Lindblad-Toh: differences such as lower heritability for height in Green- None. U. Gyllensten: None. J.R.S. Meadows: None. landerscomparedtoEuropeans.Inconclusion,totalnarrow- sense heritability in recently admixed populations is best P18.33A estimated using a mixture of genetic relationship matrices TherelevantroleofItaliangeneticisolatesforthestudy onindividualswithatleastoneﬁrst-degreerelativeincluded of Human Knockouts in the sample. G. Athanasiadis: None. D. Speed: None. A. F. Sirchia1, M. Cocca1, F. Faletra1, G. Girotto1,2, Albrechtsen: None. B. Spedicati2, A. Morgan1,2, R. Palmisano2, C. Barbieri3, D. Toniolo3, P. Gasparini1,2 P18.32D High conﬁdence HLA resource based on 1000 Swedish 1IRCCS Materno Infantile Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Trieste, genomes Italy, 2Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3Division of J. Nordin1, A. Ameur2, K. Lindblad-Toh1,3, GeneticsandCellBiology,SanRaffaeleScientiﬁcInstitute, U. Gyllensten2, J. R. S. Meadows1 Milan, Italy 1Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Introduction: Rare (MAF<1%) Loss of Function (LoF) biochemistryandMicrobiology,Uppsala,Sweden,2Science variants have been characterised with huge study effort on for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics large cohorts and isolated communities, thanks to their and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Broad Institute of MIT enrichmentforbiallelicknockoutevents.Asub-categoryof and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States LoF variants is represented by human knockouts (HKO). Materials and Methods: Low coverage whole genome Introduction: Recently genome variation from 1000 sequence data of 946 samples from three Italian isolated individuals of Swedish ancestry was reported based on cohorts was performed. All the LoF variants with at least short read 30x Illumina NGS data. From this curated one homozygous carrier in the whole dataset and a CADD dataset,ahighconﬁdence(HC)HLA(classicaleightgenes: score>=20 or “not available” were considered. A,B,C,DPA1,DPB1,DQA1,DQB1,DRB1)resourcewas Results: We obtained a total of 506 variants, 205 clas- constructed for the use of the wider research community. siﬁed as total LoF and 301 as partial LoF (i.e. predicted as Materials and Methods: A combination of software LoF only in some gene transcripts). We selected LoF var- (HLA-VBSeq, HLAscan, OptiType, SNP2HLA) was used iants from 30 interesting genes involved in mendelian1758 diseases.ArarepartialLoFmutationinFANCL(associated NorthofItaly.Here,participantshavebeeninvestigatedfor withFanconianaemia)wasdetectedinhomozygosisinone FA for ~80 traits. individual and in heterozygosis in four additional subjects, Results and Conclusions: Tests performed equally well from the same isolated village. We further investigated the for cases with low prevalence, high penetrance and many subjects’ clinical history: the FANCL KO subject shows a generationsofaffectedindividuals.Wewereabletoidentify long history of head and neck cancer without the classical tests with superior performance under more challenging Fanconi haematological features, while the FANCL carriers conditions(e.g.6.25%traitprevalenceand60%penetrance are healthy. in three generations of affected individuals) and give Conclusions: HKO study has already shown great recommendationsontestusageandinterpretation.Basedon potential despite being in its very early stages. Thanks to these observations, we discuss examples from the our large cohort of genetic isolates, analysed by WGS, we CHRIS study. highlighted the role of one LoF variant in FANCL, parti- Availability: http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/Fa cularly enriched in one of our villages and not being asso- mAgg ciated to the expected phenotype. Functional studies to C.X. Weichenberger: None. J. Rainer: None. B.M. evaluate the potential phenotypic consequences of this Motta:None.M.DeBortoli:None.V.Vukovic:None.C. variant will be performed. Pattaro:None.A.Rossini:None.P.P.Pramstaller:None. F.Sirchia:None.M.Cocca:None.F.Faletra:None.G. F.S. Domingues: None. Girotto: None.B.Spedicati: None.A.Morgan: None.R. Palmisano: None. C. Barbieri: None. D. Toniolo: None. P18.35C P. Gasparini: None. No effects of high-resolution population-speciﬁc genetic map on downstream genomic analyses P18.34B Trait aggregation analysis in families with large S. Hassan1, I. Surakka1, P. Palta1, M. Wessman1, pedigrees: techniques, assessment and examples M. Pirinen1, A. Palotie1,2,3, S. Ripatti1,4 C. X. Weichenberger, J. Rainer, B. M. Motta, M. De 1Institute for Molecular Medicine (FIMM), Helsinki, Bortoli, V. Vukovic, C. Pattaro, A. Rossini, Finland,2AnalyticTranslationalGeneticsUnit,Department P. P. Pramstaller, F. S. Domingues ofMedicine,MassachusettsGeneralHospitalUSA,Boston, MA, United States, 3Program in Medical and Population Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Public Health, Clinicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Introduction:Inepidemiologicalstudies,familialaggrega- Finland tion (FA) analysis provides an important early means for determining promising phenotypes, which may be inﬂu- Introduction: Recombination is an important part of enced by genetic factors. Availability of comprehensive meiosis as it facilitates chromosomal aggregation. Founder ancestral information is especially valuable for detecting population size, demographic changes like multiple bottle- remoterelationshipsinotherwisedisconnectedfamilies.We necks or rapid expansion can lead to variation in haveimplementedandassessedFamAgg,anRpackagefor recombination rates across different populations like in the detecting related individuals affected by some trait in large case of Finland. Previous research has shown population pedigrees. We furthermore demonstrate its capabilities by speciﬁc settings has a signiﬁcant effect on downstream examining traits in the context of the Cooperative Health population genomic analysis like haplotype phasing, Research in South Tyrol (CHRIS) study. genotype imputation and association. Materials and Methods: In order to assess the ability to Materials and Methods: Here, we examined high- correctly detect FA, we deﬁne families affected by a resolution recombination rate variation at 10 and 50kb Mendelian trait (cases) and challenge ﬁve different FA scales using deep whole genome sequences (20-30X cov- methods to identify these families within a large set of erage) of55 trios all overfrom Finland. We then testedthe pedigrees with randomly chosen affected individuals (con- downstream effects of the population-speciﬁc effective trols). Method performance evaluation is based on varying populationsizesandlowerrecombinationratesinstatistical trait prevalence and penetrance, and on the number of phasing, genotype imputation and disease association affected generations within the case families. The CHRIS mapping in Finns in comparison with non-Finnish study is a population-based study with pedigree data on Europeans. >10,000 participants carried out in an alpine valley in the Results: Population-speciﬁc effective population sizes were found to have no effect in haplotype phasing (switchAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1759 errorrates~2%)andaverageimputationconcordances(97- genome-wide association results for IBD risk published by 98%). Similarly, we found no effect of population-speciﬁc the International IBD Genetics Consortium. recombination maps in phasing with comparable switch Results: TWAS analysis identiﬁed one novel IBD locus error rates (SER) across all autosomes. Downstream popu- association(INPP5Egeneat9q34.3region;P=1.2x10-19) lation genetic analyses depend on population-speciﬁc con- and eleven new candidate genes in known GWAS loci textslikeappropriatereferencepanelsandtheirsamplesize (P<1x10-8).Weenvisageenlargingtheanalyzeddatasetto but not on recombination maps or effective nearly 500 samples during the following months. population sizes. Conclusions: Our ﬁndings help to explain observed Conclusions:CurrentlyavailableHapMaprecombination association results for diseases affecting colon tissue and mapsseemquiterobustforpopulation-speciﬁcphasingand provide target genes for further functional analyses. Grant imputation pipelines. Grants: Academy of Finland references: NIH/NCI CA143237; NIH/NCI CA204279; (251217 & 255847), Center of Excellence for Complex NIH/NCI CA201407; ISC III - FEDER PI14-00613; Disease Genetics, Finnish Foundation for Cardiovascular CIBERESP CB07/02/2005; Catalan Government DURSI Research, Biocentrum Helsinki & Sigrid Jusélius Founda- 2014SGR647;EUH2020-MSCgrantNo796216.FPU16/ tion grants to S.R. FIMM-EMBL doctoral funding to S.H. 00599. and Academy of Finland Postdoctoral Fellowship to I.S. R. Carreras-Torres: None. V. Díez-Obrero: None. F. (298149). Moratalla-Navarro: None. M. Devall: None. G. Casey: S.Hassan:None.I.Surakka:None.P.Palta:None.M. None. V. Moreno: None. Wessman: None. M. Pirinen: None. A. Palotie: None. S. Ripatti: None. P18.37A Estimating additive and non-additive genetic P18.36D components from low-depth sequencing data Genetically predicted gene expression reveals candidate genes for Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease risk A. F. Herzig1,2, M. Ciullo3,4, A. L. Leutenegger1,2, H. Perdry5 R. Carreras-Torres1,2,3, V. Díez-Obrero1,2,3, F. Moratalla- Navarro2,3, M. Devall4, G. Casey4, V. Moreno2,1,3 1Inserm, U1141, NeuroDiderot, Equipe GenMedStroke, Paris, France, 2Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris 1Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, L'Hospitalet de Cité,Paris,France,3InstituteofGeneticsandBiophysicsA. Llobregat, Spain, 2Catalan Institute of Oncology, Buzzati-Traverso - CNR, Naples, Italy, 4IRCCS Neuromed, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Pozzilli, Insernia, Italy, 5Université Paris-Saclay, Biomédica en Red, Madrid, Spain, 4University of Virginia, Université Paris-Sud, Inserm, CESP, Villejuif, France Charlottesville, VA, United States Avarietyofmethodsforestimatingcoefﬁcientsofpairwise Introduction: Genome-wide association studies have relatedness from genotype data have been proposed. For identiﬁed a large number of genetic variants associated to each pair of individuals, this allows estimates of both their complex diseases. However, most of these variants lay in kinshipcoefﬁcient φandtheirprobabilityψofsharingtwo intronic or intragenic regions and do not provide a clear alleles Identical-By-Descent. Estimating relatedness is an target gene. Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) importantstepformanygeneticstudydesigns.Forinstance, studiesandtranscription-wideassociationanalyses(TWAS) estimates of φ and ψ are necessary to assess the respective may contribute to explain the observed associations roles of additive and non-additive genetic components in between genetic regions and complex diseases such as the study of complex traits. However, when dealing with Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. In this study, we low-depth sequencing or imputation data, individual level conducted a summary-based TWAS for Inﬂammatory genotypes cannot be conﬁdently called. To ignore such Bowel Diseases (IBD) risk using RNA-seq data form a uncertainty is known to result in biased computations. largestset of colon tissuebiopsies from healthy volunteers. Accordingly, methods have recently been developed to Materials and Methods: Colon tissue biopsies were estimate kinship from uncertain genotypes. Here, we make obtained from 191 healthy volunteers at colonoscopy. an extension to include non-additive variance by deriving Genetic predictive models for the expression of ~6,000 orthogonal genetic components from uncertain genotype genes were obtained through penalized elastic-net models data and proposingnew estimatorsfor both the coefﬁcients using PredXcan software. Subsequently, summary-TWAS φ and ψ. By construction, our estimators are robust to was performed combining genetic prediction models and departuresfromHardy-Weinbergprinciples,andthuscould be of interest for samples that present inbreeding or1760 population structure. For an additional application, the activated protein kinase-activated protein kinase 5 acts as a orthogonality of the components allows for association tumorsuppressorbymediatingRas-inducedsenescenceand testingofnon-additivegeneticeffectswithouthavingtocall phosphorylating p53/TP53. genotypes.Wehavesimulatedlow-depthgeneticdata for a Conclusion: This pilot case-control study reveals new sample of individuals with extensive relatedness by using insights in complex genetic background of human long- the complex pedigree of the known genetic isolates of evity. Acknowledgment to DN 03/7 from 18.12.2016 - Cilento. Though this simulation, we explore the behaviour National Science Fund of Bulgaria of our estimators, demonstrate their properties, and show R.V. Vazharova: None. L. Balabanski: None. D. Ser- potential advantages over alternative methods. bezov: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. R. Sta- A.F. Herzig: None. M. Ciullo: None. A.L. Leute- neva: None. M. Mihailova: None. V. Damyanova: None. negger: None. H. Perdry: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoude: None. O. Boyanova: None. D. Nikolova: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. D. P18.40D Toncheva: None. Variants in genes related to telomere maintenance in Bulgarian centenarians P18.42B MR-link: Identifying known and novel causality from R. V. Vazharova1, L. Balabanski2,3, D. Serbezov4, gene expression to complex traits, while accounting for S. Karachanak-Yankova4, R. Staneva4, M. Mihailova4, pleiotropy and linkage V. Damyanova4, D. Nesheva4, Z. Hammoude4, O. Boyanova4, D. Nikolova4, S. Hadjidekova4, A. van der Graaf, A. Claringbould, H. Westra, BIOS D. Toncheva4 Consortium, Y. Li, C. Wijmenga, S. Sanna 1SoﬁaUniversity"St.Kl.Ohridski",DepartmentofBiology, Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Medical genetics and Microbiology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, Groningen, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University- Netherlands Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3GARH Malinov MD, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical MendelianRandomization(MR)isawidelyusedmethodto University - Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria identify causality from genetic data, but its application to geneexpressiontraitsischallenging.Widespreadpleiotropy Introduction: The Bulgarian genome has been largely and linkage between expression quantitative loci (eQTL) studied in the postgenomic era. The GnomAD_exome often resultinviolations oftheassumptions behind MR.In database includes 1335 Bulgarian exomes and a series of simulations,existingMRmethodsdemonstrateuncalibrated internationalresearchstudiesinvolveBulgarianexomesand false positive rates (FPR) or low power to detect causality. genomes. In this study we further characterize genomic Here, we introduce MR-link, a novel two-sample MR variations in centenarians, focusing on variants in genes method that incorporates variants in linkage disequilibrium related to telomere maintenance. Telomeres are complex with conditionally independent (CI) eQTL, to correct for DNA-proteinstructuresthatformprotectivecapsattheend linkageandunobservedpleiotropy.Insimulations,MR-link of eukaryotic chromosomes. They prevent chromosome has consistently calibrated FPR (median: 0.05) and higher degradation and form part of cellular mechanisms respon- power over other tested methods (max: 0.96), even when sible for maintaining genomic integrity and cell longevity. only a single CI eQTL variant is detectable. Materials and Methods: Case-control WES pool ana- WehavenowappliedMR-linktoLDL-cholesterol(LDL- lysis of 32 centenarians and 61 young healthy controls and C) measurements, joined to eQTL datasets derived from WGS was performed in 16 centenarians. blood (2), liver, and coronary artery tissue. This identiﬁed Results:Afterqualityﬁlteringatotalof610variantswere 25 genes causal to LDL-C, including the known and vali- found in 82 genes known to be involved in regulation of dated SORT1 transcript, along with genes that were missed telomere maintenance. 22 variants were found to be more by genome-wide association studies on lipids but none- prevalentinBulgariancentenariansthanincontrolsandfor theless validated in-vivo. For example, MR-link implicates one of them (rs75803132) the P value was below 5.0х10-8 NEGR1,involvedinthelipidstoragedisorderNiemanPick (MAF G=0,267 in BG centenarians versus MAF G=0,07 disease as well as DEPP1 expression, lowering insulin incontrols).Thevariantrs75803132(NM_003668.3:c.661- levels,whichconsequentlyaffectslipids.Besidegeneswith 63A>G) in intron 8 of the gene MAPKAPK5 has been known biological function, MR-link identiﬁed 15 novel observed at MAF 0,076 (GnomAD_genome NFE) and genes causal to LDL-C levels, interesting candidates for seems to be enriched in Bulgarian centenarians. Mitogen- follow-up experiments.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1761 These results demonstrate that MR-link successfully mortality from non-communicable diseases in the UK identiﬁes known causal relationships between gene Biobank. Sex-differences in the effect estimates were expression and complex traits while also revealing novel assessed using Cochran’s Q test (P ). het causalgenesthatmayfurtherimproveourunderstandingof Results: Up to 194,697 men and 227,717 women were the etiology of complex traits from observational data. included, with mean (SD) age 57.0 (8.1) and 56.6 (7.9) A. van der Graaf: None. A. Claringbould: None. H. years, BMI 27.9 (4.2) and 27.0 (5.1) kg/m2 and WHR 0.94 Westra: None. Y. Li: None. C. Wijmenga: None. S. (0.07) and 0.82 (0.07), respectively. Obesity traits causally Sanna: None. increased the risks of coronary artery disease, stroke, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), lung can- P18.43C cer,type1andtype2diabetes(T2D),andacuteandchronic Causal relevance of obesity on the leading causes of renal failure. BMI increased T2D risk more in women than death in women and men: A Mendelian randomization in men (P =5.1×10-6), whereas WHR increased risks of het study COPD (P =5.5×10-6) and chronic renal failure het (P =1.3×10-4) more in men than in women. het J. C. Censin1,2, J. Bovijn1,2, T. Ferreira1, S. L. Pulit1,3,4, Conclusions: Obesity traits increase the risk of the R. Mägi5, A. Mahajan2,6, M. V. Holmes7,8,9, majority of the leading causes of mortality. There are sex- C. M. Lindgren1,2,4 differences in the effects of obesity traits on COPD, T2D, and chronic renal failure, which may have implications for 1Big Data Institute at the Li Ka Shing Centre for Health health policy and provision of health services. Information and Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford, J.C.Censin:None.J.Bovijn:None.T.Ferreira:None. United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, S.L. Pulit: None. R. Mägi: None. A. Mahajan: None. M. Nufﬁeld Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, V. Holmes: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Department of Genetics, Center collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center grants already received); Signiﬁcant; has collaborated with Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Program in Medical and Boehringer Ingelheim in research, did not accept any per- Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, sonal payment. C.M. Lindgren: B. Research Grant (prin- United States, 5Estonian Genome Center, Institute of cipal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6Oxford grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; has Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, collaborated with Novo Nordisk in research, and in accor- Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, dance with the policy of University of Oxford, did not Oxford, United Kingdom, 7NIHR Oxford Biomedical accept any personal payment. Research Centre, Oxford University Hospitals NHS FoundationTrust,JohnRadcliffeHospital,Oxford,Oxford, P18.44D United Kingdom, 8Medical Research Council Population Prognostic value of expression quantitative trait loci in Health Research Unit at the University of Oxford, Nufﬁeld multiple myeloma prognosis Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Clinical Trial Service Unit & A. Macauda1,2, C. Piredda1, G. Buda1, F. Gemignani1, Epidemiological Studies Unit(CTSU),NufﬁeldDepartment M. Pelosini1, R. M. Reis3, J. Sainz4, W. Tomczak5, of Population Health, Big Data Institute Building, D. Zawirska6, M. Rymko7, M. Raźny8, M. Dudziński9, Roosevelt Drive, University of Oxford, Oxford, United A. Druzd-Sitek10, R. Garcia-Sanz11, M. Wątek12, Kingdom E. Subocz13, J. Martinez Lopez14, W. Prejzner15, K. Jamroziak16, L. Hyldahl Ebbesen17, A. Butrym18, Introduction:Obesitytraitshavebeencausallylinkedwith C. Dumontet19, N. Abildgaard20, G. Mazur21, A. Suska22, cardiometabolicdiseaserisk,buttheextenttowhichobesity J. Varkonyi23, M. Kruszewski24, A. J. Vangsted25, traits affect risk of other leading causes of death has not M. Markiewicz26, F. Canzian2, D. Campa1 been comprehensively evaluated. It is also unclear if any such causal effects differ between men and women. 1Universitá di Pisa, Pisa, PI, Italy, 2German Cancer Materials and Methods: We constructed sex-speciﬁc Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, genetic risk scores for the obesity traits: body mass index 3UniversityofMinho,Braga,Portugal,4GenomicOncology (BMI),waist-hip-ratio(WHR),andWHRadjustedforBMI, Area, GENYO, Granada, Spain, 5Medical University of including 565, 324 and 338 genetic variants, respectively. Lublin, Lublin, Poland, 6University Hospital of, Cracow, Using Mendelian randomization, we investigated for asso- Poland, 7N. Copernicus Town Hospital, Torun, Poland, ciations between these obesity traits and leading causes of 8Rydygier Specialistic Hospital, Cracow, Poland,1762 9Teaching Hospital No 1, Rzeszów, Poland, 10Centre of None. J. Sainz: None. W. Tomczak: None. D. Zawirska: Oncology-Institute of Maria Skłodowska-Curie, Warsaw, None.M.Rymko:None.M.Raźny:None.M.Dudziński: Poland, 11University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, None. A. Druzd-Sitek: None. R. Garcia-Sanz: None. M. Spain, 12Holycross Cancer Center, Kielce, Poland, Wątek: None. E. Subocz: None. J. Martinez Lopez: 13Military Institute of Medicine, Warsaw, Poland, None. W. Prejzner: None. K. Jamroziak: None. L. Hyl- 14Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 15Medical dahl Ebbesen: None. A. Butrym: None. C. Dumontet: University of, Gdańsk, Poland, 16Institute of Hematology None. N. Abildgaard: None. G. Mazur: None. A. Suska: and Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw, Poland, 17Aarhus None. J. Varkonyi: None. M. Kruszewski: None. A.J. University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 18Wroclaw Vangsted: None. M. Markiewicz: None. F. Canzian: Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 19Cancer Research None. D. Campa: None. Center of Lyon, Lyon, France, 20Odense University Hospital, Copenhagen, Poland, 21Medical University P18.45A Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland, 22Jagiellonian University Genetic predisposition to co-morbid depression and Medical College, Cracow, Poland, 23Semmelweis anxiety in diabetes using multi-omics framework University, Budapest, Poland, 24University Hospital approach Bydgoszcz, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 25Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark, 26Silesian Z. Balkhiyarova1, M. A. Kaakinen1, H. H. M. Draisma1, Medical University, Katowice, Poland M. D. Anasanti1, A. Ulrich1,2, M. Timonen3, J. Veijola4, M. Järvelin3,5, A. Nouwen6, I. Prokopenko1 Introduction: Owing to many advances in therapy during the last decade, the survival of multiple myeloma (MM) 1Section of Genomics of Common Disease, Department of patients improved considerably, although it remains an Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United incurable disease. Gene expression proﬁling (GEP) is Kingdom, 2Centre for Pharmacology and Therapeutics, widelyusedfortumorclassiﬁcationandsurvivalprediction Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, and can effectively identify patients who can beneﬁt from 3Center for Life Course Health Research, University of particular types of therapy. A recent study has identiﬁed a Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 4Unit of Clinical Neuroscience, GEPrelatedtotheresponseofMMpatientstotheﬁrstline University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 5School of Public treatment based on bortezomib, thalidomide, and dexa- Health, Imperial College London, London, United methasone (VTD). The variability of gene expression Kingdom, 6Department of Psychology, Middlesex depends in part on germline genetic polymorphisms. University, London, United Kingdom Germline variants called expression quantitative traits loci (eQTLs)canaffectsgeneexpression.IfthereareeQTLsfor Introduction: Depression and anxiety are highly prevalent theabovementionedGEP,theycouldbeusedasprognostic in individuals with type 2 diabetes (T2D), affecting quality marker in MM. of life and well-being. Epidemiological studies suggest Materials and Methods: We genotyped 6 expression sharedaetiologybetweentheseconditions.Geneticvariants, quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) in ENTPD1, CCND1, reportedly associated with them, affect lipid metabolism, CCND2, ARK3, HELLS, and ACTR2 genes in 1284 MM cell proliferation, immune and inﬂammatory response, and cases from the International Multiple Myeloma rESEarch oxidative stress, thus suggesting shared pathophysiological (IMMEnSE)consortium,andanalyzedtheirinvolvementin processes. However, the phenotypic variance responsible progression free survival (PFS), overall survival (OS) and for T2D and depression captured by genome-wide associa- response to ﬁrst line therapy. tionstudies(GWAS)explainsonly~5%ofsusceptibilityto Results: Carriers of the minor (C) allele of ENTPD1- these conditions. We aimed to identify genetic factors rs2153213 showed a consistent better survival (PFS: HR= contributing to their co-morbidity using multi-variable 0.59, 95%CI=0.38-0.91, p=0.018; OS; HR=0.7, 95%CI= analytical framework. 0.54-0.94,p=0.017). Methods: We analysed data from population-based Conclusion: According to GTEx the C allele of Northern Finland birth cohort using 46 years-old clinical rs2153213 is associated with decreased level of ETPD1. examination from 3,597 participants, Haplotype Reference Lower levels of ENTPD1 have been suggested to be consortium imputed genome-wide Illumina involved in immune modulation response against several HumanCNV370DUO platform data was quality controlled cancers leading to a better outcome. This may explain our providing >10M autosomal SNPs for analysis. Using ﬁndingandinpartthevariabilityofMMpatient’ssurvival. SCOPA software, we performed the multiple-phenotype A.Macauda:None.C.Piredda:None.G.Buda:None. GWAS (MP-GWAS) aslinearcombination of residuals for F. Gemignani: None. M. Pelosini: None. R.M. Reis: T2D, anxiety (Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item Scale)Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1763 and depressive symptoms (Beck Depression Inventory) increasedburdenoflow-frequencyvariantsinaffecteds.As score, obtained after adjusting for sex and three principal whole-genome sequencing is currently too expensive for components to control for population structure. large cohorts, targeted approaches (e.g., single-molecule Results: Three loci, at MICAL2 (rs10765927), INPP5K molecular inversion probes (smMIPs)) have emerged as (rs145536147) and ZNF599 (rs7259475) reached genome- strong alternative. Selection criteria for candidate regions wide signiﬁcance (P<5×10-8). Expression of target genes at include integrated functional and genomic data. these loci, involved in cell growth, insulin metabolism and In this study we applied this strategy to non-syndromic transcriptionalregulation, takes place primarily in thebrain cleft lip with/without cleft palate (nsCL/P), a frequent birth and is decreased in presence of depression. rs10765927, defect with multifactorial etiology. We selected three risk rs145536147 and rs7259475 were associated in GWAS loci that had shown association with nsCL/P in previous with neuroticism, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases, GWAS(P<10-05)andidentiﬁedtwelvecandidateelements respectively. in the credible SNP regions, based on functional data from Conclusion: The results of this MP-GWAS provide ﬁrst neural crest cells and craniofacial tissue. SmMIPs-based evidence for a shared aetiology between T2D, depressive resequencing of these regions in 1,061 nsCL/P cases and symptoms and anxiety. 1,591 controls yielded 1,835 variants with a MAF<1%. Funding: WT205915. These variants are currentlyanalyzed both individually and Z. Balkhiyarova: None. M.A. Kaakinen: None. H.H. in aggregate (burden analyses). Furthermore, different non- M. Draisma: None. M.D. Anasanti: None. A. Ulrich: coding variant annotation tools are evaluated, and pedigree None.M.Timonen:None.J.Veijola:None.M.Järvelin: analyses will be performed. Our framework is largely None. A. Nouwen: None. I. Prokopenko: None. scalable and can be extended to other disorders where access to relevant tissue is similarly difﬁcult. P18.46B F.Thieme:None.L.Henschel:None.N.Ishorst:None. Implementation of a scalable framework for the N. Hammond: None. A. Biedermann: None. A. Hoi- identiﬁcation of regulatory variants at non-coding risk schen:None.C.Gilissen:None.E.Mangold:None.M.J. loci: Follow-up of GWAS ﬁndings in orofacial clefting Dixon: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. F. Thieme1, L. Henschel1, N. Ishorst1, N. Hammond2, P18.47C A. Biedermann1, A. Hoischen3,4,5, C. Gilissen3, Population-basedassessmentofthephenotypicproﬁleof E. Mangold1, M. J. Dixon2, K. U. Ludwig1 Melanocortin-4 Receptor mutation carriers 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,Schoolof A. M. Yiorkas1,2, O. Leinhard3,4,5, A. I. Blakemore1,2 Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, Manchester 1Brunel University London, London, United Kingdom, AcademicHealthSciencesCentre,MichaelSmithBuilding, 2Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Advanced MR Analytics AB, Linköping, Sweden, 4Centre 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University for Medical Image Science and Visualization (CMIV), Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 5Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Medical and Health Sciences, Linköping University, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Radboud Institute for Molecular Linköping, Sweden Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands Introduction: The hypothalamic leptin-melanocortin path- way constitutes the primary central control mechanism for GWAShaveyieldedunprecedentedinsightsintothegenetic eatingbehaviour.RaremutationsinMC4R-thecommonest etiology of multifactorial disorders. Main outcomes were monogenic cause of obesity - have been mainly discovered that associated common risk variants are primarily located in severelyobese individuals, and the phenotypic proﬁle of in non-coding regions, have low to moderate effect sizes, mutation carriers not ascertained for obesity is unknown. and show extended stretches of LD. For functional Thus, our understanding of the penetrance and expressivity translation of these ﬁndings, approaches such as eQTL of MC4R mutations in the general population is very analysesare often applied, butthis approach isrestrictedto limited. traits for which disease-relevant cell types/tissues are Materials and Methods: Data from 329,419 unrelated available. WhiteBritishindividualsintheUKBiobankwereanalysed An alternative approach is via the identiﬁcation of rare, to compare anthropometric and metabolic-related deleterious mutations in individual families, and/or the1764 phenotypes between carriers of rare, complete loss of decreased waist-hip-ratio. The interactions of the function (cLOF) MC4R mutations and non-carriers. GRS*weightgainonquantitativecardiometabolictraitsand Results: The prevalence of MC4R cLOF mutations was associations with MHO status were examined in 5,348 0.08%. The 276 carriers differed from 314,2017 non- participantsoftheDanishInter99cohort.MHOwasdeﬁned carriers in: height (P=0.033), BMI (P=1.20E-05), WHR as BMI ≥25 kg/m2 in the presence of none or only one (P=0.016), various measures of body fat and muscle mass, component of metabolic syndrome. andbasalmetabolicrate(P=3.12E-07)afteradjustmentfor Results: The GRS attenuated the impact of weight gain age and sex. Since only 31% of carriers were obese, and on fasting insulin by 0.03 pmol/L per allele per each kg of 25% were within the “healthy” BMI range, we sought to body weight gained during the follow-up (P interac- investigate genetic factors inﬂuencing penetrance. GRS for =0.031). The GRS was associated with higher odds of tion BMIdidnotappeartomodulatepenetrance.Co-carriageof being MHO at baseline (OR=1.04 per allele, P=0.0002) theprotectiveV103IMC4Rvariantmoderatedtheeffectthe but did not reduce the odds of converting from MHO to a cLoF mutation, such that 50% of cLoF carriers, who also metabolically unhealthy state by 5-year follow-up had V103I had normal BMI compared to 25% (OR=1.00 per allele, P=0.679). without V103I. Conclusion: Genetic predisposition to higher “fat Conclusions: Our appreciation of phenotypic variability expandability” attenuates the impact of weight gain on among MC4R cLOF mutation barriers is compromised by insulin resistance. ascertainment bias. An unexpectedly high proportion of Funding body: Novo Nordisk Foundation support grant mutation carriers in the UK Biobank are not obese. This number NNF18CC0034900 may be at least partly due to epistatic effects. G.D. Carrasquilla: None. A. Linneberg: None. T. A.M. Yiorkas: None. O. Leinhard: None. A.I. Jørgensen: None. N. Grarup: None. O. Pedersen: None. Blakemore: None. T. Hansen: None. T.I.A. Sørensen: None. T.O. Kilpeläinen: None. P18.48D Does genetic predisposition to higher fat expandability P18.49A attenuate the impact of weight gain on cardiometabolic Epigenome-wide association study of change in blood risk? metabolite and glycaemic trait levels and in obesity measures from young- to middle adulthood in 595 G. D. Carrasquilla1, A. Linneberg2, T. Jørgensen1, Northern Finland Birth Cohort 1966 participants N.Grarup1,O.Pedersen1,T.Hansen1,T.I.A.Sørensen3, T. O. Kilpeläinen1 H. H. M. Draisma1, M. Kaakinen1, L. Prelot1, M. D. Anasanti1, Z. Balkhiyarova1, M. Wielscher1, 1Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of S. Sebert1,2, M. Jarvelin1,2, I. Prokopenko1 Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Center for Clinical Research and Prevention, University of Copenhagen, 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Center for Basic Metabolic 2Center for Life Course Health Research, Oulu, Finland Research, Copenhagen, Denmark Anumberofassociationsbetweenadiposity,metaboliteand Introduction: Obesity is linked to cardiometabolic comor- glycaemic trait levels and DNA methylation (DNAm) have bidities, but many obese, often called “metabolically been reported. However, the relationship between long- healthy obese” (MHO), seem protected. Recent studies itudinal changes in these phenotypes and differential suggest that genetic variants associated with higher “fat methylation is underexplored. We assessed associations expandability” contribute to this paradox by higher storage between DNAm and change over time in 228 blood of metabolically inert, subcutaneous fat. Whether these metabolomics-based variables and waist/hip ratio; body variants attenuate the impact of long-term weight gain on mass index (BMI); fasting blood plasma glucose (FG), cardiometabolic risk remains unknown. bloodinsulin,andserumtriglycerideandcholesterollevels. Objective: We examined whether a “fat expandability” For 595 non-diabetic individuals from the Northern Fin- genetic risk score (GRS) attenuates the detrimental impact land Birth Cohort 1966 for whom phenotype data were of weight gain on cardiometabolic risk during a 5-year available at both ages 31 (T1) and 46 (T2) as well as con- follow-up. We also examined whether the GRS predicts current blood DNAm data at T2, we calculated the average MHO baseline status and the persistence of such status. changeinphenotypevalueperyearbetweenT1andT2.We Methods: The GRS was constructed by combining 24 used our methylSCOPA software, which can also perform genetic loci robustly associated with increased BMI but multi-phenotype epigenome-wide association studyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1765 (EWAS),forsingle-phenotypeEWASofchangeresiduals– Materials and Methods: A sample of 340 individuals corrected for sex – for each phenotype versus DNAm for fromSãoPauloState,Brazil,wasstratiﬁedaccordingtoeye 832,569 markers on the Illumina (San Diego, CA, USA) pigmentationandpresenceorabsenceofirisfeatures.DNA MethylationEPIC BeadChip. We quality-controlled, resi- libraries were prepared using Haloplex (Agilent) and dualized, and normalized the DNAm data, and mapped sequenced at the MiSeq platform (Illumina). CutAdapt, genomic locations to CGCh37/hg19. BWA and GATK were used for trimming, alignment and Speciﬁcally, for BMI change we detected epigenome- genotype calling, respectively. wide signiﬁcant associations (P<1×10-7) at established loci Results:170polymorphismswerecalledandelevenwere PHGDH (cg14476101|chr1:120,255,992; β=-0.05, associatedwithoneormorequalitativeandquantitativeeye SE=9.1×10-3) and SLC43A1 (cg11376147| color phenotypes, aswell aswith irisfeatures. The HERC2 chr11:57,261,198; β=-0.01, SE=2.6×10-3), and for FG rs12913832 polymorphism was associated with the largest change at cg20367077 (chr11:19,224,117; β =0.11, number of phenotypes, with its "G" allele associated with SE=0.02)annotatedtoCSRP3,whichhasaroleinobesity- blue/green eyes. Additionally, this polymorphism was induced insulin resistance in murine and human skeletal associated with iris features for the ﬁrst time, such as muscle. Wolfﬂin's nodes (p = 1.0x10-4), contraction furrows (p = We implemented a novel method to detect associations 5.0x10-4) and iris pigmentation spots (p = 0.0013). The between change in phenotype over time and DNAm and HERC2 polymorphism rs58358300 was associated with provide account of its use for a range of phenotypes. sclera pigmentation (p = 1.0x10-4), hitherto not reported. Funding: WT205915 Conclusions: We identiﬁed previously unknown asso- H.H.M. Draisma: None. M. Kaakinen: None. L. Pre- ciations of polymorphisms with some eye pigmentation lot:None.M.D.Anasanti:None.Z.Balkhiyarova:None. characteristics, which reinforces the need for studies in M.Wielscher:None.S.Sebert:None.M.Jarvelin:None. highly admixed populations such as the Brazilian, which I. Prokopenko: None. presents favorable conditions for the identiﬁcation of new variation sites that may have a functional effect on pig- P18.51C mentation genes. Grants and fellowships: CAPES Variants within OCA2 and HERC2 genes associated (88881.197124/2018-01), FAPESP (2013/154470) and with eye color and iris features in a Brazilian admixed CNPq/Brazil (448242/2014-1 and 309572/2014-2). population sample C.T. Mendes-Junior: None. G. Debortoli: None. E.J. Parra: None. L. Marcorin: None. A.L.E. Pereira: None. C. T. Mendes-Junior1, G. Debortoli2, E. J. Parra2, N.C.A. Fracasso: None. M.G. Oliveira: None. J.D. L. Marcorin3, A. L. E. Pereira3, N. C. A. Fracasso3, Massaro: None. E.A. Donadi: None. A.L. Simões: None. M. G. Oliveira3, J. D. Massaro4, E. A. Donadi4, E.C. Castelli: None. A. L. Simões3, E. C. Castelli5 P18.52D 1Departamento de Química, Faculdade de Filosoﬁa, Accounting for cryptic relatedness between subjects Ciências e Letras de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São with no genotype data across families Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2Department of Anthropology, University of Toronto Mississauga, M. Saad1, E. Ullah1, E. Wijsman2 Mississauga, ON, Canada, 3Departamento de Genética, FaculdadedeMedicinadeRibeirãoPreto,Universidadede 1Qatar Computing Research Institute, Doha, Qatar, São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 4Departamento de 22Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, ClínicaMédica,FaculdadedeMedicinadeRibeirãoPreto, and Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, Seattle, WA, United States 5Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu,UniversidadeEstadualPaulista,Botucatu,Brazil Complex traits continue to provide challenges for identify- ing genes responsible for variation in disease risk. Genome Introduction: OCA2 and HERC2 are considered the main sequencinghasbecomeinexpensiveandfast.Thisprovides genes associated with the normal variation of eye opportunities for investigation of rare variation. In the pigmentation in humans. We sequenced their regulatory search for disease-associated rare variation, family-based and coding regions, associating genetic polymorphisms designs have again become common, because high- withqualitativeandquantitativemeasurementsofeyecolor, penetrant genotypes segregate in pedigrees. as well as the presence or absence of iris features. Association testing is typically used to identify associa- tion with rare variants. When related subjects are included1766 inthesample,akinshipmatrixmustbeusedtoaccountfor ofshared novel sequences,while theother wasfound tobe relatedness between subjects. Relationships may be known diverse:asifsampledfromafounderpopulation,aswellas from the pedigree structure, or can be inferred using a large, and diverse minority population. Finally, by observed genotypes. For subjects without genotype data, aligning publicly available low coverage whole genome however, no approach is able to infer relatedness. sequencing data from 23 Viking age individuals to our Pedigree-based imputation increases the sample size and modern Swedish novel sequence catalogue, we show that thusassociationpower,andprovidesgenotypeprobabilities genome sequences from Viking age individuals are in subjects without genotype data. If phenotypes are avail- enriched in novel sequences from modern day Swedes. able for such subjects, including them in the analysis is J. Eisfeldt: None. G. Mårtensson: None. A. Ameur: likely to maximize power to detect association between None. D. Nilsson: None. A. Lindstrand: None. genotypes and phenotype. However, knowing the relation- ship between such subjects and the remaining ones, espe- P18.55C cially across pedigrees, is crucial to control type 1 error. Identifying signatures of positive selection in the Here, we propose a solution for inferring cryptic relat- Lithuanian population from high-density SNP data edness between subjects with complete missing genotypes. Our approach uses GIGI to estimate the probabilities of A. Urnikyte1, M. Mondal2, A. Molyte1, E. Bosch3, missing genotypes, and integrates them in an Expectation- V. Kučinskas1 Maximization approach to estimate kinship coefﬁcients. Through simulation, our approach succeeds to infer many 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Biomedical types of relationships with relatively high conﬁdence. It Science Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, yields an average kinship estimates of 0.19, 0.1, and 0.05 Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Institute of Genomics, University of for an underlying kinship of 0.25, 0.125, and 0.0625, Tartu,Tartu,Estonia,3InstitutdeBiologiaEvolutiva(UPF- respectively, for subjects without genotype data. CSIC), Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la M. Saad: None. E. Ullah: None. E. Wijsman: None. Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain P18.54B Discovery of novel Viking sequences in Swedish A characterization of the adaptive history in particular genomes populationsisofgreatimportanceasitprovidesknowledge of the genes that have been targeted by positive natural J. Eisfeldt1, G. Mårtensson2, A. Ameur3, D. Nilsson1, selection at a local geographical scale. We carried out A. Lindstrand1 genome-wide scans for different signatures of positive selection in a total of 399 individuals from the Lithuanian 1Karolinska institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Royal institute population. of technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Uppsala University, We analysed Illumina 770 K HumanOmniExpress-12 Uppsala, Sweden v1.1 and Inﬁnium OmniExpress-24 array data from Lithuania and combined it with that of the CEU, FIN and Abstract Novel sequences, not present in the human YRI populations from the 1000G project. Signatures of reference genome, are abundant and remain largely positive selection were then investigated using three statis- unexplored. Here, we utilize de novo assembly to study tics: Tajima's D, F and XP-EHH. ST novel sequences present in 1000 Swedish individuals ﬁrst We detected a total of 42 candidate regions with sig- sequencedaspartoftheSweGenprojectrevealingatotalof natures of recent selection in the Lithuanian population. 51Mbpin69098distinctcontigsofsequencesnotpresentin Few new strong signals of selection comprising several GRCh38. The contigswere then alignedto thecomprehen- interestinggeneswereidentiﬁedwhencomparingLTtothe sive blast database, a recently published catalogue of YRI population. One of such signals was found in chro- Icelandicnovelsequences,theunmappablesequencesofthe mosome 3, which comprises the COL6A5 and COL6A6 Pan-African genome, as well as the chimpanzee genome, genesencodingforthecollagentypeVIalpha5andalpha6 revealing a great diversity of shared sequences. Addition- chains, respectively. Moreover, a non-synonymous variant ally, the unmappable sequences were searched for repeats in COL6A5 (rs12488457) with a CADD value of 23.2 was and repeat elements: revealing a majority (58%) of found among the top XP-EHH and F outliers along the ST repetitive sequence, consisting mainly of satellites (19%) region. and simple repeats (26%). Clustering all 1000 individuals As expected, other candidate regions for positive selec- based on their novel sequences resulted two clusters of tion identiﬁed in the Lithuanian population were related similarsize.Oneclusterischaracterizedbyahigherdegree with pigmentation (SLC24A5, TYRP1), the immuneAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1767 response (BRD2, HLA-DOA, IL26, IL22) and other traits increasing age-gap was observed among all siblings pairs. and were partly shared with other European populations. On the other hand, among full-siblings born within 2 years This work supported by the LITGEN project (VP1-3.1- of one another, the correlation estimate increases sig- ŠMM-07-K-01-013), funded by the European Social Fund niﬁcantly over the years, with some decrease in the mid- under the Global Grant Measure. 1990s. A. Urnikyte: None. M. Mondal: None. A. Molyte: Conclusion: The assumption of equal environmental None. E. Bosch: None. V. Kučinskas: None. conditions, in the case of pregnancy duration, is difﬁcult to be met due to broad palette of environmental factors P18.56D affecting the outcome. Caution when interpreting the her- Time-related differences in pregnancy duration itability estimates must be taken. distributions of relatives and its effect on heritability D. Modzelewska: None. P. Sole-Navais: None. G. estimates Zhang: None. L. Muglia: None. S. Nilsson: None. B. Jacobsson: None. D. Modzelewska1, P. Sole-Navais1, G. Zhang2,3, L. Muglia2,3, S. Nilsson4, B. Jacobsson1,5 P18.58B Colonexpress browser: An interactive web application 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of for exploring gene and transcript expression in normal Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg colon tissue University, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Human Genetics Division, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, V. Diez-Obrero1,2,3, F. Moratalla-Navarro1,3, R. Carrera- Cincinnati, OH, United States, 3Center for Prevention of Torres1,2,3, M. Devall4, G. Casey4, V. Moreno1,2,3 Preterm Birth, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 4Mathematical 1Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), L'Hospitalet de Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Llobregat, Spain, 2Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute Sweden, 5Department of Genetics and Bioinformatics, (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Consortium Domain of Health Data and Digitalisation, Institute of for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology and Public Public Health, Oslo, Norway Health (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain, 4University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States Background: In determining the contribution of genetic factors to variation in pregnancy duration, it has been Introduction: Understanding the genetic regulation of suggested that the core assumption underlying heritability healthy tissues may contribute to explain the missing estimation, equal environmental conditions in which heritabilityofcomplexdiseases.Inthisstudy,weconducted relatives grow, might not be met when analyzing relatives quantitative trait locus (QTL) analyses to associate genetic coming from different generations. variation to gene and transcript expression in normal colon Aim: Exploration of time-related environmental dis- tissue and developed an interactive web application to tributional differences, their detection and signiﬁcance for explore in deep the results. the assessment of similarity in pregnancy duration between Materials and Methods: Colon biopsies were obtained relatives. from 191 healthy volunteers at colonoscopy. Normalized Methods: 454435 parent-child, 2247065 full-siblings, gene and transcript expression, obtained from RNA-Seq, 405116 maternal- and 469995 paternal- half-siblings pairs and ~5 million Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms were were retrieved from the Swedish Birth Register. The pre- analyzed using the R packages MatrixEQTL and sence of time-related environmental changes was deter- sQTLSeekeR for expression and transcript ratio QTL ana- mined by analyzing the shape of pregnancy duration lyses, respectively. Shiny was used to develop the appli- distribution over the years 1973 - 2012. The effect on the cation. We envisage enlarging the analyzed data set to correlationestimatewasevaluatedbyanalyzingvariationin nearly 500 samples during the following months. themagnitudeofcorrelationestimatesbetweentherelatives Results: The web app Colonexpress browser allows to born in periods of time with differently shaped pregnancy explore colon gene and transcript expression levels and duration distributions, and relatives with different age-gaps download custom plots, such as scatter plots colored by in between. variables of interest or annotated heatmaps where the spli- Results: Over the years, the distribution of pregnancy cingdiversitycanbeobserved.Lowlyexpressedtranscripts duration is left-shifting. Distributional differences were canbegroupedatadesiredthreshold.Also,theapplication observed among relatives born in largely spaced periods of allows to browse the QTL catalog and downloading tables time. Decreasing correlation estimates together with1768 with statistics. It will be available at https://shiny.snpstats. of 3.3% for paediatric RDs. 65.7% of paediatric mortality net/colonexpress_browser. cases for the year 2000 cohort and 58.6% of all cases from Conclusion:Colonexpressbrowserallowstheinteractive 2006-2016 had a RD. It conﬁrms that the use of acute visualizationofausefuldataresourceforconductingfurther hospital services by RD patients far exceeds that expected functional studies, which may help understanding associa- by their numbers. tion studies for diseases affecting colon tissue. E.A.Gunne:None.C.McGarvey:None.K.Hamilton: Grant references: NIH/NCI CA143237; NIH/NCI None. A. Ward: None. E. Treacy: None. D. Lambert: CA204279; NIH/NCI CA201407; ISC III - FEDER PI14- None. S.A. Lynch: None. 00613; CIBERESP CB07/02/2005; Catalan Government DURSI2014SGR647;EUH2020-MSCgrantNo796216; P18.60D FPU16/00599. Estimating global point prevalence of rare diseases: V. Diez-Obrero: None. F. Moratalla-Navarro: None. analysis of the Orphanet database R. Carrera-Torres: None. M. Devall: None. G. Casey: None. V. Moreno: None. S. Nguengang-Wakap1, D. M. Lambert2, A. Olry1, C. Rodwell1, C. Gueydan1, V. Lanneau1, Y. Le Cam3, P18.59C A. Rath1 Towards estimating the incidence of rare diseases in a paediatric population, born in Ireland in the year 2000 1INSERM, US14-Orphanet, Paris, France, 2Orphanet Ireland, National Rare Diseases Ofﬁce, Dublin, Ireland, E. A. Gunne1, C. McGarvey1, K. Hamilton1, A. Ward2, 3EURORDIS, Plateforme Maladies Rares, Paris, France E. Treacy3, D. Lambert3, S. A. Lynch1,3,2 Introduction: Rare diseases (RDs) are an emerging global 1Temple Street Children's University Hospital, Dublin, publichealthpriority.Thesechronic,degenerativeandlife- Ireland, 2Our Lady's Children's Hospital Crumlin, Dublin, threatening diseases are scarce and diverse, resulting in a Ireland, 3National Rare Disease Ofﬁce, Mater Hospital, lack of knowledge and expertise. Orphanet (www.orpha. Dublin, Ireland net)isapubliclyaccessibleRDknowledgebasecontaining curated epidemiological indicators. Accurate epidemiologi- Introduction:TheEUrecognisesRareDiseasesaschronic, calinformationaboutRDsasagroupisnecessarytoinform life threatening illnesses. National epidemiological studies public policy. ofRDprevalenceareuncommon.Thisstudyaimstoderive Methods: Univariate analysis of Orphanet data (www. the incidence of paediatric RD and its mortality case orphadata.org). Global point prevalence of RDs was deter- number for children born in the year 2000. mined from the ‘Orphanet Epidemiological File’ by Materials and Methods: Cases were identiﬁed using selecting RDs described by ‘point prevalence’ from pre- electronic/manual records from: National Paediatric Mor- deﬁnedgeographicregionsforanalysis,andsummingpoint tality Registry ofﬁce; Clinical, Cytogenetics and Molecular prevalences. genetics database; Radiology and the Hospital In-Patient Results: Point prevalence is the appropriate epidemiolo- Enquiry system (HIPE). In addition, a detailed analysis of gical indicator for 85.9% (n=5304) of RDs and annual 10years national death registration information for RDs incidence for 14.1% of RDs. 71.7% (n=4425) of RDs are from 2006-2016 was undertaken along with a 2year study genetic (known/suspected familial; inherited or de novo (2015-2016) of inpatient RD deaths. single gene disorders; mitochondrial diseases; and chro- Results: There were 54,789 livebirths in 2000. Clinical, mosomal rearrangements). 11.9% of RDs are exclusively CytogeneticandMolecularGeneticsidentiﬁed603,121and adult-onset. The minimum cumulative point prevalence of 77 cases of RDs respectively. HIPE searches (two major RDs was calculated of 3.5-5.9%, or 263 to 446 million centres) identiﬁed 370 and 702 additional cases of RD. persons affected worldwide by RDs at any point in time. Mortality data (2006-2016) revealed 65.7% of 105 deaths While 84.5% of the 3585 RDs analysed had a point pre- from the 2000 cohort had a RD. Of all deaths on the Reg- valence of < 1/1,000,000, 77.3-80.7% of the population ister (2006-2016), (n=4044) aged 0-14, 58.56% (n=2368) burdenofRDswasattributableto149(4.2%)diseaseswith had a RD diagnosis. Of the total hospital days used by this prevalence of 1-5 per 10,000; and >95% of the population cohort (n=5566.5) 84%(n=4668.5) of the total day usage burden of RDs was attributable to 390 diseases. and 77% (3137/4059) of ICU days used were by RD Conclusion: Our conservative estimate of 3.5% to 5.9% patients. is the ﬁrst evidence-based estimate of the population pre- Conclusions: This study has identiﬁed > 1,800 RD valence of RDs. Future RD registry research and the patients presenting by age 17 giving a minimum incidenceAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1769 implementation of RD codiﬁcation in healthcare systems 1Arthritis Research UKCentrefor Genetics andGenomics. will further reﬁne these estimates. Division of Musculoskeletal and Dermatological Sciences, S.Nguengang-Wakap:None.D.M.Lambert:None.A. SchoolofBiologicalSciences,FacultyofBiology,Medicine Olry: None. C. Rodwell: None. C. Gueydan: None. V. and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, Lanneau: None. Y. Le Cam: None. A. Rath: None. United Kingdom, 2NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, P18.61A Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, Rare variant association tests in presence of United Kingdom heterogeneity between cases Introduction: The interrogation of rheumatoid arthritis O. Bocher1, G. Marenne1, H. Perdry2, E. Génin1 (RA) susceptibility loci has focussed on disruption of protein-codinggenesandenhancers,howeverthesefeatures 1Inserm UMR1078, Brest, France, 2Univ Paris-Sud, are unlikely to mediate the association with disease risk at Villejuif, France all identiﬁed loci. Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) have previouslybeendemonstratedtobeenrichedwithingenome The wide availability of Next Generation Sequence data wide association study (GWAS) loci, however the sig- opensnewopportunitiestodiscoverrarevariantsassociated niﬁcance of this enrichment, its relevance, and its to rare or common diseases. Rare variants association tests generalisability to individual traits is unknown. have been proposed speciﬁcally to this end. To obtain a Materials and Methods: Using fgwas, the ability of higher statistical power, they test association between a individual annotations to improve a probabilistic model of whole genomic region (usually encompassing one gene) diseasesusceptibilitywastested.PubliclyavailablelncRNA andthedisease.Thesetestscanbebroadlyclassiﬁedintwo annotations, including lncRBase, lncipedia and the categories: burden tests (CAST, WSS) and variance tests miTranscriptome assembly, were incorporated, in addition (SKAT). to cell type speciﬁc chromatin states annotations. However, even these tests may have an unsatisfactory Results: Using fgwas it is possible to reproduce a pre- power, due to the limited size of case samples and to the viously reported enrichment of enhancers active in primary large number of genes to be tested when an agnostic T helper cells amongst RA GWAS loci (log enrichment 2 approachisused.Inthiscontext,incorporating information 2.96, 95% conﬁdence interval [2.01, 3.69]), however esti- on clinical heterogeneity among cases, e.g. differences in mates for enrichment of lncRNA are statistically insignif- disease presentation, severity or age at onset, is an appeal- icant. Interestingly, the miTranscriptome assembly, ing way to build association tests with a higher sensitivity. previously used to demonstrate an enrichment of lncRNA We propose extensions of both burden and variance tests amongst GWAS loci, is demonstrated to be depleted to the situation where the cases are divided in such sub- amongstRAloci,usingfgwas(log enrichment-0.80,95% 2 groups. The burden tests were extended by means of a conﬁdenceinterval[-1.70,-0.08]).Theenrichmentestimate multinomial logistic regression. A geometrical interpreta- associated with alternative databases of lncRNA seems to tion of the SKAT test for binary phenotypes was used to varybasedontheprotein-codingpotentialthresholdapplied construct a natural extension of this test to our setting. The to discriminate against protein-coding transcripts and power of these tests was investigated under various simu- appears to be independent of chromatin state annotations. lation scenarios. They were also applied on some real data Conclusions: Whilst at speciﬁc GWAS loci, long non- examples. coding RNA may represent interesting candidates for An efﬁcient implementation of the proposed tests has functionalinterrogationwefoundnoevidencetosupportan been made available in an R package, Ravages, which is enrichment of long non-coding RNA amongst RA depositedongithub(https://github.com/genostats/Ravages). susceptibility loci. O.Bocher:None.G.Marenne:None.H.Perdry:None. J. Ding: None. C. Shi: None. J. Bowes: None. S. Eyre: E. Génin: None. None. G. Orozco: None. P18.62B P18.63C Exploring the overlap between rheumatoid arthritis DistributionofRunsOfHomozygosity(ROHs)alongthe susceptibilitylociandlongnon-codingRNAannotations human genome is shaped by recombination and purifying selection J. Ding1, C. Shi1, J. Bowes1,2, S. Eyre1,2, G. Orozco1,21770 K. Popadin1, D. Iliushchenko2, E. Zezyulya2, Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University First P. Makrythanasis3, M. Ansar4, S. E. Antonarakis4, Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital, A. Reymond1 Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Diagnostic and Research Unit for 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, Rare Diseases, Charles University 1st Faculty of Medicine 2Immanuel Kant Baltic Federal University, Kaliningrad, and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic Russian Federation, 3academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 4University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland The increasing implementation of exome sequencing (ES) leads to growing number of secondary ﬁndings (SF). Whereasthehigherfractionofthehumangenome,covered FollowingtherecommendationsoftheAmericanCollegeof by Runs Of Homozygosity (ROHs), was associated with Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) we started to decreased height, decreased educational attainment and buildapilotalgorithmforSFmanagementbasedonESdata other phenotypes, the mapping position of the contributing fromfamiliesanalysedinresearchsettingduetointellectual ROHswasnotassessedindetails.Here,analysinggenome- disability in their children. The ACMG recommendations wide distribution of ROHs in offsprings of 100 consangui- focus on genes inﬂuencing health risks for individuals neous families we observed a non uniform distribution. themselves. However, most families are tested as trios, and Using multiple linear model we demonstrated that this the couples are often young and planning to have another variationcouldbeexplainedby(i)recombinationlevel,i.e. child.Thedatacontaininformationonparentalcarrierstatus the higher the recombination in a given region, the less the for severe hereditary disorders, and SF may also be number of ROHs; and (ii) selection, i.e. the higher the pLI extended to variants with implications for future children score (which estimates loss of function intolerance) of the andreproductivechoices.Therefore,ourpilotSFalgorithm embedded genes the less the number of ROHs. The combines evaluation of ACMG-recommended genes and observed selection component might be explained by analysis of parental carrier status for risk variants in elimination of carriers of homozygous recessive loss of recessive and X-linked genes. Until now, 260 individuals function mutations in genes with high pLI. To examine the from77familieshavebeenanalysed.Thedatashowthatat selectioncomponentfurther westratiﬁedROHs byageand least 2.3 % of individuals carry variants in ACMG- lengthfollowingapreviouslysuggestedclassiﬁcation:class recommended genes reported in ClinVar as pathogenic/ A (old and short: < 0.6 Mb), class B (intermediate in age likely pathogenic (e.g. BRCA2, RET), and couples may and length: 0.6 - 1.6 Mb) and class C (young and long: > exist whereboth partners carry variants causing a recessive 1.6Mb)andrerunouranalyses.Weobservedthatwhilethe disorder (e.g. VPS13B). We propose discussion on the distribution of all three classesis shaped by recombination, extension of SF to variants associated with risks for future only the class C ROHs showed a strong negative relation- reproduction. The next stage of the algorithm will be to ship with pLI, suggesting that younger ROHs are under explore the inclusion of this extension into informed strongerselection.Altogetherourresultsprovideadditional consent and genetic counselling. Discrepancies in variant metrics (properties of affected genes, ROH classes), which classiﬁcation, need of expert analyses of individual genes should be taken into account inferring deleterious effect of and high time demand represent further obstacles in this ROHs in GWAS and genetic medicine. effort. Supported by 17-29423A and 00064203. K. Popadin: None. D. Iliushchenko: None. E. Zezyu- K. Prochazkova: None. M. Havlovicova: None. M. lya: None. P. Makrythanasis: None. M. Ansar: None. S. Vlckova: None. A. Baxova: None. D. Prchalova: None. E. Antonarakis: None. A. Reymond: None. M. Hancarova: None. S. Bendova: None. V. Stranecky: None. Z. Sedlacek: None. P18.64D Secondary ﬁndings - should we focus only on those P18.65A relevant for individual health, or also on those with Admixture mapping study of sepsis in an African- implications for further reproduction in the family? admixed population from southwestern Europe K. Prochazkova1, M. Havlovicova1, M. Vlckova1, I. Marcelino-Rodriguez1, T. Hernandez-Beeftink1,2, A. Baxova2, D. Prchalova1, M. Hancarova1, S. Bendova1, B. Guillen-Guio1, H. Rodriguez-Perez1, A. Corrales1, V. Stranecky3, Z. Sedlacek1 I. Garcia-Laorden2,3, D. Dominguez4, E. Espinosa4, J. Villar2,3, C. Flores1,3,5 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Second Faculty of Medicine and University 1Research Unit, HUNSC, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of 2Research Unit, H.U. de Gran Canaria Dr. Negrin, LasAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1771 PalmasdeGranCanaria,Spain,3CIBERdeEnfermedades 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Respiratorias,InstitutodeSaludCarlosIII,Madrid,Spain, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4Department of Anesthesiology, HUNSC, Santa Cruz de Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Institute of Computer Science, Tenerife, Spain, 5Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4University Center for y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Primary Care and Public Health, Lausanne, Switzerland, Spain 5Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Introduction: Sepsis is a severe systemic inﬂammatory Switzerland, 6Endocrine, Diabetes, and Metabolism response to an infection that is accompanied by organ Service,CentreHospitalierUniversitaireVaudois(CHUV), disfunction. Although the ancestral background is an Lausanne, Switzerland important factor for sepsis susceptibility and prevalence, no study has leveraged the genetic footprint of a recent The prevalence of many diseases differs between men and admixture in the population for the identiﬁcation of loci women. Identiﬁcation of sex-speciﬁc GWAS loci can help involved in sepsis susceptibility. Here we describe the understanding the mechanisms underlying such sex differ- results of the ﬁrst admixture mapping study in sepsis. ences. To address this challenge, we applied a Material and Methods: Local ancestry blocks obtained transcriptome-wide summary statistics-based Mendelian from genome-wide data from 113,414 SNPs genotyped in Randomization approach (TWMR) to waist hip ratio 343sepsiscasesand410unrelatedcontrols,ascertainedfor (WHR) combining whole-blood eQTLs and sex-speciﬁc grandparental origin in the Canary Islands (Spain), were GWAS summary statistics from UKBiobank. Our results used for the analysis. Signiﬁcance was declared based on recapitulated the marked sexual dimorphism known for the number of ancestry blocks (p<1.82e-4). Fine mapping WHR: in the sex-combined analysis, we found 203 genes analysis were assessed with logistic and conditional causally associated with WHR; of note, 38 and 26 genes regressions on HRC-imputed data. were causally associated to WHR in women or men only, ResultsandConclusions:Asigniﬁcanthitwasidentiﬁed respectively(topgenes:ENTPD6,P =7.9E-11inmen; TWMR inaregionspanning1.2Mbofchromosome8q23.1forthe CALCRL, P =4.6E-12 in women). Consistently, 16 of TWMR European ancestry supported by 114 SNPs (lowest these 64 genes showed signiﬁcant sex-difference (P- p=1.37e-4;OR=0.51;95%CI=0.40-0.65).8q23.1contains diff<0.05/203=2.5E-04). Conducting TWMR separately in MFHAS1 gene, which encodes a regulator of the Toll-like men and women not only improves power to identify sex- receptor 2 and 4 signaling pathways. MFHAS1 has been speciﬁc associations, but also allows testing for sex proposed as a biomarker for sepsis and genetic variants of differences. As might be expected, we did not observe the the gene have been associated with immune diseases. Our samepowerimprovementwhenweappliedTWMRtotraits results revealed a new genetic locus with plausible impli- not showing sexual dimorphism, such as educational cations in sepsis susceptibility. attainment (EA). Out of the 49 genes causally associated Funding:InstitutodeSaludCarlosIII(PI14/00844,PI17/ with EA, only 4 and 5 were speciﬁc to women and men, 00610, FI17/00177, FI18/00230), co-ﬁnanced by the Eur- respectively. Although previous data indicate that eQTL opean Regional Development Funds, “A way of making effects are not strongly inﬂuenced by sex, it will be crucial Europe” from the EU; ACIISI (TESIS2015010057) co- to perform the same analyses with sex-speciﬁc eQTL data funded by European Social Fund; Agreement OA17/008 generatedfromlargerdatasetstodissectsex-speciﬁceffects with Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables appearing up- vsdown-stream of gene regulation. Our (ITER). ﬁndings demonstrate the importance of investigating sex I. Marcelino-Rodriguez: None. T. Hernandez-Beef- differences, which may lead to a better understanding of tink: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. H. Rodriguez-Perez: disease mechanisms facilitating treatment options and None. A. Corrales: None. I. Garcia-Laorden: None. D. precision medicine. Dominguez:None.E.Espinosa:None.J.Villar:None.C. E.Porcu:None.K.Lepik:None.S.Rüeger:None.F.A. Flores: None. Santoni: None. A. Reymond: None. Z. Kutalik: None. P18.66B P18.68D Transcriptome-wide causal analyses reveals sex-speciﬁc High-dimensional analysis of SNP array data reveals biomarkers for complex human traits major subdivisions in the Canary Islands (Spain) population E. Porcu1,2, K. Lepik3,2,4, S. Rüeger5,2, eQTLGen Consortium, F. A. Santoni6, A. Reymond1, Z. Kutalik4,2 B. Guillen-Guio1, I. Marcelino-Rodríguez1, A. Muñoz- Barrera2,L.A.Rubio-Rodríguez2,A.Corrales1,3,A.Díaz-1772 de Usera2, R. González-Montelongo2, J. M. Lorenzo- M. Lin1, P. Weng1, S. Kao1, T. Wu2, W. Wu1, S. Chen3, Salazar2, C. Flores2,1,3 A. Yen3, Y. Lee4, C. Tse5, T. Liu6, H. Chen7 1ResearchUnit,HospitalUniversitarioN.S.deCandelaria, 1InstituteofPublicHealth,NationalYang-MingUniversity, Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, Taipei,Taiwan,2DepartmentofPublicHealth,Chung-Shan 2Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 3School of Oral Genomics Division, Granadilla de Abona, Spain, 3CIBER Hygiene, College of Oral Medicine, Taipei Medical de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos University, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Internal III, Madrid, Spain Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Bureau of Health and Welfare, Lienchiang Introduction: Based on SNP array data, model-based County Government, Matsu, Taiwan, 6Lienchiang County ancestry estimations, and principal component (PC) analy- Government, Matsu, Taiwan, 7Institute of Epidemiology sis,wehaverecentlyconductedadetailedgenomicanalysis and Preventative Medicine, College of Public Health, of the current inhabitants of the Canary Islanders (Spain), National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan revealing the existence of a signiﬁcant African inﬂuence and population isolation. Here we have reassessed their Introduction: Telomeres are the tips of chromosomes and genomic diversity and structure based on alternative high- are composed of proteins and several thousand copies of a dimensional analysis techniques. hexamer repeat sequence (TTAGGG)n. Telomere length Materials and Methods: A total of 117K variants from (TL) is shortened progressively with age. Many studies 618 unrelated subjects from the seven main islands of the revealed that age, sex, ethnicity, smoking, obesity, lack of archipelago ascertained based on grandparental birthplace exercise could result in shorter telomere length. However, were compared. Topological data analysis (TDA) was these factors associated with TL are also contributed to conducted using umap v0.2.0 R library both based on raw cardio-metabolic components/diseases. Several genetic loci genotypingdataand2-to-20PCsderivedwithPLINKv1.9. associated with telomere length have been identiﬁed. The Results:Three mainpopulation-aggregated clusters were studywasaimedtoassesswhethertelomerelengthcausally identiﬁed: two corresponding to the smallest islands of the affects cardio-metabolic components using Mendelian archipelago (El Hierro and La Gomera), and a Y-shaped randomization design. clusteraggregatingtherestofCanaryIslanders.Inaddition, Methods: A total of 2543 adults were recruited from the TDA based on six PCs showed intriguing subdivisions Matsu community-based integrated health screening pro- withinLaGomera,thepopulationshowingthelargestNorth ject. Five SNPs (TERC rs12696304, rs16847897, TERT African inﬂuences described so far for a southwestern rs2736100, FTO rs9930506, rs9939609) associated with European population. telomere length were used as instrument variables to esti- Conclusions: High dimensional data analysis suggests mate the causal effect of telomere length on cardio- thatextremeisolationinthepopulationsfromElHierroand metabolic components by Mendelian randomization analy- La Gomera is a major source of genetic sub-structure in sis using two-stage least-square instrumental variable (IV) Canary Islanders. regression. Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Uni- Results: We found that both FTO rs9930506 and versidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER, rs9939609 SNPs were signiﬁcantly associated with telo- UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER. Fellowships by mere length (p<0.05), but not the other three telomere ACIISI co-funded by European Social Fund to B.G.G. lengthrelatedSNPs.Theresultsoflinearregressionshowed (TESIS2015010057) and Spanish Ministry of Education, that telomere length was not signiﬁcantly associated with Culture and Sports to A.D.U. (FPU16/01435). waist circumference, body mass index, blood pressures, B.Guillen-Guio:None.I.Marcelino-Rodríguez:None. fasting glucose, lipid levels (all with p>0.05). Mendelian A.Muñoz-Barrera: None. L.A.Rubio-Rodríguez: None. randomization using two-stage least-square IV regression A. Corrales: None. A. Díaz-de Usera: None. R. Gonzá- did not show that telomere length instrumented by the two lez-Montelongo: None. J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. C. FTO SNPs, were associated with any cardio-metabolic Flores: None. components (p>0.05). Conclusion: Our study could not conﬁrm the previous P18.69A knowledge of the causal effects of telomere length on The association between telomere length and cardio- cardio-metaboliccomponents.GrantNo:MOST106-2314- metabolic components: a Mendelian randomization B-010-020-MY3 studyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1773 M. Lin: None. P. Weng: None. S. Kao: None. T. Wu: J. M. Lorenzo-Salazar1, A. Díaz-de Usera1, A. Muñoz- None. W. Wu: None. S. Chen: None. A. Yen: None. Y. Barrera1, L. A. Rubio-Rodríguez1, B. Guillen-Guio2, Lee: None. C. Tse: None. T. Liu: None. H. Chen: None. A. Corrales2,3, I. Marcelino-Rodríguez2, D. Comas4, R. González-Montelongo1, S. Alonso5, C. Flores1,2,3 P18.70B A large spectrum of variants identiﬁed in moderate 1Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), thrombocytopenic French blood donors: results of the GenomicsDivision,GranadilladeAbona,Spain,2Research ABC study Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, A.Dupuis1,P.Guéguen2,J.Py3,A.Desprès2,C.Gachet1, 3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud C. Férec4,2 Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC- 1EFS Grand-est - Inserm UMR 1255, Strasbourg, France, UPF), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire - Inserm UMR 5Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and 1078, Brest, France, 3EFS Centre-Atlantique, Orléans, AnimalPhysiology,UniversityoftheBasqueCountryUPV/ France, 4EFS Bretagne - Inserm UMR 1078, brest, France EHU, Leioa, Bizkaia, Spain Moderate thrombocytopenia (less than 150G/l) is a reason Introduction: Genetic structure of populations often fordonorsdeferralforblooddonationinFrance.Weaimed necessitates multidimensionality reduction, typically at exploring potential genetic variations responsible for assessed with principal component (PC) analysis (PCA). thesedefectsandtodeﬁnetheirprevalenceinablooddonor However,suchproceduremostcommonlyfocusesonafew population from 3 French regions: Alsace, Centre- main dimensions limiting the possibilities to excavate ﬁne- Atlantique and Bretagne. We collected a saliva sample grained strata. Here we used topological data analysis from 448 donors with platelet counts <150 G/l on two (TDA) to embed high-dimensionality of SNP array data to consecutive blood donations. Following DNA extraction explore the degree of genetic differentiation between the coding sequences and intron/exon junctions of 17 Canary Islanders and the Iberian Peninsula candidate genes were ampliﬁed by PCR Ampliseq™ and population (IBS). sequencedonaIonProton©.Annotationofthevariantswas Materials and Methods: We used data from 46 Canary performed (SeqNext© software). The pathogenicity of the Islanders along with 740 unrelated subjects from IBS and variants was assessed using data from the literature and 23NorthAfricans(NAF)forreference.PCAandTDAwere bioinformatics prediction tools. Most donors (59%) were assessed on quality-controlled data using the PLINK v1.9 aware of their low platelet count but only 17% knew a and umap v0.2.0 library for R. family history. 84 heterozygous variants of interest spread Results: By leveraging the information from as few as over 12 genes. 23 variants are deleterious, the rest of the 136K independent SNPs embedded within a 2-to-50 PC variants being of unknown signiﬁcance 59 variants were space,wefoundhighlydistinctivepatternsofdifferentiation found on gene already studied in patients with inherited between Canary Islanders and the IBS populations despite thrombocytopenia(8GPIBA,2GPIBB,3WF,9MYH9,11 their shared Spanish ancestry. Strikingly, most Canary TUBB1, 9 ACTN1, 13 ITGA2B and 5 FLNA) with a Islanders clustered closer to NAF, although a few indivi- surprisingly high frequency of ITGA2B and TUBB1 duals clustered with IBS. variants. The remaining 24 variants where identiﬁed on Conclusions: TDA provides an optimal alternative to genes suspected to be responsible for thrombocytopenia in reveal previously unrecognized ﬁne structure separating human or already studied in mouse models (7 TUBA8, 8 IBS from Canary Islanders, compatible with genetic drift ITGB3, 5 ITGA2, 2 RASGRP2 and 2 TUBA4A). These and differential admixtures. Co-clustering of Canary Islan- results indicate that at least 5% of healthy donors with ders both with NAF and IBS supports wide interindividual moderate thrombocytopenia carry a constitutional anomaly variation in ancestries, reﬂective of their recent history. in a gene responsible for this platelet count defect. Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Uni- A. Dupuis: None. P. Guéguen: None. J. Py: None. A. versidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER, Desprès: None. C. Gachet: None. C. Férec: None. UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER. Fellowships by Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports to A.D. P18.71C U. (FPU16/01435) and ACIISI co-funded by European TopologicaldataanalysisofSNParraydataexposesthe Social Fund to B.G.G. (TESIS2015010057). genetic differentiation between Iberians and Canary J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. A. Díaz-de Usera: None. Islanders A.Muñoz-Barrera: None. L.A.Rubio-Rodríguez: None.1774 B.Guillen-Guio:None.A.Corrales:None.I.Marcelino- mucosa tissue was signiﬁcantly associated with the case/ Rodríguez: None. D. Comas: None. R. González-Mon- control status (p=1.2*10-8). telongo: None. S. Alonso: None. C. Flores: None. Conclusion: Our work dissected a strong polygenic component of Barrett’s esophagus and Esophageal adeno- P18.72D carcinoma, we identiﬁed potential candidate genes and In-silico analysis of Barrett's esophagus and esophageal established gene expression alterations in disease-speciﬁc adenocarcinoma reveals an association between the tissues. genetic signal and gene expression regulation in O. Borisov: None. C. Maj: None. J. Schröder: None. esophagus tissues M. Yeung: None. M. Knapp: None. P. Gharahkhani: None. M. Nöthen: None. J. Schumacher: None. A. O. Borisov1, C. Maj1, J. Schröder2, M. Yeung1, Böhmer: None. P. Krawitz: None. M. Knapp3, P. Gharahkhani4, M. Nöthen2, J. Schumacher2,5, A. Böhmer2, P. Krawitz1 P18.73A Cross-phenotype transcriptome-wide association study 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, reveals shared susceptibility genes between University of Bonn School of Medicine & University schizophrenia and inﬂammatory bowel disease in gut- Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human brain axis related tissues Genetics, University of Bonn School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of C. Maj1, O. Borisov1, A. Weiß2, S. Mucha3, S. Bej4, Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, F. Uellendahl-Werth3, M. Wolﬁen4, International University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Statistical Genetics, Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease Genetics Consortium, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, T. Karlsen5, A. Franke3, P. Hoffmann2,6, P. Krawitz1, Queensland, Australia, 5Center of Human Genetics, O. Wolkenhauer4, M. Nöthen2,7, F. Degenhardt2, University Hospital Marburg, Marburg, Germany D. Ellinghaus3 Introduction: Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a premalignant 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, precursorofEsophagealadenocarcinoma(EA)whichisone University of Bonn, School of Medicine & University of the leading causes of cancer deaths. Both conditions are Hospital, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, complex traits and we aimed at dissecting their polygenic University of Bonn, School of Medicine & University structure inassociation with tissuespeciﬁc gene expression Hospital, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Clinical Molecular regulation. Biology, Christian Albrechts University of Kiel, Kiel, Materials and Methods: We estimated the SNP- Germany, 4Institute of Computer Science, Department of heritability on the liability scale and genetic correlation by SystemsBiologyandBioinformatics,UniversityofRostock, applying LD score regression analysis to the largest meta- Rostock, Germany, 5Norwegian PSC Research Center, analysis results (6,167 BE cases, 4,112 EA cases, 17,159 Department of Transplantation Medicine, Division of controls). We performed Polygenic Risk Score (PRS) Cancer Medicine, Surgery and Transplantation, Oslo modeling. We analysed gene expression alterations by University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, means of Transcriptome Wide Association Study (TWAS) 6Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University andFUMAplatform.WemodeledthegeneexpressionPRS Hospital Basel and Department of Biomedicine, University (GE-PRS)basedonthePrediXcan-andMetaXcan-imputed of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 7Department of Genomics, gene expression proﬁles. Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany Results: SNP-heritability (h2) for BE was h2=0.20, h2=0.13forEA,andh2=0.15forthecombinedcohort(BE Introduction:Genome-WideAssociationStudies(GWAS) and EA). The genetic correlation between BE and EA was have identiﬁed hundreds of genetic loci both for schizo- r =0.85. We identiﬁed a strong association of PRS com- phrenia (SCZ) and inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD). g paring BE against controls (p=3.7*10-5), EA against con- Noteworthy,bothincreasedprevalenceandgeneticcorrela- trols (p=3.5*10-7), and the combined cohort (BE and EA) tion have been reported for SCZ and IBD, which suggests against controls (p=5*10-13), but no association comparing potentialsharedmolecularmechanismsbetweenthesetraits. BE against EA (p=0.09). Esophagus tissues were prior- Materials and Methods: We performed a cross- itized as the most signiﬁcant by FUMA, and the TWAS phenotype transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS) uncovered particular genes among these tissues (e.g., using the largest available summary statistics for SCZ BTN3A2) whose expression was signiﬁcantly altered (36.989 cases, 113.075 controls) and IBD (18.431 Crohn's (p=3*10-7). Finally, the GE-PRS model in the esophagus disease cases, 14.191 ulcerative colitis cases, and 33.658Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1775 controls). We imputed the genetically regulated component range of clinical signs (i.e., peripheral and autonomic of gene expression by integrating GWAS signals with neuropathy, cardiomyopathy, nephropathy, gastrointestinal tissue-speciﬁcExpressionQuantitativeTraitLoci(eQTL)in or ocular impairment). Additionally, a form of senile 48 tissues. We used models trained on data from the systemic amyloidosis (SSA) is due to the misfolding of Genotype-Tissue Expression Project (GTEx). theprotein product ofthesamegene.Non-codingvariation Results: The combined evaluation of SCZ and IBD in TTR gene appears to have a key role in affecting the TWAS results revealed a signiﬁcant enrichment of asso- clinical phenotype of carriers of coding mutation and ciatedgenesoverlappingbetweenSCZandIBDindifferent increasing the risk of SSA in non-carriers. To understand tissues. Interestingly, colon and brain were among the top the role of TTR gene non-coding variation, we conducted a signiﬁcanttissues.Genesfromthemajorhistocompatibility phenome-wide association study in the UK Biobank. complex (MHC) are also among the most strongly TWAS- Materials and Methods: We investigated 18,823 var- associated genes, which is in line with corresponding iants located in TTR gene and its surrounding genomic genetic signals in SCZ and IBD. regions (GRCh37 chromosome 18: 27171000–31171500) Conclusion: Our TWAS results suggest that the genetic in 361,194 participants from the UK Biobank with respect correlation between SCZ and IBD can be associated with to more than 4,000 traits, which include a wide range of gene expression alteration in tissues involved in the reg- physiological and pathological conditions. ulation ofthe gut-brain axis and that MHC genes may play Results: TTR non-coding variants were signiﬁcantly apivotalrole.Inordertofurtherinvestigatethishypothesis, associated with multiple phenotypic traits after multiple we intend to perform cross-phenotype TWAS including testing correction (false discovery rate q-value < 0.05). otherpsychiatricandimmune-relatedtraitsshowinggenetic Among these signiﬁcant results, we observed several correlation. associations related to known signs of TTR amyloidosis: C. Maj: None. O. Borisov: None. A. Weiß: None. S. renal failure (rs150146618, p=1.33x10-6); disorders related Mucha:None.S.Bej:None.F.Uellendahl-Werth:None. to central nervous system (rs8091089, p=1.24x10-6); and M. Wolﬁen: None. T. Karlsen: None. A. Franke: None. cardiacfailure(rs145777295,p=2.52x10-6).Additionally, P.Hoffmann:None.P.Krawitz:None.O.Wolkenhauer: a sex-stratiﬁed analysis showed signiﬁcant differences None. M. Nöthen: None. F. Degenhardt: None. D. between females and males in the effects of TTR non- Ellinghaus: None. coding variants. Conclusions: The study provides novel insights regard- P18.74B ingthemolecularmechanismsinvolvedinATTRandSSA, Phenome-widestudyofTTRnon-codingvariationinUK demonstrating the effect of TTR non-coding variation on Biobank participants: new knowledge regarding the human phenome. pathogenesis of hereditary and senile systemic A. De Lillo: None. F. De Angelis: None. M. Di Gir- amyloidosis olamo: None. M. Luigetti: None. S. Frusconi: None. D. Manfellotto: None. M. Fuciarelli: B. Research Grant A. De Lillo1, F. De Angelis1, M. Di Girolamo2, (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and M.Luigetti3,S.Frusconi4,D.Manfellotto2,M.Fuciarelli1, pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig- R. Polimanti5,6 niﬁcant; Pﬁzer Inc.. R. Polimanti: None. 1Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, P18.75C Rome, Italy, 2Clinical Pathophysiology Center, Combined effect of genetic predisposition, obesity, and Fatebenefratelli Foundation – ‘San Giovanni Calibita’ favorable lifestyle on risk of type 2 diabetes Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS. UOC H. Jakupović1, T. M. Schnurr1, G. D. Carrasquilla1, Neurologia. Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, N. Grarup1, T. I. A. Sørensen1, A. Tjønneland2, Italy, 4Genetic Diagnostics Unit, Laboratory Department, K. Overvad3,4, O. Pedersen1, T. Hansen1, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 5Department T. O. Kilpeläinen1 of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, West Haven,CT,UnitedStates,6VACTHealthcareCenter,West 1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Haven, CT, United States Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, UniversityofCopenhagen,Copenhagen,Denmark,2Danish Introduction: TTR coding mutations are responsible for a Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark, hereditary form of amyloidosis (ATTR), which presents a 3Department of Public Health, Section for Epidemiology, complex genotype-phenotype correlation including a wide1776 Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 4Aalborg University Introduction:Genotypescausingmildhyperbilirubinaemia Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark (OMIM:#143500) are common in human populations ranging from 10% (Europe and East Asia) to 25% Objective:To study whethergeneticrisk of type 2 diabetes (equatorialAfrica).Basic studies suggestmoderatelyraised (T2D)canbeattenuatedbyadheringtoafavorablelifestyle bilirubin may be beneﬁcial and protect respiratory systems and retaining normal body weight. againstoxidativestressfrominfection,smokeandpollution. Methods: We applied Prentice-weighted Cox regression Herewereporttheresultsoftheﬁrstlarge-scaleMendelian models to a case-cohort sample of 9,556 men and women randomisation examining the causal relationship between from the Danish prospective Diet, Cancer and Health serum bilirubin and respiratory cancer. cohort. 49.5% of the participants developed T2D during an Materials and Methods: This research has been con- average 12 years of follow-up. A favorable lifestyle was ducted using unrelated participants of European ancestry deﬁned as having three of the following healthy lifestyle from the UK Biobank Resource. Homozygosity for the factors:nocurrentsmoking,moderatealcoholconsumption, minor T allele of rs887829 in the UDP- regular physical activity, and healthy diet. An unfavorable glucuronosyltransferase 1-1 gene is associated with serum lifestyle was deﬁned as no or only one healthy lifestyle bilirubin levels 8-10 μmol/l (80-100%) higher than those factor while the remaining participants were deﬁned as without this genotype. Using multivariable Poisson regres- having an intermediate lifestyle. Genetic risk was assessed sion, we analysed the relationship between rs887829 and by a genetic risk score (GRS) comprising 213 genetic loci the incidence of respiratory and intrathoracic cancers robustly associated with T2D. The GRS was stratiﬁed into derived from national registers. All analyses were stratiﬁed low(lowest25%),intermediate(middle50%)andhighrisk by smoking status with heavy smoking deﬁned as ≥20 (top 25%) groups. cigarettes per day. Results: Adherence to a favorable lifestyle and normal- Results: 323,702 participants (median follow-up 5.5 weight decreased T2D risk independent of genetic predis- years)and918cancereventswereincludedintheanalyses. position (P>0.05 for GRS-lifestyle and GRS-obesity inter- Overall homozygosity for the T allele of rs887829 action). Obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m2) increased T2D-risk by (n=31,794) was associated with a 22% lower incidence of 5.8-fold (95% CI: 5.2-6.6) compared to non-obese indivi- respiratory cancer (95%CI:0-48%; p-value=0.047) com- duals, while the independent effects of high (vs. low) paredwithothergenotypes.Stratiﬁedanalysisrevealedthis genetic risk and unfavorable (vs. favorable) lifestyle were effect was driven by heavy smokers with a 59% lower relatively modest (HR=1.8, 95% CI 1.6-2.0; and HR=1.2, incident rate (95%CI:38-76%; p-value=0.0018). 95% CI 1.1-1.3, respectively). Conclusion: Genetically raised bilirubin could help pro- Conclusions: Individuals with poor lifestyle and obesity tect people exposed to high levels of oxidants against are at greater risk of incident T2D regardless of their respiratorycancers.Serumbilirubinmaythereforerepresent genetic risk. a therapeutic target as well as a low-cost biomarker for This study was supported by Danish Council for Inde- disease risk stratiﬁcation. Wellcome Trust funded:209207/ pendent Research (DFF-6110-00183) and Novo Nordisk Z/17/Z Foundation (NNF18CC0034900, NNF17OC0026848 and L.J.Horsfall:None.S.Burgess:None.I.Hall:None.I. NNF15CC0018486). Nazareth: None. H. Jakupović: None. T.M. Schnurr: None. G.D. Car- rasquilla: None. N. Grarup: None. T.I.A. Sørensen: P18.77A None. A. Tjønneland: None. K. Overvad: None. O. Genetic contribution of visceral adiposity and its Pedersen: None. T. Hansen: None. T.O. relation to cardiovascular and metabolic disease Kilpeläinen: None. T. Karlsson, M. Rask-Andersen, G. Pan, J. Höglund, P18.76D C. Wadelius, W. E. Ek, Å. Johansson The relationship between genetically raised bilirubin and respiratory cancer: a UK Biobank study Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden L. J. Horsfall1, S. Burgess2, I. Hall3, I. Nazareth1 The genetic contribution to, and the disease-related effects 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, ofvisceraladiposetissue(VAT)arelargelyunexploreddue 2MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom, to the requirements of advanced imaging technologies to 3University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom accurately measure VAT. We therefore developed non- linear prediction models of VAT mass using 4,198Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1777 individuals of white British ancestry from UK Biobank Omni2.5Exome BeadChip genotype data, with which there (UKBB). VAT mass was then predicted in 325,153 UKBB was concordance of 0.998 across overlapping variants. We participants, aged 40-73 years. We performed a genome- performed single-variant association analysis using wide association (GWA) study for predicted VAT mass EMMAX to account for family structure, and gene-based (VAT^) and estimated the association between VAT^ and associationanalysisusingSKAT,groupingvariantsmasked hypertension, heart attack/angina, type 2 diabetes, and as either “LoF” or “high-moderate impact”. We used VEP/ hyperlipidemia.Causaleffectsondiseaseriskwereassessed LOFTEE for annotation. For both approaches, analyses by Mendelian randomisation. The GWA study identiﬁed were repeated conditioning on all previously known 209 independent genetic associations for VAT^, represent- variant-trait associations collated from the EBI GWAS ing102novelloci.Functionalanalysesshowedasigniﬁcant catalog, to ensure novelty of identiﬁed associations. difference, both in expression and promoter activity Results: In total, 825,158 rare variants (MAF<0.5%) between the alleles of rs1799993, located in the HMBS were identiﬁed across all samples. The single variant promoter. VAT^ was associated with increased risk of association analysis identiﬁed 60 novel variant-trait asso- diseasewithamorepronouncedeffectinfemalescompared ciations (P<2e-7), which clustered to 22 loci-trait associa- tomales(p<0.0001).Thelargestobservedeffectwasfound tions. Gene-based association analysis yielded for type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, a pronounced non-linear 27signiﬁcantgene-traitassociations(P<3.3e-6),ofwhich5 effect of VAT^ on disease risk was uncovered for all four werecompletelynovel,and5werenovelgene-levelsignals diseases (p<0.0001). Finally, Mendelian randomisation near known single-variant associations. showed VAT^ to be a casual risk factor and a remarkably Conclusion:IntheageoflargeBiobanks,relativelysmall high causal OR=7.34 (95% CI 4.48-12.0) was found for but well characterized population-based studies remain type2diabetesinfemales.Ourﬁndingssubstantiallybolster important for elucidating the genetic architecture of quan- the role of visceral adiposity as a bona ﬁde predictor. titative traits. Theresearch wasfundedbySSMF,VR,andSciLifeLab, D.B. Emmert: None. J. Mitchell: None. E. König: as well as Kjell and Märta Beijers, Göran Gustafssons, None. M. Gögele: None. C. Pattaro: None. P.P. Pram- Borgström/Hedström, Åke Wiberg, the Swedish Heart- staller: None. C. Fuchsberger: None. Lung, and the Swedish Diabetes Foundations. T. Karlsson: None. M.Rask-Andersen: None.G. Pan: P18.79C None. J. Höglund: None. C. Wadelius: None. W.E. Ek: Cataloging genetic variation in Canary Islanders by None. Å. Johansson: None. means of whole exome and genome sequencing P18.78B A. Díaz-de Usera1, L. A. Rubio-Rodríguez1, A. Muñoz- Exome sequencing identiﬁes novel rare variant Barrera1, B. Guillen-Guio2, A. Mendoza-Alvarez2, association signals in the Cooperative Health Research A. Corrales2, I. Marcelino-Rodríguez2, A. Pedrero- in South Tyrol (CHRIS) study García2, A. Cabrera de León2, R. González-Montelongo1, J. M. Lorenzo-Salazar1, C. Flores1,2,3 D. B. Emmert, J. Mitchell, E. König, M. Gögele, C. Pattaro, P. P. Pramstaller, C. Fuchsberger 1Genomics Division, Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, Institute for Biomedicine, Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy 2ResearchUnit,HospitalUniversitarioN.S.deCandelaria, Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, Introduction: Thus far, only few rare variant association 3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud signals have been identiﬁed. Given their expected larger Carlos III, Madrid, Spain impact on complex traits, it is valuable to study their association in different contexts (e.g., homogeneous Introduction:ThegeneticuniquenessofthecurrentCanary environmental conditions) and not only in large biobanks. Islands population (Spain) results from isolation, local Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing adaptation, and recent admixture events mainly involving (WES)associationanalyses were performed for association individuals of Europe, Northwest-Africa and a minor with 56 biochemical traits in 3840 individuals from the contribution from Sub-Saharan populations. These condi- population-based CHRIS study using the xGen Exome tions and the limited characterization of the genetic pool of Research Panel (v1.0) and processed using the Genome the African populations justify the necessity of building a Analysis Toolkit (GATK v3.7) pipeline. After QC, reference dataset to be instrumental for Precision Medicine 3422 samples remained, with a mean target coverage of in the archipelago. Here we provide details of the design 68.4X. WES variants were validated against Inﬁnium and preliminary results of this catalog.1778 Materials and Methods: A target sample of 1000 con- admixture with sources from Northwest Africa (NAF), trols is being characterized by whole-exome sequencing Europe (EUR) and thesub-Saharan Africa (SSA).Weused (WES) using Nextera-DNA Exome kit (Illumina) on whole-genome sequencing (WGS) to identify genomic HiSeq4000andAxiomGenome-WideHumanCEU1array regions under selective processes. technologies.Inaddition,whole-genomesofasubsetofthe Materials and Methods: WGS from Canary Islanders donors are being obtained with two complementary (n=46) were obtained and variant calling was assessed sequencing technologies (Illumina and Oxford Nanopore using BWA-GATK. WGS data from NAF (n=23), and Technologies). SSA and EUR from the 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP), Results: Array-based-genotypes and whole-exome were used for comparisons. Selection signals were identi- sequences of 317 controls have been analysed so far. A ﬁed with distinct neutrality tests. Values in the extremes of total of 816,829 variants have been identiﬁed by WES, of the distributions were prioritized and used for enrichment which 55% and 47% are not described in ExAC nor in analysis. gnomAD,respectively, while59%ofthemareclassiﬁedas Results:Atotalof14.4millionvariantswereidentiﬁedin missense or nonsense. Canary Islanders, and about a ﬁfth was not described in Conclusions: These results evidence the necessity of a 1KGP. Neutrality tests identiﬁed a number of putative detailedcatalogofgeneticvariationintheCanaryIslandsto regions of selection. Attending to PBS, the largest values improvetheidentiﬁcationofdiseasegenesandfacilitatethe were located in the HLA, supporting different independent identiﬁcation of pathogenic variants. signals. Autoimmune, ophthalmologic, and oncologic dis- Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Uni- eases were among the top-enriched terms in the prioritized versidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER, regions. UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER. Fellowships by Conclusions: Our results support the existence of a Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports to A.D. genuine gene pool in the current Canary Islanders. Studies U. (FPU16/01435), ACIISI (TESIS2015010057) co-funded toevaluatetherelationshipbetweenthesignalsofselection by European Social Fund to B.G.G., and CajaSiete-ULL and the admixture sources are needed. fellowship to A.M.A. Funding: Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Uni- A.Díaz-deUsera:None.L.A.Rubio-Rodríguez:None. versidades (RTC-2017-6471-1; MINECO/AEI/FEDER, A. Muñoz-Barrera: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. A. UE), agreement OA17/008 with ITER. Fellowships by Mendoza-Alvarez: None. A. Corrales: None. I. Marce- SpanishMinistryofEducation,CultureandSports(FPU16/ lino-Rodríguez: None. A. Pedrero-García: None. A. 01435) to A.D.U., CajaSiete-ULL to A.M.A., and ACIISI Cabrera de León: None. R. González-Montelongo: (TESIS2015010057) co-funded by European Social Fund None. J.M. Lorenzo-Salazar: None. C. Flores: None. to B.G.G. R. González Montelongo: None. J.M. Lorenzo-Sala- P18.80D zar: None. A. Muñoz-Barrera: None. L.A. Rubio- A whole-genome scan of natural selection in Canary Rodríguez: None. A.Díaz-de Usera: None.A. Mendoza- Islanders Alvarez: None. B. Guillen-Guio: None. I. Marcelino- Rodríguez: None. A. Corrales: None. G. Serra-Vidal: R. González Montelongo1, J. M. Lorenzo-Salazar1, None. D. Comas: None. C. Flores: None. A. Muñoz-Barrera1, L. A. Rubio-Rodríguez1, A. Díaz-de Usera1, A. Mendoza-Alvarez2, B. Guillen-Guio2, P18.81A I. Marcelino-Rodríguez2, A. Corrales2,3, G. Serra-Vidal4, Increasing the value of the Swedish 1000 whole-genome D. Comas4, C. Flores1,2,3 data resource 1Instituto Tecnológico y de Energías Renovables (ITER), A. Ameur, H. Che, I. Bunikis, L. Feuk, U. Gyllensten GenomicsDivision,GranadilladeAbona,Spain,2Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden Universidad de La Laguna, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 3CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud The SweGen data resource is a collection of 1000 human Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Experimental whole genomes (Illumina 30x coverage), which represents and Health Sciences, Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC- the genetic variation in the Swedish population. Since its UPF), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain ﬁrstreleasein2016,theSweGenvariantdatahasbecomea widely used resource with about 200 monthly visits to the Introduction:ThegeneticuniquenessofthecurrentCanary website both from Sweden and abroad (swefreq.nbis.se). Islands (Spain) inhabitants results from the historical DuringthecourseoftheprojectithasbecomeapparentthatAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1779 the SweGen data can serve many more purposes than just associatedwiththeexpressionlevelsofseveralbiomarkers. providing information about SNPs and small indel variants For regulatory regions, only cis-regulatory elements were in the Swedish population. We have therefore initiated a analysed, and for as many as 191 biomarkers we identiﬁed number of follow-up projects to increase the value of the atleastone regulatory elementthat was associated with the resource.Examplesofongoingactivitiesare:i)detectionof expression of the biomarker. complexstructuralvariation,ii)analysisofgeneticvariation Conclusions: We have shown that analysing the com- in the MHC region, iii) characterization of haplotypes of bined effect of rare and common variants in a gene-based pharmacogenetic utility, iv) detection of somatic genomic approach increases the power to detect genetic effects, aberrations,andv)utilizationofSweGendataforimproved comparedtoa GWA study.Many ofourassociated signals SNP array imputation. In addition, we have constructed de containmultiplerare,andevenpopulationspeciﬁcvariants, novo high-quality reference genomes for one male and one which highlights the importance of more sophisticated female SweGen individual, based on multiple long-read methodsforanalysingWGSdatainrelationtohumantraits. sequencing technologies (PacBio, Oxford Nanopore, 10X Funding: The research was funded by SSMF, VR and Genomics and BioNano). These two assemblies are among SciLifeLab, as well as the Kjell and Märta Beijers, the the most complete individual human genomes to date, and Göran Gustafssons, the Borgström/Hedström, the Åke surprisingly we detected over 10Mb of sequence in each Wiberg, and the Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation. individual that is missing from the current version of the N. Rafati: None. J. Höglund: None. M. Kierczak: humanreferencegenome(GRCh38).Basedonthismissing None. M. Rask-Andersen: None. W. Ek: None. D. sequence, we have constructed a modiﬁed version of the Ekman: None. T. Karlsson: None. Å. Johansson: None. human reference, tailored for the Swedish population, that signiﬁcantly improves the alignment and variant calling of the SweGen Illumina data. P19 A. Ameur: None. H. Che: None. I. Bunikis: None. L. Genetic counselling - Services - Education Feuk: None. U. Gyllensten: None. P19.02A P18.82B Genetic testing: panacea or Pandora’s box? Analysing the joint effect of rare and common variants Questionnaire survey among Poles on human traits, using whole-genome sequencing data and a gene-based approach, increases the power to M. A. Malarska, A. Mazerant, P. M. Pachniak, identify genetic effects E. M. Borkowska, M. Borowiec N. Rafati1, J. Höglund1, M. Kierczak1, M. Rask- Department of Clinical Genetics, Łódź, Poland Andersen1, W. Ek1, D. Ekman2, T. Karlsson1, Å. Johansson1 Aim: AnalyseofPolish people approachtogenetictesting. Inaddition,thedoctors'knowledgeonthesamesubjectwas 1Uppsala university, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Stockholm checked Methods: Data collection was carried out by the university, Stockholm, Sweden use of a comprehensive questionnaire which was available to respondents on the Internet as well as in paper format. Introduction:Despitethesuccessofgenome-wideassocia- 2210 people were examined. The average age was 29 tion (GWA) studies, much of the genetic contribution to (between 18 to 80 years old). Group of doctors counting complex diseases and phenotypes remains unexplained. 204 people answered the same set of questions with few Two major limitations in GWA studies are the lack of addition, the average age was 30 years old (between 27 to power to test the effect of rare alleles and the use of 57 years old). genotyped or imputed SNPs. Results:Manyofrespondents(37,7%)declaredagenetic Materials and Methods: Whole-genome sequencing disease among their close relatives (family, friends). They (WGS) data and measurements of over 400 disease-related mainly mentioned the Down Syndrome. Interestingly, biomarkers were produced in 1,021 individuals from a 47.4% of them admitted to encounter stigma in everyday cross-sectional Swedish cohort. We scored variants using life. 9,9% of respondents was consulted by clinical geneti- CADD or Eigen scores. We then developed a pipe-line for cist. What is interesting 10,5%, who haven’t seen the exploringthecombinedeffectsofcommonandraregenetic clinical geneticist, carried out a commercial genetic tests. variants on biomarker levels in a gene-wise manner. Most test were done in search of the genetic basis of the Results: For coding variants, we identiﬁed 158 inde- diseases (63,6%). 88.9% of the respondents met with the pendentsignals,ofwhich52wasintrans.Sixofthesewere termgeneticallydeterminedcancer.94.1%thinkthatbreast1780 cancer isincludedinthat group ofcancers,62.6% consider M. Cloutier: None. ovarian cancer, and interestingly 43.4% also ﬁnd a genetic basis for cervical cancer. Results for the same question in P19.05D the medical group showed that 99.5% of physicians con- EuroGEMS.org - the ESHG’s new educational sider breast cancer, 93.3% ovarian cancer and 26.8% cer- resources website for genetics professionals, students, vical cancer as partially hereditary cancers. schools and patients: international uptake and further Conclusions: We should focus on developing opportu- development nities to broaden the knowledge of both medical personnel and citizens. E. S. Tobias M.A. Malarska: None. A. Mazerant: None. P.M. Pachniak: None. E.M. Borkowska: None. M. Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, University of Borowiec: None. Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom P19.03B Introduction: Many highly-impressive, free, genetic/geno- Genetic counselling for the Inuit indigenous population mic educational online resources exist internationally but ofNunavut,Canada:anexerciseinculturalcompetency are often difﬁcult to locate. The author’s new, already- popular ESHG-supported website, ESHG Genetic Educa- M. Cloutier tional Materials and Sources (at www.EuroGEMS.org) provides a straightforward categorized guide with direct Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, links to numerous excellent free online educational Canada resources worldwide. These include professionally-created patient videos, sophisticated but entertaining animations The importance of providing culturally competent and and cutting-edge genomic databases. culturally appropriate genetic counselling is recognized by Methods:Followingdiscussionwithcolleagues,students the profession, as culture’s role is crucial in molding an andpatients,>70up-to-date,high-qualityonlineworldwide individual’sconceptualizationofhealthandillness.Thereis sources were selected and categorized with concise expla- a dearth of literature on the provision of genetics services nationsofeachsource'sfeatures.Includedaremultiplelinks including genetic counselling for indigenous populations to new, excellent but less well-known sites, plus ESHG globally.Althoughexploratorystudieshavebeenpublished pages and localized non-English-language initiatives. regarding the provision of genetics services for the Professional-level web-hosting permits unlimited simulta- indigenous populations of Australia, New Zealand, Philip- neous visits. pines and the United States, few have described genetics Results: EuroGEMS.org was enthusiastically endorsed services for the Canadian Indigenous populations (First by the ESHG Board (ESHG-Milan-2018), and linked from Nations,InuitandMétispeoples).Ottawa,Canadaservesat the ESHG-Education web-page. To date, EuroGEMS.org the “local” genetics service for residents of Bafﬁn Island, has received 3318 views from 81 countries. The most fre- Nunavut, which has an Inuit population of approximately quently visited sub-section index pages are those for: 15,000. We describe the Ottawa Bafﬁn Nunavut Services “Genetics Professionals”, then “Universities & Students”, (OBNS) program, as it relates to the provision of genetics “Patients/Families”, “Secondary Schools”, “Primary services for Inuit persons, including travel coordination, Schools” and “Ethical, Legal & Social Implications”. lodging, traditional diet, Inuktitut interpretation services, RadboudUniversity's "Science EducationHub" isthe most and medical records coordination. We present a reﬂective frequently visited linked resource. Students report that review of cases illustrating the genetic counselling chal- EuroGEMS.org is “wonderful for accessing genetics data- lenges, including building rapport, pedigree taking, patient bases and looking up relevant genetic conditions." isolation from their community, and cultural views of Conclusions:Anup-to-dateinformativeguidetomanyof decision-making.Wesharepersonalstoriesofthehumbling the best free worldwide educational resources has been journey as genetic counsellors providing genetics services createdfortheESHGandaccessedfrom81countriesinjust for Inuit persons from Nunavut and the lessons learned in 8 months. The website's careful maintenance and develop- culturalcompetency.Exploring theseissueshasneverbeen mentcontinues.Furthersuggestionsforlinksarewelcomed. more important, as Canada embarks on the Silent Genomes The author is grateful to Education Committee Chair, Prof Project, which aims to improve the access to genomic Han Brunner, for his welcome encouragement whilst technologies and research to Indigenous populations while creating this website. ensuring Indigenous-led governance over biological sam- E.S. Tobias: None. ples and health data.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1781 P19.06A Y. Goto1,2, N. Harada2, H. Moriya2, M. Shinoda1,2, Online education to the masses enables transformative M. Terao3,2, H. Atsumi2, K. Takahashi2, M. Okami2, changes in healthcare A. Kondo4,2, K. Takeshita2, S. Izumi1,2 A. C. Davies, F. Hooley, R. Bennett, A. Brass 1Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan, 2Dept. of Clinical The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Genetics,TokaiUniversity School ofMedicine, Kanagawa, Kingdom Japan, 3Dept. of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Tokai UniversitySchoolofMedicine,Kanagawa,Japan,4Dept.of Introduction: Genomics is revolutionising healthcare Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shikoku Medical Center for enabled by techniques such as whole genome sequencing, Children and Adults, Kagawa, Japan consequentiallythereisapressingneedtoimprovegenomic literacyanddataanalysisskillsinthehealthcareworkforce. Introduction: Our genetic counselling departments were In this study we demonstrate how development of the founded in 2007. Outpatient service speciﬁc to familial world’s ﬁrst free Massive Online Open Course (MOOC) in tumor started in 2013. In Japan, precision medicine will Clinical Bioinformatics has addressed these needs in increase from April 2019 with the background of national healthcare professionals and patients and the public policy. We consider that it is important to review the world-wide. patients and their needs to prepare future outpatients. Methodology: The MOOC is hosted by FutureLearn, Materials and Methods: We reviewed 100 cases of exploring the subject from its initial roots to clinical familial tumor from April 2009 to May 2018. Type of workingpractices,ethicsandtools.Thesocialconstructivist diseases, undergoing genetic test, results of the tests and approach embeds social discourse, enabling knowledge their courses were examined retrospectively. exchange between healthcare professionals, patients and Results: We had 95 female patients and 5 male patients carers. Social learning is encouraged using "follow", “like” as proband. The number of cases increased after familial and "bookmark" buttons to applaud speciﬁc comments. tumor service has been started. Type of diseases were her- Results:Withinsevencourseruns17,000learnersjoined editary breast ovary cancer (HBOC), Lynch syndrome, the course, the largest numbers from the UK, Egypt, India hereditary thyroid cancer and so on. 76 cases were sus- and USA. Pre-course surveys showed that of those who pected HBOC and 58/76 cases underwent genetic test. Of statedtheirprofessiononenrolment,31%,thelargestgroup, 58 cases, 56 cases had already developed cancer. The identiﬁedasworkinginhealthandsocialcare. TheMOOC resultsofthetestwerepositivefor12cases.Positivegenes was most popular with participants in the aged 18-35, were BRCA1 for 4 cases, BRCA2 for 4 cases and RET for educated to at least degree level. Post-course evaluation 4 cases. showed 78% of 145 learners liked or strongly liked the Conclusions: The genetic counselling for HBOC is the online discussions and enjoyed interacting with other lear- most required in our department. We need to expand col- ners,92%of80learnerssaidtheyagreedorstronglyagreed laborationsystemwithnotonlybreastcancerteambutalso thatthecoursehadincreasedtheirunderstandingofclinical gynecological cancer team. Also cooperation with ward bioinformatics. nurses and other medical staffs would be needed to offer Conclusions: This course has provided knowledge and substantial support for patients. skills in bioinformatics and improved genomic literacy at a Y.Goto:None.N.Harada:None.H.Moriya:None.M. global scale, facilitating discussion between clinicians and Shinoda: None. M. Terao: None. H. Atsumi: None. K. the public regarding important areas such as data sharing. Takahashi:None.M.Okami:None.A.Kondo:None.K. https://www.futurelearn.com/courses/bioinformatics Takeshita: None. S. Izumi: None. A.C. Davies: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as P19.08C grants already received); Modest; Molmart. F. Hooley: Exploring the experiences and support needs of non- None. R. Bennett: None. A. Brass: None. carrier fathers of children with fragile X syndrome P19.07B J. Luermans1, J. Fleming1, R. O’Shea2, M. Field3, Needs of the genetic counselling for familial cancer at a E. E. Palmer3,4, M. Lefﬂer3 university hospital 1University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Genetics of Learning Disability (GOLD) Service, Hunter Genetics,1782 Waratah, Australia, 4School of Women’s and Children’s Methods: Cognitive interviews explored interpretability Health, University of NSW, Sydney, Austria of GCOS-24 items and items highly valued by the target population. The Graded Response Model (GRM) was used ClinicalfeaturesofchildrenwithfragileXsyndrome(FXS) to examine item discrimination in an existing GCOS-24 include developmental delay or intellectual disability and dataset (n=395). Items with poor discriminative properties behavioral, emotional and speciﬁc learningchallenges. The were then excluded and items capturing a similar concept diagnosis of FXS in a child often reveals the premutation were not selected together. Finally, quantitative and quali- carrier status of their mother. The genetic counseling tative ﬁndings were combined to identify superior items. process may therefore focus on the child and mother, Rasch analysis was used to establish the optimal without signiﬁcant attention given to the information and response scale. supportneedsofthenon-carrierfather.Thisresearchsought Results: Ten cognitive interviews were conducted with to explore the experiences and support needs speciﬁc to individuals from families affected by genetic conditions, non-carrier fathers of children diagnosed with FXS. recruited through support groups. Qualitative analysis of Eleven interviews were conducted with non-carrier interview transcripts identiﬁed twelve GCOS-24 items fathers recruited through the Australian-based Genetics of highly valued by participants. GRM item characteristic Learning Disability (GOLD) Service and the Fragile X curves and item information curves were generated. Find- Association of Australia. Interviews lasted on average ings from both analyses were used to select ten items that 78 minutes (range 61 – 102 minutes). Interviews were werebothhighlyvaluedandperformedwell.Finally,items transcribed, deidentiﬁed, coded and analyzed by three were iteratively removed and permutated to establish opti- coders using thematic analysis with an inductive approach. mal ﬁt using the Rasch model. A six-item questionnaire Thematic saturation was reached. Four themes emerged: with a ﬁve-point Likert Scale was created (The Genomics 1) Making Life Easier through Understanding – Yesterday OutcomeScale(GOS)).CorrelationbetweenGCOS-24and and Today; 2) The Path to a New Normal – Today and GOS is good (r=.838, 99% conﬁdence), indicating that Tomorrow; 3) Information and Support – Paper, Scissors, GOS maintains the ability of GCOS-24 to capture Rock; and 4) What Men Want. empowerment,whilstprovidingalessburdensomescalefor Our study highlights some of the unmet support and respondents. information needs of non-carrier fathers of children with Conclusions:GOSwill beless burdensomethan GCOS- FXS. These include the need for practical and prognostic 24 for patients and could be used where genetic testing is information, guidance in supporting their families, and done outside the context of clinical genetics. ﬂexibleopportunitiesforaccessingpersonalcounselingand Unfunded study. support. Our ﬁndings will inform the provision of more P. Grant: None. M. Pampaka: None. K. Payne: None. tailored support and information, not only for fathers of A. Clarke: None. M. McAllister: None. childrenwithFXS,butforotherneurocognitiveconditions. J. Luermans: None. J. Fleming: None. R. O’Shea: P19.10A None. M. Field: None. E.E. Palmer: None. M. The challenges of genetic counselling in consanguineous Lefﬂer: None. communities in North Israel P19.09D O. Aboleil Zoubi1,2, S. Allon Shaliv1,2 Development of a short 6-item form of the Genetic Counselling Outcome Scale: The Genomics Outcome 1The Genetic Institute Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, Scale 2Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel P. Grant1, M. Pampaka2, K. Payne2, A. Clarke1, The Genetics Institute of Emek Medical Center serves a M. McAllister1 population living in northern Israel, with signiﬁcant representation of Israeli minorities, including Muslim and 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University Christian Arabs. These populations are devoted to old of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom traditions including consanguineous marriages, (presently 24.4%), leading to an increased risk of rare autosomal Introduction: The Genetic Counselling Outcome Scale recessive disorders. Most of this population lives in small (GCOS-24) is a 24-item patient-reported outcome measure towns and villages that were founded by small number of for evaluating genetic counselling and testing interventions. individuals. Therefore, the diagnosis of founder mutations TheaiminthisstudywastocreateashorterformofGCOS- allows effective genetic counselling and occasionally 24. genetic screening.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1783 However, there are genetic mechanisms that make the ethicalmodesofthoughtsuchaspersonalism,virtueethics, counselling more challenging such as co- inheritance of narrative ethics and care ethics which have been applied to more than one recessive condition in the same sib- ship. other medical ﬁelds or action, are herewith analyzed in the Eachofthesecoupleshas25%riskforanoffspringaffected context of genetic counseling, speciﬁcally in prenatal by one condition and additional 25% risk for the other diagnostics. Practical implications for counseling are condition. Seven couples had 2 autosomal recessive con- deduced from this analysis. ditions, diagnosed in different babies. For example, Con- Conclusion: An understanding of a wider range of genital thrombocytopenia/Muscular Dystrophy, Wolman/ bioethicalconceptsallowsforagreaterawarenessofethical Meckel syndromes. requisites for proper genetic counseling. Given that this Counseling these couples often done following the birth communication process frequently involves value-laden of affected children, and is complex particularly after the decisions on the part of patients and families, such an second event. It is associated with marked emotional understanding can build better counselor-counseled rela- struggleoftheparents,reducedself-conﬁdenceandasense tionships adequately facilitating well-informed, shared of control-loss, occasionally leading to mistrust of the decision-making processes. counselling process. Family planning becomes more chal- J.L. Castaneda: None. lenging, with pre-implantation genetic diagnosis become advantageous, a treatment associated with medical, techni- P19.12C calandpersonaldifﬁculties.Geneticcounsellingperformed Genetic Counsellors working with young people: byexperiencedandawareprofessionals,mightimprovethe overview of current needs and glimpse forward outcome. The new era of genomic technologies has dramatically M. M. Radu, A. S. Baban, R. Moldovan improved our diagnostic abilities, and hopefully will allow us to detect those couples before the birth of their affected Department of Psychology, Babeş-Bolyai University, Cluj- children. Napoca, Romania O. Aboleil Zoubi: None. S. Allon Shaliv: None. Introduction: Genetic counselling has been consistently P19.11B shown to increase understanding of genetic disorders and Genetic counseling from the perspective of modern the implications of genetic testing, manage emotional ethical concepts: practical implications distress and stigma, promote empowerment and patient autonomy in choosing screening or treatment options. The J. L. Castaneda overwhelming evidence is primarily based on adult data. Geneticcounsellingofyoungpeopleislessreportedonand Institute of Mother and Child, Department of Medical brings with it additional challenges. To this date we know Genetics, Warsaw, Poland little about genetic counsellors’ needs, knowledge and conﬁdence when working with children and adolescents. Introduction: Genetic counseling can be considered as the Method:Anonlinesurveyassessinggeneticcounsellors’ externalimage of Clinical Genetics. The way in which it is knowledge and skills used in the counselling process, self- delivered is the basis for patients’ and the health care efﬁcacy in working with children and adolescents and system’s evaluation of the efﬁciency of the ﬁeld as a access to training speciﬁcally for working with age group, medical specialty. It is thus of utmost importance that was sent to European and national professional organiza- genetic counseling professionals obtain an adequate pre- tions representing 20 countries. paration for its practice, in accordance with the complex Results: At the time of the abstract submission data is character of genetic diseases. still being gathered. A preliminary analysis shows that Stern (Measuring Medical Professionalism, 2006) genetic counsellors’ self-efﬁcacy in conducting genetic includesethicalandlegalunderstandingasafoundationfor counselling sessions with young people is rather modest; medicalprofessionalism.Theethicsofgeneticcounselingis there is overwhelming consensus on the need for more often reduced to the implementation of the requisite of theoretical and practical training. Speciﬁcknowledge about nondirectiveness and of the elements of principialism: child development and communication strategies were respect for autonomy, beneﬁcence, non-maleﬁcence and among the most frequent needs mentioned by genetic justice. counsellors. Aim and Methodology: This study aims to apply other Conclusions: Having a clearer insight into genetic bioethical concepts to the practice of genetic counseling. counsellors’ needs when working with this age group can Principles derived from various modern philosophical and be particularly informative for training programmes.1784 Focusing on developing speciﬁc skills and knowledge, P19.14A drawing on the knowledge of pediatrics, developmental Utilisation of genetic counselling services in Germany psychology and counseling, and empowering genetic before and after the enactment of the German counsellors to acknowledge their skills when working with Gendiagnostikgesetz (GenDG) – Results of the GenBIn children and adolescents are key aspects in training and study supervision. M.M. Radu: None. A.S. Baban: None. R. Nippert1, J. T. Epplen2, R. Glaubitz3, T. Grimm4, Moldovan: None. R. P. Nippert5, J. Schmidtke6, K. Zerres7, H. Tönnies8 P19.13D 1Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, Germany, 2Ruhr InsightintotheimpactofgeneticcounsellingonEnglish Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 3amedes group, and Urdu speaking Pakistani families affected with an Hannover, Germany, 4Biozentrum Universität Würzburg, autosomal recessive disorder living in the UK North Würzburg, Germany, 5Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, West Münster, Germany, 6Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 7Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische V. A. Leach1,2, N. Khan2 Hochschule, Aachen, Germany, 8Robert Koch – Institut, Berlin, Germany 1Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of BiologicalSciences,UniversityofManchester,Manchester, Introduction: The GenDG stipulates the requirements of United Kingdom, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic good practice in regard to safety, patient rights to know, Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS patient rights to decide and requirements for genetic Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom counselling. A guideline on the requirements for contents and qualiﬁcation in genetic counselling within the scope of Introduction: Cousin marriages are common in the UK each medical specialty came into force in 2011. South Asian population and consanguineous couples are at Methods: Development of a database (GenBIn) that increasedriskofhavingachildwithanautosomalrecessive provides both, baseline data on utilisation of genetic disorder. This study explored views around consanguinity counselling services prior to the GenDG (status quo ante) and the utilisation of genetic information following genetic and data on utilisation after the enactment. counsellingofbothEnglishandUrduspeakingSouthAsian Results: 26 genetic counselling centres volunteered to women who had children with an autosomal recessive collect data on in person counselling cases in 2011, 34 condition. centres provided data for counselling cases seen in 2016/ Methods: Participants were ascertained through purpo- 2017. In total the GenBIn database contains data on 5256 sivesampling.Face-to-facesemi-structuredinterviewswere cases. Compared to 2011 the relative share of referrals by conducted with English and Urdu speaking genetic coun- obstetricians&gynecologists has decreased (83%/63%), sellors. Transcripts were analysed using thematic analysis. whilst referrals by other specialists (15%/27%) and self- Results: Twelve participants took part in interviews; 6 referrals (2%/10%) have increased in private practice. Englishspeakingand6Urduspeaking.Most(92%)werein Referrals for prenatal counselling have decreased, coun- consanguineous marriages. Similar themes included; effect selling for familial cancer and other familial disorders has ofgeneticcounsellingonreproductivedecisionmakingand increased. Workload and mean waiting time per case have the perception of a cultural shift in the practice of cousin increased. marriage.Differencesinthemesincluded;geneticsbeingan Conclusions: The data document a rising demand for abstract concept among Urdu speaking participants and a genetic counselling services and a shift in indications for greater willingness to share genetic information among referral. Arguably, the observed changes are due to a mul- English speaking participants. tiplicity of causes and are not attributable solely to the Conclusion:Theﬁndingsofthisstudyprovideavaluable GenDG. Advances in genetic testing technology, growing insight into aninsufﬁciently researchedminoritygroup and awareness among healthcare providers and among patients has implications for how services are delivered and devel- (increased self-referrals) are likely to contribute together to opedforthesefamilies.Thisstudyconﬁrmsthatfamiliesdo higher patient volumes, to increased workload and to engage and utilise genetic services. However, it highlights capacity constraints for genetic counselling services. Fun- theessentialneedforgreaterawarenesstowardsthecultural ded by German Federal Ministry of Health ZMVi1-2515- sensitivities and attitudes towards genetics for service FSB-7 development among this ethnic population. V.A. Leach: None. N. Khan: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1785 M. Nippert: None. J.T. Epplen: None. R. Glaubitz: P19.16C None. T. Grimm: None. R.P. Nippert: None. J. Is follow-up our future? A focus on changing roles in Schmidtke: None. K. Zerres: None. H. genetic counselling Tönnies: None. S. M. A. Goodman1, M. Bradford2 P19.15B 1University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom, Development of a genetics education program: 2Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, equipping medical professionals for the genomics era United Kingdom B. Cham1, T. Ting1, Y. M. Bylstra2, A. Lai1, S. M. D. Genomic technology and the expansion of mainstreaming Dominguez2, S. Jamuar1 mean that increasingly complex test results are being delivered in a wide range of medical settings. Genetic 1KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Singapore, counsellor(GC)involvementwillbecriticaltosuccessfully Singapore, 2SingHealth Duke-NUS Institute of Precision navigatethissituation,ensuringthatpatientsunderstandand Medicine (PRISM), Singapore, Singapore beneﬁtfullyfromtheirtests.GCexpertisewillbeimportant insupportingfamilies,especiallyinthefaceofuncertainor Advances in molecular diagnostic technologies and greater evolving results. integration of genetic testing into the diagnostic process Cross-sectional survey data (Family Web study n=286) have required the modern healthcare provider to become supportstheimportanceofatrustedexpertwhocanbalance literate in genomics. Many physicians report lack of these different roles. Data indicate that, in a population of knowledge and conﬁdence as barriers to offering appro- patients at high risk of bowel cancer, the diagnosis had a priate genetic counselling. In response to this, ahalf-day profound effect on patients and their families: participants interactive workshop was developed to provide existing wantedmoresupport,ideallyfromacareco-ordinator;plus healthcare professionals with current knowledge in ﬁeld of information on a range of topics and a positive message to genetics. give their relatives. Key issues identiﬁed included: gene- The educational program was tailored to equip providers speciﬁc risks, accessing adequate cancer surveillance, and with an awareness of the beneﬁts, limitations and risks of advice on how to reduce cancer risk through lifestyle. availablegenetictesting.Coursecomponentsincludedbasic Pressures to meet clinical targets, combined with genetic concepts, current testing methodologies, interpreta- increasingly robust GC training, have resulted in a greater tionofresultsandlocallegalframeworksregulatinggenetic prevalence of GC-led clinics for diagnostic and predictive testing. Through case studies, providers also gained an testing. It seems likely that this will be matched by an understanding of medical, social, ethical and legal issues increased emphasis on follow-up. GCs possess the neces- surrounding genetic testing. sary range of skills to provide ongoing liaison services, Since 2018, the workshop has been run twice, with 2 assistingwiththetwo-waycommunicationthatisnecessary more runs planned in 2019. Participants include more than for managing uncertain results over time. Successful 90healthcareprovidersfromvarioushealthcareprofessions. genomic services depend on patients successfully assim- A pre- and post-course evaluation was conducted to assess ilatinginformation;GCsmaybeuniquelyplacedtosupport knowledge improvement and self-reported conﬁdence in this across a range of settings. ordering and interpreting genetic test results. There was an Partially funded by charity: Bowel Cancer West. improvementofapre-coursescoreof6topost-coursescore S.M.A. Goodman: None. M. Bradford: None. of 9 out of 12 questions. However, participants generally did not report changes in their level of conﬁdence in P19.17D ordering or interpreting genetic test results. The genetics Teaching Clinicians Practical Genomic Medicine – Our education program is effective in improving the level of 7 Year Evaluated Experience genetic knowledge amongst healthcare providers. It will be usefulinfuturetoexplorethefactorsthatincreaseprovider R. Michaelson-Cohen1,2, L. Salzer- Sheelo3, L. Basel- conﬁdence in ordering and interpreting test results so as to Salmon3,4, I. Maya3 empower healthcare providers in this genomics era. B.Cham:None.T.Ting:None.Y.M.Bylstra:None.A. 1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Lai: None. S.M.D. Dominguez: None. S. Jamuar: None. Jerusalem,Israel,2HebrewUniversityof,Jerusalem,Israel, 3Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Petach1786 Tikva, Israel, 4Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv Introduction: Android & iPhone (iOS) educational smart- University, Tel Aviv, Israel phoneappsthatexplain(andtestknowledgeof)commonly used genomics and bioinformatics terms and acronyms, Introduction: With introduction of various genomic weredevelopedbytheauthors&recentlygreatlyexpanded. technologies into the clinic, physicians must be proﬁcient Methods: Further development has included iOS12- ingenomics.Trainingofphysiciansingeneticsisofferedin compatibility and doubling the number of terms and con- programs across Europe and USA, but there is need for cepts explained. The new total of 42 includes: databases standardized, effective program-models. We sought to (e.g. gnomAD, ExAC & COSMIC), genome projects, evaluate effectiveness of our genomic-education-model. constraint metrics (e.g. pLI & Z scores), polygenic risk Methods: Our program served physicians from various scores, third-generation sequencing & biological concepts levels of training and disciplines. We used 11 different e.g. topologically associating domains & NMD. These program-formats (8-44hrs, 10-35participants), most fre- Clinical Genomics apps are being made available via the quently our “extended-format”- week-long course combin- Apple and Android app stores (search: “Clinical Geno- ing lectures, educational-movies, interactive tests, and mics”). They provide immediate clear explanations (often practical exercises. Lecturers were dedicated team of 15 difﬁculttoﬁndelsewhere)ofgenomics-relatedterminology geneticists. Pretest exams assessed baseline knowledge; (such as “MNPs”, “BED”, “PED”, “FASTQ”, “BAM”, posttest exams after program evaluated improvement. Pre- “CRAM”, “GVCF”, “BED ﬁles”, “GATK” and “BWA”). andposttestscoresbetweendifferentgroupswerecompared Results:Highlypositivefeedbackhasbeenreceivedfrom using t-tests (SAS-institute version9.4). physicians, genetic counsellors, laboratory scientists and Results: Over 7 years, 774 clinicians attended 35 pro- students. The apps are used by professionals, who increas- grams (924 hours total) over 7 years, 334 participants ingly receive complex genetic laboratory reports requiring completed“extended-format”.Knowledgeimprovedgreatly interpretation for patient beneﬁt. The apps have been for all participants (mean improvement 15.05 points, approved by the ESHG, the Scottish Genetics Education P<0.001). Residents started with better knowledge than Network (ScotGEN) and by DSDnet. They have been specialists (pretest score 66.3±17.3 vs. 58.7±16.6, respec- downloaded thousands of times, across approximately 60 tively, p=0.002). Both groups improved knowledge sig- countries and were shortlisted for a national higher educa- niﬁcantly,bysimilarmagnitude,with specialists “catching- tion innovation award. up”(post-test79.1±17.2vs.75.7±15.9,NS).Thetrendwas Conclusions: Although creating these multi-platform same when comparing fellows and subspecialists (pre-test apps was complex and time-consuming, they have thank- 70±18vs.59.4±16.4,p=0.007,post-test78.6±16.4vs.73.2 fully been found very useful by many individuals. The ±17.7, NS). Specialists who completed training within last authors would welcome feedback and suggestions for 10yearshadsigniﬁcantlyhigherscoresthanthosepracticing additional terms/concepts to include. Author APT, a medi- >10years(beforeandafterprogram).Despitedifferences in cal student, is grateful to have been a recipient of a Young scores, degree of improvement was equivalent for physi- Enterprise Scotland Innovation Award 2018. cians from various disciplines. A.P. Tobias: None. E.S. Tobias: None. Discussion: Our program is effective in improving genomic knowledge of clinicians, regardless of practice P19.19B years and disciplines. It could serve as a model for TheInﬂuenceofNaturalSciencesontheDevelopmentof improving genetic skills of medical-professionals. Human Genetics as a Medical Field in the Federal R. Michaelson-Cohen: None. L. Salzer- Sheelo: None. Republic of Germany L. Basel-Salmon: None. I. Maya: None. H. I. Petermann1, T. Liehr2 P19.18A Greatlyexpandednew2019versionsoffreeeducational 1Institute for Ethics, History and Theory of Medicine, Clinical Genomics apps for smartphones & tablets: Muenster, Germany, 2University Clinic Jena, Institute of international uptake and further development Humane Genetics, Jena, Germany A. P. Tobias1, E. S. Tobias2 Introduction: In 1953, biologist JD Watson and physicist FHC Crick published the molecular structure of DNA. 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, Together with physicist MHF Wilkins they were awarded 2University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom theNobelPrizeinMedicineorPhysiologyin1962.Natural scientists added more fundamental principles to human genetics in the following decades.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1787 Materials and Methods: Basis are the results of the effect. We calculated mutational-age, characterized tumour DFG-Project of H.Petermann. Based on those data, we are spectrum and analysed management output in the extended conducting interviews with human geneticists, natural sci- pedigree (n=114 individuals). entists andphysicians.The focusisontheroleofscientists Materials and Methods: RNA-based analysis was per- of various ﬁelds (medicine, natural sciences, anthropology) formed to prove variant deleteriousness. CDH1 c.1901C>T in establishing human genetics at universities in the FRG. variant carriers and non-carriers were used to estimate the Results: 1. In the 1950s physicians and philosophical founder-effect age by decay of haplotype sharing methods. anthropologists dominated the institutes that did mainly Carriers’clinical data were collected asthey werefollowed paternitytests.Thosewerepaidbythecourtsthatinstructed in high-risk consultations. them. 2. In 1960 the Scientiﬁc Council of FRG (Wis- Results: Germline RNA from c.1901C>T carriers senschaftsrat) forced the establishment of Human Genetics demonstratedproductionofasingletruncatedtranscript.All Institutes as a ﬁeld of medicine. 3. Since the beginning of carrierssharedthesameancestralhaplotypeina6.8Mb/5.1 the 1970s National Health Insurances paid for genetic cM region. The time to the most recent common ancestor counselingbyphysicians,accordingtotheGermanScaleof was estimated to489.64 [CI: 445-10,900] years. Following Fees for Doctors (GOÄ). 4. Therefore, two departments death of 5 DGC probands (3F:2M), aged 18-35, we iden- were established at Human Genetics Institutes: for diag- tiﬁed 48(24F:24M) additional carriers. In female-carriers, 9 nostics by natural scientists and for genetic counseling by underwentRRG,7bothRRGandRRM,and8endoscopic/ physicians. 5. Lectures were given by physicians and nat- MRIsurveillance.Inmale-carriers,10underwentRRGand ural scientists. 14 endoscopic surveillance. The application of a strict sur- Conclusions:Theroleofphysiciansandnaturalscientists veillance/prophylaxis protocol, following positive genetic- at Human Genetics Institutes is determined by two facts: testing, allowed DGC (n=4) and LBC (n=2) early- historical reasons and reimbursement of expenses. There- detection and sub-clinical disease detection in RRG and/or fore, head of Human Genetics Institute at medical faculties RRM surgical specimens (DGC=19, LBC=4). is always a specialized physician. For changes, there must Conclusion: We identiﬁed the ﬁrst Portuguese CDH1- be a revolution of the system. related founder-effect with ~500 years. Reaching out to 48 H.I. Petermann: None. T. Liehr: None. carriers from 7 families allowed to adopt appropriate risk- reducing surgeries and/or surveillance, so far without fur- P19.20C ther cancer-related deaths. *Equal contribution The ﬁrst CDH1 founder mutation in Portugal: Risk L. Garrido*: None. R. Leal*: None. A. Aguiar: None. assessment and clinical management S. Seixas: None. L. Ferro: None. L. Vilarinho: None. I. Gullo: None. V. Devezas: None. R. Oliveira: None. S. L.Garrido*1,R.Leal*2,A.Aguiar2,S.Seixas2,L.Ferro1, Fernandes: None. S. Costa: None. A. Magalhães: None. L. Vilarinho1, I. Gullo1,2,3, V. Devezas1,3, R. Oliveira1,3, M.Baptista:None.F.Carneiro:None.S.Castedo:None. S. Fernandes3,2, S. Costa1,3, A. Magalhães1, C. Oliveira: None. M. Baptista1,3, F. Carneiro1,2,3, S. Castedo1,2,3, C. Oliveira2,3 P19.21D Attitudes of Genetic Counsellors towards counselling 1Centro Hospitalar Universitário São João (CHUSJ), young adults through predictive testing for Porto, Portugal, 2Ipatimup/i3S, Institute of Molecular Huntington’s Disease (HD) Pathology and Immunology at the University of Porto (Ipatimup), Porto, Portugal & Instituto de Investigação e U. Savania1, S. Lesley2 Inovação em Saúde (i3S), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto 1University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, (FMUP), Porto, Portugal 2Clinical genetics, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow, United Kingdom Introduction: Germline CDH1 mutations cause hereditary diffusegastriccancer(HDGC),characterizedbyearly-onset Majority of individuals who seek a predictive test for multigenerationaldiffuse-gastric-cancer(DGC)andlobular- Huntington’sdisease(HD),havebeenprimarilyfoundtobe breast-cancer (LBC). Risk-reduction-gastrectomy (RRG) youngadults(YA)(18-30yearsold).Withnocurrentdirect and –mastectomy (RRM) may be life-saving if performed medical beneﬁt to testing, as well as the uncertainty in the in asymptomatic carriers. In Northern Portugal, we severity/ageatwhichsymptomsmayappear,theemotional, identiﬁed 7 HDGC-unrelated families sharing the ethical and other psychological consequences associated c.1901C>T variant, raising the hypothesis of a founder- with the test have been found to be increased. The1788 importance of genetic counselling and support for at-risk (n=379) and to members of the general population via a individualsremainscrucialtoenableabetterunderstanding commercial panel (n=1000). on the impact predictive testing can have on one’s life. Results: Attitudes of the patient and population samples However, YA have previously reported lack of emotional generallycorresponded.Amajorityofparticipantsbelieved supportandacommunicationbarrierduringtheseconsulta- that initially only ﬁrst-degree relatives should be informed, tions.Asthereislimitedresearchconductedontheexplicit following the principles of cascade screening. Most parti- experiences of genetic counsellors with predictive testing cipants also thought that patients and healthcare profes- for HD, it is difﬁcult to establish why this gap in support sionals (HCPs) should be involved in informing relatives, and communication exists. The aim of this study was to and a large proportion believed that HCPs should contact gain a better understanding of experiences of GCs whilst relatives directly when patients are unwilling to inform, for counselling at-risk young adults for predictive testing for untreatable and treatable conditions. Participants from the HD, as well as explore the HD service provision in patient sample were of the opinion that HCPs should Scotland. Nine genetic counsellors from three regional actively offer support. centresin Scotland (Glasgow,Aberdeen andDundee) were Discussion: Our ﬁndings show that both patients and interviewed using a semi-structured interview guide. HCPs should be involved in informing relatives at risk of Thematic analysis identiﬁed three key themes: challenges autosomal dominant diseases and suggest that relatives’ faced with young adults and Huntington’s disease, aspects ‘right to know’ was considered a dominant issue by the of the pre-symptomatic predictive testing protocol and the majority of participants. Further research is needed on how relationships with other health care professionals. Being to more actively inform at-risk relatives. made aware about these experiences can highlight gaps in L.M. Van den Heuvel: None. D. Stemkens: None. W. trainingandsupportforgeneticcounsellorsaswellasother Van Zelst-Stams: None. F. Willeboordse: None. I. healthcare professionals. Christiaans: None. C. Oosterwijk: None. U. Savania: None. S. Lesley: None. P19.23B P19.22A Experiences with transition of gene panel DNA- How to inform relatives at risk? Attitudes of 1.379 diagnostics from clinical geneticists to treating patients, relatives and members of the general physicians in breast cancer patients population M. L. Haadsma1, B. A. H. Caanen2, K. J. A. F. Van L. M. Van den Heuvel1, D. Stemkens2, W. Van Zelst- Kaam2, A. R. Mensenkamp1, R. J. Blok2, E. M. Leter2, Stams3,F.Willeboordse4,I.Christiaans1,5,C.Oosterwijk2 M. Van Geel2, W. A. G. Van Zelst-Stams1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, N. Hoogerbrugge1 1Amsterdam UMC,Amsterdam,Netherlands,2VSOPDutch Genetic Alliance, Soest, Netherlands, 3Radboud University 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Knowledge Netherlands, 2Maastricht University Medical Center, Institute of Medical Specialists, Utrecht, Netherlands, Maastricht, Netherlands 5University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands Introduction: In many European countries requesting DNA-diagnostics for hereditary breast cancer has tradition- Introduction: The uptake of predictive DNA testing in ally been the ﬁeld of clinical geneticists. Since test results familieswitha hereditary diseaseis less than 50%. Current can now be available within 2-3 weeks, these are practiceoftenreliesontheprobandtoinformrelativesabout increasingly considered for determining treatment options the possibility of predictive DNA testing, but not all in breast cancer patients. Treating physicians therefore relatives are informed adequately. To enable informed increasingly refer eligible, recently diagnosed breast cancer decision-making concerning predictive DNA testing, the patients for rapid DNA-testing to the clinical geneticist. To approach used to inform relatives needs to be optimized. facilitate timely test results, we aimed to shift counseling This study investigated preferences of patients, relatives, and requests for rapid DNA-diagnostics for these patients andthegeneralpopulationonhowtoinformrelativesatrisk from clinical geneticists to treating physicians and evaluate of autosomal dominant diseases. this transition towards so-called ‘mainstreaming’. Methods: Online surveys were sent to people with an Methods:Theprojectwasinitiatedbythedepartmentsof autosomal dominant neuro, onco or cardiogenetic disease Clinical Genetics from Maastricht University Medical and to their family members via patient organisations CenterandRadboudUniversityMedicalCenter,Nijmegen, TheNetherlands.Regionalhospitalswereincluded one-by-Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1789 one from July 2018 onwards. Treating physicians were weretranscribedverbatimandanalysedusingInterpretative asked for their needs and barriers to participate. DNA- Phenomenological Analysis (IPA). diagnostics consisted of gene panel analysis for BRCA1, Results: Three superordinate themes emerged from the BRCA2, PALB2, CHEK2 and ATM. study:validationofadiagnosis,responsetounexpectedtest Results: In the start-up phase, treating physicians results &acceptance patterns and thirdly, impact of results. requested hands-on information, for which the website Conclusion: This study identiﬁed that all the parents www.DNAﬁrst.nl was developed. Barriers included time interviewed valued the genetic diagnosis provided by investmentduringconsultationandperceivedincompetence microarray testing. Acceptance patterns of results differed of providing breast screening advice for family members. based on personal family differences. However there still Therefore, clinical geneticists joined multidisciplinary existed some uncertainty regarding their child’s future. meetings. Up to February 2019, nine hospitals were inclu- Interventions to help parents adapt must also include ded, 65 requests for DNA-diagnostics made and three impartinginformationaboutwhatisknownandwhatisyet pathogenicmutationsfound(4.6%)forwhichpatientswere to be known about these rare and variable conditions. Par- referred to a clinical geneticist. Structured evaluation of ents may beneﬁt from follow up care in order to keep quality of care and experiences of doctors and patients will abreast of latest developments. follow shortly. S. Devaiah: None. S. Douzgou: None. M. Conclusion: Transition of rapid gene panel diagnostics Bottomley: None. fromclinicalgeneticiststophysicianstreatingbreastcancer patients appears to be feasible. P19.25D M.L.Haadsma:None.B.A.H.Caanen:None.K.J.A.F. Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (Morquio syndrome) Van Kaam: None. A.R. Mensenkamp: None. R.J. Blok: A rare case report None. E.M. Leter: None. M. Van Geel: None. W.A.G. Van Zelst-Stams: None. M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. N. M. Mahdavi Amiri1, A. Khoshaeen2 Hoogerbrugge: None. 1Thalassemia Research Center,, Sari, Iran, Islamic P19.24C Republic of, 2Welfare Counseling Center, Sari, Iran, Parental perceptions to recurrent chromosomal Islamic Republic of microarray ﬁndings and their implications Motivation: One of the rare inherited diseases is the S. Devaiah1, S. Douzgou2, M. Bottomley3 mucopolysaccharidoses disorders (MPS) associated with accumulation of glycosaminoglycan in several organs, 1Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford, United leading to abnormalities in musculoskeletal, respiratory, Kingdom, 2Manchester Centre For Genomic Medicine, cardiac, neurological, ophthalmological, otolaryngological, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Manchester Centre for and gastrointestinal. Nowadays, an increasing number of Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom patientswithMPSarereaching adulthood andareinvolved infamilyplanningduetoimprovementsindiagnosis,multi- Introduction: Following the American College of Medical disciplinarycare,andtherapiessuchasenzymereplacement Genetics (ACMG) guidelines in 2010, chromosome micro- therapyandhematopoieticstemcelltransplantation.Knowl- array analysis (CMA) has become the baseline genetic test edge on skeletal deformity in MPS remains relatively performed in individuals with neurological and cognitive uncommonandincludesafewcasereports.Toassessmore, impairment which may often occur in association with we present a case report on musculoskeletal deformity in multiple congenital anomalies. However, there is scarce one subject with MPS. information regarding the families’ comprehension of Case: This case revealed that subject with MPS has microarray results indicative of recurrent chromosomal generalizedosteoporosis,DegenerativeJointDisease(DJD) micro-deletion/ duplication ﬁndings. This is especially true of both hips, general skeletal deformity alongside normal in cases where microarray testing identiﬁes parents to be mental status. He is 26 years old and the parents were carriers of similar chromosomal alterations as their child relatives (1st cousin). He had one healthy younger sibling. and where parents may/may not have some clinical On physical examination, disproportionate short stature, manifestations of their own. skeletal dysplasia, osteoporosis, prognathism, negative Method: This is a qualitative exploratory study, where ulnar variance, angle blunting and ulnar styloid were semi structured interviews were conducted with four detected.Intelligenceisnormalandthereisnodirectcentral mothers of children identiﬁed to have recurrent chromoso- nervoussystem(CNS)involvement.Inthepresentresearch mal micro-deletion/duplication syndromes. The interviews work,C.181C>T(p.Arg61Trp)variantofGALNSgenewas1790 found through whole exome sequencing and the mutation A. Esteve Garcia: None. was conﬁrmed using Sanger sequencing method, which is associated with MPS4A phenotype. P19.27B Conclusions: Pathogenic variant in the GALNS gene Next Generation Sequencing in health care and clinical associated with hereditary Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA, research: attuning all steps (MPS4A, Morquio syndrome A) which encodes N- acetylgalactosamin-sulfate sulfatase, may be useful as a T. Rigter1, J. A. M. Beliën2, G. M. W. R. de Wert3, biomarker to early diagnosis and treatment. C. Ploem4, E. M. Bunnik5, A. L. Bredenoord6, M. Mahdavi Amiri: None. A. Khoshaeen: None. M. C. Cornel1 P19.26A 1Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Clinical MultipleEndocrineNeoplasiatype1(MEN1)associated Genetics, section Community Genetics, Amsterdam, moderate breast cancer risk: Women’s attitudes Netherlands, 2Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit towards the introduction of additional breast screening Amsterdam, Pathology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University, A. Esteve Garcia Department of Health, Ethics and Society, Maastricht, Netherlands,4AmsterdamUMC,AcademicMedicalCenter, West of Scotland Regional Clinical Genetics Service - Department of Public Health, Amsterdam, Netherlands, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom 5Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, DepartmentofMedicalEthicsandPhilosophyofMedicine, BackgroundMultipleEndocrineNeoplasiatype1(MEN1) Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6University Medical Center is a rare inherited condition characterised by a lifetime risk Utrecht,JuliusCenter,DepartmentofMedicalHumanities, of developing numerous tumours at different sites of the Utrecht, Netherlands body. The main clinical manifestations include tumours of the parathyroid glands, pancreas and anterior pituitary ResponsibleimplementationofNGSinhealthcareinvolves gland. Recent research suggested that female patients with different disciplines which need to communicate and MEN1 might also be at an increased risk of early onset cooperate. For instance, while clinicians ask informed breast cancer. Therefore, there is a potential need to consent forNGS,lab-techniciansperformingDNAsequen- introduce early breast screening into the surveillance cing and analysis do not always know what exactly was programme of this group of patients. The purpose of this consented to. Contrariwise, those who are developing study was to explore attitudes towards the introduction of consent forms and/or performing consent conversations additionalbreastscreeningamongwomenwithMEN1who with the patient, require information from all other parties were mainly unaware of this risk and already undergoing involved in later steps of the NGS process. intensive screening investigations. Toelucidatethekeystepsinthecommunicationbetween Methods: Seven women with molecular diagnoses of the different parties involved in NGS in health care and MEN1 were recruited through Clinical Genetics at the clinical research, an expert meeting was organized by the Queen Elizabeth University Hospital (Glasgow). Semi- National Consortium of Ethical, Legal and Social Implica- structuredqualitativeinterviewswereconducted.Interviews tions of Personalised Medicine (ELSI-PM) in the were transcribed verbatim and analysed using thematic Netherlands. analysis. Ideally, it should be clear to all parties what exactly is Results: Three main themes underpinning the attitudes consented to.Transparency isrequiredabout e.g. how long about additional breast screening emerged: positivity, con- the samples and the data can/should be stored, what cern and information needs. All participants were positive (unsolicited) results should be communicated to the physi- about the introduction of additional breast screening. cian and/or patient, possibility of data-sharing between However, a fear of cancer, risk misperceptions and lack of physiciansand/orresearchers,thetypesofresearchthatcan information were identiﬁed as major concerns affecting be conducted, and conditions for data de-identiﬁcation. their willingness to be screened. Furthermore, the content of the informed consent forms Conclusions: The positive attitude of women with and conversations should be aligned with the requirements MEN1 supports the feasibility of introducing additional for effective and responsible execution of each of the next breastscreeningintothesurveillanceprogramofthisgroup steps in the NGS process. of patients. Emphasis should be placed on the risk com- This requires not only clear deﬁnitions of roles and municationprocessinorder tofacilitate informed decisions responsibilities of the different parties involved, but also alongside maintaining the wellbeing of these patients.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1791 agreementon,andfacilitationof,thesharingofinformation A. Devereau: None. A. Davies: None. M. Cornell: across disciplines, including the content of the consent. None. F. Hooley: None. P. Trimbel: None. H. Hulme: Funding: ELSI-PM is funded by ZonMw (Netherlands None. I. Eleftheriou: None. A. Brass: None. OrganisationforHealthResearch&Development;grantno. 846003102) P19.29D T. Rigter: None. J.A.M. Beliën: None. G.M.W.R. de Pre-genetic counseling telephone interviews (PTI) and Wert: None. C. Ploem: None. E.M. Bunnik: None. A.L. routing: an efﬁcient procedure for an accessible, Bredenoord: None. M.C. Cornel: None. appropriate, accelerated and affordable genomic medicine P19.28C Developing clinical bioinformatics online learning using M. Branchaud1, N. Parodi1, G. Collet1, C. Gasnier2, agile and reusable principles Z. Neviere2, J. Thery1, I. Tennevet1, E. Lacaze3, P. Berthet2, T. Frebourg1 A. Devereau, A. Davies, M. Cornell, F. Hooley, P. Trimbel, H. Hulme, I. Eleftheriou, A. Brass 1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, NormandyCentreforGenomicandPersonalizedMedicine, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Rouen, France, 2Department of Genetics, Comprehensive Kingdom Cancer Centre François Baclesse, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Caen, France, Introduction: We present an online learning course in 3Department of Genetics, Le Havre Hospital, Normandy clinical bioinformatics developed using an agile approach Centre for Genomic andPersonalized Medicine, LeHavre, and reusability of components. The University of Manche- France ster delivers face-to-face post-graduate taught courses to trainee Clinical Bioinformaticians in the UK National We previously described a new procedure, based on pre- Health Service. A recent MOOC (Massive Open Online genetic counseling telephone interviews (PTI) followed by Course) introducing this subject area, and market research routingofpatients,inordertoaddressthechallengesofthe has demonstrated the wider demand for skills and knowl- exponential demand for genetic counseling, especially for edge development in this ﬁeld. patientssuspectedtopresentwithhereditarybreastorovary Materials and Methods: We used agile processes for cancers (HBOC). We provide here an update of the course development including user storyboarding, priori- procedure extended to a total of 4272 patients suspected tised development sprints and iterative development. We of HBOC, hereditary colorectal or renal cancers. After the took a reusable approach to development of teaching PTI scheduled within 14 days and performed by genetic materials to make them useable in other contexts. counselors, a pre-genetic counseling ﬁle (including tumour Results:UsingLaurillard’sconversationalframeworkthe data and status of treatment and number of affected and course was divided into sections and discussion activities unaffectedﬁrst-andsecond-degreerelatives),isestablished. designed. Each section was further divided into learning The PTI is then submitted within 7 days to the routing objects which were developed iteratively by subject matter performed by a cancer geneticist with 3 possible conclu- expertsusingarangeofteachingapproaches.Teammeeting sions:(i)priorityface-to-facegeneticcounseling(FTFGC), were used to prioritise each development sprint. Learning with a cancer geneticist, if the indication is conﬁrmed and objects were designed to be non-context speciﬁc and thus genetic analyses have potential immediate therapeutic reusable: weekly topics were formed by contextualising a impacts, (ii) non priority FTFGC with genetic counselors series of learning objects using text, videos and interactive if the indication is conﬁrmed, but genetic analyses have no activities using the Articulate Rise 360 platform. User immediate therapeutic impacts and (iii) non indication for Acceptance Testing provided feedback on the completed FTFGC.For1525patients(35.7%),FTFGCwasconsidered course. not justiﬁed and approximately 10% of the patients Conclusions: This approach has made course develop- beneﬁted from priority FTFGC. The human resources mentmoreﬂexible,easiertomanageandinnovative.Initial required for the genetic counseling, using this procedure, overheads for development of online material are high, but wasestimatedper1000indexcasesat0.12FTEsecretaries, enable easier maintenance of the course. Development of a 0.62 FTE genetic counselors and 0.08 FTE medical libraryofreusablelearningobjects(RLOs)willallowfaster geneticists, conﬁrming our previous estimate. This simple and easier development of further courses. Details of the strategy, based on PTI and routing, allows an accessible, course can be found here: http://bit.ly/clinicalbio appropriate, accelerated and affordable genomic medicine, especially in the ﬁeld of cancer genetics.1792 M. Branchaud: None. N. Parodi: None. G. Collet: term. The program will target various groups of stake- None. C. Gasnier: None. Z. Neviere: None. J. Thery: holders - researchers, practitioners, patients/their represen- None. I. Tennevet: None. E. Lacaze: None. P. Berthet: tatives. Speciﬁc attention will be given to patient- None. T. Frebourg: None. centredeness in research and the needs of ERN and EU13 countries. Increased accessibility of trainings will be P19.30A secured through course rotation, fellowships and open Capacity building and empowerment program in access to some online resources. This project has received European Joint Program on Rare Diseases: time to funding from the European Union‘s Horizon 2020 research address unmet needs in rare disease research education and innovation programme under grant agreement No and training 825575, EJPRD, 2019-2023. B. Tumiene: None. V. Bros-Facer: None. C. Carta: B. Tumiene1,2, V. Bros-Facer3, C. Carta4, R. Favresse5, None. R. Favresse: None. E. Bonnaud: None. H. Gra- E. Bonnaud5, H. Graeßner6, K. Chrzanowska7, eßner: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. S. Maiella: None. S. Maiella8, G. Matthijs9, C. M. Wang10, G. Matthijs: None. C.M. Wang: None. A. Papadopou- A. Papadopoulou11, D. Julkowska8 lou: None. D. Julkowska: None. 1Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of P19.31B BiomedicalSciences,Vilnius,Lithuania,2VilniusUniversity Reproductive genetic counseling and management of Hospital Santaros klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, hemoglobinopathies carriers couples 3EURORDIS-Rare Diseases Europe, Paris, France, 4Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 5French C. Skrypnyk1,2, H. Albuarki1,2, J. S. Pedro2, A. Hellani3 Foundation for Rare Diseases, Paris, France, 6Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen, Centre for Rare Diseases, 1ArabianGulfUniversity,CollegeofMedicineandMedical Tübingen, Germany, 7Instytut Pomnik - Centrum Zdrowia Sciences,, Manama, Bahrain, 2University Medical Center, Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 8Institut National de la Santé et King Abdullah Medical City, Manama, Bahrain, 3Viafet de la Recherche Médicale, Paris, France, 9Katholieke Genomic Center, Dubai, United Arab Emirates Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 10Fondazione Telethon,Milan,Italy,11JointResearchCentre,Directorate Introduction: The premarital hemoglobinopathies screen- F-Health,ConsumerandReferenceMaterials,Ispra,Italy ing associated with genetic counseling and genetic testing offer people at risk the opportunity of making informed Rare diseases (RD) are conditions with prevalence of <5/ decisions on marriage and reproduction. 10,000 inhabitants, ~80% of RD have genetic etiology. Materialand Methods: Preconceptional counseling was Despite signiﬁcant developments in recent years, major offeredforcouplesatriskforhaemoglobinopathyoffspring, challenges remain including delayed RD diagnosis, insufﬁ- referred to Genetic Clinic at University Medical Center cient treatments and difﬁcult access to appropriate care. In Bahrain, from 2016 till 2019. 21 couples were counseled, view of current massive generation of new data, introduc- genetic testing conﬁrmed the carrier status and those who tion of omics into care practices and ongoing RD care optoutforpreimplantationgeneticdiagnosis(PGT-M)were structurationinEuropeanReferenceNetworks(ERN),there referredtoInVitroFertilizationClinic(IVF).PGT-Mofthe is crucial need to develop RD research capabilities, to particular mutations identiﬁed in the couples were per- spread know-how and standards in RD research among formed andpregnancieswereinitiated with thehealthyand stakeholders.RecentlylaunchedEuropeanJointProgramon non-carrier selected embryos. Rare Diseases (EJPRD) encompasses comprehensive and Results:38%coupleswerecarriersofsicklecell,33.33% cohesive capacity building and empowerment program carriers of sickle cell and beta thalassemia, 28.57% carriers addressing developing needs of RD research community in of beta thalassemia, 4.76% carrier of sickle cell and termsofcontent,geographicalcoverage,targetedaudiences. hemoglobin D and 4.76% carrier of beta and alpha tha- Existingresourceswill be pooled and novel will becreated lassemia.66.66%ofthecoupleswerenonconsanguineous, to tackle areas as data management, orphan drug develop- 76.19% were married and 40% of them had already one ment, HTA/regulatory processes, scientiﬁc innovation/ affected child. 57.14% (12/21) couples underwent the IVF translational research, best practice guidelines and ERN +PGT-M, 58.33% (7/12) for Sickle Cell Disease and cross-cutting themes/needs. The face-to-face capacity 41.66% (5/12) for Sickle Cell/beta thalassemia disease. building activities will train ~1,500 participants over 5 Pregnancy was achieved in 50% (6/12) couples, 2/6 mis- years, while ﬁrst-in-class online training program has the carried,3/6haveanongoingpregnancyin1/6gavebirthto potential to reach unlimited number of trainees in the long a healthy child.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1793 Conclusions: Thereisahighhemoglobinopathies carrier cancer depending on the individual genotype and pheno- status in non-consanguineous couples. Genetic counseling type. Based on our retrospective studies, the correlation allowsthecarriercouplestounderstandtheirriskandhelps between a high-risk result and subsequent cancer is 80%. themintakingtheirbestreproductivedecision.PGT-Mwas R. Miñambres: None. J. Triviño: None. M. Sánchez: the main option and had a good pregnancy rate. None. D. Serra: None. A. Lluch: None. A. Julve: None. C. Skrypnyk: None. H. Albuarki: None. J.S. Pedro: A. Cano: None. A. Garcia: None. S. Hoyas: None. A. None. A. Hellani: None. Martínez: None. E. Rubio-Solsona: None. B. Cortina: None.A.Ceba:None.L.Bernad:None.C.Moya:None. P19.32C S. Santillán: None. J. Montoya: None. L. Montes: None. BrecanRisk: Stratiﬁcation of high-risk women to suffer R. Rosa: None. D. Salas: None. J. Ibáñez: None. M. from breast cancer Escrig: None. G. Pita: None. A. Llaneza: None. P. Marrón: None. J. Benitez: None. R. Miñambres1, J. Triviño1, M. Sánchez1, D. Serra1, A. Lluch2, A. Julve2, A. Cano2, A. Garcia2, S. Hoyas3, P19.33D A. Martínez2, E. Rubio-Solsona1, B. Cortina1, A. Ceba1, WorkinginCambridge,UKandBrisbane, Australia:A L. Bernad1, C. Moya1, S. Santillán1, J. Montoya1, comparison between 2 Clinical Genetics services in the L. Montes1, R. Rosa1, D. Salas4, J. Ibáñez4, M. Escrig2, United Kingdom and Australia G. Pita5, A. Llaneza6, P. Marrón6, J. Benitez7 S. G. Mehta 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico Universitario de VAlencia, Valencia, Spain, 3Instituto Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrookes Hospital, Matemática Aplicada UPV, Valencia, Spain, 4Salud Cambridge, United Kingdom Pública-FISABIO,Valencia,Spain,5Cegen,Madrid,Spain, 6HospitalUniversitarioCentraldeAsturias,Oviedo,Spain, Clinical Genetics services have evolved rapidly in a 7CNIO, Madrid, Spain relatively short period of time. They have had to adapt to technologicalchange,increasingdemand,increasingaware- Introduction: During last years, the main genetic (SNPs) nessbyothercliniciansandthepublicofthegeneticburden and phenotypic risk factors in breast cancer have been of disease. There have been different models adopted described. In this context, we have developed Brecan Risk depending on the healthcare system, funding models, algorithm, in order to integrate these factors and assess the resources available, training, personnel and geography. risk throughout women’s life. These services are increasingly requiring new and inno- Material and Methods: In the ﬁrst phase, the genotypic vative ways of working to meet demand and overcome the stratiﬁcation was validated in a cohort of 930 healthy signiﬁcant shortage of trained health professionals in Clin- women and 1202 patients, analyzing 120 SNPs related to ical Genetics. Comparing and contrasting delivery of these breast cancer susceptibility from peripheral blood DNA. In services between countries is a way of beneﬁtting from thesecondphase,thealgorithmwasvalidatedinacohortof innovations which have worked elsewhere. 790 women by integrating genotypic and phenotypic data I am a trained Clinical Geneticist from Cambridge, UK, (family history, previous biopsy, breast density, age of and worked in a similar role in Brisbane, Queensland, menopause, age at ﬁrst pregnancy). In two independent Australia for a year. I will describe the pathway to be retrospective cohorts followed up for 2-15 years, Bre- recognised as a Clinical Geneticist in Australia and the canRisk was calculated and correlated with breast cancer similarities and differences in the services. development. There were signiﬁcant similarities with the clinical work Results: The genotypic analysis separated case-control in both centres however triage, organisation of the patient populations and stratiﬁed them according to the risk based pathway,useofITsoftwareandroleofGeneticcounsellors on the genotype-phenotype combination. 67% of the was different. There were variable numbers of staff per women were classiﬁed as low-medium risk (0-1.67) while million population. the remaining 33% were classiﬁed as moderate (1.67-2.49) As an example, due to the large geographical area cov- orhighrisk(>2.49).Intheﬁrstretrospectivecohort(170),9 ered by the statewide service in Queensland, telehealth women developed cancer, being 80% of them stratiﬁed as utilisationenabledaccessinremoteareasandalsotoenable moderate-highrisk.Thisresultwassupportedinthesecond subspecialist care to be delivered. Due to the increasing cohort recruited through the screening program (157). demand and lack of resources, the Cambridge department Conclusions: The BrecanRisk algorithm efﬁciently stra- had transferred some roles to administrative staff to allow tiﬁes women according to their risk to suffer from breast1794 the Genetic counsellors and Doctors time to focus on their N. M. Medendorp1, M. A. Hillen1, P. E. A. van specialist skillset. Maarschalkerweerd1, C. M. Aalfs2, M. G. Ausems2, S.G. Mehta: None. S. Verhoef3, L. E. van der Kolk4, L. P. V. Berger5, M. R. Wevers6, A. Wagner7, B. A. H. Caanen8, P19.34A A. M. Stiggelbout3, E. M. A. Smets1 Perspectives in genetic counseling for spinal muscular atrophy in the new therapeutic era 1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Leiden C.Serra-Juhé,A.AbulíVidal,M.CodinaSolà,E.Rovira University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, Moreno, E. F. Tizzano Ferrari 4Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain Netherlands, 6Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Erasmus MC University Medical Introduction: Genetic diagnosis and counseling in Spinal Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Maastricht UMC+, muscularatrophy(SMA) presentseveralchallenges includ- Maastricht, Netherlands ing the existence of carriers that are undistinguishable of non-carriers and the report of patients with very mild Introduction: Pre-test counseling about multigene panel manifestations and even asymptomatic that are discovered testing involves an increased level of uncertainty. Ideally, when a full symptomatic case appears in the family. counselees are fully informed about uncertainties to make Younger asymptomatic siblings of symptomatic SMA an informed decision about whether or not to perform such patients are usually never tested until adolescence or adult atest.Itispresentlyunknownwhetherandhowuncertainty life. However, following regulatory approval of the ﬁrst is discussed during initial cancer genetic counseling. We tailored treatment for SMA, the prospects for care of these therefore investigated in which counselors discuss uncer- patients have changed as early testing would change taintyconcerningmultigenepaneltests,addresscounselees’ proactive measures and opportunities for these patients. uncertainties, and whether their manner is associated with Methods: Different aspects of genetic counseling that counselors’ characteristics. could potentially be inﬂuenced by new advanced therapies Materials and Methods: Videotapes were made of are explored. Among them are considered: 1) Risk of counselors discussing a multigene panel test with a simu- recurrence and diagnosis of carriers in the family 2) latedpatient(SP).SPsrepresentedacounseleewhohadhad Reproductive options 3) Phenotypically concordant and multiple cancer types. Before and after their consultation, discordant brothers 4) Prevention levels 5) Predictive counselors completed a survey. Counselors’ uncertainty genetic markers of disease evolution 6) Early intervention: expressions, initiative- and framing of expressions, and criteria for neonatal screening and presymptomatic treat- counselors’ verbal responses to SP’s scripted uncertainty ment. Two clinical cases are deeply analyzed. expressions were coded. Results: In all the aspects analyzed there were potential Results: Counselors (N=29) expressed uncertainties substantial changes regarding attitudes and decision- mainly regarding scientiﬁc topics (94%) and on their own making. Of particular relevance is the fact that at present initiative (95%). Most expressions were framed directly the SMA would fulﬁll the total of the 10 criteria of Wilson (77%; e.g. We don’t know), and non-valenced (59%; i.e. and Jungner to be considered a candidate disease for neo- without a positive or negative value). After SPs expressed natal screening. uncertainties, counselors mainly responded by explicitly Conclusions: The approval of effective advanced thera- referring to the uncertainty (69%) without providing space pies is changing the way in which the communication and for further disclosure (66%). More experience with genetic genetic counseling is assumed in SMA. It is essential that counseling led to a decrease in space for further disclosure professionalsbeawareoftheseadvancesastheychangethe of SPs’ uncertainties (p<.02). perspective of this disease. Conclusions: Mainly communicating scientiﬁc uncer- C.Serra-Juhé:None.A.AbulíVidal:None.M.Codina tainties, and using mostly space-reducing responses, raises Solà: None. E. Rovira Moreno: None. E.F. Tizzano thequestionwhetherenoughattentionispaidtocounselees’ Ferrari: None. personal uncertainties allowing them to disclose their con- cerns during initial genetic counseling. P19.35B Funding: The Dutch Cancer Society (KWF Kankerbes- The discussion of uncertainty concerning multigene trijding) Grant number: UvA 2015-7607 panel testing during cancer genetic counseling. An N.M. Medendorp: None. M.A. Hillen: None. P.E.A. observational study vanMaarschalkerweerd:None.C.M.Aalfs:None.M.G.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1795 Ausems: None. S. Verhoef: None. L.E. van der Kolk: None. A. Pavel: None. M. Becleanu: None. D. None. L.P.V. Berger: None. M.R. Wevers: None. A. Stambouli: None. Wagner:None.B.A.H.Caanen:None.A.M.Stiggelbout: None. E.M.A. Smets: None. P19.37D Memory game in the learning about X-linked diseases P19.36C Whole exome sequencing in Romania - beginnings and N. T. Simões, M. B. Reis, S. Vasconcelos, E. Leite, challenges A. C. M. Marlinverni, G. M. G. Carvalheira A. Tutulan-Cunita1, F. Nedelea1,2, M. Gica1,3, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil N. Usurelu4, D. Blanita4, E. Rentea1, A. Pavel1, M. Becleanu1, D. Stambouli1 Introduction: The inheritance patterns of X-linked dis- orders had been easily identiﬁed due to unequally 1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, distribution of the chromosome X between women and 2Filantropia Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3Maria men.Liketheothermonogenicdiseases,X-linkeddisorders Sklodowska-Curie Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 4Institute are categorized into dominant and recessive. In order to of Mother and Child, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of teach about this inheritance pattern of diseases, it has been created a memory game, which the main purpose was to Introduction:Genomictechnologiesareanintegralpartof inform, in a playful way, their characteristics. thegenetic investigation toolkit inmany areas of medicine. MaterialsandMethods:Thismemorygamecontains24 While genomic data accumulates at a very fast pace, its cards, split in 12 pairs. Each pair has a card with informa- availability and the speciﬁcs of the local genetic landscape tive text and another with an illustrative ﬁgure about the are among main challenges encountered by the biomedical corresponding text. The game needs two players that will or clinical geneticist. We present our preliminary data on use memory and logic capacities. As the game progresses, the implementation of whole exome sequencing (WES) the player must use memory to store information contained technology as a clinical investigation tool in our Romanian inthecardandhispositioninthegame,winningtheplayer patients. that achieves a larger number of correct pairs. Materials and Methods: Twenty two patients with Results: We used eight players, divided into four pairs. neurological, metabolic, cardiac, and skin disorders were Theyhadafewknowledgeaboutthesubjectand,duringthe referred to our laboratory for WES or panel sequencing game,werecorrelatingthetextswiththeﬁgures.Intheend, between June 2017 - January 2019. Ion GeneStudio S5 the players were able to correctly relate the information System (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and Ion Reporter plat- contained in the cards with the respective ﬁgures. form were used. Conclusion: The memory game proved to be efﬁcient in Results: Eleven pathogenic or likely pathogenic muta- acquiring knowledge about the theme, brought in a playful tions associated with part of/complete clinical phenotypes and easy-to-learn way. By relating the information con- were found in ACADS, ACADVL, ALOX12B, AP4B1, tained in the texts with the images, the players presented a APOE, GJB6, IQSEC2, PHKB, TBCK genes. 3 VOUS in greater understanding about the features of X-linked ACADVL, GK, KCNMA genes possibly causative for the diseases. clinical presentations ofpatientswerealsodescribed. Thus, N.T. Simões: None. M.B. Reis: None. S. Vasconcelos: mutations explaining the patients’ phenotypes were found None. E. Leite: None. A.C.M. Marlinverni: None. G.M. in7cases,indicatinganoveralldetectionrateof30.43%;in G. Carvalheira: None. 2 more cases only part of the phenotype was clariﬁed. Conclusions:Geneticdiagnosisisbecomingincreasingly accessible throughout the Western world. However, small, P20 local clinics beyond this geographical space encounter Psychological and social issues in genetics speciﬁc challenges when embarking in WES, such as the genetic particularities of the local populations, the need to P20.01A establishanopendialoguewithinmultidisciplinarymedical Cognitive and psychosocial proﬁle in Silver-Russell teams, competition with larger Western companies and, syndrome: a ﬁrst study in adults quite often, the lack of patient ﬁnancial assistance from local health insurance systems. M. Burgevin1, A. Lacroix1, A. Toutain2, D. Martin- A. Tutulan-Cunita: None. F. Nedelea: None. M. Gica: Coignard3, M. Vincent4, C. Crosnier-Schoedel5, None. N. Usurelu: None. D. Blanita: None. E. Rentea: V. Coutinho6, I. Netchine5, S. Odent71796 1Univ Rennes, LP3C (Laboratoire de Psychologie: Crosnier-Schoedel: None. V. Coutinho: None. I. Netch- Cognition, Comportement, Communication) - EA 1285, ine: None. S. Odent: None. Rennes, France, 2CHRU de Tours, Hôpital Bretonneau, Service de Génétique Médicale, Université François P20.02B Rabelais, Faculté de Médecine, INSERM UMR U930, Genetic risk information (APOE) as a lifestyle change Tours, France, 3CH du Mans, Service de Génétique, Le motivator in Finland - Description of the participant Mans, France, 4CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique population Médicale, Nantes, France, 5Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Est (AP-HP), Hôpital des Enfants Armand Trousseau, M. Tringham1, H. Leskinen2, H. Karjalainen1, T. Iso- Service d’explorations Fonctionnelles Endocriniennes, Touru2, H. Hietaranta-Luoma3, S. Rokka2, P. Marnila2, Centre de Recherche Saint Antoine, INSERM UMR S938, J. Pihlava2, T. Hurme2, A. Pietilä4, H. Puolijoki3, Paris, France, 6Hôpital des Enfants Armand Trousseau, K. Åkerman3, L. Tanner5, M. Sandell1, K. Vähäkangas4, AP-HP, GUEP, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Paris, France ; A. Hopia1, R. Tahvonen2 Centre de Recherche en Épidémiologie et Santé des Populations, INSERM U1018, Villejuif, France, 7Hôpital 1Functional Foods Forum, University of Turku, Turku, Sud,CHUdeRennes,Servicedegénétiqueclinique,Centre Finland, 2Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke), de référence Maladies Rares CLAD-Ouest, Univ Rennes, Jokioinen, Finland, 3The Hospital District of South CNRS UMR 6290, Rennes, France Ostrobothnia, Seinäjoki, Finland, 4University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, 5Department of Clinical Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a rare disorder character- Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland izedbysevere intrauterine andpostnatalgrowthretardation with relative macrocephaly at birth, typical dysmorphic Introduction: The Western lifestyle greatly contributes to features, andfeedingdifﬁculties (Wakelingetal.,2017). In theriskofcardiovasculardiseasesandAlzheimer’sdisease. 50-60% of cases, SRS is caused by an epimutation of the Lifestylechangecanimprovehealthprospectsdramatically, region11p15.Currently,nostudieshavebeenpublishedon but executing the change requires ﬁrm motivation. Our 18- the assessment of cognitive, psychological and behavioral month lifestyle intervention, “Effects of ApoE4 genotype particularities of adults with SRS. information and intervention intensity on the fulﬁlment of Methods: An evaluation of cognitive and psychosocial lifestyle changes and sensory preferences (ApoE4mot)”, proﬁlewasperformedin11patients(7men),aged18to39 assessed the effect of genetic risk information (APOE ɛ4 years (M=24.36 years). All patients had an epimutation of carrier status) on the motivation for lifestyle change. the region 11p15 IGF2/H19 region. Ten patients had a MaterialsandMethods: Werecruited 211healthyadult bachelor’sdegreeand7completedahighereducation.70% volunteersfromOstrobothnia(Finland),genotypedthemfor were treated with growthhormoneand 90%have beneﬁted APOE ɛ4 carrier status (carrier vs. non-carrier) and com- from speech therapy and/or psychological care. municated the results to the intervention group. The parti- Results: Mean overall IQ score was 95.82 (17.65 SD). cipants ﬁlled in questionnaires on lifestyle choices, food Verbal comprehension index was on average higher than preferences and psychological state. Their lifestyle status other indexes (mean 109.55; 18.17 SD). We have found a was documented by physiological measurements and trendlinkbetweenbirthweightandProcessingSpeedIndex plasma values (cholesterol, blood glucose, fatty acid and between birth head circumference and Perceptual composition etc.). Reasoning Index. The abilities to concentrate were con- Results: 35.6% of the individuals had at least one ɛ4 sideredverylow(scorebelow84)in4patients.Self-esteem allele. LDL and total cholesterol levels were lower inthose was also very low (score below 33) in 4 patients. Inter- with APOE ε2 than those with APOE ε3 and ε4 (p<0.05). nalizing problems score was higher in SRS group than in However, in those with ε2, the proportions of 18:2n-6 and the normative control group (p=0.032). total polyunsaturated fatty acids, for example, were lower Conclusion: Overall adults with SRS had normal intel- than in those with ε4, and 16:0 and total saturated fatty lectualefﬁciency.Inourgroup,somespeciﬁccognitiveand acids higher (p<0.05). psychosocialproﬁles wereobserved.Theseresults improve Conclusions: The plasma fatty acid differences may knowledge about SRS and point to the importance of early result from genetic differences in the fatty acid metabolism intervention and multidisciplinary care from childhood to between theAPOEgenotypes,or,exceptingthecholesterol adulthood. values,theslightlybetterlifestylesoftheAPOEɛ4carriers, M. Burgevin: None. A. Lacroix: None. A. Toutain: suggesting better health-awareness. The study population None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. M. Vincent: None. C. was a representative sample of the Finnish population,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1797 forming a reliable basis for a genetic risk information to be tested. High-quality research is needed to inform best intervention. practices in clinical medicine, particularly in genomics. M. Tringham: None. H. Leskinen: None. H. Karja- B.B. Biesecker: A. Employment (full or part-time); lainen: None. T. Iso-Touru: None. H. Hietaranta- Modest; RTI International Non-proﬁt. B. Research Grant Luoma: None. S. Rokka: None. P. Marnila: None. J. (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and Pihlava: None. T. Hurme: None. A. Pietilä: None. H. pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; Puolijoki: None. K. Åkerman: None. L. Tanner: None. NIH Grant Consultant-Baylor Univ. and Kaiser- M. Sandell: None. K. Vähäkangas: None. A. Hopia: Permanente. B. Boyea: A. Employment (full or part- None. R. Tahvonen: None. time); Modest; RTI International Non-proﬁt. N. Kulkarni: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; RTI Interna- P20.03C tional Non-proﬁt.H.L.Peay: A.Employment (full or part- Communication of Clinical Uncertainties: A Systematic time); Modest; RTI International Non-proﬁt. R.S. Paquin: Literature Review A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; RTI Interna- tional Non-proﬁt. A.C. Wheeler: A. Employment (full or B. B. Biesecker1, B. Boyea2, N. Kulkarni2, H. L. Peay2, part-time); Modest; RTI International, Non-proﬁt. M.A. R. S. Paquin3, A. C. Wheeler2, M. A. Lewis4 Lewis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; RTI International Non-proﬁt. 1RTI, International, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2RTI, International, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States, P20.04D 3RTI, International, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 4RTI, The concept of ‘emotional distress’ as a measure of International, Seattle, WA, United States outcome when assessing the impact of genetic test results; a systematic review Uncertainties pervade medicine, and genomics is no exception. How patients perceive uncertainty is inﬂuenced S. Eddy, L. M. Jackson byhowprovidersconveyit.Communicationtheoriesabout managing uncertain health information include provider University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom messaging.Toassessthestateofthescience,weconducted a systematic literature review on communication of Purpose: In psychological assessment a wide range of uncertain health risk information across specialties. Our terms are used to describe an individual’s behaviour, aimsweretoassessthebreadthandqualityoftheevidence, personality and state of wellbeing. Across the genomics identifyresearchgapsandpositevidence-basedhypotheses. research literature there are myriad studies using a plethora Thesearch identiﬁed1020abstractsfrom PubMed, Webof of psychological terms, not always consistently. As well as Science, PsycINFO, Communication Source and Cochrane the terminology utilised, the tools employed to measure Reviews published between 1/1/1990 and 6/1/2018. Forty- these states also vary. This review examined the usage and onemetinclusioncriteria:16quantitativeand25qualitative measurement of ‘emotional distress’ in the context of studies. A total of 3656 providers and 4530 patients were genetic testing. represented. Among the quantitative studies, one was of Methods:ThissystematicreviewfollowedtheCentrefor high quality--an intervention study to enhance effective Reviews and Dissemination (CRD) framework and MED- communication of uncertainty. Nine were moderate quality LINE, EMBASE and PsycINFO databases were searched. observational studies. Seven were self-report of lower The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and quality. Among 25 qualitative studies, 12 were analyses Meta- Analyses (PRISMA) framework was used to report of recorded clinical sessions of high quality, ten were self- results followed byaqualityscoringanalysis.Search terms report interviews, three were focus groups and one was an included “emotional distress”, “psychological distress” and ethnographic study. Communication and management of “gene*”. Qualitative thematic analysis was conducted and clinical uncertainties were observed or reported between tools used within the included studies were quantitatively providers and patients in primary care, advanced cancer tabulated. care, genetics, obstetrics, oncology, cardiology, and emer- Results:Thereviewincluded13papers,incorporating16 gency medicine. Research gaps exist in intervention tools. Thematic analysis generated six major themes; research. Evidence revealed providers’ avoidance of com- demographics,inﬂuenceofpatients’condition,inﬂuenceof municating clinical uncertainties, recognition of challenges timeonpatientemotion,supportstructuresandmechanisms in communicating uncertainties, decisions to provide and familial implications, emotions surrounding genetic information over uncertainties, and relational factors that testing and methods of emotional measurement. led to expressions of uncertainty; all generating hypotheses1798 Conclusion: Terms used when measuring psychological L. Silva: None. L. Condon: None. J. Kai: None. S. states differed and it is clear that the term ‘emotional dis- Weng: None. K. Vedhara: None. N. Qureshi: None. tress’isbeingusedinconsistently.Thereisalsovariationin the application of tools. It is suggested that incorrect P20.06B assumptionsormisunderstandingregardingterm usage and Psychological and ethical considerations of population psychologicalhealthmeasurement,mayresultindisparities genomic testing: qualitative interviews with the public in patient care. This is of concern when assignment of a particular term is being used to stratify patient follow-up. A. K. Smit1,2,3, A. J. Newson2, G. L. Fenton1, G. Reyes- S. Eddy: None. L.M. Jackson: None. Marcelino1, L. Keogh4, A. E. Cust1,3 P20.05A 1Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention Research, Sydney Patient's experiences of genomic testing for Familial School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Hypercholesterolaemia: What it might reveal about the The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Sydney adoption of healthy lifestyle behaviours Health Ethics, Sydney School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, L. Silva, L. Condon, J. Kai, S. Weng, K. Vedhara, Australia, 3Melanoma Institute Australia (MIA), The N. Qureshi UniversityofSydney,Sydney,Australia,4MelbourneSchool of Population and Global Health, The University of Division of Primary Care, Nottingham, United Kingdom Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia Introduction: Recent scientiﬁc advances have led to Introduction: As genomic technologies rapidly improve, genomic testing being mainstreamed into clinical practice. the incorporation of genomic testing into public health Consequently, there has been increasing interest in the prevention strategies and screening programs is being change in health-related behaviour after patients receive a investigated. To assess whether genomic testing should be genomic test result. Leventhal’s Self-regulation model is implemented on a population-scale, and to ensure effective one of the frameworks used in this area. According to this research translation, evidence is required on the psycholo- theory, the genomic test result (external stimulus) would gical and ethical implications of this approach. The change the patient’s mental representation about health perspectives of main stakeholders, such as the public, are threats.Recentevidencesuggeststhatsimplyacquiringnew key to understanding these implications. information about one’s risk to develop a certain condition Methods: Semi-structured interviews were undertaken might not be enough for patients to change their lifestyle with 30 participants (24-69 years, 50% female) recruited (Hollandsetal.,2016).Therefore,wewillalsobeinterested from a pilot trial in which they received personalised mel- to ascertain if taking part in the study might inﬂuence the anomagenomicriskinformation.Weexploredparticipants’ intention to change particular behaviours (Prochaska & psychological responses to receiving this information and DiClemente, 1982). their views on broader ethical considerations of offering Our aim is to explore patients’ experiences of genomic genomic risk information to the population. Data were testing for Familial Hypercholesterolaemia (FH) and analysed thematically. understand what factors may explain their readiness to Results: Many participants described positive responses adopt (or not) a healthier lifestyle. to receiving genomic risk information, including feeling Materials and Methods: We will report a mixed- reassured. Some reported short-term negative emotional methods approach that evaluates patients receiving differ- reactions that dissipated over time. Their responses were ent types of FH genomic test results. Quantitative data will linked to: expectations for their risk result, disease risk begeneratedthroughaquestionnairethatincludesmeasures perception, existing preventive behaviours and their risk of anxiety, beliefs and perceived control over heart disease results. Participants raised ethical considerations of and stages of change for smoking cessation and exercise. population-scale genomic testing including: consequences Qualitative data will be collected through semi-structured forindividualresponsibilityfordiseaseprevention,possible interviews and the framework model will be used in the adverse responses due to perceptions of genetic exception- analysis. alism, implications for parental responsibilities and poten- Conclusion: Following the example of FH, we will tial discrimination. Participants felt that trust, choice and explorehowgenomictestinginprimarycaremightbeused equity should be taken into account in the provision of as a potential intervention to empower patients to adopt population-scale genomic testing. healthier lifestyle behaviours. Conclusions: Personalised melanoma genomic risk informationalongsideeducationandlifestylecounsellingisAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1799 favourably received by the public with minimal negative approaches range from isolation, challenging stigma, and responses. Ethical considerations relevant to policy discus- normalizing the disease experience. sion and program design include trust, choice and equity. These results may be relevant for genetic counselling A.K. Smit: None. A.J. Newson: None. G.L. Fenton: practice, bringing further insight into transgenerational None. G. Reyes-Marcelino: None. L. Keogh: None. A.E. processes of management of the information about HD in Cust: None. families. Grants and fellowships: FEDER (POCI-01-0145- P20.08D FEDER-007746; CINTESIS (UID/IC/4255/2013) and FCT Transgenerational management of information about Doctoral Fellowship (SFRH/BD/131925/2017). Huntington disease within the family: from past silence C.R. Oliveira: None. Á. Mendes: None. J. Sequeiros: to normalization in the present None. L. Sousa: None. C. R. Oliveira1, Á. Mendes2, J. Sequeiros3, L. Sousa4 P20.09A Noninvasive prenatal test: preferences and awareness 1UniversidadedeAveiro,CINTESIS;andUnIGENe, IBMC among healthcare professionals in Russia –InstituteforMolecularandCellBiology,i3S–Institutode Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Univ. Porto, Aveiro, E. Zaiaeva1, E. Baranova1, L. Zhuchenko1, L. Ivanova2, Portugal, 2UnIGENe and CGPP – Centre for Predictive V. Izhevskaya3 and Preventive Genetics, IBMC – Institute for Molecular andCellBiology,i3S–InstitutodeInvestigaçãoeInovação 1Department ofMedicalGenetics, Federal State Budgetary em Saúde, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3UnIGENe and Educational Institution of Further Professional Education CGPP – Centre for Predictive and Preventive Genetics, Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional IBMC–Instit.forMolecularandCellBiology,i3S–Instit. Education of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Univ. Porto, Federation,Moscow,RussianFederation,2SectorofSocial Portugal;andICBAS–Instit.deCiênciasBiomédicasAbel Health Problems, Federal Center of Theoretical and Salazar, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Universidade de Applied Sociology of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Aveiro, CINTESIS, Aveiro, Portugal Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Educational Department, Federal State Budgetary Institution Research Centre for Huntingtondisease(HD)hasasigniﬁcantimpactonfamily Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation process.Management of theinformationon HDinfamilies has been scarcely reported, from a transgenerational Introduction:Noninvasiveprenataltests,NIPT,arerapidly perspective. This study aims to get a deeper understanding changingthealgorithmofﬁrsttrimesterscreening,FTS,for ofthemanagementofinformationaboutthedisease,within chromosomal abnormalities, CA. NIPT allows to improve PortugueseHDfamilies,anditsimplicationsforfamilyand the detection of CA of a fetus and reduce the number of social relationships. unwarranted invasive procedures. Healthcare professionals, This is an exploratory qualitative study, using a semi- HPs, in Europe are ready to use NIPT as a ﬁrst or second structured interview with persons from HD families. Ten line test due to its safety, high sensitivity and early results. participants were recruited: two carriers, eight non-carriers. However, there were found country-speciﬁc differences in Interviews were transcribed and submitted to theme choosing methods for FTS, depending on ethnic, socio- analysis. demographicandreligiouscharacteristicsofrespondents,as Information from genetic diagnosis and the potential for wellasthelocalhealthpolicyrelatedtotheneedforpartial presymptomatic testing represent a turning point for HD or full payment of prenatal tests and the availability of familymembers,withahighimpactformanagementofthe abortion. Accordingly, each country requires its own information about the disease within the family. After a guidelines, developed with taking into account the social diagnosis of HD,families tend to identify possibly affected context. relatives (inpreviousandpresentgenerations)andquestion Methods: Our group conducted the sociological survey who may develop it in the future. Through this process, among37HPs.Thequestionnaireincludedquestionsabout familiesi)travelintotheirpast,tore/buildthehistoryofthe preferences for FTS, demographic attributes and a discrete disease in the family; and ii) build a new consciousness choice experiment. aboutHDanditshereditarycharacter.Familymembersuse Results: For Russian HPs, most signiﬁcant attributes of different approaches to deal with HD in the family and in prenatal tests are their cost, the justiﬁcation of invasive the community: either closure (denial, silence, secrecy) or procedures and the possibility of obtaining the most openness (open disclosure). Outcomes from these1800 completeinformation.Don’taffectthechoicethesensitivity this study since they didn’t show any speciﬁc symptoms. and the time of receiving results. Wetakecareofthewomenwithpositiveresult,butitmight Conclusion: The obtained results are not fully matched be important to screen all the pregnant women to offer with the data from the world literature, therefore it is psychological support depend on objective evaluations. necessary to pay attention to the level of awareness of HPs A. Kondo: None. D. Nakaoku: None. M. Yamasaki: about the possibilities of NIPT, assessment of existing None. M. Morine: None. K. Hinokio: None. Y. Goto: social and ethical problems in the country, as well as the None. K. Takahashi: None. K. Maeda: None. prospects for introducing NIPT into the algorithm of FTS. Grant RFBR №18-013-01175. P20.11C E. Zaiaeva: None. E. Baranova: None. L. Zhuchenko: Transmission of genetic information to relatives in None. L. Ivanova: None. V. Izhevskaya: B. Research vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; J. Mazzella1, S. Adham1, M. Frank1, X. Jeunemaitre1, Russian foundation for basic research. K. Lahlou-laforet2 P20.10B 1Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen A review of the proﬁle of mood states (POMS) with the Georges Pompidou, Centre de Référence des Maladies client of prenatal test Vasculaires Rares, Paris, France, 2Assistance Publique- Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, A. Kondo1, D. Nakaoku1, M. Yamasaki1, M. Morine1, Unité de Psychologie et Psychiatrie de Liaison et K. Hinokio1, Y. Goto2, K. Takahashi2, K. Maeda1 d’Urgence, Paris, France 1ShikokuMedicalCenterforChildrenandAdults,Zentsuji, Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare Japan, 2Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, inherited disorder leading to arterial, digestive and uterine Japan complications due to pathogenic COL3A1 variants. Identi- ﬁcation of variants allows family screening, provided that Introduction: The availability of prenatal screening and relatives have been previously informed accordingly to a diagnostictestinghaschangedtheexperienceofpregnancy. 2013 French decree. We wanted to assess the effective Prenatal screening tests may have positive or negative transmission of genetic information to relatives and the effects for women. In this study, we are looking at the impactofthediagnosisdisclosure,andshowapossiblelink psychological effects of prenatal screening tests for betweenvEDSexperiencingandabilitytocommunicatethe the fetus. genetic information. vEDS adult probands answered a Materials and Methods: A sample of 162 women who questionnaire during a clinical visit. Transmission of had genetic counselling sessions regarding prenatal tests information to relatives was considered effective if the completed the Proﬁle of Mood States (POMS) short form probandgaveinformationtosomeorallrelativesandeasily before the prenatal test and after they received the result. realized if it was done less than a month, without The Proﬁle of Mood States (POMS) is a psychological difﬁculties, to all relatives. Personal and family aspects of rating scale used to assess transient, distinct mood states probands regarding their vEDS experience were also such as Tension or Anxiety, Anger or Hostility, Vigor or assessed. Effective transmission of information to relatives Activity, Fatigue or Inertia, Depression or Dejection, Con- was remarkably high (98%). Siblings were the most fusion or Bewilderment. frequently informed (82%). This process seemed simple to Results: Most cases showed slightly higher score in perform(58%)butworrying(44%).Women(89%)seemed Tension or Anxiety, Confusion or Bewilderment category to inform their relatives more quickly than men (59%). beforetheprenataltests.Thescorewasdecreasedafterthey There was no difference in the information of relatives received the test result but some showed repressive and before and after 2013, meaning that regular multidisciplin- punitive attitudes at the session. Six women showed ary support of patients fosters transmission of information. medically disturbed mood in spite of negative result Regarding vEDS experience, patients felt anxiety (78%) at for NIPT. diagnosis disclosure and considered this diagnosis as the Conclusions: Testing the fetus make some impact on possibility to start a medical follow-up (82%) ; Most of pregnant women and the partner even with negative result. probands with children (56%) felt guilty about vEDS The study showed prenatal tests make them slight mood transmissiontooffspring.Theabilitytoeasilycommunicate change within expected range in many cases. It was very information seemed to be mainly related to the relief felt helpful to ﬁnd some medically disturbed women through during vEDS diagnosis disclosure.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1801 J. Mazzella: None. S. Adham: None. M. Frank: None. P21.02A X. Jeunemaitre: None. K. Lahlou-laforet: None. Polarisedviewsontheregulationofgeneticdataanduse of genetic information in criminal justice P21 R. Chapman1, V. Smereczynska1, V. Nanau1, Lay beliefs and public understanding of genetics - D. Matsepuro2, F. Selita2, Y. Kovas1,2 Access to genetic services 1Goldsmiths, University of London, London, United P21.01D Kingdom, 2Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian The genome as the most intimate common: taking Federation citizen perspectives into account in policy and research The use of genetic data is permeating all areas of society. W. Van Hoof, C. Mayeur The talk/poster will present 2 studies dedicated to under- standing more about public views on legal applications of Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium genetic data. In the ﬁrst study, data were collected on how genetic information should be used in criminal trials. Introduction: Genomic research and medicine can only Results from the International Genetic Literacy and advance as long as there is a willingness to share genomic Attitudes Survey (iGLAS, N=3981) showed marked data. However, given that genomics is both a fringe and variation in views. For example, 62% of participants felt highly complex subject, there is a big risk of misinforma- that genetic information shouldinformsentencing, whereas tion, misunderstanding and general distrust in society. 29% felt that it should not be considered. 6% felt a high Methods: Different initiatives have been launched to genetic risk for aggression should reduce the defendant’s organize the societal debate on ethical, legal and societal sentence; and 3% felt it should increase it. In the second issues (ELSI) in genomics. We will focus on in-depth study, participants considered whether family members qualitative data from a Belgian citizen forum (32 citizens, have a right to information about a close relative’s genetic 3 weekends) and a French public consultation (22 citizens, condition(basedonABCvstheNHS).Datawerecollected 4 weekends) in 2018. several times as additional information was provided to Results: On the one hand, genomic research can beneﬁt participants. The results revealed highly polarised views. everyoneandscientiﬁcprogressisacommongood.Onthe Some participants resolutely supported familial rights to other hand, the individual - and potentially the individual’s access information about their relative’s diagnosis and that family - is at risk when certain mutations are discovered or the NHS should be legally obliged to provide this. Other data is misused. In the public’s understanding, genes are participants steadfastly supported the patient's right to linked to identity, irreversible traits, the ‘nature’ of an conﬁdentiality and non-disclosure, even though this might individual. Both risks and beneﬁts regarding genomics havehealthimplicationsfortheirrelatives.Participantswho touch an intimate part of individuals’ private lives. This either had a genetic condition themselves or in their family tension is not alleviated through societal debate, but dis- favoured disclosure. Sex differences also emerged. These cussionsbetweencitizenscaninformresearchersandpolicy and other results suggest polarisation of opinions on these makersabout different perspectivesinsocietyandpotential important matters and call for increased efforts to involve reactions to certain information, requests, policies and the public in debates about genetic data usage. projects. In turn, well organized debates enhance public With support from the Russian Foundation for Basic awareness and understanding of ELSI in genomics. We Research grant No. 18-29-14071. describe different approaches to societal debates and their R. Chapman: None. V. Smereczynska: None. V. outcomes. Nanau: None. D. Matsepuro: None. F. Selita: None. Y. Conclusion: Without societal support, the ambitions of Kovas: None. genomic research are unattainable. In an area where everyone can feel intimately involved, it is important to P21.03B actively listen to all perspectives. Opinion about prenatal and gene mutation testing W. Van Hoof: None. C. Mayeur: None. among Polish population1802 M. A. Malarska, P. M. Pachniak, A. Mazerant, governed,meaningthatallstakeholdersshouldbeinvolved E. M. Borkowska, M. Borowiec in determining the purposes and boundaries of the technology. Therefore, a public dialogue will be organized Department of Clinical Genetics, Łódź, Poland intheNetherlandstoprovideinformation,encourageactive participation, and to assemble various stakeholders’ opi- Aim:Theaimofthestudywastocollectinformationabout nions. We aim to investigate the impact of this human knowledge and approach among Polish population to the GLGE dialogue on public opinions. topic of genetic prenatal tests. We also analyzed the Method: This study was piloted among 28 students who doctor’s approaches to the same issues. ﬁlledinasurveyonattitudestowardshumanGLGEbefore Methods:Datacollectionwascarriedoutbytheuseofa and after a ten weeks minor course. comprehensive questionnaire on the Internet and in paper Results: Student deﬁnitions of germline editing were format. 2210 people were examined. 204 doctors answered signiﬁcantly more correct after the minor period compared the same set of questions with few addition. tobefore(p<0.01).AttitudestowardsGLGEshiftedequally Results: 60,6% of respondents are enthusiastic about towardsbothdirectionsbetweenpreandpostmeasurement. prenatal test such as amniocentesis. Over 26% patients and Proponents perceived GLGE to be more promising (p<.01) 30,9%doctorsconsiderthistesttoorisky.FreefetalDNAis and hopeful (p<.05) and judged the odds of the best-case considered to be very important test by 86,1% of doctors scenariotooccurasgreater(p<.01)comparedtoopponents. and75,1%ofpatients(therespondentswereinformedabout Conclusions: Increased knowledge does not imply a theneedofadditional payment).Alsoweasked whatisthe more positive attitude towards human GLGE. Our data attitude of respondents to perform genetic testing for indicates that especially factors related to trust and affect BRCA1 / BRCA2 / BRAX without a family history of may inﬂuence attitudes towards GLGE. Together these cancer. 25.9% of respondents do not have any knowledge ﬁndings support the presumption that organizing a public about such tests and 90.3% of doctors replied that such a dialoguewillenablepublicdeliberationwithoutinﬂuencing study would have a positive impact. Unfortunately doctors public opinion. do not know how to properly collect samples (82,5%) and D. Houtman: None. S. Riedijk: None. B. Vijlbrief: what documents to ﬁll in to correctly carry out the proce- None. R. Hofstra: None. dure (43,3%). Conclusions: The opinion on genetic testing among P21.07B Poles is very positive. There is a great need to increase the Most issues covered but not in their full complexity: a availabilityofprenatalandothergeneticstestsinPoland.It newspapercontentanalysisofethicalissuesinpredictive seems very necessary to expand the knowledge of both genetic testing patients and physicians on subject of genetic research. M.A. Malarska: None. P.M. Pachniak: None. A. B. M. Zimmermann, B. S. Elger, D. M. Shaw Mazerant: None. E.M. Borkowska: None. M. Borowiec: None. Institute of Biomedical Ethics, Basel, Switzerland P21.04C Predictivegenetictestingisbecomingmoreavailabletothe The human germline gene editing dialogue in the general population through direct-to-consumer genetic Netherlands testing. Its application raises many ethical issues of considerable complexity. Broadsheet newspapers are one D. Houtman, S. Riedijk, B. Vijlbrief, R. Hofstra ofthepublic’smainsourceofinformationonsuchscientiﬁc topics. We analysed all articles about predictive genetic Department ofClinical Genetics,ErasmusMedicalCenter, testingpublishedinTheGuardianandtheDailyTelegraph Rotterdam, Netherlands between2011and2016.PrinciplesofBiomedicalEthicsby Beauchamp and Childress and a review of scientiﬁc Introduction: Safe and effective clinical application of literature served as a starting point for the deductive human germline gene editing (GLGE) is becoming more analysis. The analysis was qualitative with semi- feasible, as gene editing techniques are being improved. quantitative aspects. We found that issues related to the This provides a real prospect of curative treatment for principlesofbeneﬁcenceandautonomywerecoveredmore serious (mono)genetic diseases. However, human GLGE than aspects regarding the principles of justice and may also be used to prevent disease, as in He Jiankui’s nonmaleﬁcence. More speciﬁcally, the medical beneﬁts of experiment, and to enhance humanity. There is general predictive genetic testing were preferred in newspaper consensus that human GLGE should be democratically coverageoveritspotentialharms.ManyethicalissueswereAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1803 not portrayed in their full complexity, and there was a lack Respondents’ perceived risks were strongly related to ofcoverageregardingtheautonomy-relatedissuesRightnot actualriskestimates.P5studyparticipantswillreceivenew to know and Incidental ﬁndings. With direct-to-consumer risk estimates based on polygenic and metabolomic genetic testing on the rise, the ethical issues regarding analyses. predictive genetic testing are highly signiﬁcant for society. A. Haukkala: None. M. Vornanen: None. O. Halmes- Medical professionals, journalists and other stakeholders vaara: None. M. Marttila: None. H. Kääriäinen: None. need to improve the representation of such issues in M. Perola: None. communicationtothepublic,especiallythroughbroadsheet newspapers as the public’s main trusted source of informa- P21.09D tion. This study also provides a new methodological Surveyingthe general public on genome editing:10 tips approach on how to empirically assess ethical issues in on how to do it to make it count media coverage. B.M. Zimmermann: None. B.S. Elger: None. D.M. V. Romano, H. C. Howard Shaw: None. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden P21.08C RiskperceptionsforType2diabetesandcoronaryheart Surveying the general public on a game-changing technol- diseaseafter receivingrisk information-participants of ogysuchasCRISPR-Cas9isessentialforatleasttwomain P5 FinHealth study reasons. First, surveying the general public aims at under- standing people’s attitudes and orientations about genome A. Haukkala1, M. Vornanen1, O. Halmesvaara1, editing which are relevant as they should inform, in some M. Marttila2, H. Kääriäinen2, M. Perola2 ways, further public engagement, scientiﬁc research and policy. Second, it simultaneously educates the general 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2National public about the surveyed matter and drives people’s Institute of Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland attention onthe subject ina chosen way. Surveyingon any subject, no matter how “merely descriptive” the explicit Providing risk information to people is expected to change goal of the survey is, always comes as a selection of what their perceptions of risk and motivate them to change their has to be considered relevant, why and how. In order for behaviour. The aim of this presentation is to examine how such surveys to not be (too) biased and to increase the actual risk estimates correlate with perceived risk and how knowledge about genome editing, they therefore need to genetic knowledge is related to these estimates. follow a structured design and rigorous methodology.We Participants of FinHealth 2017 study received a proﬁle analyzed the only 8 surveys on genome editing - published based on clinical and self-reported measures. The proﬁle worldwide in the last four years and fully dedicated to this includedriskfordevelopingtype2diabetes(T2D)andrisk subject - and here present the comparative analysis of their fordevelopingcoronaryheartdisease(CHD)inthenext10 main strengths and weaknesses. We noticed that the years. After receiving the health proﬁle, 3384 participants researchdesignoften tendstobe identiﬁedasthestatistical consented to P5 study to receive genetic and metabolomic sample selection process and that’s why we fear this might risk information. Those who consented to study answered weakentheheuristicrangeoftheresearchitself.Wesuggest questions related to genetic knowledge and perceived risk howtostructuretheresearchdesigninordertodiminishthe for CHD and T2D. risk to get expected results Research grants open call 2017 At the baseline, 19% of men in age group 50-59 had (Medicine and Health) Swedish Research CouncilType of increased risk (>10%) for CHD and 71% in oldest age grant:ResearchProjectGrantProjecttitle:Ethical,legaland group 60-69, respectively among women 2% and 17%. In social issues of gene editing Project start: 2018-01-01 the youngest age group (30-39) only 4% and at least Project end: 2021-12-31 moderate risk for T2D, while 33% were in that group V. Romano: None. H.C. Howard: None. among 60-69 years old males, respectively among women 11% and 40% had at least moderate risk. Only 10% of all P5 respondents reported their risk to be high for CHD, P22 while 33% reported their risk to be at least moderate for Ethical issues in genetics T2D. Genetic knowledge was weakly related to perceived T2D risk (r=-.05,p=.023) and CHD risk (r=-.06,p=.017).1804 P22.01A 1Medical Genetics Service, Hospital Le Mans, Le Mans, Do international recommendations meet citizens' values France, 2Service of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hospital and needs regarding genomic information? Le Mans, Le Mans, France, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Nantes, Nantes, France C. Mayeur Thedifﬁcultyofgeneticcounsellingincaseoffœtuscarrier Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium of microdeletion or microduplication syndrome showing variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance consists in Introduction: We compare some of the main results of a bringing appropriate prognosis about the postnatal devel- Belgian citizen forum (2018) on the use of genomic opment. The prognosis is more uncertain when the CNV is information, with related recommendations of international inherited from a healthy parent. Here we present two cases professional societies, such as the European Society of of prenatal diagnosis of 1q21.1 deletion with opposite Human Genetics. pregnancy issues. The ﬁrst case is a second pregnancy of Materials and Methods: At the request of the Minister healthy parents. During the second trimester US examina- of Public Health, we organized a panel of 32 citizens, tion the AVSD was detected. The amniocentesis was selected to ensure maximal diversity. During three week- performed and array-CGH showed 2,6 Mb deletion ends, they debated and reﬂected on the ethical, legal and including GJA5 and GJA8, inherited by the father. The societalissuessurroundingtheuseofgenomicinformation, parents were worried from the uncertain prognosis and the supported by experts of different backgrounds. familyhistoryofrelativeswithdevelopmentaldelay,autism Results: Among the many needs and opinions expressed and heart defects. They choose to terminate the pregnancy bycitizens,wefocusononekeymessage.Citizenssupport and applied for preimplantation diagnosis for next preg- genomic data sharing for the common good, which they nancy. The second case is a ﬁfth pregnancy of healthy deﬁne as scientiﬁc research that improves knowledge (on parents showing some learning difﬁculties. Two of 3 both prevention and diagnostics) to build a fair society children had learning difﬁculties/epilepsy. The second where everyone has an equal opportunity to live healthy. trimester US examination showed VSD and an amniocent- However, their support hinges on three conditions: esis was performed. The array-CGH showed 1,6 Mb deletion in 1q21.1 including GJA5 and GJA8, inherited 1) No genetic discrimination: a person should not be a from the mother. The parents were not worried and the prisoner of his/her genetic makeup pregnancy was maintained. A number of ethical questions 2) Privacy protection: the genome is an unique and rise in an everyday clinical practice mainly announcing or intimatepartoftheindividualthatwarrantsprotection no the CNV with uncertain pathogenicity and the place of 3) Individual control: transparency, traceability and pregnancy termination and preimplantation diagnosis. decision-making R. Stoeva: None. E. Henry: None. M.T. Cheve: None. C. Le Caignec: None. D. Martin Coignard: None. As genomics grows more and more important, it will impact the lives of many citizens. However, recommenda- P22.03C tions of international professional societies are based on A survey of public attitudes toward genetic services in expert opinion. Georgia We investigate whether the principles underlying these recommendations are in line with fundamental values in E. Kvaratskhelia1, M. Kvintradze1, D. Chokoshvili2, society. K. Dzagoevi1, S. Surmava1, E. Abzianidze1 Conclusion: Professional recommendations should be informed by fundamental values and needs of citizens. 1Tbilisi State Medical University, Dept. of Molecular and C. Mayeur: None. Medical Genetics, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Centre for Biomedical Ethics P22.02B and Law, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Challenges of prenatal genetic counselling in two cases of CNV of variable expressivity and incomplete Objective: The aim of the present study is to assess penetrace knowledgeandattitudesofGeorgianpopulationtowardthe genetic testing. R. Stoeva1, E. Henry2, M. T. Cheve2, C. Le Caignec3, Methods: A total of 491 individuals completed surveys. D. Martin Coignard1 The data were gathered using a convenience sampling. Eligibleparticipantsmusthavebeenatleast18yearsofage,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1805 Georgian-speaking. Respondents were recruited from the the case of a 39 y.o patient, severely affected, diagnosed annual scientiﬁc festival 2018 held in Tbilisi, Tbilisi book with Huntington disease, mother of two boys, aged 12 and festival 2018 and scientiﬁc conferences. Participants were 17 that show clinical signs. The purpose of this paper is to surveyed using a Likert-scale written questionnaire con- explore the positive ramiﬁcations and possible negative ducted by medical students from Tbilisi State Medical impactsfrom thepredictivegenetictestingfor thechildren, University. given the real possibility of a treatment. Results: Positive attitude were found toward predictive L. Curteanu: None. C. Rusu: None. C. genetic testing. A majority of participants (77.4%) would Afuduloai: None. like to know whether they at risk of developing diseases. Moreover, about 65% of participant would like to test their P22.05A newbornchildtolearnwhichdiseases they maydevelopin Ethical solicitude in medical genetics as perceived from adulthood. Most respondents (71.2%) are agreed that cou- a genetic counselor's perspective in the tribal-based plesplanningapregnancyshouldhaveapossibilitytohave community of Saudi Arabia a carrier test. Only 20% of respondents agreed that carrier screeningforspeciﬁcdiseaseswillleadtoaninferiorimage A. A. Qari1, A. Kashmeeri2, M. Al-Sayed1 of people with these disorders. Conclusions:Interestingenetictestsishighandattitudes 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, are largely positive in Georgian population. Such investi- 2king Saud bin Abdulaziz university, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia gation is critical to ﬁnd out ways to start the discussion between the public, policy makers, and healthcare profes- Introduction:The genetics domain is witnessing great sionals on these issues. advances in diagnosing and predicting genetic diseases. In E. Kvaratskhelia: None. M. Kvintradze: None. D. a clinical setting, autosomal recessive genetic disorders are Chokoshvili: None. K. Dzagoevi: None. S. Surmava: frequently observed as a result of the high rate of None. E. Abzianidze: None. consanguinity. The advances in genomic technologies in recentyearshavefacilitatednewtoolsforgenediscoveryin P22.04D humans. Such approaches have already proven to be Betweenburdensomeandknowledge-predictivegenetic beneﬁcial for the identiﬁcation of the genetic causes of testing in two children from a mother diagnosed with several Mendelian disorders. There is a debate over the Huntington disease ethicaldilemmasbehindprovidingfamilieswiththegenetic test results and incidental ﬁndings identiﬁed by the whole L. Curteanu1,2, C. Rusu3, C. Afuduloai3 exome sequencing. Thus, this vast source of information canhaveamultitudeofethicalandsocialimplicationsboth 1SaintMaryEmergencyHospital,Iasi,Romania,2Regional forpatientsandhealthcareproviders.Inthisstudyweaimto Center of Medical Genetics - Iasi, Iasi, Romania, 3Saint study how families of affected children respond when they Mary Emergency Hospital - Regional Center of Medical receive incidental ﬁndings. Also we aim to identify how Genetics, Iasi, Romania healthcare professionals working within genetic counseling ﬁelds descriptively abide by their role and the information- Huntington disease (HD) is a late onset, progressive, sharing procedures. neurodegenerativeautosomaldominantdisorder.Giventhis Methods: This study was qualitative conducted at King inheritance pattern, there has been a signiﬁcant and rather Faisal Specialist Hospital in Riyadh. It included a total of sensible controversy whether predictive genetic testing for fourteenparents,andatotaloffourteenhealthcareproviders minors - in a condition for which there is no disease- working with children diagnosed with genetic diseases. modifyingtreatment-isﬁt.Thenumerousethicalissueson Results and conclusion: In this study six strong themes bothsidesofthedebaterefernotonlytothepsychological, emerged. This study explored the experiences of parents of emotional and social impact of the decision making, but children affected with genetic diseases at the time of also raise the question regarding the cognitive capacities of receiving the incidental ﬁndings. It also explored the thechildrenintheirdifferentdevelopmentalstagesandtheir experiences of the healthcare providers attending these right to autonomy. The controversy of testing in minors families. where there is no medical beneﬁt in the immediate future References: Abbort, Madue E. "The Evolution of Mod- needs to be challenged once again, given the current ern Medicine." Canadian Medical Association Journal 12.3 perspective of the latest trials that cast a vision upon the (1922): 182 possibility of tangible treatments. Given the acknowl- A.A. Qari: None. A. Kashmeeri: None. M. Al- edgment of this new perspective, the discussion addresses Sayed: None.1806 P22.06B P22.07C Ethical aspects in genetic research Demarcating the ethical and legal boundaries of Mitochondrial Replacement Therapy: A literature S. De1, H. Karjalainen2, M. Tringham2, A. Hopia2, review analysis R. Tahvonen3, A. Pietilä4, K. Vähäkangas1 F. Noohi, A. Caulﬁeld, Y. Joly 1School of Pharmacy/ Toxicology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, McGill, Montreal, QC, Canada 2Functional Foods Forum, Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 3Bio-Based Business and Mitochondrial Replacement Therapy (MRT) is a new type Industry, Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke), ofinvitrofertilizationthataimstopreventthetransmission Jokioinen, Finland, 4Department of Nursing Science, of mitochondrial diseases (matrilineal transmission) by Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, replacing mutated mitochondrial DNA in unfertilized Kuopio, Finland oocytes or zygotes with normal mitochondria from a healthy donor. Since as a result of MRT, permanent Introduction:“EffectsofApoE4genotypeinformationand changesaremadetothegermlinethatwouldbetransmitted intervention intensity on the fulﬁlment of lifestyle changes through generations, this controversially so-called “three and sensory preferences” (ApoE4mot) is a nutrigenetic parent IVF” can be considered as a means of genetic intervention study. Within its ethics work package, a modiﬁcation. Besides the UK, which became the ﬁrst generally usable questionnaire is being developed to study countrytoapproveMRTin2015,onlyafewcountrieshave ethical aspectsingenetic studies. Informedconsentprocess addressed MRT through public policy. In order to explore isa signiﬁcant step inthe recruitmentof participants andis howtheinterdependenceofethics,policy,andpublicviews the focus of this questionnaire. can address questions that arise from new reproductive Methods and Materials: Participants were recruited technologies and analyze the inﬂuence of sociocultural through advertisements from South Ostrobothnia, Finland. factors upon stakeholders’ motives for using MRT, we A closed-ended ethics questionnaire was developed based conductedasystematicliteraturereviewanalysisofrelevant onliteratureanddiscussionsamongtheresearchgroup.One academicsourcesaccordingtoOxford’sBodleianLibraries part of the questionnaire assessed genetic knowledge and review guidelines. Next, we reviewed and assessed the other parts probed opinions related to recruitment pro- pertinent legislation, policies, and ethical guidelines, in cess including informed consent. Answering options were both the research and clinical contexts, in Canada, the US, “agree”, “disagree” and “don’t know”. The questionnaire the UK, and Mexico whose approaches in governing this was ﬁlled online. The answers are being analyzed through controversial technique range from strict bans with serious descriptive statistical methods. consequences to an absence of policy. The major themes Results: The majority of the participants (250/281) identiﬁed in our review included, safety and efﬁcacy, answered the ethics questionnaire. As to informed consent, concerns over germline modiﬁcation, issues of identity, 91%(228/250)thoughtthatenoughinformationwasgiven, concerns over three genetic contributors, and distributive 96% was happy with the way information was given and justice. Next, the interdisciplinary knowledge produced in 99.6% felt that enough time was given to consider partici- the ﬁrst phase will be used to analyze perceptions and pation. Most (98%), felt that they understand what signing expectations and concerns of Canadian stakeholders with the consent means. Although 38% thought that consent regard to MRT. should be asked each time their information is used in any F. Noohi: None. A. Caulﬁeld: None. Y. Joly: None. study, 54% thought asking once was enough. Conclusion: Participants regarded the informed consent P22.08D process as satisfactory. The ethics questionnaire was found Earlier, more and better information in families with a to be a useful tool and is now being further developed and genetic disease validated. Funding: Academy of Finland, University of Eastern J. Hennessy1, M. Amador2,3, M. Monin4, G. Coraelli4, Finland A. Heinzmann4, S. Heide3, E. Schaerer3, M. Spentchian3, S. De: None. H. Karjalainen: None. M. Tringham: A.Herson3,5,S.Sayah1,5,E.Petit4,D.Heron3,S.Tezenas None. A. Hopia: None. R. Tahvonen: None. A. Pietilä: du Montcel6, M. Gargiulo7,8,3, A. Durr4,3 None. K. Vähäkangas: None. 1ICM (Brain and Spine Institute), Inserm U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Université, UMR_S 1127, Paris,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1807 Paris, France, 2Paris ALS Center, Departement of Grant references: Agence de la Biomédecine Neurology, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, J. Hennessy: None. M. Amador: None. M. Monin: France, Paris, France, 3Department of Genetics, APHP, None.G.Coraelli:None.A.Heinzmann:None.S.Heide: Pitié-Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France, Paris, None. E. Schaerer: None. M. Spentchian: None. A. France, 4ICM (Brain and Spine Institute), Inserm U 1127, Herson:None.S.Sayah:None.E.Petit:None.D.Heron: CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Université, UMR_S 1127, None.S.TezenasduMontcel:None.M.Gargiulo:None. Paris, Paris, France, 5Institute of Myology, Pitié A. Durr: None. Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France, Paris, France, 6Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Pierre P22.11C Louis de Santé Publique, Medical Information Unit, Pitié- searching for secondary ﬁndings, considering Salpêtrière Charles-Foix University Hospital, Assistance actionability and preserving the right not to know Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), 75013, Paris, France, Paris, France, 7Institut of Myologie, Pitié M.Vincent1,M.Nizon1,S.Julia2,S.Bézieau1,B.Cogné1, Salpêtrière University Hospital, Paris, France, Paris, L. Pasquier3, B. Isidor1 France, 8Laboratoire de Psychologie Clinique et Psychopathologie, EA 4056, Université Paris Descartes, 1CHU Nantes, nantes, France, 2CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut de Psychologie, Paris, France, 3CHU Rennes, Rennes, France France., Paris, France Asuseofhigh-throughputsequencingisrapidlygrowingin Introduction: Genetic counselling relies on information theclinicalsetting,vitalquestionsneedtoberaisedoverthe circulation within families. One issue of information about most appropriate course of action regarding the active genetic risk is reproductive decision making. The aim was searchfordisease-causingvariantsextraneoustotheclinical tocompareattitudesindifferentneurogeneticdiseasessuch question. Although the American College of Genetics and as Huntington disease, spinocerebellar ataxias, Creutzfeldt- Genomicsrecommendsalistofthesesecondaryﬁndingsbe Jakob disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Myotonic identiﬁedinallpatients,otherprofessionalbodiesarenotin dystrophy and assess evolution for Huntington disease agreement,aviewwhichweshareforseveralreasons.First, since 2000. as we discuss, the use of actionability as the criterion for MaterialsandMethods:Aquestionnairewasdistributed determining whether or not to report secondary ﬁndings is since June 2018. problematic, particularly as it is currently lacking a clear, Results:Weanalysed370completedquestionnaires(200 precise and widely agreed upon deﬁnition. Second, the HD, 81 SCAs, 56 DM1, 28 ALS, 5 CJD). Affected indi- question remains as to how beneﬁcial the knowledge of viduals were 34.9%, spouses 27.6%, at-risks persons 21% thesevariantsistoindividuals’health,particularlygiventhe andpremanifestcarriers10.1%,ornon-carriers6.5%.Mean uncertaintyassociatedwiththepathogenicityofsomeofthe age at response was 56.5± 15.5 (18-85), signiﬁcantly older variants. We suggest it is critical that reasonable choices in ataxias (p<0.001). Only 12.5% knew about the French concerning the release of data resulting from high- law,stipulatingobligatoryinformation,but66.6%saidthey throughput sequencing are made and that it is appropriate did inform offspring. to wait for a consensus among scientists on the pathogeni- 37% wished having children, their family disease inter- city and clinical utility of disclosing secondary ﬁndings fered: 85% declared their disease justiﬁed prenatal or pre- before integrating this into sequencing practices in the implantationdiagnosis,67%tointerruptafuturepregnancy. clinical setting. Disease gravity estimated by the participant was positively M. Vincent: None. M. Nizon: None. S. Julia: None. S. correlated to turn to preimplantation diagnosis (p<0.01). Bézieau: None. B. Cogné: None. L. Pasquier: None. B. Between 2000 and 2019 participants had been informed Isidor: None. about their risk earlier (33.8±13.2 years versus 28.8±14.9 p<0.05); they were informed more often by parents, 13.8% P22.12D versus 51.2%; less by clinicians, 36.6% versus 18.2%; by Geneticdiscriminationconcernsintravelinsurance-the otherfamilymembers20.7%versus14.0%andnotdirectly, pre-existing medical condition rule 23.4%versus16.5%(p<0.001)andtestingbeforetheageof 18 was considered positively in 13.8% versus 30.1% K. K. Barlow-Stewart1, B. V. Murillo1, M. Otlowski2, (p<0.005). A. Doble1 Conclusion: Prospective comparison showed that infor- mation is given earlier, more frequently and wished to be 1University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2University of even earlier for the offspring. Tasmania, Hobart, Australia1808 subjects’ rights, the GDPR also provides for a two-level Internationally steps have been taken to prevent or limit framework to enable derogations from these rights when geneticdiscriminationinlifeinsurance,yettravelinsurance scientiﬁc research is concerned. First, by directly invoking remainsunregulatedandhasreceivedlittleattentiontodate. provisionsoftheGDPRonacondition thatsafeguards that An on-line survey explored the experiences of consumers must include ‘technical and organisational measures’ are in applying for a range of risk-rated insurance products who place. Second and in addition to that, through the Member had had predictivegenetic testing 2010-2016 and asympto- State law. Although these derogations are allowed in the maticatthetimeofapplication.Recruitmentwasconducted nameofscientiﬁcresearch,theycansimultaneouslybeseen through Australian support groups and research organisa- aschallenginginlightoftheethicalrequirementsandlong- tions. 67/79 respondents at risk for one or more of 76 existed protection standards in biobanking that have been conditions were valid for analysis. Of the 31/67 who set forth in various research-related soft legal tools, applied for travel insurance after genetic testing, seven international treaties and other legal instruments. In this [hereditary breast/ovarian cancer - HBOC (4), cardiovas- paper we review such soft legal tools, international treaties cular(2),neuromuscular(1)]reportedbeingchargedhigher and other legal instruments that regulate the use of health premiums(1)orrefusal(5)withthereasonscitedashaving research data. We report on the results of this review, and a pre-existing condition. Another respondent at risk for analyse the rights contained within the GDPR and Article HBOCreportedhighanxietythatshehadanswered“no”to 89 of the GDPR vis-à-vis these instruments. These thepre-existingquestionandmayhavedifﬁcultiesclaiming instruments were also reviewed to provide guidance on if she developed breast cancer. An audit of application possible safeguards that should be followed when imple- formsfortravelinsuranceavailableinAustraliafoundnone menting any derogations. To conclude, we will offer some included any reference to positive genetic test results as a commentary on limits of the derogations under the GDPR criterionthatmeetsthedeﬁnitionofa‘Pre-ExistingMedical and appropriate safeguards to ensure compliance with Condition’. While limitations of the survey methodology standard ethical requirements. prevent conﬁrmation of their asymptomatic status, there is S. Ciara: None. S. Slokenberga: None. D. the potential that these consumers inferred themselves that Mascalzoni: None. they had the condition as a result of their test. This emphasizes the need for clear guidelines for providers of P23.02B travel insurance, education of consumers as to the meaning Achievingamoratoriumontheuseofgenetictestresults of their test result and of the importance of the language in Australian life insurance: a case study used by professionals when returning the result. K.K. Barlow-Stewart: None. B.V. Murillo: None. M. J. M. Tiller1, M. Otlowski2, P. Lacaze1 Otlowski: None. A. Doble: None. 1Public Health Genomics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia P23 Legal implications of advances in genetics Introduction: Historically, Australian life insurance com- panieshavebeenpermittedtousegenetictestresultsofany P23.01A kindinlifeinsuranceunderwriting,andlegallydiscriminate The GDPR and the research exemption: considerations on that basis. Despite international trends towards banning on the necessary safeguards for research biobanks orrestrictingthispractice,theAustralianinsuranceindustry has, until recently, opposed any restriction of access to S. Ciara1,2, S. Slokenberga3,4, D. Mascalzoni2,4 applicants’ genetic results. This has resulted in the deterred uptake of clinical genetic testing and reduced participation 1MiddlesexUniversity,London,UnitedKingdom,2EURAC, in medical research, and has compromised progress in Bolzano, Italy, 3Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 4Uppsala genomic medicine for Australia (Tiller et al, Front. Public University, Uppsala, Sweden Health, 2018). Methods: In 2016, the Australian Genetic Non- TheGeneralDataProtectionRegulation(GDPR)cameinto Discrimination Working Group formed to address issues force in May 2018. The aspiration of providing for a high of genetic discrimination in Australia, especially in life level of protection to individuals’ personal data, risked insurance. Over the past 2 years, we undertook research, placing considerable constraints on scientiﬁc research, that lobbied government, and gave evidence at public hearings was contrary to various research traditions across the EU. for a national Parliamentary Inquiry. We also appeared in Therefore, along with the set of carefully outlined data the media and surveyed hundreds of Australians withAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1809 genetic mutations about their experiences of insurance provided on the decisions of the courts of the Russian discrimination. Federation on disputes related to genomic research. Results: The survey data we collected indicated a wide- ThestudywasfundedbyRFBRaccordingtotheresearch spread issue, based on consumer-reported breaches of cur- project № 18-29-14073 rent policy by insurance companies. In early 2018, the A.A. Inyushkin: None. V.D. Ruzanova: None. E.S. ParliamentaryInquiryrecommendedanurgentbanonusing Kryukova: None. I.S. Povarov: None. genetic results in life-insurance underwriting. In late 2018, the peak insurance industry body (Financial Services P23.04D Council)proposedamoratoriumtocommenceinmid-2019. Analysis of the procedure for agreement of subjects of Conclusion: Achieving a moratorium on the use of the genomic information in the Russian Federation to genetictestresultsinAustralianlifeinsuranceunderwriting obtain their biological material for research was a concerted effort requiring the cooperation of numer- ous groups and individuals and signiﬁcant time and V. D. Ruzanova, I. S. Povarov, E. S. Kryukova, resource commitments. This case study is highly relevant A. A. Inyushkin for all jurisdictions considering these issues. J.M. Tiller: None. M. Otlowski: None. P. Samara National Research University, Samara, Russian Lacaze: None. Federation P23.03C Introduction: Legislation in the ﬁeld of obtaining the ImprovementoftheRussianintellectualpropertylawin genomicinformationintheRussianFederationconsistsofa order to protect the results of genomic research large number of regulations and does not have a precise system. This leads to inconsistency of legal norms and A. A. Inyushkin, V. D. Ruzanova, E. S. Kryukova, creates a problem of the agreement for obtaining the I. S. Povarov biologicalmaterialforitsanalyzing,classiﬁcation,account- ing and subsequent use. Samara National Research University, Samara, Russian Materials and Methods: The genomic information traf- Federation ﬁcking,aswellasjudicialpracticeincludingthepracticeof the European Court of Human Rights were analyzed in the Introduction: The Civil Code of the Russian Federation study. A method for analyzing the doctrine, judicial prac- contains an exhaustive list of intellectual property that is tice, comparative legal methods as well as the method of grantedlegalprotection,butitlacks"theresultsofgenomic legal modeling were used. research". At the same time, the results of genomic studies Results: The study suggests the systematization of cases requirelegal protection. For the purpose oflegal protection of compulsory and optional coordination of the form, pro- of the genomic research results, it is necessary to apply the cedure, and conditions in which agreement must be mechanisms used in the ﬁeld of intellectual property that achievedforobtainingbiologicalmaterialforthepurposeof meet international standards. subsequent identiﬁcation of genomic information. A sys- Materials and Methods: The aim of the study was to tematic approach to the analysis of the legal system in the improve a legal basis for protection of the results of geno- Russian Federation has being developed. mic research. A method for analyzing the doctrine, judicial Conclusion: The results correlate with legislation and practice, comparative legal methods, as well as the method judicial practice in the Russian Federation and in foreign oflegalmodelingwereused.Thespeciﬁcmechanismswere legal systems. The similarities and differences in approa- proposed to protect the results of genomic research. ches to obtaining consent to the processing of biological Results:Toprotecttheresultsofgenomicresearchinthe materialarerevealed.Optimalapproachestotheapplication Russian legal system, the legal regime of copyright, patent of the normative base in the ﬁeld of genomic information law,aswellastradesecretscanbeapplied. Inaddition,we collection are developed. The study was funded by RFBR have deﬁned the limits of applying the legal regime of according to the research project № 18-29-14073 intellectual property to protect the results of genomic V.D. Ruzanova: None. I.S. Povarov: None. E.S. research in the Russian legal system. Kryukova: None. A.A. Inyushkin: None. Conclusion:Therecommendationsweremadetoprovide theprotectionofgenomicresearchresults.Inparticular,the P23.05A interpretationofRussianlegislationonintellectualproperty Patent Protection of the Inventions Created by the objects is carried out in the aspect of protection of the Therapeutic Cloning genomic research results. In addition, comments are1810 L. Rudzite1,2 GenIMPACT: Centre for Economic Impacts of Genomic Medicine, Macquarie Park, Australia 1University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia Introduction: Economic cost of cancer care could be improved via the implementation of precision medicine. Introduction: One of the latest and most controversial The aims of this study is to i) determine the costs and issues of biotechnology is therapeutic cloning as it hospital utilisation by childhood cancer patient through comprises morally and ethically ambiguous question currentpractice;andii)developamicrosimulationmodelto regarding embryo stem cell research. As inventors and evaluatethecostandbeneﬁtfromapplyingnext generation scientists tend to protect their intellectual property and sequencing(NGS) inthemanagement ofchildhoodcancer. resources applying for a patent, opposing debate occurs as The model will be ﬂexible to allow for updating input tothefeasibilitytograntpatentprotection.Notwithstanding parameters in future. the controversy, scientists and inventors have possibility to Materials and Methods: We used linked datasets of avail patent protection also for inventions of therapeutic children under 18 year of age, living in New South Wales cloning. (NSW),Australia,whohavehadcancerasbasepopulation. Materials: books, journals, reports as well as law and TheirrecordswereextractedfromtheNSWCentralCancer case-law in different languages. Registry and were linked to mortality database and the Methods: 1) comparative method; 2) historical method; hospital datasets. Individual patient’s hospital services 3) analytical method; 4) inductive and deductive methods; usage was determined from the hospital datasets. The 5) logical method; 6) grammatical, systemic and tele- simulation will mainly focus on actionable variants identi- ological methods. ﬁed,andchangeinmanagementduetotheNGSresult.The Results: controversy exists as to what interests of an simulation will be benchmarked against the current evi- embryoprevail-rightstobeborn,rightstobebornhealthy dence, and sensitivity analysis will be performed. andrightstohealthorrightstohumandignity.Theconcept Results: Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, neuroblastoma, of ‘being healthy’ leaves a margin of interpretation - whe- and Hodgkin's lymphoma, accounted for 30% of the ther‘healthy’includesgenerallystated standardinthestate reported cases. The annual cost of hospitalisation was $ or it may comprise the standard which an individual may 114,000. Early diagnosis and treatment before the cancer attain if it exceeds the generally stated level. The debate spread are critical drivers to lower costs and hospital utili- increases even more in countries which have stated the sation. In our simulation model, 40% of the patients would status of an embryo at a constitutional level. Inventions be diagnosed with actionable variants. regarding the therapeutic cloning may be patented in the Conclusions: We have successfully determined the USA as such, including all types of patents even embryo baseline cost of caring for childhood cancer. Our micro- stem cells. Whereas, amongst the European States may be simulation model will allow us to simulate the impact of claimed via micro-biological invention approach, including NGS on costs and patients’ care. all types of patents but not involving methods which leads O. Tan: None. D. Schoﬁeld: None. R. Shrestha: None. to destruction of human embryo even comprising super- numerary embryos. P24.03D L. Rudzite: None. Predictors of colonoscopy uptake: psychosocial and healthcare factors P24 A. Ciuca1, S. Pintea1, A. Baban1, R. Moldovan1,2 Other relevant ELPAG issues in genetics 1DepartmentofPsychology,Babes-BolyaiUniversity,Cluj- P24.02C Napoca, Romania, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Modelling the economic impact of next generation Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS sequencing on childhood cancer management—a Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom microsimulation approach Introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most O. Tan, D. Schoﬁeld, R. Shrestha frequent form of cancer worldwide, and approximately one third of cases have a positive family history of CRC or associated cancers. Colonoscopy is one of the mostAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1811 effective methods of screening for CRC. Uptake of Economics, thought discrete choice experiments (DCEs), colonoscopy is suboptimal, and many countries lack a allows to reveal and analyze individual and societal national screening programme. Our study aims at identify- preferences for genetic testing. Here, we will present two ing and ranking the factors contributing to a positive studiesweconductedinFrance.TheyillustratehowHealth decisiontoparticipateincolonoscopyscreeninginasample Economicscaninvestigate thevalue ofgeneticinformation population at risk, in order to inform psychosocial and apprehend the diffusion of genomic technologies. interventions, such as genetic counselling. Materials and Methods: SEQUAPRE investigated Method:Thestudyincluded98individualsagedover50 individual preferences. 513 parents of children with rare years, recruited from senior centres in Romania. Measures diseases who would beneﬁt from NGS were surveyed. included socio-demographic variables, frequency of colo- PRESAGE investigated societal preferences. 2501 noscopy, previous recommendations for screening and respondents representative of the French population were preventive measures, health literacy and family history of surveyed. In each study, DCE was aimed to investigate cancer. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis preferences as regard to different characteristics that can was used to establish the discriminative value for each describeagenetictestsuchasnatureandcostoftheresults. variable between positive and negative decision for colo- Econometric analysis investigated the presence of pre- noscopy screening. Area Under Curve (AUC) coefﬁcients ference heterogeneity. and effect size parameters were calculated. Results:Theystressedhowgeneticinformationisvalued Results: 23.5% participants reported previous colono- from individual and societal perspectives and the hetero- scopy screening. ROC curve analysis shows that colono- geneities among respondents: the value of uncertain and scopy uptake is best discriminated by perceived beneﬁts of secondary results, the role of the clinician in the decision screening (AUC=0.711, d=0.787, p=0.001), previous making-process, the willingness to pay for the test. recommendations for screening (AUC=0.689, d= 0.697, Conclusions: In the context of “Plan Médecine France p=0.007) and previous recommendations for preventive Génomique 2025”, our results show the importance to measures (AUC=0.675, d=0.642, p=0.011). understandindividualandsocietalpreferencestofavourthe Conclusions: Results show that recommendations from diffusion of the technology. healthcare professionals towards colonoscopy adherence Funding: Studies were funded by Regional Council of and preventive measures and highlighting the beneﬁts of Bourgogne Franche-Comté and FEDER. PRESAGE was screening were associated with improved colonoscopy also funded by Fondation Maladies Rares. uptake.Theseresultscanfurtherinformgeneticcounselling A. Pélissier: None. C. Thauvin Robinet: None. L. sessions by bringing empirical evidence to emphasize Olivier: None. C. Peyron: None. screening recommendations in individuals at risk for CRC. A. Ciuca: None. S. Pintea: None. A. Baban: None. R. P24.05B Moldovan: None. Incidental ﬁndings in clinical exome sequencing P24.04A H. G. Yntema1, V. van der Schoot2, L. Haer-Wigman1, “It is written in our genes! What people would like to A. J. M. Oerlemans3, M. van Koolwijk1, F. Tammer1, know?” Economic approaches to reveal preferences for Y. Arens2, H. G. Brunner1,2, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, genetic testing. Methods and results based on two I. Feenstra1 projects (SEQUAPRE and PRESAGE) in Health Economics 1Dept Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Dept Clinical Genetics, A. Pélissier1,2, C. Thauvin Robinet3,2, L. Olivier3,2, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, C. Peyron1,2 Netherlands, 3Scientiﬁc Centre for Quality of Healthcare, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 1LEDi, université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, Netherlands France, 2FHU Translad, université de Bourgogne/CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 3CHU Dijon, Dijon, France In our Genome Diagnostics laboratory, whole exome sequencinghasbeenperformedformorethan15,000index Introduction:Withtherapidspreadofgenomesequencing cases in the last 5 years. After analysis of genes associated in medicine, it's important to know its acceptability for with the patient’s condition (tier 1), analysis of the entire patients and potential users. Which elements of a genetic proteincodingsequencecanbeperformed.Especiallytier2 testareimportanttothem:dotheywanttoknowallresults, has an intrinsic risk to uncover incidental ﬁndings (IFs), whatever they are? Under what conditions? Health referring to the unintended identiﬁcation of (likely)1812 pathogenicvariantsunrelatedtotheinitialclinicalquestion, patients and ﬁrst-degree relatives as a result of cascade but of possible medical relevance to patients and their testing, (3) outcomes in patients and ﬁrst-degree relatives families. In total 15 IFs (0.1%) were detected in tier 1, including parental reproductive outcomes. mainly in the gene panel including all OMIM genes. As Results: When the directly observed cost and health expected,theriskofIFsinthesecond tier ishigher:85IFs outcomes of the cohort participants were forecast over 20 weredetectedin5,358analyses(1.6%).Forsome diseases, years,theuseofESresultedinatotalgainof7.63QALYs this1.6%chanceofanIFisevenhigherthanthechanceof for the cohort and an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio apositivediagnosis.Only58ofthese85IFswerelocatedin (ICER) of AUD$24,887.80 per additional QALY gained. the59medicallyactionablegenesreportedbytheAmerican When cascade testing in ﬁrst-degree relatives was added to College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG), the model, cost-effectiveness was substantially increased, indicatingthatinourdiagnosticsettingthereis1.0%chance generating a total gain of 16.15 QALYs and an ICER of ofﬁndingapathogenicvariant inoneoftheACMG genes. AUD$12,331.17. When parental reproductive outcomes This number differs 2.5-fold from the incidence of were added to the model, this produced the most cost- secondary ﬁndings (deliberate analysis of available data) effectiveoutcome,withatotalQALYgainof40.55andan in these genes in our population (incidence 2.6%, Haer- ICER of AUD$11,899.69. Wigman et al. EJHG (2019)). Strikingly, one third of the Discussion and Conclusions: ES in suspected mono- IFs reported by us are located in genes that are not on the genic disorders becomes more cost effective as the beneﬁts ACMG gene list. These results ask for a revision of of cascade testing and reproductive outcomes are realised. international guidelines on the reporting of IFs in L. Rynehart: None. D. Schoﬁeld: None. R. Shrestha: clinical care. None. Z. Stark: None. S. White: None. H.G. Yntema: None. V. van der Schoot: None. L. Haer-Wigman: None. A.J.M. Oerlemans: None. M. van P24.07D Koolwijk: None. F. Tammer: None. Y. Arens: None. H. Theroleofpersonalityandpriceoninterestindirect-to- G. Brunner: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. I. consumer genetic testing in a UK sample Feenstra: None. H. Davies1, R. Wootton1, O. Davis2, C. Haworth1,2 P24.06C Long-term economic impacts of exome sequencing for 1University of Bristol School of Psychological Science, suspected monogenic disorders Bristol, United Kingdom, 2University of Bristol Medical School, Bristol, United Kingdom L. Rynehart1, D. Schoﬁeld1, R. Shrestha1, Z. Stark2,3,4, S. White2,3,4 Introduction: The accuracy and accessibility of direct-to- consumer genetic tests (DTCGT) has increased rapidly in 1Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia, 2Victorian thelastfewyears. Consequently, itisimportanttoresearch Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, who is using these tests and why. This study explored the 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, underlying psychosocial factors that impact on interest in Melbourne, Australia, 4Melbourne Genomics Health DTCGT, including the inﬂuences of personality and price Alliance, Melbourne, Australia (£149 versus free-of-charge) on the decision-making process. Background:Exomeandgenomesequencing(ES/GS)has Methods: Participants (N=168, average age=18-25 high diagnostic and clinical utility in rare genetic disease years), recruited via social media and email, completed an diagnosis. However, the current health economic evidence online survey including the 44-item Big-Five Personality base to support widespread adoption and reimbursement is Inventory. This measured: Neuroticism; Extraversion; very limited. Conscientiousness; Openness; Agreeableness. Additional Aim:Toundertaketheﬁrstcost-effectivenessanalysisof questions measured levels of interest in DTCGT and how ES for suspected monogenic disorders in comparison with these vary as a function of price. usual diagnostic care, incorporating forecasting of both Results:Increasedconscientiousnesswasassociatedwith patient and family outcomes over a 20-year horizon. decreased interest in free-of-charge DTCGT, perhaps a Methods: A cohort of 80 infants who underwent ES and result of the perception that genetic tests pose a greater usual diagnostic care in parallel were used to model incre- threat to mental health than a beneﬁt to physical health. In mentalcostandhealthoutcomes(usingqualityadjustedlife participants over 25 years, interest in £149 DTCGT was years, QALYs) attributable to ES. Three models were associated with increased openness. Extraversion was developed: (1) outcomes in patients only, (2) outcomes in associated with decreased interest in free DTCGT in 18-25Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)... 1813 year olds. Neuroticism and agreeableness did not predict patients with different personality traits may require per- interest.86%ofparticipantsassertedaGPrecommendation sonalised support during the consent process. We are cur- would heighten their interest. rently exploring theUKpublic’sawareness andacceptance Conclusion: Personality and price both affected interest of genomic medicine to further inform NHS consent in DTCGT. Interest peaked when tests were free-of-charge procedures. andwithaGPrecommendation.ThissuggeststheUK’suse H. Davies: None. R. Wootton: None. O. Davis: None. of genomic medicine will attract signiﬁcant interest, but C. Haworth: None.