EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2019)27:1043–1173 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0492-4 ABSTRACTS COLLECTION Abstracts from the 52nd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations Publishedonline:10October2019 ©EuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics2019 Volume 27 | Supplement 2 The Swedish Exhibition & Congress Center, Gothenburg, Sweden June 15–18, 2019 Sponsorship:Publication ofthis supplement was sponsored by theEuropean Society ofHuman Genetics. All content was reviewed and approved by the ESHG Scientiﬁc Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract 1234567890();,:1234567890();,: sDeilseccltoiosunsr.eInformation:Inordertohelpreadersformtheirownjudgmentsofpotentialbiasinpublishedabstracts,authors are asked to declare any competing ﬁnancial interests. ContributionsofuptoEUR10000.-(TenthousandEuros,orequivalentvalueinkind)peryearpercompanyareconsidered “Modest”. Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered “Signiﬁcant”. Plenary Sessions of these results, we used BYL719 to treat nineteen patients withPROS.Thedrugimprovedthediseasesymptomsinall PL1 patients. Previously intractable vascular tumours became Opening Plenary Lectures smaller,congestiveheart failure was improved, hemihyper- trophy was reduced, and scoliosis was attenuated. The PL1.3 treatment was not associated with any substantial side Targeted therapy in patients with PIK3CA-related effects. In conclusion, this study provides the ﬁrst direct overgrowth syndrome evidence supporting PIK3CA inhibition as a promising therapeutic strategy in patients with PROS. G. Canaud G. Canaud: None. Necker Enfants Malades hospital, Paris, France PL2 CLOVES syndrome (congenital lipomatous overgrowth, What’s New? vascular malformations, epidermal naevi, scoliosis/skeletal andspinalsyndrome) isageneticdisorder that results from PL2.1 somatic, mosaic gain-of-function mutations of the PIK3CA The single-cell transcriptional landscape of gene, and belongs to the spectrum of PIK3CA-related mammalianorganogenesis overgrowth syndromes (PROS). This rare condition has no speciﬁc treatment and a poor survival rate. Here, we M. Spielmann1, J. Cao2, X. Qiu2, X. Huang2, describe a postnatal mouse model of PROS/CLOVES that D. M. Ibrahim1, A. J. Hill2, F. Zhang3, S. Mundlos1, partially recapitulates the human disease, and demonstrate L. Christiansen3, F. J. Steemers3, C. Trapnell2, the efﬁcacy of BYL719, an inhibitor of PIK3CA, in J. Shendure2 preventing and improving organ dysfunction. On the basis1044 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, P.Bucher4,S.Bergmann1,S.Antonarakis2,A.Reymond3, Germany, 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United E. Dermitzakis2 States, 3Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States 1Department of Computational Biology, University of During mammalian organogenesis, the cells of the three Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic germ layers transform into an embryo that includes most MedicineandDevelopment,UniversityofGeneva,Geneva, major internal and external organs. The key regulators of Switzerland, 3Center for Integrative Genomics, Faculty of developmental defects can be studied during this critical Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, window, but conventional approaches lack the throughput Switzerland, 4Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer and resolution to obtain a global view of the molecular Research, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne states and trajectories of a rapidly diversifying and (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Protein Expression Core expanding number of cell types. Facility, School of Life Sciences, Ecole Polytechnique We have developed a three-step combinatorial barcoding Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland method to proﬁle single-cell transcriptomes (‘sci-RNA- seq3′) without requiring physicalisolation ofeach cell. We Genome-wide studies on the genetic basis of gene haveusedthisnewmethodtoproﬁlewholemouseembryos expression and chromatin structure have considerably staged between 9.5 and 13.5 days of gestation with sci- advanced our understanding of the function of the human RNA-seq3, and created a transcriptional atlas of mouse genome. However, it remains unclear how structure relates organogenesis at single cell resolution (http://atlas.gs.wa tofunctionand here we aim atstudyingthis by assembling shington.edu/mouse-rna/). We identify hundreds of a dataset combining the activity of regulatory elements expanding, contracting and transient cell types and deﬁne (ChIP-seq for H3K4me1, H3K4me3 and H3K27ac), the corresponding sets of cell type-speciﬁc marker genes, expression of genes (RNA-seq) and genetic variations of several of which we validate by whole mount in situ 317 European individuals across two cell types (Lympho- hybridization. With Monocle 3, we delineate and annotate blastoid Cell Lines and Fibroblasts). 56 single cell developmental trajectories of mouse organo- First,weshowthattheregulatoryactivityisstructuredin genesis.Weexplorethedynamicsofproliferationandgene 12,583 Cis Regulatory Domains (CRDs) that are reﬂective expression within cell types over time, including focused ofTopologicallyAssociatingDomains.Inaddition,wealso analyses of the apical ectodermal ridge, limb mesenchyme ﬁnd 25,315 signiﬁcant associations between CRDs located and skeletal muscle. These data comprise a foundational on distinct chromosomes that form 30 Trans Regulatory resource for mammalian developmental biology. Hubs (TRHs) and reﬂect the global chromatin organization This single cell atlas of the development of wild-type into A/B nuclear compartments. mice also represent a ﬁrst step towards understanding Second,weshowthatCRDsandTRHsdelimitthesetsof pleiotropic developmental disorders at the organismal scale active regulatory elements controlling the expression of andprovidesrichopportunitiesfordetailedinvestigationsof most genes and are key contributors of cis and trans gene subtle roles for genes andregulatory sequences involvedin co-expression. developmental defects. Finally, we show that CRDs are under strong genetic M. Spielmann: None. J. Cao: None. X. Qiu: None. control.Wediscovered58,968chromatinpeaksaffectedby X.Huang:None.D.M.Ibrahim:None.A.J.Hill:None.F. nearby genetic variants (cQTLs). At the CRD level, this Zhang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illu- converts into genetic control of the activity of 6,157 CRDs mina. S. Mundlos: None. L. Christiansen: A. Employment and the structure of 110 CRDs. In practice, we estimated (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina. F.J. Steemers: A. that 75% of these are eQTLs and showed that CRDs and Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina. TRHs capture complex regulatory networks into which the C. Trapnell: None. J. Shendure: None. effects of eQTLs are propagated and combined to affect gene expression. PL2.2 SysGenetiX grant 3826, SNSF Sinergia grant CRSI33_ Chromatin 3D interactions mediate genetic effects on 130326, SNSF grants 31003A_170096, 31003A_160203 gene expression and 163180. O. Delaneau: None. M. Zazhytska: None. C. Borel: O. Delaneau1,2, M. Zazhytska3, C. Borel2, G. Giannuzzi3, None. G. Giannuzzi: None. G. Rey: None. C. Howald: G. Rey2, C. Howald2, H. Ongen2, K. Popadin3, None. H. Ongen: None. K. Popadin: None. D. Marbach: D. Marbach1, G. Ambrosini4, D. Bielser2, D. Hacker5, None. G. Ambrosini: None. D. Bielser: None. D. Hacker: L. Romano-Palumbo2, P. Ribaux2, E. Falconnet2, None. L. Romano-Palumbo: None. P. Ribaux: None. E. Falconnet:None.P.Bucher:None.S.Bergmann:None.S.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1045 Antonarakis:None.A.Reymond:None.E.Dermitzakis: Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 19Depart- None. ment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Clinical Sciences,SahlgrenskaAcademy,UniversityofGothenburg, PL2.3 Gothenburg, Sweden, 20University of Queensland, Bris- Insights from the largest genetic study of sporadic and bane,Australia,21DepartmentofBiostatistics,Universityof recurrent miscarriage Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 22School of Biome- dicalSciences,FacultyofHealth,QueenslandUniversityof T. Laisk1,2, A. Soares3,4, T. Ferreira5, J. N. Painter6, Technology,, Brisbane, Australia, 23Massachusetts General S.Laber5,7,J.Bacelis8,C.Chen9,M.Lepamets2,K.Lin10, Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 24Department of S.Liu11,12,I.Y.Millwood10,A. Ramu13,J. Southcombe14, Epidemiology,UniversityofGroningen,UniversityMedical M. S. Andersen15, L. Yang10, C. Becker14, S. D. Gordon6, Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 25Department J. Bybjerg-Grauholm16, Ø. Helgeland17, of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Peking University Health D. M. Hougaard16, X. Jin11, S. Johansson18, Science Centre, Peking University, Beijing, China, J. Juodakis19, C. Kartsonaki10, V. Kukuškina2, P. Lind6, 26Department of Integrative Biology, University of Califor- A. Metspalu2, G. W. Montgomery20, A. P. Morris21, nia Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States, 27Bristol P. B. Mortensen16, P. R. Njølstad18, D. R. Nyholt22, NationalInstitute of Health ResearchBiomedical Research M. Lippincott23, S. Seminara23, A. Salumets1, Centre, Bristol, United Kingdom, 28Program in Medical H. Snieder24, K. Zondervan14, Z. Chen10, D. F. Conrad13, and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Boston, MA, B. Jacobsson8, L. Li25, N. G. Martin6, B. Neale9, United States R.Nielsen26,R.G.Walters10,I.Granne14,S.E.Medland6, R. Mägi2, D. A. Lawlor4,3,27, C. M. Lindgren5,7,28 Introduction: Miscarriage is a common complex trait that affects 10–25% of all clinically conﬁrmed pregnancies. 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Miscarriageisassociatedwithexcessivebleeding,infection, Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Genome Center, Institute depression, infertility and an increased lifetime risk of of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3MRC cardiovascular disease. A variety of predisposing factors Integrated Epidemiology Unit at the University of Bristol, havebeenassociatedwithincreasedmiscarriagerisk,andit Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Population Health Sciences, has a genetic component that thus far has remained poorly Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, characterized. Our aim was to discover and map the United Kingdom, 5Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Center maternal genetic susceptibility and underlying biology of for Health for Health Information and Discovery, Oxford sporadic and recurrent miscarriage. University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6QIMR Berghofer Materials and Methods: We performed a genome wide MedicalResearchInstitute,Brisbane,Australia,7Wellcome association study including up to 69,118 sporadic mis- Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, carriagecasesfromsevendifferentancestries,750recurrent United Kingdom, 8Department of Obstetrics and Gynecol- miscarriage cases of European ancestry, and up to 359,469 ogy, Sahlgrenska University Hospital Östra, Gothenburg, femalecontrols.Weinvestigatedthegeneticarchitectureof Sweden, 9Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Mas- miscarriage with biobank-scale Mendelian randomization, sachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, heritability, genetic correlation and functional annotation 10Clinical Trial Service Unit & Epidemiological Studies analyses. Unit (CTSU), Nufﬁeld Department of Population Health, Results: We identiﬁed one and four loci signiﬁcantly (p University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 11BGI- <5×10−8) associated with sporadic and recurrent mis- Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 12Bioinformatics Centre, carriage, respectively. Following functional annotation Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copen- linkedtheseassociationswithgenesrelatedtogonadotropin hagen, Denmark, 13Department of Genetics, Washington regulation, placental biology and progesterone production. University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, MO, United States, We found a heritability of 29% (95%CI 20–38%) for mis- 14Nufﬁeld Department of Women’s and Reproductive carriage. Consistent with observational associations, we Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, found signiﬁcant genetic correlations between sporadic 15Department of Endocrinology, Odense University Hospi- miscarriage and number of children (p=7.2×10−9). tal, Odense, Denmark, 16iPSYCH, The Lundbeck Founda- Conclusion: Our results conﬁrm miscarriage as a com- tion Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, plexpartlyheritablephenotypeandimplicatenovelbiology Copenhagen, Denmark, 17Department of Genetics and through regulation of genes involved in gonadotropin reg- Bioinformatics,HealthDataandDigitalisation,Norwegian ulation, placental biology and progesterone production. Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway, 18KG Jebsen T.Laisk:None.A.Soares:None.T.Ferreira:None.J. Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical N. Painter: None. S. Laber: None. J. Bacelis: None. C.1046 Chen: None. M. Lepamets: None. K. Lin: None. S. Liu: novel. The novel genes have a signiﬁcantly larger ratio of None. I.Y. Millwood: None. A. Ramu: None. J. South- missense to PTV DNMs compared to the known genes, combe: None. M.S. Andersen: None. L. Yang: None. C. suggestingtheyarelesslikelytoactviahaploinsufﬁciency. Becker: None. S.D. Gordon: None. J. Bybjerg-Grau- We also investigated phenotypic similarity in patients holm:None.Ø.Helgeland:None.D.M.Hougaard:None. harbouring mutations in the novel genes and compared X.Jin:None.S.Johansson:None.J.Juodakis:None.C. the phenotypic distribution between the known and novel Kartsonaki: None. V. Kukuškina: None. P. Lind: None. genes. Overall, we explained ~51% of the exome wide A. Metspalu: None. G.W. Montgomery: None. A.P. DNM burden within our dataset. We compared the Morris: None. P.B. Mortensen: None. P.R. Njølstad: likelihood of our observed DNMs under different under- None. D.R. Nyholt: None. M. Lippincott: None. S. lyinggeneticmodelstoestimatehowmanygenesunderpin Seminara: None. A. Salumets: None. H. Snieder: None. the remaining 49% and the sample size needed to K. Zondervan: None. Z. Chen: None. D.F. Conrad: identify these. None. B. Jacobsson: None. L. Li: None. N.G. Martin: J. Kaplanis: None. K. Samocha: None. Z. Zhang: A. None. B. Neale: None. R. Nielsen: None. R.G. Walters: Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. R. None. I. Granne: None. S.E. Medland: None. R. Mägi: Torene: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; None. D.A. Lawlor: None. C.M. Lindgren: None. GeneDx. K. Arvai: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. S. Lelieveld: None. E. de Boer: PL2.4 None.E.Kucuk:None.R.Pfundt:None.L.vandeWiel: Discovery and characterisation of 49 novel genetic None.P.Danecek:None.J.McRae: A.Employment(full disorders from analysing de novo mutations in 31,058 or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Illumina, Inc. G. Gallone: None. parent child trio exomes R. Eberhardt: None. H. Brunner: None. C. Gilissen: None. K. Retterer: A. Employment (full or part-time); J. Kaplanis1, K. Samocha1, Z. Zhang2, R. Torene2, Signiﬁcant; GeneDx. M. Hurles: E. Ownership Interest K. Arvai2, S. Lelieveld3, E. de Boer3, E. Kucuk3, (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); R. Pfundt3, L. van de Wiel3, P. Danecek1, J. McRae4, Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; G. Gallone5, R. Eberhardt1, H. Brunner3, C. Gilissen3, Signiﬁcant; Congenica Ltd. K. Retterer2, M. Hurles1 PL2.5 1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, LossofMAENLI,anewlycharacterizedlncRNA,results 2GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 3Radboud inlimbspeciﬁcinactivationofEN1andadorsaldimelia Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Nether- limb phenotype lands, 4Illumina, Inc, San Francisco, CA, United States, 5Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, L. Allou1, S. Balzano2, A. Magg1,3,4, M. Quinodoz2, Germany B. Royer-Bertrand2, R. Schöpﬂin1,3,4,5, W. L. Chan3,4, C.E.Speck-Martins6,D.RochadeCarvalho6,L.Farage7, Despite the rapid discovery of novel dominant develop- C. Marques Lourenço8, S. Rajagopal9, S. Nampoothiri10, mentaldisorders(DD)inrecentyears,manymoredominant B. Campos-Xavier2, C. Chiesa2, F. Niel-Bütschi2, DDs have yet to be discovered. Following clear consent M. Spielmann1, V. Desiniotis1, S. Unger2, C. Rivolta2, practices, and only using aggregate, deidentiﬁed data, we L. Wittler11, B. Timmermann12, S. Mundlos1,3,4, pooled parent-child trio exome data from GeneDx, the A. Superti-Furga2 Deciphering Developmental disorders study and Radboud University Medical Center to form a dataset of 31,058 DD 1RG Development & Disease, Max Planck Institute for trios. We identiﬁed 45,242 de novo mutations (DNMs), Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Medical Genetics which were called with similar sensitivity and speciﬁcity Unit, Dept Computat Biol & Div of Genet Medicine, Univ across the three cohorts. We devised a novel simulation- Hospital (CHUV) and Uni Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzer- basedmethodtotestforanenrichmentofdamagingDNMs land, 3Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, in individual genes. This method scores all classes of Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, variantsonauniﬁedseverityscalebasedontheempirically- 4Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, estimatedpositivepredictivevalueofbeingpathogenic,and Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, incorporates a gene-based weighting derived from the 5Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max deﬁcit of protein truncating variants (PTVs) in the general Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, population. Applying this method, we identiﬁed 307 sig- 6Genetic Unit, SARAH Network of Rehab Hosp, Brasilia, niﬁcantly enriched genes exome-wide of which 49 are DF,Brazil,7InstCardioldoDistritoFederal,Brasilia,DF,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1047 Brazil,8CtrUnivEstacio,Facul.Med.,RibeiraoPreto,Sao L.Raymond,onbehalfofTheNIHRBioResourceandthe Paulo, Brazil, 9Dept Med Genet, Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. 100,000Genomes Project - Rare Diseases Pilot Med Univ, Chennai, India, 10Dept Pediat Genet, Amrita Inst, Cochin, India, 11Department of Developmental Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, United Kingdom Berlin, Germany, 12Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Sequencing Core Facility, Berlin, Germany TostudygeneticvariantsunderlyingunresolvedMendelian disorders and to improve interpretation of pathogenic Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been established variants, we sequenced the genomes of 13,000 individuals as key regulators of gene expression, yet, we are only withrarediseasesandrelativestoanaverage30xcoverage. beginning to understand the nature and extent of the Participants were recruited in the UK using approved involvement of lncRNAs in human Mendelian diseases. In eligibilitycriteria for 15different rarediseasedomains. We this study, we report three unrelated children, all from identify over 172 million unique short variants (91.5% consanguineousparents,withasofarundescribedcomplex SNVs, 3% insertions, 6% deletions) in the 10,259 limb malformation consistent with a dorsal dimelia genetically independent samples. Pertinent ﬁndings in over phenotype (syndactyly, mesomelic shortening, triangular 2,000 diagnostic-grade genes with 1,106 unique causal tibia, absent patella, vertically positioned feet and nails on variants(733SNVs,263indels,104largedeletions,6other the palmar side of digits). Array-CGH identiﬁed over- structural variants) affecting 304 genes were reported. lapping homozygous deletions located 200 kb upstream of Diagnostic yields varied across disease domains from Engrailed-1 (EN1), a homeobox containing gene involved 1.6–54%. Using a Bayesian genetic association method, in brain and limb development. CRISPR/Cas9 induced BeviMed, we identiﬁed evidence (posterior probability deletions of the homologous region in mice resulted in a >0.75)for99geneticassociationsbetweenrarevariantsand double dorsal limb phenotype recapitulating the human groupings of patients with similar phenotypes. Of these 61 malformation due to a complete loss of En1 expression hadﬁrmlyestablished evidencefor causality.Weidentiﬁed speciﬁcally in the limb. Using genome-wide epigenetic novel variants in regulatory elements of ARPC1B, GATA1, studies in the developing mouse and human limbs, we LRBAandMPL.WeusedTelomerecatsoftwaretoestimate characterized a new lncRNA (Maenli – Master regulator of telomere lengths (TL). We identiﬁed rare variants in TERT engrailedinthelimb)inthedeletedregionconsistingofan and DKC1 in patients with extremely short TLs. We approximately 1kb 4 exon transcript. Detailed characteriza- demonstrate how rare variants in previously reported tion in vivo including promoter deletion, promoter inver- GWAS loci facilitate identiﬁcation of novel monogenic sion, and insertion of a stop cassette showed that Maenli diseasegenes.WedemonstratethefeasibilityofusingWGS speciﬁcally regulates En1 expression in the limb but not at acrossanationalhealthcaresystemtodeliveradiagnosisfor other sites such as the brain. We also show that the patients,toidentifynovelassociationsandcomplexgenetic inactivationofMaenliisthecauseofthedoubledorsallimb architecture in rare diseases. phenotypeandassuchtheﬁrstdescriptionofanlncRNAin L. Raymond: None. a human developmental disorder. Our study highlights the involvement of lncRNAs as a new disease mechanism in congenital malformations. PL3 L. Allou: None. S. Balzano: None. A. Magg: None. M. Mendel Award Lecture Quinodoz: None. B. Royer-Bertrand: None. R. Schöpﬂin:None.W.L.Chan:None.C.E.Speck-Martins: PL3.1A None.D.RochadeCarvalho:None.L.Farage:None.C. 25 Year Genomic Odyssey Marques Lourenço: None. S. Rajagopal: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. B. Campos-Xavier: None. C. C. Venter Chiesa: None. F. Niel-Bütschi: None. M. Spielmann: None. V. Desiniotis: None. S. Unger: None. C. Rivolta: J. Craig Venter Institute, San Diego, CA, United States None. L. Wittler: None. B. Timmermann: None. S. Mundlos: None. A. Superti-Furga: None. In 1995 J. Craig Venter, Ph.D. and team at the Venter Institutesequencedtheﬁrstgenomeinhistoryfollowedﬁve PL2.6 years later when Celera Genomics published the ﬁrst draft Whole-genome sequencing of rare disease patients in a human genome which was a composite of ﬁve individual’s national healthcare system genomes. In 2007 he and his team at the J. Craig Venter Institute published the ﬁrst complete diploid human1048 genome,whichwashisgenome.Whilethesegenomeswere recentyears,theknowledgeonourgenomehasbeengreatly an important starting point for research, they were not expanded, as thousands of genetic variants have been enough to change health care. Hundreds of thousands of associated to hundreds of complex traits and diseases. In peopleneedtohavetheirowngenomesequencedanddone addition, we have seen increasing awareness of the soatacompleteandaccurateleveltohavesufﬁcientdatato important role of another set of genomes in our body, also interpret the genome. Cost was prohibitive and the known as human microbiome or our second genome. Our technology was not yet robust enough in 2007 to make gut microbiome encodes some 150 times more genes that thisareality.Threeyearsago,thischangedwiththeadvent the host genome. While the human genome is set at birth, ofnewsequencingtechnologyandimprovedbioinformatics thegutmicrobiomecan undergo dynamicchanges overthe and machine learning tools. Dr. Venter and his team course of an individual’s life. By making use of the continuetheirworktodaywhichwasbegundecades agoin population-based LifeLines-DEEP cohort, we have shown comparing genotype to phenotype to better understand that the inter-individual variation of the gut microbiome humanbiology,healthanddisease.Hewilldiscussongoing captures quite some of the variation contributed by genetic research which the primary objective is to realize the full andnon-geneticenvironmentalfactors,therebycontributing impact of genomics prediction, to have a thorough under- to the susceptibility to complex diseases. Since the gut standingoftheDNAsoftwareandhowitcodesforthewide microbiome can be modiﬁed, this offers opportunities for range of human phenotypes and abilities. He and his team future therapeutic interventions. However we ﬁrst need to have a 25-year track record of continually increasing the understand if changes in the microbiome cause disease, or information content that can be derived from the human whether the microbial changes are the consequence of genome.Morerecently,wehavemergedthisexpertisewith disease. To move towards causality we applied, as a proof- an extensive phenotyping platform and machine learning of-concept, Mendelian Randomization and were able to techniques to demonstrate its predictive power to improve show that microbial changes are causal for type 2 diabetes healthoutcomes.Dr.Venterwillalsodiscusshispioneering andmetabolictraits.Furthermore,wearedevelopingagut- work in synthetic biology. In 2010, he and his team at the on-a-chip, a sophisticated microﬂuidic device to study the Venter Institute became the ﬁrst to successfully construct interplaybetweenthehumanhost,thegutepithelialbarrier, ‘synthetic life’—putting humankind at the threshold of the the immune system and the gut microbiome. most important and exciting phase of biological research, C. Wijmenga: None. onethatisenablingustoactuallywritethegeneticcodefor designing new species that can be used in many ways for the betterment of mankind. The science of synthetic Concurrent Symposia genomics is and will continue to have a profound impact on human existence, including new chemical and energy S01 generation, human health and medical advances, clean Updates in psychiatric genetics water and food production, positive environmental impact, and possibly even our evolution. S01.2 C. Venter: None. Genome wide patterns of structural mutation and selection guide the identiﬁcation of cis-regulatory structural variants in autism PL4 ESHG Award Lecture J. Sebat1, P. Tandon2 PL4.1 1LaJolla,CA, United States,2UCSD, La Jolla, CA,United Weandoursecondgenome:twokeyplayersincommon States. complex diseases Genome rearrangement is a driving force in human C. Wijmenga evolution and a contributor to complex traits and diseases. Structural Variants (SVs), including deletions and duplica- Lodewijk Sandkuijl Professor of Human Genetics, UMCG tionsofchromosomal regions,exhibit signiﬁcant clustering Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands in the genome, reﬂecting regional differences in mutation rateandtheactionofnaturalselection.Ourworkdevelopsa The manifestation of common complex diseases is the multi-scale regression model to predict SV mutation rates outcome of interaction of many different genetic factors in based on DNA sequence motif features. By applying our conjunction with non-genetic environmental factors. In random mutation model to population data, we identifyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1049 categories of functional elements that are under signiﬁcant S02.3 SV constraint, including enhancers and promoters and Immunotherapy in cancer UTRs. We then apply SV constraint to estimate the deleteriousness of SVs in genome sequencing studies, and K. Serre1, S. Mensurado1, A. Simões1,2, D. Correia1,2, we demonstrate that a proportion of the inherited risk for B. Silva-Santos1,2 autism is attributable cis regulatory structural variants (CRE-SVs). 1Instituto de Medicina Molecular| JLA, Lisbon, Portugal, P. Tandon: None. 2Lymphact-LymphocyteTechnologiesS.A.,Lisbon,Portugal S01.3 Immunotherapy is a game changer in the treatment against Updates in clinical applications of psychiatric genetics cancers. In particular, the immune checkpoint blockers that unleash host anti-tumour lymphocytes, or the adoptive J. Austin1,2 transfer of anti-tumour T cells have provided remarkable results. Regrettably, although these treatments yield extra- 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, ordinary hope, only a small fraction of patients fully 2BC Mental Health and Addictions Research Institute, respond. Resistance to treatment can be intrinsic to tumour Vancouver, BC, Canada cells, but it is also conferred by the tumour microenviron- ment. We will discuss the principles of immunotherapy Background: We now have a substantial and growing list exempliﬁedwithcurrentoptionsandresultsinvarioustypes of genetic variations - including both single nucleotide of cancers and envisage the future avenues. Then, I will polymorphisms and copy number variations that we can present two ongoing research lines in our laboratory. conﬁdently identify as contributing to the etiology of First, I will present a cellular immunotherapy product conditions like schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and depres- composed of gamma-delta T cells that selectively target sion. This progress is accompanied by a need for urgent malignant (but not normal) leukocytes. This subset attention to the question of how to apply this knowledge expressestheVdelta1TCRandabroadrepertoireofnatural clinically in such a way as to promote the best possible cytotoxicityreceptors(NCRs),suchasNKp30andNKp44, outcomes for those who live with psychiatric disorders and which recognize transformation-induced ligands like B7- their families. H6.Wewilldiscusstheresearchbehindtheselymphocytes, Methods: In this presentation, the outcomes of applying termed Delta One T (DOT-) cells, that leads to their pro- our developing knowledge of the etiology of psychiatric posed testing in leukaemia clinical trials by the end of disorders in the clinical setting will be reviewed. For the year. example, we will explore the psychological importance for Second, I will provide evidence that we can induce people with psychiatric illness and their families of under- tumour regression in mouse model of breast cancer, in a standing cause of illness, and in particular, the psycholo- manner that depends strictly on macrophages. Macro- gical and behavioural ramiﬁcations of understanding that phages, which can represent over 50% of the tumour there is a genetic contribution to these conditions. The immune inﬁltrate, are usually associated with poor prog- impactofcounselingenvironment,timing offamily history nosis.Althoughthesemyeloidcellscanalsoactaspowerful documentation, and risk communication on patient out- anti-tumoureffectors,theeffectiveinductionofanti-tumour comes of psychiatric genetic counseling will be discussed. functions in macrophages remains a major scientiﬁc and Results: Through presentation of both quantitative and clinicalchallenge.Thus,ourdatawillshednewlightonthe qualitative, narrative-based data, some of the key ramiﬁca- remarkablepotentialthatshapingmacrophagesmayofferto tions of applying psychiatric genetics data in clinical prac- design novel avenues for immunotherapy. tice will be highlighted. K.Serre:None.S.Mensurado:None.A.Simões:None. Conclusion: These data suggest factors that may be D. Correia: None. B. Silva-Santos: None. important to consider when implementing genetic data in clinical practice in order to promote the best possible out- comes for patients with psychiatric disorders and their S03 families. RNA mis-splicing dynamics, diagnosis and treatment J. Austin: None. S03.1 Minor spliceosome and disease S02 Finding the strengths that make cancer cells weak1050 M. J. Frilander M. Swanson, C. A. Nutter, J. L. Bubenik, R. Oliveira, L. J. Sznajder, B. M. Kidd University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States The minor spliceosome, which is also known as the U12- dependent spliceosome, excises rare U12-type introns Repetitive elements, including transposable elements and duringthenuclearmRNAprocessingstep.U12-typeintrons tandem repeats, are prominent structural features of the are characterized by highly conserved 5′ splice site and human genome. Among the latter repetitive class, micro- branch point sequences. Human genome contains approxi- satellites or short tandem repeats (STRs, ≤10 bp) are mately 700 genes carrying U12-type introns, typically one particularly dynamic sequences and are prone to expansion intron ineachgene (1). Unlike thenormal U2-type introns, mutations that cause >30 neurological and neuromuscular the U12-type introns are not typically alternatively spliced diseases. While STR expansions may occur in both the to produce multiple protein-coding mRNA isoforms. coding and noncoding regions of genes, pathomechanistic Instead, they show elevated level of intron retention in studies of noncoding expansions led to the discovery of RNAseq data that has been interpreted as less efﬁcient STR-induced RNA-mediated and protein-mediated toxicity splicing of this type of introns, and a possibility for rate- mechansims, due to either RNA-binding protein (RBP) limiting regulation of the genes containing U12-type sequestrationorrepeat-associatednon-AUG(RAN)transla- introns (2,3). tion (RAN), respectively. To gain further insights into Several human diseases have been associated with the disease pathology and also provide mammalian platforms minor spliceosome. While only two diseases have been fordrugtesting,transgenicmousemodelsforthesediseases reported to result from mutations in the U12-type intron have often employed heterologous promoters and gene splice sites, six diseases feature mutations in the speciﬁc contexts but this strategy fails to reproduce the tissue components of the minor spliceosome (4). Of these, con- speciﬁcity, developmental timing and spatial expression of genital mutations in the U4atac snRNA lead to Micro- the affected endogenous gene. Here, we report the cephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarﬁsm/Taybi-Linder developmentofanewgenerationofmouseknockinmodels Syndrome (MOPD1/TALS), Roifman syndrome (RFMN), usingrollingcircleampliﬁcation(RCA)invitrotogenerate and Lowry-Wood Syndrome (LWS). In U12 snRNP, large stable repeat expansions combined with CRISPR/ mutations in U12 snRNA lead to Early-Onset Cerebellar Cas9 genome editing for the neuromuscular disease Ataxia (EOCA) and mutations in RNPC3 to Isolated myotonic dystrophy type 1, which is caused by a CTG growth hormone deﬁciency type I (IGHD). Additionally, expansion (CTGexp) in the 3′UTR of the DMPK gene. somatic mutations in ZRSR2 have been associated with Dmpk CTGexp HDR templates resulted in knockin mice Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Additionally, several carrying a range of expansion mutations due to repeat neuronal diseases such as SMA and certain forms of ALS contractions in vivo and DM1-relevant disease manifesta- show defects in the splicing of U12-type introns (5). tions, including nuclear RNA foci and developmental I will give a brief overview of the mechanism and sig- dysregulation of RNA alternative splicing, were detectable niﬁcanceofthesystemwithanemphasistodiseases linked in both tissues and primary cells. Our results demonstrate tothismRNAprocessingmachinery.Iwillalsodiscussthe that microsatellite expansions can be effectively introduced consequences of different mutations in generating diverse into affected gene loci resulting in knockin mice that serve defects at the level of individual transcripts, and their asmultisystemicexperimentalandtherapeuticplatformsfor association with different disease phenotypes. STR expansion diseases. References: M. Swanson: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; 1. Turunen et al. (2013). Wiley Interdiscip Rev RNA 4, Locana Bio. C.A. Nutter: None. J.L. Bubenik: None. R. 61–76. Oliveira: None. L.J. Sznajder: None. B.M. Kidd: None. 2. Niemelä & Frilander (2014). RNA Biology 11, 1325–1329. S03.3 3. Oghabian et al. (2018). BMC Bioinformatics 19, 130. Restoring splicing defects by antisense oligonucleotide 4. Verma et al. (2018). Sem Cell Dev biol 79, 103–112. therapy 5. Jutzi et al. (2018). Cell Stress 2, 40–54. M.J. Frilander: None. R. W. Collin S03.2 Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands Dynamic mutations and RNA mis-splicing in diseaseAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1051 Antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) are small DNA/RNA Department of Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, molecules able to modulate pre-mRNA splicing, including Freiburg, Germany the correction of aberrant splicing processes due to genetic mutations. AONs are employed for a variety of inherited Cystic kidneys are common causes of end-stage renal diseases, including Duchenne muscular dystrophy, spinal disease,bothinchildrenandinadults.Autosomaldominant muscular atrophy and various metabolic disorders. In this polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) and autosomal reces- presentation, I will mainly focus on the use of AONs for sive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) are cilia-related inheritedretinal diseases (IRD), agroup ofdisordersthatis disorders and the two main forms of monogenic cystic highlyheterogeneous,bothatthegeneticandclinicallevel. kidney diseases. ADPKD is a common disease that mostly Our proof-of-concept work on the correction of a recurrent presents in adults, whereas ARPKD is a rarer and often splicing defect underlying CEP290-associated Leber con- more severe form of polycystic kidney disease (PKD) that genital amaurosis (LCA), one of the most severe subtypes prenatallymayresultinPotter’soligohydramniossequence. of IRD, has led to the initiation of a clinical trial, with Early and severe forms of PKD are quite common. About recentlyannounced promising results, demonstrating safety the same number of children do carry mutations in the and in some subjects efﬁcacy upon intra-ocular AON majorgenesforARPKDandADPKD.Thelatteroftenarise delivery.WeexpandedtheuseofAONsforthetreatmentof de novo or may affect both disease alleles in a recessive other subtypes of IRD, including Stargardt disease mode. In addition, mutations in several other cystogenes (STGD1)whichiscausedbyABCA4mutations.Employing can phenocopy early and severe PKD. A comprehensive midigene splice assays, as well as using patient-derived knowledge of disease-causing genes is essential for the ﬁbroblastcells,wehaveidentiﬁedthesplicedefectsthatare correct diagnosis, recurrence risk and parental counselling. associated with a large group of recently identiﬁed deep- Cell biological and clinical research approaches have intronic ABCA4 mutations. In some cases, induced expanded our knowledge of its pathogenesis and revealed pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology - differentiation of some mechanistic overlap between the different forms of iPSC cells towards a retinal fate - was needed to PKD. A reduced ‘dosage’ of PKD proteins is thought to demonstrate retina-speciﬁc splicing defects. In all cases, disturb cell homeostasis and converging signalling path- AONs were designed that were able to rescue the aberrant ways, such as Ca2+, cAMP, mTOR, WNT, VEGF and splicing events. Another, recurrent, ABCA4 variant Hipposignalling,andcouldexplainthemoresevereclinical (c.768G>T) leads to an exon extension of 35 nucleotides courseinsomepatientswithPKD.Geneticdiagnosismight (nt),therebydisruptingthereading-frame.Intriguingly,also beneﬁt families and improve the clinical management of the 35-nt extension caused by the common c.768G>T patients, which might be enhanced even further with variant could be rescued by blocking the alternative splice emerging therapeutic options. In this talk, I will provide donor site in intron 6, forcing the spliceosome to use the an overview of the current knowledge of PKD and its original splice donor site of exon 6. Taken together, AONs treatment. appear to be an effective and versatile tool to correct C. Bergmann: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- different types of splice defects associated with STGD1. niﬁcant; Bioscientia/Sonic Healthcare. E. Ownership Inter- Given the promising data obtained so far in a clinical trial est (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual using AONs for the treatment of CEP290-associated LCA, property); Signiﬁcant; Sonic Healthcare. F. Consultant/ AONs may serve as a more broadly applicable therapeutic Advisory Board; Modest; Alexion, Otsuka, Merck, PTC, strategy for various subtypes of IRD. Bristol-Myers Squibb. R.W.Collin:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; ProQR S04.2 Therapeutics. New insights in the genetics of hereditary nephrotic syndromes S04 C. Antignac An update on kidney research Imagine Institute, Paris, France S04.1 Polycystic kidney disease and ciliopathies Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is a clinical entity characterized by massive proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia and hyperlipide- C. Bergmann mia.Inheritedformsofsteroid-resistantnephroticsyndrome (SRNS) (either isolated or associated with extra-renal disorders), which frequently lead to end-stage renal failure1052 in children or young adults, appeared to be genetically remains a critical question. To address this challenge, we heterogeneous and pinpointed the crucial role of the have applied CRISPR gene editing to reveal disease podocyte, a highly specialized glomerular epithelial cell, mechanismsinorganoidsandtesttherapeuticinterventions. in the regulation and function of the glomerular ﬁltration Mutationsassociatedwithpolycystickidneydiseaseorcilia barrier. Indeed, most of the 50 genes identiﬁed to date in cause organoid tubules to swell thousands of times in size, SRNS encode proteins that are expressed in the podocyte producing large, ﬂuid-ﬁlled cysts of centimeter diameters. and that are structural podocyte proteins or are involved in In contrast, mutations associated with podocytes, the ﬁl- key biological pathways such as regulation of actin or tering cells of the kidney, do not affect tubules but cause microtubule dynamics and organization, vesicular trafﬁck- junctional deformities that explain urinary defects in vivo. ing and cellular recycling processes... More recently, Harnessing the power of automation, scRNA-seq analysis important progresses have been made in deciphering the of organoids reveals sixteen different cell types, and iden- genetic bases of Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) tiﬁesanovelthree-genesignatureofglomerulardiseasethat associating SRNS with neurological defects and micro- appears in human patients. cephaly. This syndrome raises the fascinating question of To improve organoid function and seek therapies, thou- themolecular pathwaysthatcouldbecommontobrainand sands of organoids can be manufactured simultaneously in kidney, in line with the growing evidence that podocytes high throughput screening formats, and analyzed for multi- and neurons share a large set of molecular processes dimensional phenotypes of differentiation, toxicity, and essentialtodevelopmentoftheglomerulusandthenervous disease. Screening reveals treatments that dramatically system.Disease-causingmutationshavebeenidentiﬁedin8 increase thevascular endothelium, and a surprising role for genes to date: WDR73 encoding a WD40 repeat-containing non-muscle myosin in cystogenesis, which can be targeted protein required for regulation of cell survival and pharmacologically targeted to modulate cystogenesis. microtubule cytoskeleton dynamics, NUP133 and Organoids with live ﬂuorescence reporters and in micro- NUP107 encoding nucleoporins, and very interestingly 5 ﬂuidic kidney-on-a-chip formats provide next-generation genes encoding proteins involved in tRNA post- platforms for phenotypic screening and illumination of transcriptional modiﬁcations (4 proteins of the KEOPS intracellular mechanisms at the tissue scale. complex and WDR4, responsible for N-6- Collectively, our ﬁndings delineate key strategies and threonylcarbamoylation (t6A) at position 37 in ANN focus areas for advancement of kidney therapeutics using decoding tRNAs and 7-methylguanosine modiﬁcation human organoids as surrogates for drug discovery, gene respectively. These data highlight the vulnerability of therapy, and regeneration. podocytes, as neurons, to cellular defects due to RNA B. Freedman: None. metabolism alterations. C. Antignac: None. S05 S04.3 Genome editing CRISPR Gene Editing in Human Organoids for Inherited Renal Diseases S05.1 CRISPR single-cell sequencing: Toward functional B. Freedman biology in high throughput University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States C. Bock1,2,3,4 Kidneys cannot naturally regenerate lost tissue, and few 1CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the preventive medications exist, limiting treatment options to Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria, 2Depart- temporary salves of dialysis or transplant with substantial ment of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of side effects. We have developed a simple method to Vienna, Vienna, Austria, Vienna, Austria, 3Max Planck differentiate human pluripotent stem cells into intricately Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany, 4Ludwig patterned, multi-segment organoids that resemble kidney Boltzmann Institute for Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases, tissues.Theseorganoidsformviaadevelopmentalpathway Vienna, Austria thatinducesthenephronprogenitorcell,whichgivesriseto podocytes, proximal tubules, and distal tubules along a International consortia have mapped the human transcrip- proximal-to-distal axis. tomeandepigenomeinhundredsofcellstypes(ENCODE, While beautiful, how to translate organoids into innova- IHEC, BLUEPRINT, etc.) and thousands of individuals tive therapies for organs as complex as human kidneys (GTEx, GoDMC etc.). These maps are being reﬁned byAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1053 ongoing single-cell sequencing projects (HCA, HuBMAP, frequency of precise repair of Cas9-induced DNA double- etc.), which will eventually give rise to a comprehensive stranded breaks via homologous recombination from catalog of all cells in the human body. However, we are template DNA. This problem is in particular eminent in lagging behind with our ability to assign biological non-dividing tissues such as the adult liver. In my functions to the observed gene regulatory patterns. presentation I will provide insights into our efforts of CRISPR-based genetic screens have the potential to developing in vivo gene editing approaches for mono- accelerate functional and gene-regulatory studies, but cur- genetic liver diseases. I will present a study where we rentmethodshaveinherentlimitations.Widelyusedpooled circumvented the problem of low rates of homologous screens are restricted to simple readouts including cell recombination in hepatocytes by applying CRISPR- proliferation and sortable marker proteins. Arrayed screens associated base editors. Base editors enable direct conver- allow for comprehensive molecular readouts such as tran- sion of C∙G to T∙A base pairs and vice versa by base scriptome proﬁling, but operate at much lower throughput. deamination and independent of DNA break formation and To overcome these limitations, we combined pooled homologous recombination from template DNA. When CRISPR screening with single-cell RNA sequencing into a targeting a mouse model for the metabolic liver disease broadly applicable workﬂow, directly linking guide RNA Phenylketonuria,systemicdeliveryofbaseeditorsviaAAV expression to transcriptome responses in thousands of resulted in gene correction rates that fully restored individualcells(Datlingeretal.2017NatureMethods).Our physiological blood phenylalanine levels. We observed CROP-seq method enables pooled CRISPR screens with correction rates above 60%, and restoration of the single-celltranscriptomeresolutioninawaythatscaleswell phenylalanine hydroxylase enzyme activity. Our ﬁndings in the number of cells (up to millions using combinatorial suggest the feasibility of using CRISPR-associated base indexing) and target genes (up to genome-wide). editors to repair genetic diseases in vivo in adult patients. We and many other labs have found CROP-seq broadly G. Schwank: None. useful for studying biological mechanisms that are difﬁcult to reduce to a simple readout needed for classical pooled screens. Applied to heterogeneous cell populations and S06 ex vivo tissue (e.g., in combination with Cas9-expressing Thank you for the Variant (a personal utility tale) mice), CROP-seq can identify cell-type-speciﬁc regulation in entire organs and uncover cellular differentiation S06.2 hierarchies. Genetic proﬁling in primary care: triggers and impact Given the increasing throughput of single-cell tran- on risk-reducing behaviour scriptomics and the advent of single-cell multi-omics tech- nology (reviewed in: Bock et al. 2016 Trends in N. Qureshi Biotechnology), CROP-seq enables deep proﬁling of large CRISPR libraries and constitutes a powerful method for NIHR School of Primary Care Research, University of functional biology at scale. Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom Funding:C.B.issupportedbyanERCStartingGrant(n ° 679146) of the European Union and by a New Frontiers Currently access to genomic proﬁling in Britain is most Group award of the Austrian Academy of Sciences. commonly through direct-to-consumer testing, such as C. Bock: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, available at high street retailers. Our studies indicate that patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Aelian family history is an important trigger for many people to Biotechnology. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; engagewithtestingbutdiscordancebetweenanindividual’s Aelian Biotechnology. genomic proﬁle results and their family history can cause confusion and adversely impact upon their risk-reducing S05.3 lifestyle behaviours, such as weight loss and smoking Advances in therapeutic CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing cessation. Often those individuals taking up direct-to- consumer testing have already optimised lifestyle risk- G. Schwank reducing health behaviours. Of concern is that positive genomic results may precipitate a fatalistic attitude and IMHS, Zurich, Switzerland negative health beliefs about improving health. Similarly, negative results may trigger apathy towards risk-reducing The CRISPR-Cas genome-editing tool holds great promise behaviours, even though these individuals may still be at for treatment of genetic disorders. Clinical translation of high risk of disease as a result of avoidable risk factors. these targeted nucleases, however, is hampered by the low However, non-modiﬁable risk factors, such as genomic1054 proﬁling and family history, can inﬂuence (modiﬁable) S07 lifestyle risk reducing behaviours. One possible driver for Polygenic risk scores coming of age lifestyle behaviour change is the anxiety associated with positivegenomictestresults.Thishasbeendemonstratedin S07.2 studies incorporating genetic risk assessment in primary Polygenic risks and their impact on behavior care. Primary healthcare professionals will interact with patients who have engaged in direct-to-consumer genomic S. Ripatti1,2,3 testing, and therefore have an opportunity to identify why thepatienthastakenupthetestandtheimpactithashadon 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Hel- modiﬁable risk-reducing behaviour in those individuals. sinki,Finland,2DepartmentofPublic Health, Universityof N. Qureshi: None. Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States. S06.3 What will this genetic result mean for my baby? While polygenic risk scores (PRS) have shown promise in risk stratiﬁcation in common diseases, evidence about their L. Henneman value in predicting future cases alongside clinical risk factors is scarce. In this talk, I will discuss strategies for Amsterdam UMC, VUMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands combining established clinical risk factors and genetic risk evaluation, and show how PRSs for common diseases, and Technological advancement, including next generation behavioral and biomarker traits behave in Finnish biobank sequencing, increases the possibilities for population- data,includingtheFinnGenstudywith150,000individuals based preconception, prenatal and newborn screening. A and up to 46 of registry-based follow-up. In addition, the largernumberandbroaderrangeofconditionsareaddedto talk highlights why PRSs could provide a useful tool for tests such as preconception carrier screening panels and stratiﬁed preventive actions such as cancer screening. non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), which may beneﬁt There is also limited experience on returning the poly- couples’ reproductive autonomy. In newborn bloodspot genicriskinformationinaroutinehealthcaresetting;inthe screening (NBS), expansion is facilitated by increased second part of the talk I will discuss how returning genetic clinical understanding of disorders and the availability of and clinical risk motivates treatment and behavioral chan- new treatments, which can improve early diagnosis to ges. In the GeneRISK Study, we randomly sampled 7,350 prevent irreversible health damage in children. middle-aged individuals, evaluated their traditional cor- While the expansion of screening tests could be seen as onary heart disease (CHD) risk factors and integrated them beneﬁcial, it also raises new ethical, psychological and with a PRS for CHD. We then returned 10-year risk esti- societal issues. Many of the screening developments are mates back to the study participants through an interactive technology-driven, and it is important to attune to parents’ web-based tool, KardioKompassi. Returning this persona- demand.Withtheincreasingnumberandtypeofconditions lized risk information resulted in favourable changes in for which testing can be offered, the number of false posi- behavior,attitudes,andriskfactorlevels.Thetalkwillalso tive and additional (unclear) ﬁndings increases, thereby display early results from pilot studies of providing genetic complicating information provision and counseling for risk information in clinical settings in Finland and in informed decision making. Abnormal (positive) genetic Estonia. screening test results understandably have great impact on S. Ripatti: None. parents, but especially uncertain ﬁndings can result in high parental anxiety. S07.3 In an expansion of the scope of screening the beneﬁts Polygenic risk scores in prostate cancer should outweigh theharms (proportionality). The widening scope of these technologies should therefore be considered R. Eeles acceptableandmeaningful,includingtheperspectivesofits users.Inmypresentation Iwill addressthechallenges with The Institute Of Cancer Research & Royal Marsden NHS expanded screening in the context of preconception, pre- Trust, London, United Kingdom natal and neonatal screening, and particularly focus on the parents’ perspective. There are over 1 million cases of prostate cancer (PrCa) L. Henneman: None. worldwideperyearanditisbecomingthecommonestsolid cancer in men in the Western world. There is evidence for genetic predisposition to PrCa from case-controlAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1055 epidemiological studies, and twin studies. The higher risks foundwithmonozygoticversusdizygotictwinssupportthe Nearly 20% of the human genome is composed of LINE-1 hypothesis that familial aggregation results from shared (L1) retrotransposons. However, in each of us, fewer than genetic rather than just environmental factors. Men of 10 L1 copies have signiﬁcant potential to mobilise in African ancestry have nearly twice the incidence rates of germinal and somatic cells. Germline L1 mutagenesis is a Caucasians. known source of disease, whereas the consequences of Genetic predisposition to common cancers is mainly due somatic L1 retrotransposition in tumours and the brain are to a mixture of contribution from both common variants mostly unclear. In this talk, I will present results showing with slightly increased risks (generally a relative risk of 2- YY1 (Yin Yang 1) mediates L1 repression via DNA fold or less) and rarer, higher risk variants which confer methylation. Mobile L1s lacking a YY1 binding site, a higher risks (usually 3–8 fold). In PrCa predisposition, we motif conserved for >70Myr of human evolution, are now have molecular evidence that both models exist; fur- severely hypomethylated during neurodevelopment, and thermore, it is the common cancer with the highest pro- can “jump” to cause somatic L1 mosaicism in the brain. portion of a common genetic variation component. YY1 is required for full-length L1 transcription, meaning Most oftherarervariants predisposingtoPrCaareinthe L1cannotescapeitsrepressor.Theseexperimentselucidate DNArepairpathway.Consistentevidenceisnowemerging amajorpathwaycontrollingL1mutagenesisinhumancells, that BRCA mutation carriers who develop PrCa also andexplainhowL1canevadesilencingtoretrotransposein developworsediseasewithahigherproportionofnodaland the brain. metastatic spread, and have a poorer survival. More G.J. Faulkner: None. recently,evidencehasalsoemergedthatothergenesinthis pathwayalsopredisposetoPrCaandthattheresultantPrCa S08.2 disease is more aggressive. Alu elements and cellular RNA metabolism However,thelargestcomponentofgeneticpredisposition to PrCa is due to commoner genetic variants (occurring in L. E. Maquat >5% of individuals). Each confers a small relative risk, but becausetheyarenumerousandtheirrisksaremultiplicative, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, United States they can combine to contribute quite substantial relative risks. In a study of 140 000 individuals using a chip, the Primate-speciﬁcAluSINEsaswellasrodent-speciﬁcBand OncoArray, with over 500 000 SNPs, in Caucasians, we ID (B/ID) SINEs can promote mRNA export from the discovered65newSNPsandwhencombinedwithprevious nucleustothecytoplasm,translationinthecytoplasm,and/ ﬁndings, a total of 170 SNPs explain 38.5% of the familial or Staufen-mediated mRNA decay (SMD) when present in relativeriskofPrCa.Inriskstratiﬁcation,meninthetop1% mRNA 3′UTRs. The transposable nature of SINEs, their of the genetic risk score group have a relative risk of 5.7 presence in long noncoding RNAs, their interactions with fold for developing PrCa compared with the median risk Staufen (STAU), and their rapid divergence in different group. These results currently apply to Caucasian popula- evolutionary lineages suggest they could have generated tions and a multiethnic analysis is on-going. substantialmodiﬁcationofpost-transcriptionalgene-control In the talk, I will discuss how common SNP proﬁling is networks during mammalian evolution. Some of the being studied to stratify populations for targeted PrCa variation in SMD regulation produced by SINE insertion screening programmes and how such SNP proﬁles can might have been similarly adaptive in separate mammalian modify the relative PrCa risks from the rarer variants. lineages,leadingtoparallelevolutionoftheSTAUnetwork R. Eeles: None. by independent exaptation of SINEs. To explore this, we searched for orthologous gene pairs, each carrying a species-speciﬁc 3′UTR SINE and each regulated by SMD, S08 bymeasuringchangesinmRNAabundanceafterindividual Beware of the transposons depletion of two SMD factors, STAU1 and UPF1, in both human and mouse myoblasts. We identiﬁed and conﬁrmed S08.1 orthologous gene pairs with 3′UTR SINEs that have been YY1: an enduring repressor of L1 retrotransposition independently exapted in mouse and humans for SMD during human neurodevelopment control of myoblast metabolism. Our work reveals a novel mechanism for the convergent evolution of post- G. J. Faulkner transcriptional gene regulatory networks in mammals by species-speciﬁc SINE transposition and SMD. University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia L.E. Maquat: None.1056 S08.3 S09 Insertion variants at disease risk loci Multidimensional nuclear organization K. H. Burns S09.1 Revealing the RNA layer of epigenome Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States S. Zhong Interspersed repeat sequences derived from mobile genetic UniversityofCaliforniaSanDiego,SanDiego,CA,United elementsmakeupmuchofourDNA.Inthispresentation,I States will introduce the concept that transposable element insertions deliver repressed functions to genomic locations Chromatin-associatedRNA(caRNA)couldberegardedasa - trans-activating functions bound by repressive silencers, layer of the epigenome (Trends in Genetics, 2018, and splicing functions masked by RNA binding proteins. 34:867–882). To elucidate the RNA layer of epigenome, These antithetical properties are the result of complex wedevelopedtheiMARGItechnologytodiscovercaRNAs relationships pitting the intrinsic activities of these retro- and reveal the respective genome interaction loci of each elements against the host factors that evolve to mitigate caRNA (Current Biology, 2017, 27(4): 602–609; PNAS their effects. Insertions provide a unique substrate for 2019, 116 (8) 3328–3337). Applying iMARGI to analyze evolutionary innovation since either of the opposing diverse human cell types, we observed that most of the functions can be made permanent. Our lab studies how transcription start sites in the human genome are occupied the contours of this conﬂict impact human disease. First, I with long-range interacting caRNAs (Current Biology, will describe how speciﬁc transposable element loci 2017, 27(4): 602–609). iMARGI also revealed the nearest ‘escape’ silencing in diseased tissues. For example, long chromosomal regions to nuclear speckles (iScience, 2018, interspersed element-1 (LINE-1) sequences are commonly 4:204–215)andinter-chromosomalproximity.Furthermore, derepressed in human cancers, resulting in somatic retro- iMARGI revealed that RNA-DNA interactions in normal transposition events and potentially creating unique mole- cells coincide with fusion RNA pairs in cancers (PNAS cular requirements for cancer cell growth. Second, I will 2019, 116 (8) 3328–3337). These data suggest an RNA- describe how rare and commonly-occurring inherited poise model, where the spatial proximity of one gene’s insertion alleles can affect mRNA expression and splicing transcripts and the other gene’s genomic sequence poises and lead to genetic disease. Examples include highly for the creation of fusion transcripts. penetrant disease alleles, as well as variants with lesser S. Zhong: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, effects that are detectable by genome-wide association patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest;GenemoInc.. study (GWAS). We have cataloged 809 polymorphic Alu elements mapping to 1,159 loci implicated in disease risk S09.2 by genome-wide association study (GWAS) (P<10−8). The architecture and mechanical properties of the We found that Alu insertion variants occur disproportio- nuclear lamina nately at GWAS loci (P=0.013). Moreover, we have identiﬁed many of these Alu elements in linkage disequili- O. Medalia brium (LD) with the trait-associated SNP. We are now working to understand their molecular mechanisms. One University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland variantofinterestisanAluinsertionattheCD58locusona haplotypethat affects multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility Laminsarenuclearintermediateﬁlaments(IFs)ofmetazoan (OR=1.3p=3x10–10).WefoundperfectLDbetweenthe cells. They assemble into ﬁbrous structures that are trait-associated SNP (rs2300747) and the intronic Alu positioned between the inner nuclear membrane and the insertion. We went on to show that the Alu alters splicing peripheralchromatin,althoughasmall fractionoflaminsis of the CD58 mRNA, promoting exon 3 skipping in splice presentinthenucleoplasm.Laminsarerequiredtomaintain reporterassays,andcreatingasplicequantitativetraitlocus nuclear structure and, together with many interaction (sQTL) in lymphoblastoid cell lines. The aberrant CD58 partners, are involved in most nuclear activities. Mutations isoform is frame-shifted, and presumed to be non- in lamins cause a group of >14 distinct diseases called functional. This work provides a broader perspective on laminopathies, it is not clear how lamins are organized how structural variants of repetitive DNAs may contribute in vivo and how these mutations affect lamin functions. to human disease. Understanding how lamins are assembled, and how K.H. Burns: None. mutationsinlaminsandlaminbindingproteinsaffectlaminAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1057 ﬁlament assembly and cellular localization is essential for genomeisestablishedandhowthemechanismsthattrigger understanding the basic mechanisms of laminopathic this organisation are affected in disease. diseases.Here,weapplyanintegrativeapproachcombining J.M. Vaquerizas: None. cryo-electron tomography, atomic force microscopy, net- work analysis, and molecular dynamics simulations to directly measure the structure and mechanical response of S10 single lamin ﬁlaments in its three-dimensional meshwork. From genome wide association study to mechanisms: Individual lamin ﬁlaments resolved a globular-decorated ﬁne-mapping ﬁber appearance and showed that A- and B-type lamins assemble into tetrameric 3.5 nm thick ﬁlaments. The lamin S10.1 meshworkisnotarandomarrangementofﬁlamentsbutthe From association to causal variant(s): statistical meshwork topology follows ‘small world’ properties. Our methods for ﬁnemapping results suggest that the lamin ﬁlaments arrange to form a robust, emergent meshwork that dictates the mechanical C. Benner, S. Ripatti, M. Pirinen properties of the lamin ﬁlaments. O. Medalia: None. University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland S09.3 Genome-WideAssociationStudies(GWAS)havenarrowed 3D genome organisation in disease: patient-speciﬁc down the genome into regions underlying complex chromatin interactions from primary tissue phenotypes. However, any one region still harbours thousands of correlated genetic variants, complicating J. M. Vaquerizas biological follow-up. We therefore need variable selection to reﬁne the large set of variants simply associated with a MaxPlanckInstituteforMolecularBiomedicine,Muenster, phenotype down to a much smaller set of putative causal Germany variants with direct effect on the phenotype. WepresenttheFINEMAPsoftwarethatcouplesBayesian The three-dimensional organisation of the genome plays a variable selection for ﬁne-mapping causal variants with an fundamental role in the regulation of gene expression. ultrafast high-resolution stochastic search. We show that Recent examinations of chromatin conformation have FINEMAPisasaccurateasgold-standardexhaustivesearch revealed the presence of hundreds of self-associating implementedinexistingﬁne-mappingapproacheswhenthe domains and thousands of regulatory loops between latter can be completed and achieves even higher accuracy enhancersandtargetgenesthatensureacorrectdeployment when the latter must be constrained due to computational of developmental programmes. Mutations affecting these reasons. We further demonstrate that FINEMAP opens up highly conservedandrelativelytissue-unspeciﬁcregulatory completely new opportunities by ﬁne-mapping genomic features often result in striking developmental defects and regions with tens of thousands of variants in few minutes disease. Despite the characterisation of such regulatory while exhaustive search would require thousands of years. features, it is currently unknown when chromatin con- Statistical ﬁne-mapping methods that use GWAS results formation isestablished,the cellular mechanismsthat drive also require Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) information. We this process and how they are affected in disease. report important practical consequences of misspeciﬁcation Here, Iwillpresentrecentworkdemonstratingtheuseof of LD that could happen when publicly available reference Hi-C technologies as a tool for disease characterisation in genomes are used. We demonstrated both empirically and primary tissue from patients. First, I will introduce an theoretically that the size of the reference panel needs to improved Hi-C method for very low amounts of input scale with the GWAS sample size to produce accurate material, down to one thousand cells. By systematically results. This ﬁnding has major implications for the appli- comparing Hi-C libraries made with decreasingamountsof cation of all ﬁne-mapping methods using GWAS results starting material I will show that the method is highly from GWAS consortia in which accurate LD information reproducible and robust to experimental noise. Then, I will from each participating study is typically not available. show the applicability of this approach in primary B-cells GWAS sample sizes soon counted in millions provide from a large diffuse B-cell lymphoma patient, highlighting unprecedentedopportunitiestouseﬁne-mappingresultsfor patient-speciﬁc translocation and abundant local structural downstream analysis. Therefore, we investigate how much variation when compared with control B-cells. of the regional heritability can be explained by a ﬁne- Overall, our results have important implications for our mappingmodelcomparedtothevariancecomponentmodel understandingofhowthethree-dimensionalstructureofthe BOLT. Although results from FINEMAP and BOLT show1058 goodconcordanceinregionswithnegligiblecontributionto 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, thegenome-wide heritability,BOLTyieldslargerestimates 2Wellcome Trust Center for Human Genetics, Oxford, than FINEMAP in regions with moderate to high herit- United Kingdom, 3Big Data Institute, Oxford, United ability levels. Scaling the analysis to biobank data, we Kingdom, 4University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United further illustrate how violations of model assumptions on Kingdom, 5Broad Institute, Boston, MA, United States polygenicity induces inaccuracy to heritability estimates that become more accentuated as statistical power to iden- Body fat distribution is a heritable trait and a well- tify causal variants increases. established predictor of adverse metabolic outcomes, C. Benner: None. S. Ripatti: None. M. Pirinen: None. independent of overall obesity. Recently, we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis of S10.2 694,649 individuals from the Genetic Investigation of Leveraging genome-wide association studies in diverse ANthropometric Traits (GIANT) Consortium and UK populations to ﬁne-map complex human trait loci Biobank (UKBB) and identiﬁed 346 genome-wide sig- niﬁcant (p<5×10–9) loci associated to WHR adjusted for A. P. Morris BMI (WHRadjBMI). Additionally, we recapitulated the knownsexualdimorphismobservedinWHRadjBM:~30% University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom of all loci are sex dimorphic, with most signals showing a larger effect in women. Notably, this sexual dimorphism is Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of complex virtually absent in GWAS of BMI, prompting a host of human traits are increasinglyundertaken indiversepopula- questions around the underlying biology of fat distribution tions. One approach that shows great promise for the and how elucidating (potentially sex-speciﬁc) mechanisms localisationofcausalvariantsunderlyingassociationsignals could yield insights into the etiology of fat distribution. is the aggregation of GWAS across diverse populations We thus set out to perform comprehensive ﬁne-mapping through trans-ethnic meta-analysis. Trans-ethnic ﬁne-map- and enrichment testing in the 346 loci associated with pingisenabledbytheobservationthatmanyleadSNPsfor WHRadjBMI, as well as the 266 and 91 loci discovered in complextraitsareshared acrossdiversepopulations,which the women-only and men-only meta-analyses, respectively. is consistent with a model for which the underlying causal We used up to 484,563 samples from the UK Biobank to: variants are the same across ancestry groups and were (i) examine enrichment of WHRadjBMI-associated loci in derived from mutations that occurred before human hundredsofcellandtissuetypes,(ii)performBayesianﬁne- population migration out of Africa. Under this model, mapping to generate so-called ‘credible sets’ of likely- trans-ethnic ﬁne-mapping then takes advantage of the causal SNPs, (iii) test for global and local patterns of observation that patterns of linkage disequilibrium (LD) enrichment of the credible sets in various genomic anno- amongst common variants vary between populations. As a tations, and (iv) perform functional work on likely-causal result, across ancestry groups, we would expect to see variants and genes. strong association signals only at the causal variant and Global pathway analyses across the full GWAS results those SNPs in strong LD with the causal variant in all replicated the previously-described enrichment of populationsstudied:thegreaterthediversityofGWAS,the WHRadjBMI signals in subcutaneous (p=1.12×10–8) more reﬁned the localisation will be. We will review and visceral (p=1.23×10–6) adipose tissue. We addi- methods for trans-ethnic GWAS meta-analysis, present tionallyobservednovelenrichmentsinreproductivetissues, simulations demonstrating the improved ﬁne-mapping including cervix and uterus (pectocervix=5.84×10–5 and resolution achieved with this approach, and highlight puterus=8.65×10-7), a notable ﬁnding given the link applications of these techniques to localising potential betweenobesity,fatdistribution,andfertilitycomplications. causal variants at complex human trait loci. We next used a Bayesian ﬁne-mapping approach A.P. Morris: None. (FINEMAP) to generate credible sets at each locus that capture99%oftheposteriorprobabilitythatthecausalSNP S10.3 (s) are in that SNP set (i.e., the ‘99% credible set’). We Large-scale integration of genetic and ‘omics’ data to found that for 215 of the 346 (~62%) in the combined ﬁnd susceptibility genes for obesity and fat distribution sample, FINEMAP identiﬁed only 1 likely-causal SNP. A similar proportion of the women-only and men-only loci S. L. Pulit1, J. Fernandez2, T. Karaderi3, S. Laber3, were most likely to contain only 1 causal SNP. T. Brown3, A. P. Morris4, M. Claussnitzer5, C. Lindgren3 Finally,wetestedtoseeifourcrediblesetswereenriched in genomic annotations via ENCODE and the Roadmap Consortium. We found that SNPs in credible sets derivedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1059 from the GWAS of WHRadjBMI in men were enriched in approaches in more than 25%, emphasizing the importance ChIP-seq binding tracks for EZH2, a component of the and the beneﬁt of accurate genetic diagnostics in NDD, polycomb repressor complex 2 implicated in the adipo- especially when accompanied by epilepsy. genesis pathway. We are currently characterizing the J. Lemke: None. functionaleffectofSNPsthatoverlapEZH2bindingmotifs. Our work demonstrates how large-scale GWAS data, in S11.2 combination with ﬁne-mapping approaches and integration Parental Mosaicism in “De Novo” Epileptic of omics data, can be leveraged to begin revealing pertur- Encephalopathies bations in biological pathways that drive alterations in fat distribution.Theseeffortsmayadditionallyprovideinsights H. C. Mefford into sex-speciﬁc mechanisms potentially relevant to the treatment of obesity and its sequelae. University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States S.L. Pulit: None. J. Fernandez: None. T. Karaderi: None. S. Laber: None. T. Brown: None. A.P. Morris: De novo pathogenic variants have been increasingly None. M. Claussnitzer: None. C. Lindgren: None. implicated in severe neurodevelopmental disorders, includ- ing developmental and epileptic encephalopathies, over the past several years. Genetic counseling for recurrence risk S11 when a family has a child with a de novo pathogenic De novo developments in epilepsia variant, estimated at around 1–3%, is largely based on empirical data and accounts for the possibility of germline S11.1 mosaicism in one parent. In families where parental De novo variants in neurodevelopmental disorders with germlinemosaicismispresent,however,thetruerecurrence epilepsy risk may beas high as 50%.Low-level mosaicism iseasily missed by Sanger sequencing technology, but massively J. Lemke parallel sequencing technology permits deep sequencing andallowsthedetectionofmosaicalleles.Inthistalk,Iwill InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofLeipzig,Leipzig, discuss work from our group and others to investigate the Germany frequency of parental germline mosaicism for apparently de novo pathogenic variants, which may be higher than Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) are frequently previouslyappreciated.Theclinicalimplicationsandimpact accompanied by additional features, such as intellectual on segregation testing will also be discussed. disability, epilepsy or autism, but little is known about H.C. Mefford: None. genetic differences between these NDD entities. Investiga- tionofexome-widedenovovariants(DNV)in6,753NDD S11.3 parent-offspring trios revealed unexpected ﬁndings when Brain somatic mutations in malformations of cortical comparing the genetic spectrum of 1,942 individuals with development with epilepsy versus 4,811 individuals without epilepsy. Despite marked phenotypicdifferences,“epilepticencephalopathy”sharesa S. Baldassari, T. Ribierre, S. Baulac similar genetic spectrum with “NDD with unspeciﬁed epilepsy”, which is not reﬂected by current clinical Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, France classiﬁcations. In general, individuals with missense DNV were more likely to have epilepsy than individuals with Genetic malformations of cortical development, such as truncating DNV. 33 genes displayed a signiﬁcant excess of focal cortical dysplasia (FCD), are major causes of severe DNV in epilepsy cases, of which SNAP25 and GABRB2 pediatric refractory epilepsies subjected to neurosurgery. hadpreviouslyonlylimitedevidenceofdiseaseassociation. Neuropathological hallmarks of FCDs and HMEs include Joint analysis of the overall cohort also implicated enlarged dysmorphic neurons (DNs) and balloon cells CACNA1Eas anovel NDD gene. Furthermore, comparing (BCs).Recently,therehasbeengrowingevidencethatbrain the designs of 24 diagnostic epilepsy panels of different somatic variants play a major role in the etiology of these providers revealed extensive inconsistencies. All panel neurodevelopmental disorders. My talk will provide a designs lacked various genes with high diagnostic value comprehensive view of the occurrence of germline and andbycontrastshowedvastexcessofgeneswithloworno somaticvariantsinalargecohortofpatientswithFCDand diagnostic value. Among genetically solved epilepsy cases, HME. We use ultra-deep sequencing to search for low- the individual DNV gave rise to personalized treatment allele somatic variants in paired brain/blood patient1060 samples, as well as pools of microdissected pathological revealed null alleles in SLC10A7, which have not been cells to elucidate the genetic cause. Our study unveils two explained molecularly. We identiﬁed mutations in the X- distinct pathogenic mechanisms involving the non-mTOR- linked MAGT1 gene in boys. MAGT1 is a homolog of related gene SLC35A2 in FCD1, and mTOR-pathway in TUSC3 that was previously associated with intellectual FCD2/HME, orienting towards targeted therapies. disability. Remarkably, mutations in MAGT1, which is a We also model somatic mutations in the mouse brain component of the oligosaccharyltransferase complex, cause combininginuteroelectroporationandCRISPR-Cas9gene- both a CDG phenotype and a primary immune deﬁciency editing to reproduce a focal and mosaic genetic hits. Mice described as XMEN (Blommaert et al. PNAS 116 with a low-level mosaic rate of crisperized or mutant neu- (20):9865–9870, 2019). rons faithfully reproduced clinical and neuropathological G. Matthijs: None. phenotypes of focal epilepsy linked to FCD. S. Baldassari: None. T. Ribierre: None. S. S12.2 Baulac: None. CDG therapies E. Morava S12 Congenital disorders of glycosylation Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States S12.1 Congenitaldisordersofglycosylation(CDG)areagroupof Genetic heterogeneity in CDG: where are the patients? clinically and genetically heterogeneous metabolic disor- ders. Over 147 CDG subtypes have been described. CDG G. Matthijs types affecting N-glycosylation are the most common type of CDG with emerging therapeutic possibilities. This Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, review summarizes the available therapies for disorders Belgium affecting the N-linked glycosylation pathway. In the ﬁrst part of the review, we highlight the clinical presentation, The ﬁeld of Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) general principles of management and disease-speciﬁc has expanded enormously in 20 years. It has become therapies for N-linked glycosylation CDG subtypes, practically impossible to keep track of their number; a organized by organ system. The second part of the review review from last year listed 105 different types (Péanne focusesonthetherapeuticstrategiescurrentlyavailableand et al. Eur J Med Genet. 61(11):643–663, 2018). PMM2- under development. We summarize the successful (pre-) CDG remains by far the most frequent type 1 CDG (two- clinical application of nutritional therapies, transplantation, thirds of the cases collected by the EUROGLYCANET activatedsugars,genetherapyandpharmacologicalchaper- consortium).MAN1B1-CDGandseveralCOGdeﬁciencies ones and outline the anticipated expansion of the therapeu- areamongthemorefrequenttype2CDG.AlmostallCDG tic possibilities in CDG. We aim to provide a are recessive disorders, either autosomal or X-linked. comprehensive update on the treatable aspects of CDG However, the collection of CDG harbours a number of types involving N-linked glycosylation, with particular genetically interesting observations. Thus far, ALG1 emphasis on disease-speciﬁc treatment options for the deﬁciencies were rarely identiﬁed because a large number involved organ systems and present current and future of pseudogenes complicates diagnostics; this has now been therapeutic strategies for CDG. solvedbyusinganNGSapproach.COG4-CDGwasknown E. Morava: None. asatypicalCDG.Recently,itwasshownthatarecurrentde novo COG4 mutation causes Saul-Wilson syndrome. S12.3 Interestingly, a 5′ upstream GGC expansion of the XYLT1 Link between Golgi ion homeostasis defects and gene is present either in a homozygous or in a compound Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation heterozygous state in a large majority of patients with Baratela-Scottsyndrome.DefectsintheX-linkedSLC35A2 F. Foulquier genearedominant,withsevere,earlyonsetpresentationsin girls.Denovomosaicsweredescribedinmalepatients,also CNRS UMR 8576, University of Lille, Villeneuve D’Ascq, severelyaffected,whilesomaticmutationsinthebrainhave France been shown to cause severe intractable epilepsy. A careful screening of patients with a skeletal dysplasia with Within the secretory pathway, ionic homeostasis of each amelogenesis imperfecta, yet another CDG phenotype, organelle is unique in terms of H+, Ca2+ and Mn2+Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1061 concentrations. Many transporters and pumps ﬁnely reg- werecentlyshowedthattheperiodicityintheorientationof ulatethesehomeostasisintheGolgicompartment,knownto the DNA minor groove with respect to nucleosomes be crucial for many cellular processes such as the vesicular determine a periodic pattern in the generation of somatic fusionevent,thesecretionofproteinsbutalsotheactivities mutations across human tumors, germline variants across of Golgi glycosyltransferases and glycosidases. For exam- populations, and genetic divergence across closely related ple, in eukaryotic cells, the Ca2+ concentration along the species. We demonstrated that the known widespread WW secretory pathway (ER/ Golgi) decreases progressively. periodicity across eukaryotic genomes −10-bp A/T dinu- Many pumps and transporters are involved in this tight cleotides periodicity- could have arisen as a result of the regulation such as SERCA and SPCA1 pumps. Mutations periodic de novo mutation rate. of the secretory pathway Ca2+-ATPase isoform 1 (SPCA1) On the other hand, we study the genetic basis of tumors cause a rare autosomal-dominant skin disorder called and their basic biology. Combining an ensemble of bioin- Hailey-Haileydisease.Similarly,mutationsofERSERCA formatics tools developed in our group and others with the Ca2+-ATPase cause also a rare autosomal-dominant skin aim of detecting signals of positive selection in the pattern disordercalledDarier Disease. AlterationsofGolgipH can of mutations of genes across tumors, we have produced a also cause diseases such as autosomal Cutis laxa (type II) catalog of the genes that drive tumorigenesis in 60 cancer where N- and O-glycosylation are altered as well as the types.Wegoonefurthersteptoidentifywhichamongstall trafﬁcking of speciﬁc proteins. To add an extra layer of the mutations of these genes drive each individual tumor. I complexity, defects in TMEM165, SLC39A8 and recently will present IntOGen, a cancer genomics platform that in SLC10A7, were discovered to be associated to strong makes available to all researchers the catalog of driver Golgi glycosylation abnormalities leading to Congenital genesanddrivermutationsacrossmorethan50,000tumors. Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG). In these deﬁciencies, Differenttypesofsomaticalterationsaffectbothoncogenes disruptions in the Golgi Ca2+/ Mn2+ homeostasis are and tumor suppressors. Recently, we have carried out the thought to be the molecular cause leading to glycosylation ﬁrst systematic analysis of the role of abnormal protein defects. This talk will ﬁrst summarize the molecular degradationintumorigenesis.Wefoundthatmorethan10% machineries involved in the ER/ Golgi ion homeostasis of all driver mutations across well-known cancer genes regulation and then the associated diseases resulting from cause tumorigenesis through the abnormal stabilization of defects in Golgi ion homeostasis. oncoproteins. F. Foulquier: None. A. Gonzalez-Perez: None. S13.2 S13 Finding a germline mutation during tumor testing: Understanding mutations to detect cancer implications for the patient and the family S13.1 J. N. Weitzel Understanding mutational processes and tumor biology City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, A. Gonzalez-Perez1,2 CA, United States 1Institute for Research in Biomedicine, The Barcelona Precision medicine and the genomic sequencing of tumors Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, areincreasinglywellsuitedtotargetingcancertherapies.In 2Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, addition, germline variants such as BRCA have emerged as University Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain companion diagnostics for targeting PARP inhibitors. Technically, a tumor genome is the germline with a few In our lab, we use data on genomic mutations in tumors in added features. This presentation focuses on this intersec- twobroadareasofresearch.Ontheonehand,westudythe tion of tumor and germline, wherein we consider the distribution of mutations across different regions in the discoveryofgermlinemutations inprecisionmedicine,and genome to understand basic questions about molecular the implications for the patient and the family. While biology, such as the interplay between DNA damage and appreciating the importance of germline variants in repair, and other cellular processes. With these studies we treatment response in precision medicine, we will discuss havediscovereddifferentsmall-scalegenomicfeatures-i.e., criticalissuesingenomiccancerriskassessmentandcancer spanning between a dozen and a few hundred base pairs- prevention, with a focus on hereditary cancer, such as the that interfere with thedepositionofdifferent typesofDNA process for conﬁrmation of potential germline variants damage and the mechanisms of DNA repair. For example,1062 discovered in tumor or cell free DNA testing, and cascade adapts to intermittent drug schedules and provide a testing for families. molecular explanation for the efﬁcacy of rechallenge J.N. Weitzel: None. therapies based on EGFR blockade.In parallel, we focused on HER2 ampliﬁed CRC. Targeting HER2 is effective in S13.3 30% of ERBB2-ampliﬁed mCRC, and most sensitive cases Liquid biopsy to follow clonal evolution in cancer eventually relapse. We studied the molecular evolution of individual metastases during HER2 targeted treatment to B. Mussolin1, G. Siravegna2,1, L. Lazzari1,3,2, discover spatially resolved determinants of resistance in G.Crisafulli1,2,A.Cassingena4,G.Rospo1,M.Montone1, mCRC. ctDNA analysis identiﬁed alterations associated G. Corti1, A. Bartolini1, R. B. Lanman5, C. Martino1, with lack of response in the majority of refractory patients. F. Loupakis6, D. Regge1, F. Di Nicolantonio1,2, CtDNA proﬁles and lesion-speciﬁc radiographic reports A. Sartore-Bianchi4, A. Bertotti1,2, L. Trusolino1,2, revealedorgan-andmetastasis-privateevolutionarypatterns S. Siena4, S. Marsoni1,3,4, A. Bardelli2,1 in patients who had initially responded. Of clinical relevance, we found that a simple blood assay would have 1Candiolo Cancer Institute – Fondazione Piemontese per identiﬁed the HER2 sensitive patients. Finally, exploiting l’Oncologia(FPO),IstitutodiRicoveroeCuraaCarattere whole exome data from individual lesions we designed Scientiﬁco (IRCCS), Candiolo, Italy, 2University of Torino, metastases-speciﬁc SNV panels. When the latter were Department of Oncology, Torino, Italy, 3FIRC Institute of coupled with T-Cell Receptors proﬁles (corresponding to Molecular Oncology (IFOM), Milano, Italy, 4Niguarda metastases-speciﬁc T-Cells inﬁltrates) we were able to Cancer Center, Ospedale Niguarda Ca’ Granda,, Milano, concomitantlytrackinthebloodtheevolutionofneoplastic Italy, 5Guardant Health, Inc.,, Redwood City, CA, United and T-Cells during several rounds of therapy. Blood-based States, 6Department of Oncology, Veneto Institute of analyses also revealed a direct correlation between lesions’ Oncology IOV - IRCCS, Padova, Italy sizeandcontributiontoplasmactDNApool,aninformation which was previously not available in metastatic colorectal Tumors evolve by a reiterative process of genetic cancers. diversiﬁcation and clonal evolution. Genotyping cancer B. Mussolin: None. G. Siravegna: None. L. Lazzari: tissueshasinherentlimitationsandtissuebiopsiescannotbe None. G. Crisafulli: None. A. Cassingena: None. G. performed repeatedly. Liquid biopsy-tumor genotyping Rospo: None. M. Montone: None. G. Corti: None. A. using circulating cell-free tumor DNA (ctDNA) in the Bartolini: None. R.B. Lanman: A. Employment (full or blood- has been recently applied to molecularly proﬁle part-time); Signiﬁcant; Guardant Health, Inc., Redwood cancerpatients,tomonitortumorburdenduringtherapyand City, California.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock to uncover novel mechanisms of resistance to targeted options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; therapies. We used metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) as Guardant Health, Inc., Redwood City, California.. C. amodeltoassesswhetherliquidbiopsiescouldinprinciple Martino: None. F. Loupakis: None. D. Regge: None. F. uncover molecular mechanisms responsible for the emer- Di Nicolantonio: None. A. Sartore-Bianchi: None. A. gence of resistance and track clonal evolution during Bertotti: None. L. Trusolino: None. S. Siena: None. S. targeted therapies. Emerging evidence indicates that escape Marsoni: None. A. Bardelli: None. from EGFR and HER2 targeted therapy are molecularly heterogeneous and involve several genes. We exploited plasma ctDNA analysis by Next Generation Sequencing S14 and Digital PCR to deﬁne gene alterations responsible for Debate: Genomics and the Media primaryoracquiredresistancetoanti-EGFRandantiHER2 therapies. While most mCRC patients who receive anti- S14.2 EGFR antibodies develop KRAS mutations during treat- Genetics and Social Media ment, we found that additional mutations affecting key nodes of the EGFR signaling pathway can also confer E. T. Matloff resistance. Mutated KRAS clones, which emerge in blood duringEGFRblockade,declineuponwithdrawalofEGFR- My Gene Counsel, New Haven, CT, United States speciﬁc antibodies, indicating that clonal evolution con- tinues beyond clinical progression. ctDNA proﬁles of Public perception of science and medicine plays an individuals who beneﬁt from multiple challenges with important role in how well therapies and medical advances anti-EGFR antibodies exhibit pulsatile levels of mutant are integrated into society, used and accepted by ordinary KRAS. These results indicate that the CRC dynamically citizens, funded by investors and the government, andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1063 therefore embraced or halted. One striking example is until the safety issues have been dealt with and there is pediatric vaccinations. Despite decades’ worth of scientiﬁc broad societal consensus.” evidencedemonstratingthesafetyandefﬁcacyofvaccines, The 2015 Summit statement did not use the word mor- recent public dialogue has created a surge in uncertainty, atorium. Nonetheless, it was widely reported as a call for a distrust, and fear signiﬁcant enough to reshape acceptance moratorium. At the time, everyone agreed that no one anduseofvaccines inmanyareas, andtotriggeroutbreaks should proceed with heritable human genome editing. ofdiseasesthatwereoncethoughtobsolete.Thisisbecause Three years later, in November 2018, Chinese scientists public perception is based not only on scientiﬁc data and again took the world by storm. Jiankui He, a researcher at medical knowledge, but on narratives shared on social the Southern University of Science and Technology in media platforms and opinions expressed by outspoken Shenzhen China, announced the birth of twin girls with critics and celebrities, many of whom have no medical editedgenomes.Theresearchobjectiveinthisinstancewas training, experience, or knowledge. toprovidethechildrenwithresistancetoHIVbymodifying For these reasons, scientists and clinicians should care theCCR5gene.Thisannouncementoccurredontheeveof about media coverage of science and medicine and should the Second International Summit On Human Genome help shape the messaging to ensure the information that EditinginNovember2018.AtthecloseofthisSummit,the reaches the public is accurate, easy-to-understand, and can OrganizingCommitteeissuedastatementbothcondemning be used effectively. When knowledgeable professionals are theresearchconductedbyHeandcallingfora“translational not involved in these dialogues, the answers fed to the pathway to germline editing.” There was no renewed call publicareofteninaccurateandcanbedamagingtotheﬁeld for “broad societal consensus” and no statement that could and to individual consumers. This is particularly true in be interpreted as a call for a moratorium. genomics,wheretechnologyandimplementationofgenetic This presentation will critically examine the media cov- testing is evolving rapidly. Geneticists need to take a more eragesurroundingeachoftheseeventsaswellasthetwitter active role in helping to educate the public and the media. conversations. Who said what, when and why … This includes not only interaction with the mainstream F. Baylis: None. media and popular press, but also direct engagement on social media platforms, such as Facebook, Twitter, Insta- gram, and Reddit. The investment of time and resources S15 necessary to educate the public and to shape the conversa- Regulatory Landscapes tion about genetics and genomics is a worthwhile and necessary effort for students, clinicians, scientists, educa- S15.2 tors, and leaders in our ﬁeld. Regulation of disease-associated gene expression in the E.T. Matloff: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- 3D genome niﬁcant; My Gene Counsel, LLC. W. De Laat, P. Krijger, M. Verstegen, G. Geeven, S14.3 V. Bianchi, C. Vermeulen, N. Rinzema, E. Vos, Human germline genome editing: The public and the A. Allahyar, C. Valdes, M. Pieterse, M. Sharma pundits Oncode & Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands F. Baylis Genomic organization in space and time (4D genome) has Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada regulatory impact on gene expression and the epigenetic landscape. We develop new methods to understand In the Spring of 2015, Junjiu Huang and his colleagues at chromatin topology in high detail, from the single allele SunYat-senUniversityinGuangzhouChinapublishedtheir to the cell population level, to assign function to the non- research describing the ﬁrst-in-human use of CRISPR coding genome in health and disease. Latest technologies genome editing technology in early stage, nonviable and biological insights will be presented. Additionally, we embryos. The research objective was to correct a mutation develop and will present new strategies to detect transloca- in the HBB gene that causes β-thalassemia. This con- tions in FFPE tumor samples. troversialresearchleadtotheﬁrstInternationalSummitOn W.DeLaat:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, HumanGeneEditinginDecember2015.Atthecloseofthe patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Cergentis. P. Summit, the Organizing Committee issued a statement in Krijger:None.M.Verstegen:None.G.Geeven:None.V. which they decreed that “it would be irresponsible to Bianchi:None.C.Vermeulen: None.N.Rinzema: None. proceedwithanyclinicaluseofgermlineeditingunlessand1064 E. Vos: None. A. Allahyar: None. C. Valdes: None. M. RivasLabusingpopulationscalegenomicdataandmedical Pieterse: None. M. Sharma: None. records in approximately 500,000 individuals from the UK Biobank study.The algorithmsandcomputational toolsare S15.3 designed to learn about disease risk attributed to genes, to Identifying DNA-regulatory elements in non-traditional improvelearningacrosspopulations,andtoprovideprecise model systems characterization of genetic risk across diseases for an individual. D. Garﬁeld M.A. Rivas: None. IRI Life Sciences/Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany S17 Manyofthemutationsthatdeﬁneus-theonesthatmakeus ESHG-ASHG Debate: Global collaboration to advance tallvs.shortorhealthyvs.sickandeventhemutationsthat the use of genomics in health make us human, are found distributed across the non- coding, regulatory genome. Identifying and characterizing S17.1 thesemutations,howeverischallenging;unlikecodingloci, Challenges and solutions to advance global the locations and function of DNA regulatory elements collaboration to understand, diagnose, and develop cannot typically be determined by DNA sequence alone. therapies for rare diseases Regulatory elements are also highly context speciﬁc, with manyelementsshowingactivityandaccessibilitytoprotein K. M. Boycott binding in a subset of tissues or developmental stages. Single-cellchromatinproﬁlingprovidesonsolutiontothese Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, University of issues by allowing researchers to identify protein-bound Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada regulatory elements across multiple tissues and develop- mental stages in a single experiment. Rare diseases, which affect over 350 million people In this talk, I will present an overview of how my lab is worldwide, frequently go undiagnosed or misdiagnosed using single-cell chromatin proﬁling in non-mammalian for years, in large part because access to genetic testing model systems (Drosophila and sea urchins) to better acrosstheworldisfarfromoptimalandbecausethegenetic understand the regulatory elements active during embry- cause of at least one-third of rare diseases has yet to be ogenesis and how mutations impact their function. I will discovered. And while investment in the development of focusspeciﬁcallyontwoquestions:1)Howdotissue/stage- rare disease therapies has been encouraged by the speciﬁc regulatory architectures inﬂuence the functional introduction of regulations, policies and incentives, there consequences of mutations? 2) What are regulatory ele- are treatmentsfor only 6%of rare diseases, of which fewer mentsspeciﬁedduringtheearlieststagesofembryogenesis? than 1% are curative. A vast, unmet need for research and D. Garﬁeld: None. investmenttoadvance diagnosticcapabilities andtherapeu- tic development must be confronted, despite the myriad of challenges faced. Collaborative strategies that pool S16 resources and knowledge are vital, including team science, Methods for genetic epidemiology research networks, novel funding models, shared knowl- edgeplatforms, andinnovativeregulatoryframeworks. The S16.3 International Rare Diseases Research Consortium Large-scale inference of human genetic data (IRDiRC),establishedin2011,hasbeenworkingdiligently to unify stakeholders (e.g., funding bodies, companies, M. A. Rivas umbrellapatientadvocacygroups,researchers,andexperts) to seek and drive solutions that aim to accelerate diagnosis Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States and therapeutic development for rare diseases worldwide. Further and future advances will depend on continued Instead of racing to cure disease after the fact, we hope to collaborations and cooperation among stakeholders, work- prevent disease before it strikes. In order to realize the full inghandinhandwithpatients,andexponentiallyimproving potentialofPrecisionHealthwecanlearntheopportunities research and development efﬁciency. Critically, engage- byintegrating massive-scaledatasetsandadvancedcompu- ment with stakeholders from underrepresented populations tational algorithms. In this talk, I will present the resources and less developed countries must be prioritized, to enable and statistical learning approaches we have developed inAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1065 all people living with a rare disease to receive an accurate D. D. Horgan diagnosis, care, and therapy. K.M. Boycott: None. European Alliance for Personalised Medicine, Bruxelles, Belgium S17.2 EMBL-EBI and global data integration The increasing understanding of the genome is recognised as being one of the main determinants of future improve- N. Goldman ment in healthcare. The availability of genetic data from a large number of individuals increases the ability to EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United investigate questions across many rare and common Kingdom diseases and in different populations, and also provides more information for understanding clinical care outcomes Molecular biology is now a leading example of a data for an individual. A number of large scale genome intensive science, with both pragmatic and theoretical sequencing initiatives have been launched in the last few challengesbeingraisedbydatavolumesanddimensionality years to try and capitalise on this potential. Within Europe, ofthedata. Thesechanges arepresentinboth “largescale” theUKhasledthewaywiththe100,000GenomesProject. consortiascienceandsmallscalescience,andacrossnowa Thisprojectlooksatthegenomesequencesofpatientswith broadrangeofapplications-fromhumanhealth,throughto rare diseases or cancer. More recently France announced agriculture and ecosystems. All of molecular life science is plans to invest EUR 670 million in a genomics and feeling this effect. personalisedmedicineprogramme.IntheUS,thePrecision Molecular techniques - from genomics through tran- MedicineInitiativeaimsatlarge-scaleresearchbygathering scriptomics and metabolomics - continue to drop in price onemillionormorevolunteerstoextendprecisionmedicine and turnaround time. This creates a wealth of opportunity to all diseases. Meanwhile, China has announced plans to for clinical research and, in some cases, active changes in invest nearly USD 10 billion in its own precision medicine clinical practice even at this early stage. The development initiative. These projects demonstrate the commitment at a ofthisworkrequiresinter-disciplinaryteamsspanningbasic national level and raise the question “What beneﬁts would research, bioinformatics and clinical expertise. be realised by undertaking a million genome initiative in a This shift in modality is creating a wealth of new coordinated effort across European countries?” A coordi- opportunities and has some accompanying challenges. In nated, pan-European MEGA project would garner crucial particularthereisacontinuedneedforarobustinformation genetic information that could have an immeasurable infrastructure for molecular biology and clinical research. beneﬁt when it comes to the health of current and future This ranges from the physical aspects of dealing with data EU citizens. volumethroughtothemorestatisticallychallengingaspects D.D. Horgan: None. of interpreting it. A particular opportunity is the switch from research commissioning genomic measurement to healthcare-centric S18 genomic measurement. This is occurring in a number of Our genetic history and its phenotypic consequences countries worldwide, including Australia, Denmark, Fin- land, France, United Kingdom and United States. The S18.1 Global Alliance for Genomics and Health is providing a Tales of Early Humans, Admixture, and Adaptation standards-settingorganisationtoallowforbothadeepening of the technical aspects of healthcare and for appropriate M. Jakobsson secondary use for research of healthcare-commissioned genomics data. Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden I will outline the overall challenge present in this new, interdisciplinary ﬁeld, the global coordination needed to Advances in the sequencing and the analysis of the achieve its goals, and the role that the EMBL-European genomes of both modern and ancient individuals have led Bioinformatics Institute is seeking to play. to breakthroughs in understanding human evolutionary N. Goldman: None. history. As an example, I will discuss recent discoveries about human history in Africa, leading to a fundamental S17.4 revision of the age of our species. Recent sequencing of Pulling the Strands Together: MEGA Steps to Drive seven ancient individuals from KwaZulu-Natal, South European Genomics and Personalised Medicine Africa, of which three were dated to ~2000 years old,1066 provided direct evidence for migration, admixture and metabolism, including insights into the time periods over adaptation in southern Africa that had important conse- which this selection has been acting. quences for interpreting our human past. Using traditional G. Hellenthal: Other; Modest; Founding member of and new population genomics analysis approaches, we GenSci. L. Ormond: None. P. Wangkumhang: None. estimate the deepest human population divergence time to between 350,000 and 260,000 years ago. This estimate S18.3 increases the deepest divergence among modern humans, Consequences of population genetic differences in coinciding with anatomical developments of archaic genetic risk prediction across diverse human humans into modern humans as represented in the local populations fossil record, and suggest that modern humans emerged around300,000yearsago.Asweuncovernewpiecestothe A. R. Martin1,2,3, M. Kanai4,1,2,3,5, Y. Kamatani5,6, human evolution puzzle, a complex interplay between Y. Okada5,7,8, B. M. Neale1,2,3, M. J. Daly1,2,3,9 migration, admixture and adaptation often appear. M. Jakobsson: None. 1Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Program in S18.2 Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Timing past admixture events and characterizing their HarvardandMIT,Cambridge,MA,UnitedStates,3Stanley consequences in contemporary human populations CenterforPsychiatricResearch,BroadInstituteofHarvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Department of G. Hellenthal, L. Ormond, P. Wangkumhang Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 5Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, University College London, London, United Kingdom RIKENCenterforIntegrativeMedicalSciences,Yokohama, Japan, 6Kyoto–McGill International Collaborative School Periods of intermixing among populations, or admixture inGenomicMedicine,KyotoUniversityGraduateSchoolof events, have had a major inﬂuence in shaping genetic Medicine, Kyoto, Japan, 7Department of Statistical Genet- diversity, sometimes with consequences for particular ics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, genetics-based traits. Here I present a new approach Japan,8LaboratoryofStatisticalImmunology,Immunology (called fastGLOBETROTTER) to identify and date Frontier Research Center (WPI-IFReC), Osaka University, admixture using dense genome-wide Single-Nucleotide- Suita, Japan, 9Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland Polymorphism (SNP) data that is more accurate and 4–20 (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland fold faster than the GLOBETROTTER software that similarly exploits haplotype information to increase Polygenic risk scores (PRS) are poised to improve precision over existing approaches. I demonstrate the biomedical outcomes via precision medicine. However, upper limit of time depths on historic intermixing that the major ethical and scientiﬁc challenge surrounding these techniques can detect reliably when using increas- clinicalimplementationofPRSisthatthoseavailabletoday inglylargercohortsofgeneticallysimilarindividuals.Via are several times more accurate in individuals of European application to data from over 6000 Europeans, I report ancestry than other ancestries. This disparity is an new results on admixture signals in northwest Europe, inescapable consequence of Eurocentric biases in genome- including events dated to ~500–600CE from sources wide association studies, thus highlighting that--unlike carrying DNA related to Africans found in individuals clinical biomarkers and prescription drugs, which may within Belgium, France and certain parts of Germany. individually work better in some populations but do not Furthermore,Iillustratethephenotypiceffectsthatrecent ubiquitously perform far better in European populations-- migrationhashadonageographicregion,suchasheightin clinical uses of PRS today would systematically afford the United Kingdom. I describe new statistical approaches greater improvement for European-descent populations. that can model admixture processes when identifying Early diversifying efforts show promise in leveling this genetic regions affected by selection. These techniques can vast imbalance, even when non-European sample sizes are (1) identify the loci and populations involved in selection, considerably smaller than the largest studies to date. To (2) enable the joint testing of SNP sets (e.g. in pathways), realize the full and equitable potential of PRS, greater and (3) account for variation in data quality when incor- diversity must be prioritized in genetic studies, and porating DNA from ancient human remains. Testing for summary statistics must be publicly disseminated to ensure selection using a variety of world-wide human populations thathealthdisparitiesarenotincreasedforthoseindividuals and DNA from both ancient and modern humans, I report already most underserved. new ﬁndings on selection attributable to infection andAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1067 A.R. Martin: None. M. Kanai: None. Y. Kamatani: beneﬁt from the treatment. In my presentation I will None. Y. Okada: None. B.M. Neale: None. M.J. summarise recent results, and future challenges Daly: None. F. Muntoni: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Sarepta, Biogen, Avexis. S19 F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Pﬁzer, Roche. Treating rare genetic disease S19.3 S19.2 Gene therapy for hemoglobinopathies Gene therapy for inherited neuromuscular disorders G. Ferrari F. Muntoni1,2 San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR- 1University College London Great Ormond Street Institute TIGET), Milan, Italy of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2University College Great Ormond Street Institute Child Health, Sickle cell disease (SCD) and ß-thalassemia major are London, United Kingdom congenital anemias caused by mutations in the ß-globin gene, resulting in either abnormal hemoglobin structure or Childhood neuromuscular disorders are devastating condi- reduced/absent production of ß-globin chains. They are the tions associated with major disability and shortened life mostcommonmonogenicdisordersassociatedtomorbidity span. They encompass common muscular dystrophies such and mortality. Treatment of these diseases is essentially as Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD); motorneuron supportive,requiringtransfusions,ironchelationanduseof diseases such as spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), and less hydroxycarbamide in SCD. At present, the only curative common limb girdle muscular dystrophies, peripheral approach is represented by allogeneic hematopoietic stem neuropathies and congenital myopathies. Each of these cell transplantation, with a probability to ﬁnd a well- conditions presents its own therapeutic challenges. In matched donor of <25%. muscular dystrophies one major obstacle is the abundance Ex vivo gene therapy, using autologous genetically of the target organ (skeletal muscle is ~40% of the body modiﬁed hematopoietic stem cells, potentially represents a weight), the need to target the heart and, as far as DMD is cure applicable to all patients regardless of donor avail- concerned, the size of its cDNA that, at 14 Kb, precludes ability and free from transplant related immunological the use of commonly used viral vectors. For SMA, one of complications such as graft rejection and graft-versus-host- thechallengesistheneedtotargetallmotorneurons,andthe disease. The development and large scale production of short window for therapeutic intervention in this rapidly clinical grade HIV-derived lentiviral vectors expressing progressive condition affecting infants. For congenital human ß-globin, and the optimization of gene transfer myopathies such as myotubular myopathy, the profound protocols in HSCs have progressed this ﬁeld to the pio- severity of affected children and their fragility complicate neering clinical trials in France and in U.S.A., and more thedesignandexecutionofclinicaltrials.Thelandscapefor recently in Italy. The ﬁrst results of clinical beneﬁt, theseconditionsishoweververychangingrapidly,thankto including early engraftment, hemoglobin expression and early success in landmark studies, of which the most transfusion independence were reported for some patients advanced are those in SMA and DMD. An AAV9 vector and are proving the potential efﬁcacy of this therapeutic originally developed at Columbus University, has demon- approach. strated to be able to efﬁciently correct motorneurons after Ourcontributiontotheﬁeldofgenetherapyinthelast10 intravenous administration, with acquisition of unprece- yearswasdevotedtotheclinicaldevelopmentofasafegene dented functional achievements in SMA1 patients. The therapy approach for ß-thalassemia using the GLOBE len- same group in Columbus also initiated in 2018 the ﬁrst tiviral vector. The crucial steps leading to TIGET BTHAL AAV9 clinical trial for DMD, in which a highly internally clinicaltrial,aswellaspreliminarydataontreatedpatients, deleted “minidystrophin” is packaged. Early data appear will be presented. encouraging. Shortly after 2 additional industry sponsored G. Ferrari: None. studies initiated their AAV9 DMD clinical trials. Recent data also indicate that children affected by the severe myotubular myopathy, in whom the defective gene was S20 administered after AAV8 i.v. injection have obtained Epigenetics and early development1068 S20.1 approach for homing-in on mechanistically informative Single Cell Epigenomic Analysis of the Anatomy and disease-associated regulatory sequence variants, and the Neuronal Circuitry of the Brain analysis of DS-DM to test mechanistic hypotheses for how DNA methylation patterns are shaped in mammalian J. R. Ecker1,2 genomes. References 1Howard Hughes Medical Institute, La Jolla, CA, United 1: Do C, Shearer A, Suzuki M, Terry MB, Gelernter J, States, 2Howard Hughes Medical Institute & The Salk GreallyJM,TyckoB.Genetic-epigeneticinteractionsincis: InstituteforBiological Studies, LaJolla,CA,United States a major focus in the post-GWAS era. Genome Biol. 2017 Jun 19;18(1):120 Our group uses advanced technologies in single cell 2: Do C, Xing Z, Yu YE, Tycko B. Trans-acting epige- genomics and neuronal tracing to identify both the netic effects of chromosomal aneuploidies: lessons from molecular signatures of individual neuronal cell types in Down syndrome and mouse models. Epigenomics. the mammalian brain and their synaptic partners. We use a 2017Feb;9(2):189–207 variety of multi-omic assays including DNA methylation, 3:DoC,LangCF,LinJ,DarbaryH,KrupskaI,GabaA, RNA-seq,chromatinaccessibilityand3Dstructureinsingle Petukhova L, Vonsattel JP, Gallagher MP, Goland RS, neurons across the brain. These detailed cell atlases reveal Clynes RA, Dwork A, Kral JG, Monk C, Christiano AM, novel cellular taxonomy in the brain and elucidate spatial Tycko B. Mechanisms and Disease Associations of diversiﬁcation in ﬁne cell subtypes allowing the identiﬁca- Haplotype-Dependent Allele-Speciﬁc DNA Methylation. tion of cell type-speciﬁc DNA regulatory elements. From Am J Hum Genet. 2016 May 5;98(5):934–955. this information, we can infer transcriptional regulatory 4: Mendioroz M, Do C, Jiang X, Liu C, Darbary HK, networks underlying cell diversiﬁcation. To link these Lang CF, Lin J, Thomas A, Abu-Amero S, Stanier P, epigenomicallydeﬁnedcelltypestothemouseconnectome, Temkin A, Yale A, Liu MM, Li Y, Salas M, Kerkel K, AAV2retro has been used to label, isolate, and generate Capone G, Silverman W, Yu YE, Moore G, Wegiel J, single nuclei methylome data from individual projection Tycko B. Trans effects of chromosome aneuploidies on neurons for more than 50 neuronal pathways. Our analyses DNA methylation patterns in human Down syndrome and show that the laminar location, cortical region, and mouse models. Genome Biol. 2015 Nov 25;16:263. projection targets all contribute to the unique epigenetic B. Tycko: None. signatures of individual neurons. J.R. Ecker: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Zymo, Inc, Cibus, Inc. Educational Sessions S20.2 Genetic-epigeneticinteractions:mechanisticinsightsand practical applications E01 New technologies (Sponsored by Illumina) B. Tycko E01.2 HMH Center for Discovery and Innovation, Nutley, NJ, Resolving human genetic variation with long-read United States single-molecule sequencing Our lab, with our collaborators, has been working to M. J. P. Chaisson understand genetic-epigenetic interactions that occur in cis and in trans. Haplotype-dependent allele-speciﬁc DNA UniversityofSouthernCalifornia,LosAngeles,CA,United methylation (hap-ASM) is a pervasive phenomenon that States reﬂects cis-acting effects of local DNA sequences on local CpG methylation patterns in human cells and tissues. As whole genome sequencing is being applied to large DifferentialDNAmethylationinDownsyndrome(DS-DM) disease studies, researchers are faced with the challenge of isaninterestingtrans-actingeffect,inwhichthepresenceof detecting a wide range of variation, including large theextrachromosome21leadstorecurrentchangesinCpG insertions, deletions, and rearrangements called structural methylation patterns at loci distributed throughout the variation (SV) with short read high-throughput sequencing genome. I will brieﬂy cover both topics, emphasizing the (HTS) data. It is common use the consensus of multiple practical utility of hap-ASM mapping as a post-GWAS algorithms to detect SV with minimal false discovery,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1069 however the extent of missing variation is unknown. To 3. Although the multiple layers of epigenetic regulation address this, we applied a suite of approaches: long-read, that result from modiﬁcations of DNA and histones have short-read, strand-speciﬁc sequencing technologies, optical been intensely explored, a new ﬁeld is emerging, termed « mapping, and variant discovery algorithms to comprehen- RNA epigenetics », the study of RNA modiﬁcations. We sively analyze three human parent-child trios to deﬁne the will discuss about the exciting potential of these modiﬁca- full spectrum of human genetic variation in a haplotype- tions to ﬁne-tune mRNA functions, which is changing our resolved manner. We identify 818,054 indel variants (<50 perception of epigenetic regulation. bp) and 27,622 SVs (≥50 bp) per human genome. We also F. Fuks: None. discover 156 inversions per genome—most of which previously escaped detection. Fifty-eight of the inversions wediscoveredintersectwiththecriticalregionsofrecurrent E03 microdeletion and microduplication syndromes. Taken Bridginggenomicdiscoveriesandpersonalizedmedicine together, our SV callsets represent a sevenfold increase in SV detection compared to most standard HTS studies, E03.2 including those from the 1000 Genomes Project. We use Personalised Medicine and clinical practice: what it these SV callsets to assess the performance of HTS studies means for patients and healthcare delivery including the types of variation that are missed by many currentstudies, SVdetected infunctional noncoding DNA, W. G. Newman and the combinations of algorithms that most effectively detect SV in HTS reads. Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, University of M.J.P. Chaisson: None. Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom Genomic medicine is a rapidly evolving area. In this talk I E02 will examine some of the drivers for its clinical adoption, Epigenetics and cancer explore some of the barriers to this and consider how these may potentially be overcome. I will use examples from the E02.1 pharmacogenetics of adverse drug reactions and the use of Cancer Epigenetics: from DNA to RNA modiﬁcations genomic tests to inform treatment choices in cancer to illustrate principles that will ensure that lessons are learnt F. Fuks from past experiences and that these are used to aid design of future studies to facilitate rapid adoption. I will consider University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium the evidence base that is required that will provide conﬁdence to health care commissioners to ensure that DNAmodiﬁcationsandhistonepost-translationalmodiﬁca- genomic medicine is used for patient beneﬁt rather than tions are considered the two pillars of epigenetics. Indeed, sitting in a research environment. cellscanchemicallymodifyDNAtodynamicallymodulate W.G. Newman: None. gene transcription and this phenomenon, together with histone protein modiﬁcation, is known as epigenetic regulation of gene expression. It is regulated by a variety E04 offactors,includingdevelopmentalcuesandenvironmental Gene Expression Resources stimuli, and alterations in epigenetic control play essential roles in several genetic diseases. E04.2 We will address the following key issues in the ﬁeld of Tissue-speciﬁc enhancer and promoter evolution in epigenetics and epigenomics: mammals 1.SinceDNAmethylationisareversibleprocess,thereis potentially a huge beneﬁt in modulating DNA methylation P. Flicek for the treatment of human diseases, notably cancer. To achieve such anti-cancer therapy, it is essential to decipher European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioin- the underlying molecular mechanisms. An overview of the formatics Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom most recent mechanisms will be presented. 2. We will also describe recent epigenomic efforts to Mammals are characterised by a wide range of diverse betterunderstandandmapepigeneticalterationsincancers, morphology, behaviour and other characteristics arising including DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation. fromalargelyconsistentsetofgenes.Asigniﬁcantfraction1070 of these differences are assumed to derive from alterations rearrangements and copy number variants (CNVs) as in transcriptional regulation caused, for example, by detected by karyotyping or chromosomal microarray might species-speciﬁc enhancer and promoter usage. Indeed, beneﬁt from further investigation by whole genome previous work from our laboratory and others have sequencing (WGS) to accurately resolve the structural demonstrated that, within a single tissue, species-speciﬁc rearrangement. We and others have shown that unexpected regulatory elements are extremely common and that complexities are common ﬁndings in the breakpoints of enhancers evolve more rapidly than promoters. karyotypically balanced chromosomal rearrangements. To understand the evolution of tissue-speciﬁc gene reg- Such ﬁndings are of clinical importance, as they may be ulation,wehavegeneratedgenomewidemapsofenhancers the cause of mendelian phenotypes in the rearrangement and promoters as well as matched gene expression data in carrier. Short read WGS allows for high resolution fourtissues—liver,muscle,brainandtestes—for10diverse characterization of SVs, but problems remain for mapping mammalian species. For all species, the three somatic tis- breakpoints located in repetitive regions of the genome, sues show a consistent regulatory proﬁle with the majority which are known to be prone to rearrangements. In our of promoters active across multiple tissues, while enhancer study,weusemultiplecomplementaryWGSexperimentsto activity is mostly tissue speciﬁc. Testes are consistently phase and solve the structures of chromosomal rearrange- different and display a regulatory proﬁle associated with ments. In many cases, by delineating the derivative increased transcriptional activity. We are able to classify chromosomes we provide a molecular genetic explanation enhancers into different types, as evidenced by distinct for the clinical symptoms observed in the carrier. Further- histone enrichment proﬁles, and show that they evolve at more, we compare the performance, sensitivity and different rates. By comparing across tissues and across resolution of different WGS techniques in a clinical species,wecanalsocharacteriseelementsthatarereusedin diagnostic laboratory set. different contexts and suggest a role for transposable ele- A. Lindstrand: None. ments in tissue-speciﬁc and tissue-shared regulatory ele- ments. Together these results provide insight into the evolutionary rewiring of transcriptional regulation and help E06 to understand genome function Pharmacogenomic testing for personalized medicine P.Flicek:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;Fabric Genomics, Inc., Eagle Genomics, Ltd.. E06.1 Integrating pharmacogenomics into personalized drug treatment E05 The longer the better? Third generation sequencing M. Ingelman-Sundberg1,2, M. Ingelman-Sundberg2 technologies 1Stockholm, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, E05.2 Sweden Delineating the structure of chromosome rearrangements using multiple WGS technologies Pharmacogenomic biomarkers for prediction of drug metabolism, toxicity and response are currently approved A. Lindstrand by FDA andEMA andare implemented into clinical work. These mainly identify common genetic variations in genes Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden encoding enzymes, transporters and targets. However, recent results from analyses of WGS and WES sequencing In recent years, technological advances have improved the effortsoflargepopulationsrevealthatabout40%ofallloss turnaround time and cost-effectiveness of human genetic offunction(LOF)andmissensemutationsofimportancefor investigations in both diagnostics and research. However, prediction of drug response are rare. Pharmacokinetic most focus has been on single nucleotide variation (SNV). analysesintwinsalsorevealthat50%oftheinterindividual In contrast, the calling and interpretation of structural inherited variation in metoprolol and toresimide pharmaco- variants(SV)isstillchallengingandcausalmutationsoften kinetics are caused by mutations not routinely analysed in go unnoticed in genome studies. Further, the methods thepharmacogeneticplatformscurrentlyused.Thisformsa applied currently in genetic diagnostics have limitations in problem for speciﬁc individualized drug therapy when the detectionandresolutionandinconsequencecausalvariants patient speciﬁc mutations have to be taken into considera- may be missed or misinterpreted, resulting in sub-optimal tion. The talk will consider the genes and drugs of clinical management. Both balanced chromosomal importance where NGS based sequencing data wouldAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1071 substantially add information beyond the current platforms provide an answer for each patient; thus, much remains to to facilitate individualized drug therapy. This includes the belearnedtorealizethefullpotential ofpharmacogenetics. descriptionofalgorithmsabletopredictthefunctionalityof A. Gaedigk: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, missensemutationsinthepharmacogenesandprotocolsfor collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as streamline analyses in personalized medicine where the grants already received); Signiﬁcant; R24 GM123930 and whole genome sequence is taken into consideration. U54 HD090258–01. M. Ingelman-Sundberg: None. E06.2 E07 Pharmacogenomics based personalized drug treatment Single-cell transcriptomics in the brain across world populations E07.2 A. Gaedigk Single cell RNA sequencing in psychiatric disorders Children’s Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, United J. Hjerling Lefﬂer States Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Cytochrome P450 enzymes including CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 are among the most extensively studied drug Genome-wideassociationstudies(GWAS)havediscovered metabolizing enzymes owing to their contribution to the hundreds of loci associated with complex brain disorders, metabolism and/or bioactivation of numerous clinically and provide the best current insights into the etiology of used drugs. Each exhibits a wide range of activity among theseidiopathictraits.However,itremainsunclearinwhich individuals within a population and among world popula- cell types these variants may be active, which is essential tions. Extreme phenotypes can explain adverse drug events for understanding disease etiology and for disease model- or treatment failure. In addition, HLA loci with distinct ling. Recently weintegrated GWAS resultswithsingle-cell ethnic and geographical distributions, can cause severe, if transcriptomic data from the brain and the entire nervous not life-threatening adverse drug reactions. system to systematically identify cell types underlying Rich resources for the implementation of pharmacoge- psychiatricdisordersaswellasneurologicalconditionsand netics include the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementa- other brain complex traits. We show that psychiatric tion Consortium which publishes clinical practice disorders are predominantly associated with excitatory guidelines,thePharmacogeneVariationConsortium,which neurons from the cortex/hippocampus, medium spiny serves as a centralized repository for allelic variation and neuronsfromthestriatum,diversesetsofmidbrainneurons, the Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base, which curates and inhibitory neurons from the cortex/hippocampus. knowledge about the impact of genetic variation on drug Cognitive traits were generally associated with similar cell responseforcliniciansandresearchers.Briefoverviewswill types but their associations were driven by different genes. be provided. Neurological disorders were associated with different cell Implementationofpharmacogeneticsintoclinicalpractice types, consistent with other lines of evidence. Notably, we still faces a number of challengesincluding testing and test found that Parkinson’s disease is not only genetically interpretation. As exempliﬁed on CYP2D6, genotype ana- associated with dopaminergic neurons but also with lysis is not trivial due to SNPs, indels, copy number var- serotonergic neurons and cells from the oligodendrocyte iation and rearrangements with the CYP2D7 pseudogene. lineage. Using post-mortem brain transcriptomic data, we Other challenges are the translation of genotype into phe- conﬁrmed alterations in these cells, even at the earliest notype and the assignment of function to allelic variants. stages of disease progression. Altogether, our study Furthermore, a distant SNP has been shown to impact provides a solid framework for understanding the cellular CYP2D6activityinvitro,butthereislittleknownregarding basis of complex brain disorders. its impact on activity in vivo. Ongoing studies addressing J. Hjerling Lefﬂer: B. Research Grant (principal inves- the question whether this SNP needs to be taken into tigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as account for phenotype prediction from genotype data will well as grants already received); Modest; Roche. be presented. Pharmacogeneticsisincreasinglyutilizedtoindividualize drug therapy. However, a pharmacogenetic test may not1072 E08 E08.2 Chromosome Y loss and the ageing genome Mosaic chromosome Y loss, ageing and cancer risk E08.1 M. J. Machiela MosaiclossofchromosomeY(LOY)inleukocytes:from discovery to impact National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD, United States L. A. Forsberg Genetic mosaicism is the acquisition of a somatic mutation ormutations inaclonalsubset ofcellsthatdiffersfromthe Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden inheritedgermlinegenome.Detectablegeneticmosaicismis an attractive potential early biomarker for cancer risk A growing number of epidemiological investigations show because ofitsestablishedrelationshipwith aging, introduc- that LOY is linked with morbidity and mortality in men. tion of potentially deleterious mutations, and clonal LOY in blood cells is the most common acquired human selection and expansion of mutated cells. Mosaic loss of mutation and is associated with increased risk for all-cause theYchromosome(mLOY)isthemostcommonlydetected mortality and disorders such as various forms of cancer, mosaiccopynumberalterationinmen.mLOYisassociated Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular disease, autoimmune with aging, cigarette smoking and several genetic suscept- conditions, age-related macular degeneration and type 2 ibility loci. mLOY has also been associated with numerous diabetes. As a male speciﬁc genetic risk factor, LOY could outcomes including cancer risk and cancer mortality. help explain why men in the entire world live shorter lives Shared risk factors for mLOY and associated outcomes than women. makes performing epidemiologic investigations of mLOY It is not established whether the associations between andpotentialoutcomesdifﬁcult.Whileseveralstudieshave LOY in leukocytes and risks for disease in other organs investigated associations between mLOY and cancer risk, representcausalrelationships,andifso,whattheunderlying the relationship remains an active area of research. mechanismscouldbe.Forexample,LOYisassociatedwith M.J. Machiela: None. factorssuchasage,smokingaswellasgeneticbackground, and part of the LOY-associated increased risk for various outcomes might be explained by these confounders. How- E09 ever, we have also proposed a hypothesis involving dis- Variant interpretation and high-throughput functional turbed functions of blood leukocytes without a Y assays chromosomeandreducedprotectionagainstdiseaseinmen with LOY. Hence, LOY in immune cells might be E09.1 responsible for impairment of normal immune system Unraveling the functional impact of thousands of p53 functions such as inﬂammation and immune-surveillance, mutations responsiblefor eliminationofabnormal cellsandstructures throughout the soma. E. Segal1,2 To investigate if LOY changes the normal properties of immune cells we have studied LOY at the levels of DNA-, 1Rehovot, Israel, 2Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, RNA- and plasma proteome; in bulk, sorted- and single- Israel cellsinvivoandinvitro.Forexample,wehave(i)mapped thelevelofLOYinsixmajorimmunecelltypesinpatients The TP53 gene is frequently mutated in human cancer, yet diagnosedwithAlzheimer’sdiseaseandprostatecancer,(ii) research has focused predominantly on six major “hotspot” studied changes in gene expression in cells with LOY and codons, which account for only ~30% of cancer-associated identiﬁed numerous genes showing LOY associated tran- p53 mutations. Here, I will present our work on functional scriptionaleffect (LATE) and(iv) found that LOY leaves a proﬁling of a library of over 10,000 variants that we footprintintheplasmaproteome.Theseﬁndingssupportthe generated for the tumor suppressor p53. Remarkably, the hypothesis that functions of immune cells is compromized mutational effects observed in large-scale in vitro assays as an effect from LOY, and thus, provide clues toward with this library correspond to p53 mutation recurrence in mechanisticexplanationsfortheassociationsbetweenLOY patients, and provide novel insights on adverse and benign inbloodcellsandincreasedriskfordiseaseinotherorgans. variants, protein structure, and evolutionary conservation. L.A. Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Apart from gaining comprehensive insights into the effects options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; of the p53 “mutome”, our results may lead to better CRAY Innovation AB. understandingofapatient’sresponsetotreatmentbased onAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1073 their p53 sequence, potentially contributing to the develop- During meiotic recombination in most mammals, hundreds ment of novel patient-speciﬁc therapeutics. of programmed DNA Double-Strand Breaks (DSBs) occur across all chromosomes in each cell at sites bound by the E09.2 protein PRDM9, and resolve into recombination events, Understandingthefunctionaleffectsofcodingvariation, whichgeneratenewgeneticdiversity.Converselymutations at scale in PRDM9 itself, and at binding sites of PRDM9, drive profound differences in the recombination landscapes both L. M. Starita among individuals, and between all species possessing this gene so far examined, so diversity impacts recombination. University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States PRDM9 is also the only known mammalian speciation gene, causing meiotic failure and male-limited sterility in In recent years multiplexed functional assays have funda- certain mouse hybrids. Our work has revealed that this is mentally changed the way we can empirically measure the driven by PRDM9 mainly binding “non-shared” sites that effects of genetic variation. We can now measure the differbetweenthetwohomologousgenomiccopiespresent functional effect of thousands of single nucleotide variants in hybrids, due to evolutionary mutations. This leads to in protein coding genes and other sequence elements such unrepairedDSBs,failuretopairchromosomes,andsterility, as promoters, enhancers and splice signals in a single indicating strong impacts of local sequence divergence on experiment. The ability to scale functional assays means recombinational repair, via still unknown mechanisms. that functional scores are more likely to be available as Fertilityisfullyrestoredbyengineeringmicewithdifferent, evidencetohelpguideinterpretationofvariantsofuncertain shared, PRDM9 binding sites. We will discuss new work signiﬁcance that result from clinical genetic testing. These that characterizes the impact of local sequence divergence massivefunctionaldatasetsalreadyexistforBRCA1,TP53, on mammalian recombination, using thousands of directly PTEN, SUMO, CALM1/2/3, PPARG, TPMT and TPK1. detectedcrossoverandnon-crossover recombinationevents Many more will be generated in the near future and it is from a mouse hybrid cross, resolved with unprecedented likelythatonemaybegeneratedforyourgeneofinterest.In powerandresolution.Recombinationevents,butnotDSBs, this educational session, I will ﬁrst outline the general are strongly depleted at the “non-shared” sites. Therefore, experimental steps in a multiplexed functional assay. I will mutations within PRDM9 binding sites disrupt and/or then present data sets for BRCA1 generated by saturation inhibit the homologous repair of DSBs. Previous work genome editing (Findlay et al. Nature, 2018) and PTEN has found that in humans, GC-biased gene conversion generated by an assay for protein abundance (Matreyek occurs in non-crossovers, driving genome evolution. et al. Nature Genetics, 2018). Finally, I will discuss the Unexpectedly, we found that in both mice and humans, beneﬁts and limitations of using data generated by multi- this bias occurs exclusively in non-crossovers containing plexed functional assays as evidence for or against just a single mismatch - with no GC-bias whatsoever in pathogenicity for a variant. non-crossovers with multiple mismatches. These results L.M. Starita: None. demonstrate that alongside altering where recombination initiates, local genetic diversity also profoundly alters meiotic repair pathway decisions via at least two distinct E10 mechanisms, impacting genome evolution and Prdm9- Meiosis: factory of genetic variation related hybrid infertility. R. Li: None. E. Bitoun: None. N. Altemose: None. R. E10.1 W. Davies: None. B. Davies: None. S. Myers: None. Genetic diversity and its unexpected impacts on recombination, genome evolution, speciation and E10.2 sterility in mammals Meiotic recombination, gene conversion and mutation R. Li1, E. Bitoun1, N. Altemose2, R. W. Davies3, I. Tiemann-Boege1, A. Heissl1, A. J. Betancourt2, B. Davies1, S. Myers1 B. Arbeithuber3 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Univer- 1Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria, 2University of sity of California, Berkeley, CA, United States, 3The Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 3Penn State Uni- Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada versity, State College, PA, United States1074 Duringmeiosisthematernalandpaternalgeneticmaterialis N. Jäger1,2, B. C. Worst1,3, D. T. W. Jones1,3,4, exchanged in a highly regulated process known as meiotic S. M. Pﬁster1,2,5 recombination. Recombination is initiated by the formation ofdoublestrand-breaks(DSBs),andinmostorganismsitis 1Hopp Children`s Cancer Center Heidelberg (KiTZ), clustered in narrow regions, called recombination hotspots. Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of Pediatric Neuroon- The repair of DSBs reshapes the nucleotide landscape at cology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidel- recombination hotspots and a high number of polymorph- berg, Germany, 3Pediatric Glioma Research (B360), ismsaccumulateathotspotsovertime.Inhumansandmice, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, thesepolymorphismsleadtochangesinafﬁnityofPRDM9, Germany, 4German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidel- ameiosis-speciﬁc,trans-actingproteinthatrecognizesDNA berg, Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Hematology and targetmotifs andactivates recombination hotspots. Westill Oncology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, do not fully understand the exact molecular mechanism Germany driving the sequence erosion at hotspots, but it has important consequences in the outcome of recombination. Cure rates for childhood cancers have increased to about We have characterized the processes re-shaping the 80% in recent decades, but cancer is still the leading cause nucleotide sequences at recombination hotspots by screen- of death by disease in the developed world among children ing a large number of single recombination molecules. We over one year of age. Furthermore, children who survive particularly focused on de novo mutations and gene cancer often suffer from the long-term side-effects of conversion events, as well as the effect of poly-A repeats therapy.Acrucialstepindevelopingmorespeciﬁcandless ofdifferentlengths.TherepairofDSBscanleadtoabiased damaging therapies is to map the complete (epi-)genetic nucleotide composition at recombination hotspots by gene repertoire of pediatric malignancies, which is highly conversion, which is the non-reciprocal exchange of DNA relevant for the design of future clinical trials and for stretches of one chromosome to the other and is often improving translational impact. associated with a higher probability of transmitting one Through the advent of genome-wide molecular proﬁling, allele over the other. At recombination hotspots, the speciﬁcally next-generation sequencing, it became evident transmissionofGCoverATvariantsarefavouredresulting how heterogeneous and distinct childhood cancers are in overtime toahigher GCcontentathotspots. Similarly,we comparison to the often environmentally-associated adult observed that longer poly-A repeats are transmitted more cancers. The recent large-scale pan-cancer analyses of often than shorter repeats resulting in an insertion biased pediatric malignancies have demonstrated differences in gene conversion, albeit this depends on the nature of the tumor mutationalburden andmutationalsignatures,aswell repeatheterology.Wealsofoundthathotspotsareenriched as unique driving events. The role of pathogenic germline with de novo mutations, especially at CpGs sites that are variants predisposing to cancer is particularly important in pronetoahighspontaneousdeaminationrateinthecontext thispatientpopulation,likelybeinginvolvedinatleast10% ofsinglestrandedDNAformedduringDSBrepair.Meiotic of cases of childhood tumors. recombinationleadstothesequenceerosionathotspotsthat Central nervous system (CNS) tumors are the most in turn affects the binding of the recombination machinery common type of solid tumor in children and the leading and eliminates hotspots over time. In other words, hotspots causeofcancer-relateddeathinthisagegroup.Manyofthe have a tendency to self-destruct through the systematic discoveries which deﬁne the landscape of genomic altera- over-transmissionofallelesandaccumulationofmutations, tion across childhood cancers were made in this highly which poses the question if trans-acting factors evolve as a relevant entity, since pediatric CNS tumors have been response to these effects. Project funded by the Austrian extensively sequenced in large consortia and independent Science Fonds (FWF) P23811000 and P308667000. groups alike. Major genetic discoveries range from highly I. Tiemann-Boege: None. A. Heissl: None. A.J. recurrent histone H3 mutations, and hijacking of distal Betancourt: None. B. Arbeithuber: None. enhancer elements, to new oncogenic gene fusions (of the NTRKfamilyofkinases,amongothers).Further,chromatin modiﬁers were found to be recurrently altered in childhood E11 brain tumors. Genome First Testing in Pediatrics This presentation focuses on key ﬁndings that have been transforming the landscape of pediatric cancer research in E11.1 the past decade and how these results are opening new The landscape of genomic alteration across childhood avenues towards therapeutic approaches. cancers N. Jäger: None. B.C. Worst: None. D.T.W. Jones: None. S.M. Pﬁster: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1075 E11.2 The functional consequence of a mutation is frequently Rapid NGS for children in intensive care units dependent on the genetic background in which it occurs, which complicates the identiﬁcation of complete sets of F. Raymond causalvariantsassociatedwithphenotypes,includingmany diseases. These differences can be the result of modifying University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom mutations in other genes, that can either increase the severity of a disease phenotype, or that can have a With growing evidence that rare single gene disorders protective effect and compensate for the deleterious effects present in the neonatal period, there is a need for rapid, ofthediseasemutation.Althoughidentiﬁcationofmodiﬁer systematic, and comprehensive genomicdiagnoses inICUs loci can highlight potential avenues for therapeutic inter- to assist acute and long-term clinical decisions. We vention, it requires data from large cohorts of patients performed trio whole genome sequence analysis (WGS) carrying the same disease allele. Given the challenges on a prospective cohort of families recruited in NICU and associated with identifying modiﬁer mutations in humans, PICU at a single site in the UK. We developed a research genetic interactions have mainly been studied using model pipeline in collaboration with the National Health Service organisms. The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (NHS) to deliver validated pertinent pathogenic ﬁndings hasoftenbeenthemodelorganismofchoiceforsystematic within 2–3 weeks of recruitment. The analysis includes studies of genetic interactions due to its highly annotated single nucleotide variants (SNV), copy number variants genome and tractable genetics. Mapping genetic interac- (CNV), structural variants (SV), uniparental disomy, tions inmodel organisms provides a powerful approach for mitochondrial genome analysis and speciﬁc analysis of dissecting gene function and pathway connectivity, and for trinucleotide repeat diseases including myotonic dystrophy deﬁning conserved properties of genetic interactions that and Spinomuscular atrophy (SMA). >330 families had can elucidate genotype-to-phenotype relationships. In addi- whole genome analysis performed and 20–25% received a tion, with the development of CRISPR-Cas9 technology, molecular diagnosis for the underlying genetic condition in we can now screen for genetic interactions directly in the child. The phenotypic description of the child was a cultured human cells. I will discuss how we can use poor predictor of the gene identiﬁed in 90% of cases, systematic genetic interaction screens in yeast and cultured arguing for gene agnostic testing in NICU/PICU. The human cells to deﬁne conserved properties of genetic diagnosis affected clinical management in >65% of cases interactions,andhowwearestartingtousethesetoidentify includingmodiﬁcationoftreatmentsandcarepathwaysand/ genetic interactions between variants in human genome or informing palliative care decisions. A 2–3 week turn- sequences. around was sufﬁcient to impact most clinical decision J. Van Leeuwen: None. making. The use of WGS in intensively ill children is acceptable and trio analysis facilitates diagnoses. A “gene agnostic” approach was effective in identifying an under- E13 lyinggeneticcondition,withphenotypesandsymptomatol- Genetic innovations in reproductive medicine ogy being primarily used for data interpretation rather than gene selection. Whole Genome Sequence analysis has the E13.1 potential to be a ﬁrst line diagnostic tool for a subset of Noveldiscoveriesofgenesimplicatedinmaleandfemale intensively ill children. infertility F. Raymond: None. C. Arnoult1,2, P. Ray3 E12 1University of Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France, 2Institut Oligogenic inheritance pour l’Avancée des Biosciences (IAB), INSERM 1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France, 3CHU Grenoble E12.1 Alpes, Grenoble, France Systematicanalysisofgeneticinteractions:fromyeastto human The high-throughput sequencing has become a very efﬁcient and low cost approach to identify mutations J. Van Leeuwen leading to human diseases. The number of genes linked to humanpathologieshasgrownexponentiallytheselastyears University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland and the domain of human infertility did not escape this global trend. Our laboratory, in collaboration with several1076 fertility clinics located in Europe, Africa and Asia, has communityoforiginandamongArabsandDruzeaccording gathered a large cohort of infertile males and females to the religion and locality of origin. The extraordinary presenting with different marked phenotypes, such as scientiﬁc changes that occurred in the last decade acrosome-less sperm showing a round shape (globozoos- revolutionized the offers of private carrier screening permia), sperm with ﬂagellum defects (teratozoospermia programs and pilots for population programs are ongoing with Multiple Morphological Anomalies of the Flagella, in several countries. The best option may be a universal known as MMAF), absence of sperm in the ejaculate screening panel with a preference for couple screening (azoospermia), or oocytes blocked during meiotic matura- giving results only when the couple is at risk for a severe tion. Exomic sequencing of these patients enable us to disease in a future child. identify 13 genes related to male infertility and 1 gene to J. Zlotogora: None. female infertility, so far. In the MMAF cohort, a genetic cause has been identiﬁed in half of the patients but have shown a high genetic heterogeneity, highlighting the Concurrent Sessions abundance of genes involving in ﬂagellum biogenesis. The function and the localization of the corresponding proteins were studied using the most suitable deﬁcient animalmodels,includingmouseandTrypanosomabrucei,a C01 protozoan ﬂagellate parasite for genes related to MMAF. Novel diagnostic approaches Through several examples, this presentation aims at showing how the discovery of genes involved in human C01.1 infertilityallowtoimprovebothdiagnosisandprognosisin Anationalapproachtorapidgenomicdiagnosisinacute human infertility but also enable to identify new molecular paediatrics pathways necessary for mammalian gametogenesis. C. Arnoult: None. P. Ray: None. S. Lunke1,2,3, C. Patel4, M. Wilson5,6, J. Pinner7,8, S. A. Sandaradura5,6, D. Mowat7,8, E. Kirk7,8,9, E13.2 M. F. Hunter10,11, E. I. Krzesinski10,11, C. Barnett12, Population genetic carrier screening programs for L. S. Akesson1,3,10, C. M. Richmond1, S. Kumble1, reproductive purposes N. B. Tan1, A. Fennell10,11, J. Rogers4, M. Higgins4, A. Vasudevan13, K. B. Howell3,14,15, S. M. White1,3, J. Zlotogora M. G. de Silva1,2, G. R. Brett1,3,16, L. Gallacher1,3, S. Ayres1,2,16, K. Boggs5,7,2, A. Bray2,5,7, A. Baxendale12, Hadassah medical center, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, S.Borrie12,S.King-Smith2,12,M.C.Quinn2,4,L.Fowles4, Israel L. Hunt4, S. Eggers1, J. Riseley1, B. Chong1, D. Phelan1, S. Sadedin1, M. Martyn14,16, I. Goranitis2,3, S. Best2,17, The aim of population genetic carrier screening programs M. F. Buckley9, T. Roscioli9,7,8, J. Christodoulou1,2,3, for reproductive purposes is to allow couples at risk to Australian Genomics Health Alliance Acute Care choose between all the available options before a preg- Flagship, Z. Stark1,2,3 nancy. Population genetic carrier screening programs may be voluntary or required either by law or by the religious 1VictorianClinicalGeneticsService,Melbourne,Australia, authorities before marriage being targeted to founder 2Australian Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Austra- populations or offered to the whole population. The Israeli lia, 3University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, population genetic carrier screening program for reproduc- 4GeneticHealthQueensland,RoyalBrisbaneandWomen’s tive purposes is voluntary, available to all the population Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 5Sydney Children’s Hospital and free of charge. The program is used by most of the Network-Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 6University of population at reproductive age and the tests are done either Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 7Sydney Children’s Hospital before marriage, before conception or during pregnancy. Network-Randwick, Sydney, Australia, 8University of New The program includes screening for all the severe diseases South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 9NSW Health Pathology that are known to be relatively frequent in the population RandwickGenomicsLaboratory,Sydney,Australia,10Mon- and in which a test allows the detection of more than 90% ash Genetics, Monash Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, of the carriers. Carrier screening for cystic ﬁbrosis, SMA Australia,11DepartmentofPaediatrics,MonashUniversity, and FraX is recommended to all the population while for Melbourne, Australia, 12Women’s and Children’s Hospital, other diseases the recommendation is limited to the Adelaide,Australia,13RoyalWomen’sHospital,Melbourne, communities at risk: among Jews according to the Australia, 14Murdoch Children’s Research Institute,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1077 Melbourne, Australia, 15Royal Children’s Hospital, Mel- Martyn: None. I. Goranitis: None. S. Best: None. M.F. bourne, Australia, 16Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Buckley: None. T. Roscioli: None. J. Christodoulou: Melbourne, Australia, 17Australian Institute of Health None. Z. Stark: None. Innovation, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia C01.2 Introduction: Implementation of rapid genomic testing in Effectiveness of integrated interpretation of exome and neonatalandpaediatricintensivecareunits(NICUs/PICUs) corresponding transcriptome data in detecting splicing is gathering momentum, and requires the development of variants of recessive disorders systems capable of consistent delivery across multi-site networks. M. Yamada1, Y. Shiraishi2, H. Suzuki1, K. Kosaki1 Methods: We developed a rapid genomic diagnosis program involving 10 Australian hospitals and two labora- 1Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku, Japan, tories with the aim of providing test results in <5 days for 2National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan acutely unwell paediatric patients with suspected mono- genic disorders. Rapid exome sequencing (rES) was per- Background: Incorporation of RNA-seq data into exome formed as trios when possible, and analysis utilised analyses could help detection of abnormal splicing multidisciplinaryexpertise.Experiencewassharedbetween efﬁciently.Recently,Shiraishidevelopedanovelalgorithm, clinicalsites,laboratories,andprofessionalgroupstoenable “SAVNet: Splicing-Associated Variants NET”, allowing collective learning. the integrated analysis of RNA-seq and exome data from Results: The program considered 123 patients for rES cancer tissues. over 10 months, and approved 114 (93%). Five families Methods: WeappliedtheSAVNetalgorithm todecipher declined testing (4.4%), and nine (7.9%) were withdrawn abnormal splicing events and examined the correlation due to change in clinical circumstances. Of 100 patients between these events and rare germline variants (MAF tested, 51 received a diagnosis. Eleven of the diagnoses <0.03) among 179 phenotypically normal subjects whose (21%) were made using approaches augmenting standard RNA-seq data (lymphoblastoid cell lines) and correspond- ES analysis: mitochondrial genome sequencing, ES-based ing exome data were publicly available. Only the 1913 copy number analysis, matchmaking of emerging genes, causative genes of known autosomal recessive disorders reverse phenotyping and RNA analysis. Median time from wereevaluatedunderthepremisethatthesubjectscouldbe hospital admission to consent was 6 days (range carriers. 0–64days);mediantimefromsamplereceipttoclinicalES Results: Among 1913 genes, 1272 had expression levels reportwas3days(range2–7days).Thetotalcostoftesting that were sufﬁcient to be analyzed by SAVNet. Forty was AU$1,123,000/€701,638 (AU$11,230/€7,016 per aberrant splicing events associated rare germline variants case). Changes in management following a result occurred were detected in 31 of the 179 subjects; creation of alter- in 77% of diagnosed patients and 10% of undiagnosed native5′splicesite(13/40events),creationofalternative3′ patients. SS (14) and exon skipping (13). The predicted effects on Conclusion:Wedemonstratethefeasibilityofanational, proteinwereasfollows:mutationoutofframe(30),andin- highly integrated clinical-laboratory approach to rapid frame (10). Intriguingly, seven variants annotated as “mis- genomic diagnosis, which delivers results within a time- sense” (5) or “silent” (2) per exome analyses had triggered framerelevanttoacutepaediatrics,whileoptimisingclinical abnormal splicing that disrupted the reading frame. Con- utility and resource allocation. ventionalexomeanalysisthe1272genesdetectedatotalof S. Lunke: None. C. Patel: None. M. Wilson: None. J. 144 putatively pathogenic variants including nonsense, Pinner: None. S.A. Sandaradura: None. D. Mowat: frameshift, and canonical splice site (gt/ag) mutations. None. E. Kirk: None. M.F. Hunter: None. E.I. Krze- Discussion: Coupling interpretation ofpersonalgenomes sinski: None. C. Barnett: None. L.S. Akesson: None. C. with their corresponding transcriptomes successfully M.Richmond:None.S.Kumble:None.N.B.Tan:None. uncovered pathogenic splicing variants. Using this method, A.Fennell:None.J.Rogers:None.M.Higgins:None.A. the detection rate of provisionally truncating pathogenic Vasudevan: None. K.B. Howell: None. S.M. White: variants increased by twenty percent (28 / 144) in com- None. M.G. de Silva: None. G.R. Brett: None. L. Gal- parison with conventional exome analysis. lacher: None. S. Ayres: None. K. Boggs: None. A. Bray: M. Yamada: None. Y. Shiraishi: None. H. Suzuki: None. A. Baxendale: None. S. Borrie: None. S. King- None. K. Kosaki: None. Smith: None. M.C. Quinn: None. L. Fowles: None. L. Hunt: None. S. Eggers: None. J. Riseley: None. B. C01.3 Chong: None. D. Phelan: None. S. Sadedin: None. M. Chromosome conformation capture (HiC) combined1078 with whole genome sequencing for the detection and U.S. Melo: None. R. Schöpﬂin: None. R.A. Hidalgo: functional interpretation of complex genomic None.M.A.Mensah:None.B.Fischer‐Zirnsak:None.V. rearrangements in developmental disease Suckow:None.S.Türkmen:None.F.Quintero:None.S. B. Sousa: None. P. Louro: None. M. Spielmann: None. U. S. Melo1, R. Schöpﬂin1, R. A. Hidalgo1, V. Kalscheuer: None. I. Datkhaeva: None. S. Mundlos: M. A. Mensah2, B. Fischer‐Zirnsak2, V. Suckow1, None. S. Türkmen2, F. Quintero3, S. B. Sousa4, P. Louro5, M. Spielmann1, V. Kalscheuer1, I. Datkhaeva6, C01.4 S. Mundlos1 Expanding Next Generation Phenotyping on clinical notes and hand radiographs 1MPI, Berlin, Germany, 2Charite, Berlin, Germany, 3UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Coimbra’s Y.Hanani1,A.Superti-Furga2,H.Warren3,Y.Gurovich1, Paediatric Hospital, Medical Genetics Department, Coim- N. Fleischer1, S. A. Skinner3, K. W. Gripp4, G. Nadav1, bra, Portugal, 5Coimbra’s Paediatric Hospital, Medical P. M. Krawitz5 Genetics Department, Coimbra, Portugal, 6Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology David Geffen School of 1FDNA Inc, Boston, MA, United States, 2Division of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Genetic Medicine, University of Lausanne, Centre Hospi- Angeles, CA, United States talier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United High-throughput based technologies, such as array CGH States, 4Division of Medical Genetics, A. I. du Pont and whole-genome sequencing have greatly advanced the Hospital for Children/Nemours, Wilmington, DE, United ﬁeld of human genetics by identifying and associating States, 5Institute for Genomic Statistic and Bioinformatics, structural variants (SVs) with genetic disorders. However, University Hospital Bonn, Rheinische-Friedrich-Wilhelms the identiﬁcation interpretation of SVs often remains University, Bonn, Germany difﬁcult, in particular in complex chromosomal rearrange- ments and when SVs do not disrupt protein-coding Next Generation Phenotyping (NGP), and speciﬁcally sequence. Here, we address these issues by using chromo- automated facial image analysis, has shown to be useful some conformation capture (HiC) in patient cell lines in in the diagnosis of rare disorders. This can be seen in combination with whole-genome sequencing. Rearrange- different stagesofthediagnosticworkup:ﬁrst,asshownin ments of the patient’s genome with respect to a reference a recent publication, the DeepGestalt (FDNA Inc.USA) genomeemergeasdistinctpatternsintheHiCcontactmap. technology utilizes deep-learning algorithms to help Additionally, HiC informs about the wiring of so-called cliniciansarrivetodifferentialdiagnosesandtoguide them Topologically Associating Domains (TADs), which have into which tests to order. Secondly, in an improved variant been shown to largely deﬁne the genomic range in which prioritizationasshowninanapproachcalledPEDIA,tested genes interact with enhancer elements. HiC was generated in a retrospective study of 679 diagnosed individuals from ﬁbroblasts or lymphoblasts from 3 individuals with resulting in signiﬁcant diagnostic yield improvement (top- complex rearrangements at the SOX9 locus and another 5 10-accuracy rate of 99 % for disease-causing gene). And with interchromosomal translocations. HiC was instructive lastly, potentially assisting in re-evaluation of un- inrevealingthecomplexityofrearrangementsthatinvolved diagnosed cases. previously unrecognized deletions and insertions. The Here, we present two additional NGP capabilities: auto- formation of novel TADs promoting ectopic enhancer- matedclinicalnotesanalysisandhandradiographsanalysis. promoter interaction was observed. HiC identiﬁed complex We demonstrate how the technology improves phenotype nested chromosomal translocations and revealed new extraction thus potentially improving diagnostic yield by enhancer-promoter interactions upon chromosome fusion. enabling accurate and consistent interpretation of massive HiC performed in LCLs from one patient with chromo- clinical data. We created a benchmark by manually anno- thripsis showed a complex pattern of interchromosomal tating HPO-terms from 126 clinical notes. Results show translocations, which were further validated by orthogonal precision=0.78, recall=0.41 and F-score=0.51 in methods(e.gM-FISH).Insummary,HiCcanhelptodetect extracting correct terms from notes, surpassing previous and to resolve SVs. The interpretation of SVs is supported methods. byshowingtheemergenceofneworalteredTADsmaking Hand radiograph analysis correctly classiﬁed 40 of 41 of HiC to a powerful tool to investigate the pathomechanism the patients of three syndromes (Acrodysostosis, Cartilage- underlying developmental disorder. Hair-Hypoplasia, SEMD-JL-Leptodactylic) indicating that ﬁne-grained features like “cone-shaped epiphyses” or high-Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1079 level features such as “short-broad hand” can be extracted subsets, we found 15 rare CNVs intersecting known from this imaging data. disease genes, and were able to reﬁne the penetrance This analysis shows that a more holistic view of patients estimate for a pathogenic HNF4A variant in diabetes using NGP technology, can improve the classiﬁcation (only ~10% by age 40yrs in UK Biobank versus ~75% results on patients with rare syndromic disorders whose in a large monogenic diabetes cohort) and refute the pre- characteristic gestalt is not limited to the facial vious disease-association of RNF135 in developmental phenotype alone. disorders. Y. Hanani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Conclusion: This study shows that large population- niﬁcant;FDNAInc.A.Superti-Furga:None.H.Warren: based studies will help reﬁne the penetrance estimates of None. Y. Gurovich: A. Employment (full or part-time); rare variants. Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc. N. Fleischer: A. Employment (full C.F. Wright: None. M.A. Tuke: None. B. West: None. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA Inc. S.A. Skinner: None. S. Jones: None. K.Patel: None. T.W. Laver: None. R.N. K.W. Gripp: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Beaumont:None.J.Tyrrell:None.A.R.Wood:None.A. FDNA Inc. G. Nadav: None. P.M. Krawitz: A. Employ- Murray: None. A.T. Hattersley: None. T.M. Frayling: ment (full or part-time); Modest; FDNA Inc. None. M.N. Weedon: None. C01.5 C01.6 Using UK Biobank to assess the pathogenicity, Man vs Machine: Implementing clinically validated penetrance and expressivity of monogenic disease automated variant prioritisation with diagnostic variants performance that equals human experts C. F. Wright, M. A. Tuke, B. West, S. Jones, K. Patel, L. Burnett1,2,3, A. L. Statham4, B. A. Lundie4, E. Lee2,4, T. W. Laver, R. N. Beaumont, J. Tyrrell, A. R. Wood, A. Poulet1,5 A. Murray, A. T. Hattersley, T. M. Frayling, M. N. Weedon 1Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst Sydney, Australia, InstituteofBiomedicalandClinicalScience,Exeter,United 2Genome.One, Australian Clinical Laboratories, Darlin- Kingdom ghurst Sydney, Australia, 3St Vincent’s Clinical School, UNSW Sydney, Darlinghurst Sidney, Australia, 4Genome. Introduction:Thetruepenetranceofmanyofraredisease- One, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst causing alleles is uncertain and may be over-estimated by Sydney, Australia, 5Institut des Sciences Pharmaceutiques clinical ascertainment.Here,weusedatafrom388,714UK et Biologiques - Faculté de Pharmacie de Lyon, Lyon, Biobank participants to assess putatively clinically-relevant France rare variants in a population-based setting. Materials and Methods: Although rare variants are Introduction: Analysis and interpretation of genomes (and harder to genotype accurately than common variants, we exomes) are major challenges requiring bioinformatics and were able to classify 1,244 of 4,585 putatively clinically- professional resources in limited supply. We report relevant variants genotyped on the UK Biobank SNP-array development of an automated variant prioritisation frame- as high-quality. We deﬁned ‘clinically-relevant’ as variants work, whose performance equals state-of-the-art clinical thatwereeitherclassiﬁedaspathogenic/likelypathogenicin genomic diagnosis using human experts. ClinVar or are in genes known to cause two speciﬁc Methods: Genome.One operates a clinically accredited monogenic diseases: maturity-onset diabetes of the young (ISO15189) whole genome diagnostic service in Sydney, and severe developmental disorders. We also called and Australia. A reference set of ~500 clinical referrals under- visually-inspected 96 copy number variants overlapping went bioinformatics using a precisionFDA Award-winning regions known to cause developmental delay, as well as pipeline (Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics). Tertiary largechromosomaleventsacrossthegenome.Wetestedthe bioinformatics used published tools (Seave), with every association of these variants with 401 clinically-relevant case analysed by Doctoral genetics professionals. Addi- traits in UK Biobank. tionally, a team of genetics experts performed variant Results: We identiﬁed 27 putatively clinically-relevant review of selected non-trivial cases. rare sequence variants and 12 rare copy number variants We evaluated two automated pipelines: Moon (diploid. associated with traits in UK Biobank, exhibiting com), Eclipse (derived from Seave), and a combination of reduced penetrance or variable expressivity compared with the two. Reference set concordance was required for theirassociated monogenicdisease.Withinourtwodisease ACMG Class 4 and 5 variants, and desirable (but not1080 required) for Class 3 variants. Discordant results were Balanced chromosomal rearrangements (BCRs) such as adjudicated by the variant review expert team. inversions and translocations can cause congenital disease Results: Both automated pipelines performed nearly as or cancer by inappropriately rewiring promoter-enhancer wellashumanexperts,identifyingatleast88–98%ofClass contacts. However, it remains difﬁcult to predict if and 4/5 and 60–75% of Class 3 variants. Applying both in when aberrant gene activation takes place in the context of combination equalled human experts, with 100% con- BCRs. We have addressed the effect of BCRs on gene cordance for all Class 4/5 reportable variants and 75–81% expression in vivo by generating a series of genomic concordance for Class 3 variants. The new approach inversions that place an active limb enhancer cluster from resulted in order-of-magnitude reduction (median reduced theEpha4regulatorydomainatdifferent positionswithina from 225 to 6 variants) in interpretation time and need for neighboring gene-dense region. Expression studies in manual curation and review. embryonic limb buds show that the inverted enhancer Conclusion:Anautomated variantprioritisation protocol clusterwasabletoactivateseveralgenesdownstreamofits has been developed, whose performance equals that of new position, resulting in gene misexpression and limb credentialedclinicalgeneticdiagnosticexpertprofessionals. phenotypes. Capture Hi-C from mutant limb buds showed Thepipelinehasbeenvalidatedandisaccreditedforclinical thattheactivatedgeneswerelocatedwithinaregionwithan diagnosis. asymmetric three-dimensional pattern, so called architec- L. Burnett: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- tural stripes. Deletion of the CTCF binding site at the niﬁcant; Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Genome. anchor of the stripe resulted in its disappearance, dimin- One, Australian Clinical Laboratories. B. Research Grant ished ectopic gene expression, and a rescue of the skeletal (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and phenotype. Moreover, unlike in the developing limb, pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; inversion-derived stripes do not form in mouse embryonic Avant (unrelated to this project). B. Research Grant (prin- stem cells (mESC) where the enhancers are inactive, cipal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending indicating that its formation is likely to be dependent on grantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;Shire enhancer activity. Based on Hi-C from limb buds we show International (unrelated to this project). A.L. Statham: that architectural stripes are a frequent feature of the None. B.A. Lundie: A. Employment (full or part-time); chromatin structure in vivo and often associate with Signiﬁcant; Queensland Health Pathology Service. E. Lee: developmentally active enhancers. Thus, BCRs can induce A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genome. ectopic gene expression and the formation of asymmetric One, Australian Clinical Laboratories. A. Poulet: B. chromatin contact pattern that are dependent on CTCF Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or anchors and enhancer activity. consultant and pending grants as well as grants already K.Kraft:None.A.Magg:None.V.Heinrich:None.C. received);Modest;Studentscholarship,UniversityofLyon. Riemenschneider: None. R. Schöpﬂin: None. J. Mar- kowski: None. D. Ibrahim: None. R. Acuna-Hidalgo: None. A. Despang: None. G. Andrey: None. L. Wittler: C02 None. B. Timmermann: None. M. Vingron: None. S. 3D gene regulation Mundlos: None. C02.1 C02.2 CRISPR-engineered serial genomic inversions lead to Functional dissection ofTADs reveals non-essential and tissue-speciﬁc architectural stripes, ectopic gene instructive roles in regulating gene expression expression and congenital limb malformations A. Despang1,2, R. Schöpﬂin1,2, M. Franke3,1, S. Ali1,2, K. Kraft1,2,3, A. Magg1, V. Heinrich1, I. Jerkovic4,1, C. Paliou1, W. Chan5, B. Timmermann1, C. Riemenschneider1, R. Schöpﬂin1, J. Markowski1, L. Wittler1, M. Vingron1, S. Mundlos1,2,5, D. Ibrahim1,2, R. Acuna-Hidalgo1,2, A. Despang1, D. M. Ibrahim1,2,5 G. Andrey1,2, L. Wittler1, B. Timmermann1, M. Vingron1, S. Mundlos1,2 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2BIH Center for Regenerative Therapies, Berlin, 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo Germany, 2Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, (CABD), Sevilla, Spain, 4Institute de Genetique Humaine, Germany,3StanfordUniversity,Stanford,CA,UnitedStates Montpellier, France, 5Charité Berlin - Institut für Medizi- nische und Humangenetik, Berlin, GermanyAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1081 The genome is organized in megabase-sized three-dimen- sional units, called Topologically Associated Domains The majority of variants associated with common diseases (TADs), that are separated by boundaries. TADs bring and an unknown proportion of causal mutations for rare distant cis-regulatory elements into proximity, a process diseasesfallinnoncodingregionsofthegenome.Although dependent on the cooperative action of cohesin and the catalogs of regulatory elements are steadily improving, we DNA binding factor CTCF. Surprisingly, genome-wide have a limited understanding of the functional effects of depletion of CTCF has little effect on transcription, yet mutations within them. Here, we performed saturation structural variations affecting TADs have been shown to mutagenesisinconjunctionwithmassivelyparallelreporter cause gene misexpression and congenital disease. Here, we assays (MPRAs) on 20 disease-associated gene promoters investigate the importance of TADs for gene regulation (e.g. HBG1, LDLR, TERT) and enhancers (e.g. IRF6, invivo inmice bysystematically editing CTCF-sites, TAD SORT1, TCF7L2), generating functional measurements for boundary position, and TAD substructure orientation at the over 30,000 single nucleotide substitutions (SNVs) and Sox9/Kcnj locus. deletions. We ﬁnd that TADs are formed by a redundant system of Across elements, we ﬁnd that a majority of mutations CTCF sites and fusion of two neighboring TADS requires leads to a reduction in activity (transversions more so than the removal of all major sites within the TAD and at the transitions, deletions more so than SNVs), suggesting that boundary.However,thisTADfusiononlyresultsinleakage transcription factor (TF) binding is more easily lost than of regulatory activity from the Sox9 to the Kcnj TAD, but gained. Further, the density of putative TF binding sites nomajorchangesingeneexpression.Incontrast,inversions varies widely between regulatory elements. In the Telo- and/or there-positioningofboundariesactively re-organize merase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter, we identify the 3D chromatin structure and thereby re-direct regulatory additional and potentially clinically relevant activating activity,resultingindrasticgenemisexpressionanddisease mutations, as well as regions that could be targeted to phenotypes. reduce promoter activity. By combining MPRA with Our results suggest that TAD structures provide robust- GABPA knockdown, 63 TERT promoter variants show a ness and precision, but are not essential for developmental signiﬁcant change in promoter activity, highlighting GAB- gene regulation. In structural variations, efﬁcient re-wiring PA’s role in TERT activation and oncogenesis. of enhancer promoter interaction and aberrant disease Our data provides a rich compendium for studying these causing gene activation is not induced by a mere loss of 20 disease-associated elements and characterizes effect insulation, but requires the re-direction of chromatin con- sizes of regulatory mutations at an unprecedented scale. tacts. Thereby, our results provide a basis to predict the Although myriad annotations and integrative scores are regulatory effects of structural variations. available, no score consistently performs well in predicting A. Despang: None. R. Schöpﬂin: None. M. Franke: the measured regulatory effects. Thus, our data (https:// None. S. Ali: None. I. Jerkovic: None. C. Paliou: None. mpra.gs.washington.edu) provides a gold standard for fur- W. Chan: None. B. Timmermann: None. L. Wittler: ther score developments and supports clinical variant None. M. Vingron: None. S. Mundlos: None. D.M. interpretation. Ibrahim: None. M.Schubach:None.C.Xiong:None.B.Martin:None. F. Inoue: None. R.J.A. Bell: None. J. Costello: None. J. C02.3 Shendure: None. N. Ahituv: None. M. Kircher: None. Saturation mutagenesis of disease-associated regulatory elements C02.4 CharacterizationofGJB2 cis-regulatory elements inthe M.Schubach1,2,C.Xiong3,B.Martin4,F.Inoue3,R.J.A. DFNB1 locus Bell5, J. Costello5, J. Shendure4, N. Ahituv3, M. Kircher1,2,4 A. Le Nabec1, A. Quillévéré1, C. Le Maréchal1,2, C. Férec1,2, S. Moisan1,2 1BerlinInstituteofHealth(BIH),Berlin,Germany,2Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Depart- 1UnivBrest,Inserm,EFS,UMR1078,GGB,Brest,France, ment of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, Uni- 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et d’Histocompati- versity of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, bilité - CHU, Brest, France UnitedStates,4DepartmentofGenomeSciences,University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 5Department of Three-dimensional chromatin organization plays a key role Neurosurgery, University ofCalifornia SanFrancisco, San on gene expression. Gene regulation depends on cis- Francisco, CA, United States regulatory elements which can interact with gene promoter1082 bychromatinloop.Alterationofchromatinarchitectureand/ To investigate molecular mechanisms by which the SVA or cis-acting elements can lead to cis-ruption disorder. affects TAF1 expression, we used chromatin immunopre- Numerous unelucidated nonsyndromic hearing loss and cipitation (ChIP) analyzing a set of epigenetic markers deafness 1 (DFNB1) cases carrying out only one hetero- withintheTAF1generegion,followedbyquantitativePCR zygouspathogenicmutationonGapJunctionBeta2(GJB2) (qPCR)ininducedpluripotentstemcells(iPSC)fromXDP gene, led to strongly suggest the presence of distant cis- patients and sex-matched controls. Thereby, we identiﬁed regulation. To analyze chromatin conformation of a large decreasedH3K4me1signalwithinasetofdeﬁnedenhancer DFNB1locus,weperformedthe5Ctechnologyandshowed regions in XDP patients compared to controls, indicating several chromatin contacts with GJB2 promoter. Then, to reduced activity of these regulatory regions. Moreover, identifypotentialregulatoryelementsoftheGJB2gene,we general acetylation levels of histone 3, a marker of active analysedthesechromatininteractingregionswiththeGJB2 chromatin, was shown to be decreased within exonic TAF1 promoter by reporter test activity and identifying cis- regions in patient-derived cell lines. Additional regulatory elements which have enhancer action and enhancer–promoter reporter assays revealed SVA-mediated silencer effect on GJB2 expression. Moreover, to explore alterations of TAF1 promoter activity, even modulated by DFNB1 locus architecture we analysed CTCF (CCCTC- the number of hexanucleotide repeats within the SVA. bindingfactor)bindingalongDFNB1locusbyChIP-qPCR Insummary,weusedpatient-derivedcellularmodelsand and deﬁned an active domain in which cis-acting elements in vitro reporter gene assays to show SVA-mediated were closer brought to the GJB2 promoter through alterations of epigenetic markers within the coding as well chromatin looping. This ﬁrst study of DFNB1 three- as regulatory regions of TAF1. Our results provide new dimensional chromatin organization allows identiﬁcation insightsintodisease-relevantmechanismsofSVA-mediated of GJB2 cis-acting elements. Finally, better understand of alterations in TAF1 expression. the molecular mechanisms of DFNB1 deafness could be Grant reference: German Research Foundation (DFG) important to improve genetic diagnosis of hearing loss, to Research Unit FOR2488 ‚ProtectMove‘ adapt patients care and to develop small therapeutic J. Pozojevic: None. A. Westenberger: None. C.J. molecules. This work was supported by grants from the Reyes: None. K. Grütz: None. H. Kirchner: None. C. French foundation “La Fondation pour l’Audition”, the Klein: None. F.J. Kaiser: None. “Région Bretagne” and the association “Gaétan Salaün”. A. Le Nabec: None. A. Quillévéré: None. C. Le C02.6 Maréchal: None. C. Férec: None. S. Moisan: None. Understanding the roles and the regulation of the Mowat-Wilson Syndrome transcription factor ZEB2 C02.5 during development and disease Novel insights into molecular mechanisms in X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (XDP) J. Birkhoff1, A. Korporaal1, S. G. Carafﬁ2, I. Ivanovski2, S. Garcia-Minaur3, P. Kolovos4, R. Brouwer1, W. van J. Pozojevic1, A. Westenberger2, C. J. Reyes2, K. Grütz2, Ijcken1, L. Garavelli2, D. Huylebroeck1, A. Conidi1 H. Kirchner3, C. Klein2, F. J. Kaiser1 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2IRCSS Reggio 1Section for Functional Genetics, Institute of Human Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 3La Paz Hospital, Madrid, Genetics, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institute for Neurogenetics, Spain, 4BRIC Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark Lübeck, Germany, 3Department of Internal Medicine I, Lübeck, Germany Mowat-Wilson Syndrome (MOWS, OMIM #235730) is a rare intellectual disability (ID) syndrome, often associated X-linkeddystonia-parkinsonism(XDP)isaneurodegenera- with epilepsy, Hirschsprung disease (HD) and multiple tivemovementdisordercausedbyanintronicSINE-VNTR- congenital anomalies including agenesis of the corpus Alu (SVA) retrotransposon insertion in the TAF1 gene. callosum, congenital heart and eye defects. It is caused by Moreover, thenumber of hexanucleotide repeats within the ZEB2 haploinsuﬁciency, and the degree of syndrome SVA varies between patients and was recently found to severity is directly correlated with the type of ZEB2 inversely correlate with age at disease onset. TAF1 variants: from ZEB2 locus deletions associated with severe expressionisdecreasedinXDPpatients,anditwasrecently phenotypes, to missense mutations that might result in shown that by excising the SVA from XDP-model cells residual ZEB2 protein functions, accompanying milder TAF1 expression levels restore to levels found in wild MOWS. Zeb2 has been extensively studied in conditional type cells. knockout mouse embryos in different cell types and is primarily known as transcriptional repressor with an anti-Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1083 BMP, anti-Wnt, and anti-Notch activity in cell differentia- differentiation and maturation, including in the central and tion and maturation, including in the central and peripheral peripheral nervous systems. In collaborative efforts with nervous systems. In collaborative efforts with clinical clinical geneticists, we have documented the clinical geneticists, we have documented the clinical phenotype phenotype (ID, epilepsy, HD, developmental milestones), (ID, epilepsy, HD, developmental milestones), and the and the causing ZEB2 mutations in a cohort of 82 MOWS causingZEB2mutations inacohort of82 MOWS patients. patients. We followed up interesting ZEB2 variants We followed up interesting ZEB2 variants associated with associated with mild MOWS and performed RNA- mild MOWS and performed RNA-sequencing on both WT sequencing on both WT and MOWS iPSCs to identify and MOWS iPSCs to identify altered genes signature. We altered genes signature. We have characterized active and have characterized active and repressive enhancers during repressive enhancers during differentiation within the differentiation within the 3,5Mb gene desert located 3,5Mb gene desert located upstream of ZEB2. We upstream of ZEB2. We performed targeted chromatin performed targeted chromatin conformation capture techni- conformation capture technique to characterize the locus que to characterize the locus dynamics during differentia- dynamics during differentiation. Deletion of subregions tion. Deletion of subregions within this gene desert results within this gene desert results in similar effects (cell in similar effects (cell differentiation, target genes) to those differentiation, target genes) to those we have previously we have previously described when differentiating Zeb2 described when differentiating Zeb2 KO mESCs. These KO mESCs. These ﬁndings will contribute to elucidate ﬁndingswillcontributetoelucidateZEB2regulationandits ZEB2 regulation and its role in MOWS, and the common role in MOWS, and the common and patients’ speciﬁc and patients’ speciﬁc clinical presentations. clinical presentations. J. Birkhoff: None. A. Korporaal: None. S.G. Carafﬁ: J. Birkhoff: None. A. Korporaal: None. S.G. Carafﬁ: None. I. Ivanovski: None. S. Garcia-Minaur: None. P. None. I. Ivanovski: None. S. Garcia-Minaur: None. P. Kolovos:None.R.Brouwer:None.W.vanIjcken:None. Kolovos:None.R.Brouwer:None.W.vanIjcken:None. L. Garavelli: None. D. Huylebroeck: None. A. L. Garavelli: None. D. Huylebroeck: None. A. Conidi: None. Conidi: None. C02.6 C03 Understanding the roles and the regulation of the Neurogenetic and psychiatric disorders Mowat-Wilson Syndrome transcription factor ZEB2 during development and disease C03.1 Intronic expansions of an ATTTC pentamer in the J. Birkhoff1, A. Korporaal1, S. G. Carafﬁ2, I. Ivanovski2, STARD7 gene underlie Familial Adult Myoclonic S. Garcia-Minaur3, P. Kolovos4, R. Brouwer1, W. van Epilepsy linked to chromosome 2 (FAME2) Ijcken1, L. Garavelli2, D. Huylebroeck1, A. Conidi1 J. Gecz1, Z. Afawi2, M. Bahlo3, M. F. Bennett3, 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2IRCSS Reggio S. F. Berkovic4, F. Bisulli5, F. Brancati6, L. Canafoglia7, Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 3La Paz Hospital, Madrid, G. Casari8,9, R. van Coller10, M. A. Corbett1, Spain, 4BRIC Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark D.Crompton11,C.Depienne12,R.Guerrini13,E.Hirsch14, M. Klein15, L. Licchetta5, A. van den Maagdenberg16, Mowat-Wilson Syndrome (MOWS, OMIM #235730) is a D. Mei13, T. Pippucci17, L. Sadleir18, I. E. Scheffer19, rare intellectual disability (ID) syndrome, often associated S. M. Sisodiya20, P. Striano21, A. Suppa22,23, with epilepsy, Hirschsprung disease (HD) and multiple M. A. Tijssen24, L. Veneziano25, F. Zara26, The FAME congenital anomalies including agenesis of the corpus Consortium callosum, congenital heart and eye defects. It is caused by ZEB2 haploinsuﬁciency, and the degree of syndrome 1The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 2Tel Aviv severity is directly correlated with the type of ZEB2 University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3The Walter and Eliza Hall variants: from ZEB2 locus deletions associated with severe Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 4Uni- phenotypes, to missense mutations that might result in versity of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 5IRCCS residual ZEB2 protein functions, accompanying milder Institute of Neurological Sciences, Bologna, Italy, 6Uni- MOWS. Zeb2 has been extensively studied in conditional versity of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy, 7Fondazione IRCCS knockout mouse embryos in different cell types and is Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, 8Telethon primarily known as transcriptional repressor with an anti- Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 9San BMP, anti-Wnt, and anti-Notch activity in cell Raffaele University, Milano, Italy, 10University of Pretoria,1084 Pretoria, South Africa, 11Northern Health, Melbourne, L. Sadleir: None. I.E. Scheffer: None. S.M. Sisodiya: Australia,12InstitutfürHumangenetik,Universitätsklinikum None. P. Striano: None. A. Suppa: None. M.A. Tijssen: Essen, Essen, Germany, 13Meyer Children’s Hospital, None. L. Veneziano: None. F. Zara: None. Florence, Italy, 14Strasbourg University Hospital, Stras- bourg, France, 15University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, C03.2 Germany, 16Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, SINEUPs technology: a new route to possibly treat Belgium, 17Sant’Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, haploinsufﬁciency-induced Epilepsy and Autism Bologna, Italy, 18University of Otago, Wellington, New Spectrum Disorders (ASDs) Zealand, 19University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Italy, 20UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, M. Arnoldi1, F. Di Leva1, G. L. Carvill2, S. Zucchelli3, United Kingdom, 21University of Genoa, Genova, Italy, S. Gustincich4, M. Biagioli1 22University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 23IRCCS Neuromed Institute, Rome, Italy, 24University of Groningen, Gronin- 1Centre for Integrative Biology, University of Trento, gen, Netherlands, 25Institute of Translational Pharmacol- Trento, Italy, 2Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern ogy, Rome, Italy, 26G Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy University, Chicago, IL, United States, 3Department of Health Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale, Dynamic mutations are pathogenic expansions of short Novara, Italy, 4Department of Neuroscience and Brain tandemrepeatsequencesandarefrequentlyassociatedwith Technologies,IstitutoItalianodiTecnologia(IIT),Genova, disordersofmovement.FamilialAdultMyoclonicEpilepsy Italy (FAME) is characterised by cortical myoclonic tremor usually beginning in the second decade of life with later Introduction: Recurrent mutations in chromodomain heli- onset of myoclonic and generalised tonic clonic seizures. case DNA-binding protein 2 and 8 (CHD2 and CHD8), TherehavebeenatleastfourdifferentFAMElociidentiﬁed functioning in chromatin regulation and transcription, are through linkage analysis of large autosomal dominant emerging as prominent risk factors for Epilepsy and ASD, families that are located on chr2, 3, 5 and 8. Expansion of respectively. Most of the mutations in these genes are an endogenous ATTTT pentamer coupled with insertion disruptive, leading to haploinsufﬁciency. Thus, any mole- and expansion of a novel ATTTC pentamer within the cular manipulation eliciting an increase in CHD2/CHD8 SAMD12 gene are the cause of chr8 FAME (FAME1). proteins, could prove beneﬁcial for therapeutic develop- Using both long (Oxford Nanopore and PacBio) and short ment. Here, we intended to provide a Proof-of-Principle of (Illumina and Complete Genomics) read whole genome how SINEUP - recently described class of non-coding sequencing, repeat primed PCR and Southern blotting we RNAs able to augment, in a speciﬁc and controlled way, show that chr2 FAME is caused by a similar dynamic the expression of target proteins - can rise the translation mutation of the same pentanucleotide repeats that arise in of CHD2/CHD8 proteins and possibly rescue the ﬁrst intron of the STARD7 gene. The ATTTC repeat haploinsufﬁciency-associated phenotypes. expansion segregates with FAME in over 250 individuals Methods: We designed and cloned SINEUP targeting from all 22 families tested so far. RNA-Seq from patient human CHD2/CHD8 isoforms and tested their efﬁcacy to derived ﬁbroblast cell lines showed no accumulation of the increase CHD2/CHD8 protein translation in human iPS- AUUUU or AUUUC repeat sequences, however a sig- derived neuronal progenitors (iPS-NPC) expressing normal niﬁcant enrichment of differentially expressed genes and reduced levels of the target proteins and in patients’ implicated in lysosomal storage disorders and progressive ﬁbroblasts bearing CHD2/CHD8 heterozygous loss-of- myoclonic epilepsy suggested that molecular pathways function mutations. involved in cellular waste collection were active. Our data Results: While different CHD2/CHD8-SINEUP mole- demonstrate the role of ATTTC repeat expansion in culeswerenotabletosigniﬁcantlyincreaseproteinlevelin FAME2 and strongly support, regardless of the genomic parental iPS-NPC, expressing physiologic levels of CHD2/ locus, ATTTC pentamer expansions as a general cause of CHD8, SINEUP revealed to be effective in upregulating FAME, which affect thousands of individuals worldwide. CHD2/CHD8proteintranslationwhenreducedlevelsofthe J. Gecz: None. Z. Afawi: None. M. Bahlo: None. M.F. target proteins were expressed. The efﬁcacy of CHD2/ Bennett: None. S.F. Berkovic: None. F. Bisulli: None. F. CHD8 SINEUP is currently tested on patient derived cell Brancati: None. L. Canafoglia: None. G. Casari: None. lines harbouring CHD2/CHD8 truncating mutations. R.vanColler:None.M.A.Corbett:None.D.Crompton: Conclusion: Our data represent an initial Proof-of- None.C.Depienne:None.R.Guerrini:None.E.Hirsch: Concept that SINEUP, RNA-based approach could reveal None. M. Klein: None. L. Licchetta: None. A. van den functional to rescue CHD2/CHD8 haploinsufﬁciency with Maagdenberg: None. D. Mei: None. T. Pippucci: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1085 important implications for therapeutic development in Epi- somatic mutations identiﬁed in 26.9% (14 of 52) of AD lepsy and ASD. individuals were enriched in PI3K-AKT, MAPK, and Project sponsored by CURE Epilepsy and Brain & AMPK pathway genes known to contribute to hyperpho- Behaviour foundations. sphorylation of Tau. Further, we discovered that a M. Arnoldi: None. F. Di Leva: None. G.L. Carvill: pathogenic brain somatic mutation in PIN1 was more None. S. Zucchelli: None. S. Gustincich: None. M. abundant in AT8-positive neurons in the entorhinal cortex Biagioli: None. andleadstoalossoffunctionmutation.Invitromimicking of haploinsufﬁciency of PIN1 aberrantly increased the C03.3 phosphorylation and aggregated form of Tau. Altogether, Brain somatic mutations associated with aging thisstudyprovidesnewinsightsintothegeneticarchitecture contribute to dysregulation of Tau phosphorylation in underlying the pathogenesis of AD, demonstrating that Alzheimer’s disease brainsomaticmutationsassociatedwithagingcontributeto the initial appearance of Tau pathology in the hippocampal J. Park1, J. Lee2, E. Jung3,4, M. Kim1, I. Kim5, H. Son6, formation of the AD brain. S. Kim6, S. Kim7, Y. Park8, I. Mook-Jung3,4, S. Yu2, J. Park: None. J. Lee: None. E. Jung: None. M. Kim: J. Lee1,5 None. I. Kim: None. H. Son: None. S. Kim: None. S. Kim: None. Y. Park: None. I. Mook-Jung: None. S. Yu: 1Biomedical Science and Engineering Interdisciplinary None. J. Lee: None. Program, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology(KAIST),Daejeon,Korea,Republicof,2Center C03.4 for Computational Science Platform, Division of National Loss of neutral sphingomyelinase-3 (SMPD4) links Supercomputing,KoreaInstituteofScienceandTechnology neurodevelopmental disorders to cell cycle and nuclear Information, Daejeon, Korea, Republic of, 3Department of envelope anomalies Biochemistry & Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, D. J. Smits1, P. Magini2, L. Vandervore3,1, R. Schot1, 4Neuroscience Research Institute, College of Medicine, M. Columbaro2, E. Kasteleijn1, M. van der Ent4, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, F. Palombo2, L. Iommarini5, M. H. Lequin6, 5Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, A. M. Porcelli7, P. Govaert8, M. Dremmen9, M. C. Y. de Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology Wit10, M. Severino11, M. T. Divizia12, N. Ordonez- (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea, Republic of, 6Department of Herrera13,A.Alhashem14,A.AlFares14,M.AlGhamdi14, Biomedical Systems Informatics, Brain Korea 21 PLUS M. Al Ghamdi14, A. Rolfs13, P. Bauer13, J. Demmers15, Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of F.Verheijen1,M.Wilke1,M.vanSlegtenhorst1,P.vander Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 7Stanley Medical Spek16, A. Jansen3, R. Stottmann17, R. Hufnagel17, Research Institute (SMRI), Laboratory of Brain Research, R. Hopkin17, D. Aljeaid17, W. Wiszniewski18, Daejeon, MD, United States, 8Center for Cognition and P. Gawlinski18, W. B. Dobyns18, M. Seri2, T. Pippucci2, Sociality,InstituteforBasicScience(IBS),Daejeon,Korea, M. Fornerod4, G. M. S. Mancini1 Republic of 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Brain somatic mutations arising from the neural stem cell Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Medical Genet- niche appear to underlie several neurodevelopmental ics Unit, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Neuroge- disorders and brain tumors. Studies, however, have yet to netics research group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel, shed lighton the signiﬁcance and pathogenic roles of brain Belgium, 4Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University somatic mutations in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Here, we Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5University of performed deep whole-exome sequencing (average read Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6University Medical Center depth584X)in111postmortemhippocampalformationand Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 7Department of Pharmacy matched blood tissues from 52 AD patients and 11 non- andBiotechnologies,UniversityofBologna,Bologna,Italy, demented individuals. We found an average of 11.96 and 8Department of Pediatrics, division of neonatology, Eras- 12.55 somatic single nucleotide variations (SNVs) in brain mus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, tissue from AD patients and controls, respectively, and 9Department of Radiology, Erasmus University Medical 59.31and59.17SNVs fromblood.Thenumberofsomatic Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10Department of Neurol- mutations in brain specimens increased signiﬁcantly with ogy, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, aging, and the rate of mutation accumulation in the brain Netherlands, 11Neuroradiology department, Istituto Gian- was 4.8-fold slower than that in blood. The pathogenic ninaGaslini,Genoa,Italy,12MedicalGeneticsUnit,Istituto1086 Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 13Centogene AG, Rostock, Kasteleijn: None. M. van der Ent: None. F. Palombo: Germany,14DepartmentofGenetics,KingFaisalSpecialist None. L. Iommarini: None. M.H. Lequin: None. A.M. Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Porcelli: None. P. Govaert: None. M. Dremmen: None. 15Department of Molecular Genetics, Proteomics center, M.C.Y. de Wit: None. M. Severino: None. M.T. Divizia: Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Nether- None. N. Ordonez-Herrera: None. A. Alhashem: None. lands, 16Department ofBioinformatics, Erasmus University A.AlFares:None.M.AlGhamdi:None.M.AlGhamdi: Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 17Division of None. A. Rolfs: None. P. Bauer: None. J. Demmers: Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical None. F. Verheijen: None. M. Wilke: None. M. van Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Slegtenhorst: None. P. van der Spek: None. A. Jansen: Cincinnati, OH, United States, 18Department of Molecular None. R. Stottmann: None. R. Hufnagel: None. R. and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science Hopkin:None.D.Aljeaid:None.W.Wiszniewski:None. University, Portland, OR, United States P.Gawlinski:None.W.B.Dobyns:None.M.Seri:None. T. Pippucci: None. M. Fornerod: None. G.M.S. Introduction: Several neurodevelopmental processes Mancini: None. including neuronal survival, migration and differentiation are controlled by sphingolipid metabolism. Sphingomyeli- C03.5 nases generate ceramide from sphingomyelin as a second Exploring the impact of CHD2 mutations on DNA messenger in intracellular signaling pathways involved in double strand break (DSB) repair via non-homologous cell proliferation, differentiation, or apoptosis. While the end joining (NHEJ) using Cas9 and Nanopore roleofacidsphingomyelinaseiswellestablished,theroleof sequencing in human induced pluripotent stem cells neutralsphingomyelinasesinhumanneurodevelopmenthas (hIPSC) remained elusive. Methods: Twenty-ﬁve children from ten unrelated I. Tully, M. Alsaqati, A. Baldwin, W. Plumbly, families presented with microcephaly with simpliﬁed gyral A. Harwood pattern, cerebellar hypoplasia, severe developmental ence- phalopathy, congenital arthrogryposis, diabetes mellitus Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute, and early demise. All index cases have bi-allelic loss of Cardiff, United Kingdom function variants in the SMPD4 gene, coding for neutral sphingomyelinase-3.We performed additional studies to Introduction: Heterozygous CHD2 mutations cause early elucidate the mechanisms contributing to disease onset epileptic. The mechanism by which this occurs isnot pathogenesis. understood, however previous evidence suggests a role for Results: Fibroblasts from affected individuals showed CHD2 mediated chromatin remodelling during NHEJ. morphologic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) cisternae Methods: hIPSCs with doxycycline inducible Cas9 abnormalities, consistent with a previously suggested expression were used to create a heterozygous CHD2 function of SMPD4 in the ER. Overexpression of human mutant with an 11bp frameshift mutation (CHD2+/-). To Myc-taggedSMPD4inHEK392Tcellsshowedlocalization study DSB repair, ﬁve genomic targets were chosen, and of the protein to both the nuclear envelope and the ER. three gRNAs lipofected for each, in wild type (WT) and Previous studies localized SMPD4 to the outer nuclear CHD2+/−cellcultures.Inordertocaptureawiderangeof membrane. Mass spectrometry of SMPD4-associated pro- indels,a1kbregionwasampliﬁedaroundeachtargetusing teins detected peptides belonging to nuclear pore complex PCR - with a second used to apply DNA barcodes to each proteins. We also observed delayed cell cycle progression sample. Ultra-deep whole-molecule sequencing was per- after downregulation of SMPD4 by siRNA. These data are formed using the oxford nanopore minion. A comparison similar to former studies in HeLa cells showing mitotic was made between the indels seen in the CHD2+/− and abnormalities after siSMPD4 treatment. WT cell lines. Conclusion: Our study describes a novel microcephaly Results: A total of 4x106reads were obtained. In all tar- syndromecharacterizedbysevereneurologicabnormalities. gets, CHD2 mutations resulted in statistically signiﬁcant Our results suggest a major function of neutral increase in the number of larger (40bp-500bp) deletions, sphingomyelinase-3 in regulation of mitosis through mod- related to simultaneous cutting with more than one gRNA. ulation of nuclear membrane lipids, pointing to a novel Dependingonthetarget,theincreaserangedbetween2-fold mechanism and pathway in the pathogenesis of (p=1.48x10−22) and 27.1-fold (p=x10−260). At 3 of 5 microcephaly. targets, there was also a discernible shift in the pattern of D.J. Smits: None. P. Magini: None. L. Vandervore: smaller indels (<50bp length) at each individual cut site. None. R. Schot: None. M. Columbaro: None. E.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1087 Conclusion: The increase in mutations caused by multi- endings (boutons), and the ventral nerve cord (VNC) ple cuts suggests that heterozygous mutations alter the revealed changed NMJ and VNC morphology and sig- dynamics of DNA repair, causing cuts to persist longer. In niﬁcantly decreased amount of boutons compared to the developing brain, this could increase the risk of trans- control ﬂies. locations occurring, leading to a potential increase in Conclusion: We provide compelling evidence that de- pathological mosaicism in the mature brain. novo mutations in TAOK1 are causative for a novel form I. Tully: None. M. Alsaqati: None. A. Baldwin: None. of NDD. W. Plumbly: None. A. Harwood: None. M.DulovicMahlow:None.J.Trinh:None.K.Kumar Kandaswamy: None. G. Julius Braathen: None. N. Di C03.6 Donato: None. M. Werber: None. V. Krajka: None. Ø. De-novomutationsinTAOK1causeneurodevelopmental L.Busk:None.G.Oprea:None.F.Hinrichs:None.Ø.L. disorders Holla: None. M. E.R. Weiss: None. A. Kahlert: None. S. Kishore: None. K. Tveten: None. M. Vos: None. A. M.DulovicMahlow1,J.Trinh1,K.KumarKandaswamy2, Rolfs: None. K. Lohmann: None. G. Julius Braathen3, N. Di Donato4, M. Werber2, V. Krajka1, Ø. L. Busk3, G. Oprea2, F. Hinrichs1, Ø. L. Holla3, M. E.R. Weiss2, A. Kahlert4, S. Kishore2, C04 K. Tveten3, M. Vos1, A. Rolfs5,2, K. Lohmann1 Fertility 1InstituteofNeurogenetics,Luebeck,Germany,2Centogene C04.1 AG, Rostock, Germany, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Ectopic expression of CGG repeats leads to impaired Telemark Hospital Trust, Skien, Norway, 4Institute of response to gonadotropin hormones and reduced Clinical Genetics, Technical University of Dresden, Dres- fertility with age in a mouse model of the den, Germany, 5University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany FMR1 premutation Introduction: De-novo mutations represent a signiﬁcant K. Shelly1, N. Candelaria2, Z. Li3, P. Jin3, D. L. Nelson1 cause of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) such as neurodevelopmental delay and intellectual disability. How- 1Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Houston, TX, ever, only about 50% of the cases can be genetically United States, 2Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, explained. United States, 3Emory University School of Medicine, Methods: We identiﬁed de-novo variants in the TAOK1 Atlanta, GA, United States (thousand and one amino acid kinase 1) gene in NDD patients.Tovalidatethispotentialnoveldiseasegenewe(1) Carriers of expanded CGG repeats in the 5′UTR of used GeneMatcher to identify additional patients, (2) FMR1are at risk for Fragile X-associated Primary Ovarian established a primary ﬁbroblast line of one of the patients Insufﬁciency (FXPOI). Two mouse lines expressing either and collected RNA from patient’s ﬁbroblasts and blood CGG RNA-only (RNA-only) or CGG RNA and its (PAXTube), and (3) established an RNAi-mediated translated polyglycine product FMRpolyG (FMRpolyG knockdown Drosophila model. +RNA) were used to assess fertility using breeding and Results:Wecomparedthefrequencyofde-novovariants superovulation studies in order to model FXPOI. Pheno- in patient-parent trios with (n=2,030) vs. without (n= typic data were collected longitudinally, and ovarian 2,755) NDD. We identiﬁed de-novo variants in TAOK1 in histology was examined. CGG RNA and FMRpolyG four NDD patients but not in non-NDD patients. Two +RNA both contribute to ovarian dysfunction, albeit additional patients were found through GeneMatcher. All differently. Immunostaining shows FMRpolyG is present variants were absent from gnomAD. The patients shared a in oocytes and granulosa in early postnatal life and common phenotype of developmental delay. Additionally, gonadotropin stimulation reveals that young RNA-only four patients had muscular hypotonia and three autism. In and FMRpolyG+RNA mice ovulate fewer oocytes/female. the ﬁbroblast culture, we demonstrated highly reduced Ovaries during ovulation (8h post-hCG administration) TAOK1 mRNA levels compatible with nonsense-mediated show impaired cumulus expansion in the preovulatory mRNA decay. No detectable phosphorylated TAOK1 pro- folliclesofRNA-onlyandFMRpolyG+RNAovaries.With tein was found in these cells. Knockdown of TAO age, FMRpolyG+RNA mice exhibit declining fertility, but (CG14217) in Drosophila resulted in developmental delay thisreductionwasnotseeninRNA-onlymice.Cessationof and reduced survival compared to control ﬂies. Immunos- breeding in FMRpolyG+RNA females is preceded by taining of the neuromuscular junctions (NMJs), their signiﬁcant weight gain compared to control mice, and1088 histology shows a lack of ovulation as well as hyperplastic betweenAkap4-knockoutandwild-typetestesexistedinthe stromaanddisorganizedthecainagedovaries.Anincreased elongatingcellcluster,whereintheAkap4-knockouttestes, incidence of cysts present in both groups of CGG- asubgroupofelongatingcellswithmakergenesinvolvedin expressing ovaries suggest altered steroidogenesis and is cell adhesion and migration were increased, while a conﬁrmed by qRT-PCR from whole ovary tissue collected subgroup of elongating cells marked by mitochondrial from aged mice. Globally expressed FMRpolyG+CGG sheath genes were decreased. Our results revealed the RNAleadstoanovulation,alteredsteroidogenicproﬁle,and complex and well-coordinated procedures of spermatogen- fertility decline with age, while CGG RNA-only mice do esis, and substantiated Akap4’s indispensable roles in the not exhibit a decline in fertility or increased weight but integrityofspermﬂagellumandthestep-wisematurationof diminished response to superovulation and cumulus expan- sperms. sion defects similar to the FMRpolyG+RNA females N. Li: None. X. Fang: None. L. Huang: None. J. Xu: suggest that CGG RNA-alone can affect ovarian function. None. C. Ma: None. Z. Chen: None. Z. Zhang: None. C. K. Shelly: None. N. Candelaria: None. Z. Li: None. P. Liao: None. S. Zheng: None. P. Huang: None. W. Xu: Jin: None. D.L. Nelson: None. None. L. Sun: None. C04.2 C04.3 Proteomics and single-cell RNA analysis of Akap4- Discovery of selﬁsh mutations expanding in the male knockout mice model conﬁrm indispensable role of germline with duplex sequencing Akap4 in spermatogenesis R.Salazar1,B.Arbeithuber2,M.Ivankovic1,G.Povysil3,4, N. Li1, X. Fang1, L. Huang1,2, J. Xu3, C. Ma3, Z. Chen3, M. Heinzl1, I. Hartl1, S. Moura1, J. Pröll5, I. Tiemann- Z. Zhang1, C. Liao1, S. Zheng1, P. Huang4,2, W. Xu5, Boege1 L. Sun3 1Institute of Biophysics, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, 1GuangzhouInstituteofPediatrics,GuangzhouWomenand Austria, 2Department of Biology, Penn State University, Children’sMedicalCenter,GuangzhouMedicalUniversity, State College, PA, United States, 3Institute of Bioinfor- Guangzhou, China, 2Department of Urology, Zhujiang matics,JohannesKeplerUniversity,Linz,Austria,4Institute Hospital,SouthernMedicalUniversity,Guangzhou,China, forGenomicMedicine,ColumbiaUniversityIrvingMedical 3CenterofReproductiveMedicine,GuangzhouWomenand Center, New York, NY, United States, 5Center for Medical Children’sMedicalCenter,GuangzhouMedicalUniversity, Research, Faculty of Medicine, Johannes Kepler Univer- Guangzhou, China, 4Department of Urology, Okayama sity, Linz, Austria University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan, 5Reproductive Introduction: De novo mutations (DNM) are an important EndocrinologyandRegulationLaboratory,KeyLaboratory playerinheritablediseasesandevolution,yetlittleisknown ofObstetric,GynecologicandPediatricDiseasesandBirth aboutthedifferentmutagenicprocessesinourgermline.Of Defects of Ministry of Education, West China Second interest are a few highly recurrent DNM associated with University Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China congenital disorders and/or rasopathies, that have been described as selﬁsh mutations expanding in the male Sperm ﬁbrous sheath, a unique cytoskeletal structure, is germline. We have adapted an ultra-sensitive sequencing implicatedinvariousspermphysiologicalfunctions,suchas (USS)technologybasedonduplex-barcodingtodistinguish sperm maturation, motility and capacitation. AKAP4 has both DNA strands, thus increasing the sensitivity to one been described to be required for structural and functional mutation in 107 sequenced bases. This technology was integrity of the ﬁbrous sheath. We generated Akap4- applied to study the expansion of selﬁsh mutations in the knockout mice line using CRISPR-Cas9 system. Cytomor- FGFR3 gene in the male germline. phology and motility of sperms and testes were studied, Materials and Methods: A ~3000bp coding region of conﬁrming loss of Akap4 led to abnormal sperm morphol- the FGFR3 gene including the transmembrane and the ogy, motility and infertility. The proteomic components of tyrosine kinase domains was sequenced with USS in two testes were examined and Akap4 was found to be DNA sperm pools from an old and young donor group. signiﬁcantly decreased in the Akap4-knockout mice. Testes Results: DNM with frequencies of 10−3–10−5 were single-cell RNA sequencing and analysis revealed three identiﬁed in 41 exonic positions, several of which have geneswithsigniﬁcantchangeinthegeneralcellpopulation, been described in congenital disorders and/or cancer. The i.e., Akap4, Haspin, and Ccdc38. The single-cell RNA achondroplasia associated mutation c.1138G>A was expression proﬁles also showed that the major difference detected at similar frequencies as the reported occurrence.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1089 Also, various substitutions are viable and have been million sperm/ml) and their fertile parents. In total, we reported in population data (gnomAD), albeit at lower fre- identiﬁed and validated 92 protein-altering DNMs, which quencies. Mutations found in both pools show higher fre- show an enrichment in protein network edges. Also, we quencies in older donors. found an enrichment of loss-of-function (LoF) variants in Conclusion: Our USS method has proven to be suc- extremelyLoFintolerantgenes.OfallDNMs,22arelikely cessful in detecting low frequency DNM. Also, it is an todisruptnormalgenefunctionandlieingenesinvolvedin important strategy to identify driver mutations in the male sperm production such as TOPAZ1 and ODF1. Comple- germline expanding with paternal age with potentially mentarily, we detected de novo copy number variants in 2 important health consequences. patientsaffectingmultiplegenesinvolvedincellreplication Project funded by the Linz Institute of Technology and gamete production. Currently, we are performing (LIT213201001) and FWF (FWF308667000). replication studies in additional cohorts to identify recur- R. Salazar: None. B. Arbeithuber: None. M. Ivanko- rently mutated genes. Additionally, detailed phenotypic re- vic: None. G. Povysil: None. M. Heinzl: None. I. Hartl: evaluation of patient phenotype, immunoﬂuorescence None. S. Moura: None. J. Pröll: None. I. Tiemann- stainings of patient material and genetic screens using Boege: None. Drosophila Melanogaster are being performed to more conﬁdently link genes affected by a DNM to male C04.4 infertility. Our data provide the ﬁrst indications that DNMs Exome sequencing reveals de novo mutations and may play an important role in severe male infertility. deletions in severe idiopathic male infertility M.S.Oud: None.R.M.Smits:None.F.K.Mastrorosa: None. H. Smith: None. M.J. Xavier: None. G.S. Holt: M. S. Oud1, R. M. Smits2, F. K. Mastrorosa3, H. Smith3, None. H. Sheth: None. B.J. Houston: None. M.K. M. J. Xavier3, G. S. Holt3, H. Sheth3, B. J. Houston4, O’Bryan: None. P.F. de Vries: None. B. Alobaidi: None. M.K. O’Bryan4,P. F. deVries1, B.Alobaidi3, H.Ismail3, H. Ismail: None. A. Garcia-Rodriguez: None. A. Miku- A. Garcia-Rodriguez3, A. Mikulasova5, C. Gilissen1, lasova:None.C.Gilissen:None.L.E.L.M.Vissers:None. L. E. L. M. Vissers1, F. Tüttelmann6, K. McEleny7, F. Tüttelmann: None. K. McEleny: None. J. Coxhead: J. Coxhead8, S. Cockell9, D. D. M. Braat2, K. Fleischer2, None. S. Cockell: None. D.D.M. Braat: None. K. Flei- G. W. van der Heijden1,2, L. Ramos2, J. A. Veltman1,3 scher: None. G.W. van der Heijden: None. L. Ramos: None. J.A. Veltman: None. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, C04.5 Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Institute of Genetic CETN1 is associated with spermatogenesis and male Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4School fertility: Genetic and functional perspectives of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 5Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle upon D. V. S. Sudhakar1, S. Jaishankar2, R. Phanindranath1, Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Institute of Human Genetics, A. Pawar1, V. Jayaraman3, D. Verma4, J. Reshma Devi1, Münster, Germany, 7Newcastle Fertility Centre, Newcastle B. Senthilkumaran3, R. Dada5, K. Singh6, R. Singh7, upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 8Genomics Core Facility, N. J. Gupta8, B. N. Chakravarth8, M. Deendayal9, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United King- K. V. Chary4, A. Anand2, Y. Sharma1, D. Gedala Rao10, dom, 9Bioinformatics Support Unit, Newcastle University, K. C. Mantravadi10, J. Gopalakrishnan11, K. Thangaraj1 Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom 1Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, Human reproduction is vital to our species but worldwide India, 2Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientiﬁc infertility affects 1 in 6 couples, of which half of the cases Research (JNCASR), Bengaluru, India, 3University of are explained by a male factor. Although thousands of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India, 4Tata Institute of Funda- genes are known to be involved in spermatogenesis, the mentalResearch(TIFR),Mumbai,India,5AllIndiaInstitute genetic causes behind severe spermatogenic failure remain of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 6Department of largely unknown. De novo mutations (DNMs), that arise MolecularandHumanGenetics,BanarasHinduUniversity spontaneouslyinthegermlineorpostzygotically,areknown (BHU),Varanasi,India,7DivisionofEndocrinology,CSIR- to play a prominent role in early-onset disorders with Central DrugResearch Institute, Lucknow, India, 8Institute reduced ﬁtness. Here we report on the ﬁrst exome of Reproductive Medicine, Kolkata, India, 9Infertility sequencing study to investigate the role of DNMs in male Institute and Research Centre, Secunderabad, India, infertility. We examined and sequenced 108 patients 10Oasis Centre for Reproductive Medicine, Hyderabad, suffering from azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia (<5 India, 11Center of Molecular Medicine, Cologne, Germany1090 Introduction: Disorders of sex development (DSDs) are Introduction: Approximately, 10–15% of the couples are conditionsaffectingdevelopmentofthegonadsorgenitalia. infertile worldwide and male factor alone accounts for Variants in two key genes, SRY and its target SOX9, are an 30–50% of infertility. The etiology in large proportion of established cause of 46,XY DSD, but the genetic basis of infertile men still remains unknown. Therefore, to identify many DSDs remains unknown. SRY-mediated SOX9 novel genetic factors we selected CETN1 based on our upregulation in the early gonad is crucial for testis exome sequencing studies, sequenced it in large cohort of development, yet the regulatory elements underlying this case-controls and performed various functional studies. have not been identiﬁed in humans. Materials and Methods: We performed exome sequen- Methods: We analysed copy number variations (CNVs) cing of 44 idiopathic infertile men. CETN1 was one of the in the upstream regulatory region of SOX9 in DNA from seven potential candidates identiﬁed ; hence, we further patients with DSD, allowing us to deﬁne several minimal sequenced CETN1 in 1200 infertile men and 900 fertile critical regions for sex-reversal. men. Functional characterization of two variants from Results:Weredeﬁnedtheupstreamregulatorylandscape CETN1was performed usingvariousbiophysical(CD, 2D- of human SOX9. Using new patient data, we reﬁned the HSQC etc.,), cell biology (using different cell lines and 32.5 kb XYSR and 24 kb RevSex intervals and analysed iPSC) approaches and luciferase assays. Quantitative esti- these genomic regions using bioinformatic and luciferase mation of Centrin-1 in oligospermic men with IVF failure tiling approaches, to identify three putative enhancers 5′ of history was done by ELISA. SOX9. In cell-based reporter assays these enhancers Results: Two variants; rs61734344 (p.Met72Thr) and responded to different combinations of testis-speciﬁc reg- rs367716858 (5′UTR) showed signiﬁcant association with ulators including SRY, SF1 and SOX9 itself. When com- infertility (p-values: 8.46e-06 and 0.001, respectively). bined, all three enhancers show synergistic activity, Biophysicalstudiesshowedthatmutationp.Met72Thralters signiﬁcantly increasing their individual enhancer activity. calcium-binding afﬁnity and calcium-induced structural Invivo,deletionofthesethreeenhancersinmiceresulted changesinCentrin-1.SomaticcellsanddifferentiatediPSC in different outcomes ranging from: no apparent effect to over-expressing p.Met72Thr showed higher multipolar reduced Sox9 transcription and complete sex reversal. cells, fragmented nuclei and cell death. Studies using RPE Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst study to identify SOX9 cell lines showed that p.Met72Thr affects ciliary assembly enhancersthat,whenduplicatedordeleted,resultin46,XX dynamics and cell proliferation. Whereas, the 5′UTR or 46,XY sex reversal, respectively. These enhancers pro- mutation leads to over-expression of Centrin-1 due to loss vide a hitherto missing link by which SRY activates SOX9 of potential methylation site. Further, the reproductive initiation, upregulation and maintenance in humans, and outcome was markedly affected in patients with higher establish SOX9 enhancer mutations as a signiﬁcant cause levelsofCentrin-1proteinintheirspermcentrosomes.This of DSD. istheﬁrststudytodemonstratetheroleofCETN1inhuman B.M. Croft: None. T. Ohnesorg: None. A.H. spermatogenesis and male fertility. Sinclair: None. D.V.S. Sudhakar: None. S. Jaishankar: None. R. Phanindranath: None. A. Pawar: None. V. Jayaraman: None. D. Verma: None. J. Reshma Devi: None. B. Sen- C05 thilkumaran: None. R. Dada: None. K. Singh: None. R. Developmental disorders 1 Singh: None. N.J. Gupta: None. B.N. Chakravarth: None. M. Deendayal: None. K.V. Chary: None. A. C05.1 Anand: None. Y. Sharma: None. D. Gedala Rao: None. Human and mouse gene essentiality screens allow to K.C. Mantravadi: None. J. Gopalakrishnan: None. K. identify candidate genes for developmental disorders Thangaraj: None. V. Munoz Fuentes1, P. Cacheiro2, T. H. Meehan1, C04.6 D. Smedley2 Duplication and deletion of key SOX9 enhancers cause sex reversal in humans 1EMBL-EBI, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom B. M. Croft, T. Ohnesorg, A. H. Sinclair The identiﬁcation of the causal variants of rare genetic Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, diseases from voluminous patient sequencing data is an Australia ongoing challenge. Here we combine cellular essentiality screen data with in vivo organismal gene essentiality fromAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1091 the International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium to aid in Here, we show that 3- and 4-week-old BrafQ241R/+ mice the prioritization of candidate disease genes. We categor- have decreased body weight and length, as well as reduced ized genes within a spectrum of phenotypic effects, and growth plate width in the proximal tibiae. Furthermore, identiﬁedaDevelopmentalLethal(DL)category,whichwe proliferative and hypertrophic chondrocyte zones of the deﬁne as genes not essential for cell survival but required growth plate were reduced in BrafQ241R/+ mice compared for organismal development. With mouse viability data with control mice. Immunohistological analysis revealed available for ~4,900 genes, 764 genes fall into the DL that ERK activation was enhanced in hypertrophic chon- category.We found that this categorypresentsa signiﬁcant drocytes in BrafQ241R/+ mice. In accordance with growth overrepresentationofMendeliandiseasegenes (OMIMand retardation and reduced growth plate width, decreased Orphanetassociations,2.5-foldincreaseodds),andaneven serumlevelsofinsulin-likegrowthfactor1(IGF-1)andIGF higher enrichment (3.2-fold increase) for human genes binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) were observed in BrafQ241R/+ associated with developmental disorders (from the Deci- mice at 3 and 4 weeks of age. In contrast, serum growth pheringDevelopmentalDisordersStudy,DDD).Wefurther hormonelevelswerecomparableincontrolandBrafQ241R/+ investigated DL genes that were: (i) not described as mice. Treatment with C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP), a associated with human disease by OMIM, Orphanet or stimulator of endochondral bone growth and a potent DDD; and (ii) highly intolerant to LoF mutations, inhibitor of the FGFR3-RAF1-MEK/ERK signaling, comprising 164 genes. Of these, 24 genes overlap with increased body and tail lengths in control and BrafQ241R/+ those containing heterozygous functional de novo variants mice. In conclusion, ERK activation in chondrocytes and in undiagnosed cases from the DDD study (DDD Research low serum IGF-1/IGFBP-3 levels could be associated with Variants). Further investigation of this set of genes is the growth retardation observed in BrafQ241R/+ mice. Our ongoing by comparing the clinical features of develop- data also suggest that CNP is a potential therapeutic target mental disorders with homozygous and heterozygous in CFC syndrome and other RASopathies. knockout mouse models, to identify potential disease S. Inoue: None. N. Morozumi: None. K. Yoshikiyo: variants in cases with undiagnosed developmental None. H. Maeda: None. Y. Aoki: None. disorders. V. Munoz Fuentes: None. P. Cacheiro: None. T.H. C05.3 Meehan: None. D. Smedley: None. Towards the treatment of Cantú syndrome C05.2 H. I. Roessler1, C. McClenaghan2, Y. Huang2, C-type natriuretic peptide improves growth retardation C.M.Halabi2,3,T.Harter2,S.Savelberg1,F.Tessadori4,1, in a mouse model of cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome J. Bakkers4,5, A. Kovacs6, M. S. Remedi2,7, E. P. Kirk8,9, associated with a Braf mutation I. Scurr10, S. F. Smithson10, M. M. van Haelst11,12, D. K. Grange2,3, C. G. Nichols2, G. van Haaften1 S. Inoue1, N. Morozumi2, K. Yoshikiyo2,3, H. Maeda2,4, Y. Aoki1 1Department of Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University 2Center for the Investigation of Membrane Excitability School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan, 2Immunology & Diseases (CIMED), and Department of Cell Biology and Inﬂammatory Disease Field, Asubio Pharma Co., LTD, Physiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Kobe,Japan,3CellTherapyResearchLaboratories,Daiichi Louis, MO, United States, 3Center for the Investigation of Sankyo CO., LTD, Tokyo, Japan, 4End-Organ Disease Membrane Excitability Diseases (CIMED), and Depart- Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo CO., LTD, Tokyo, Japan ments of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States, 4Hubrecht Cardio-facio-cutaneous(CFC)syndrome,ageneticdisorder Institute-KNAW and University Medical Centre Utrecht, caused by germline mutations in BRAF, KRAS, MAP2K1 Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of Medical Physiology, and MAP2K2, is characterized by growth retardation, heart Division of Heart and Lungs, University Medical Center defects, dysmorphic facial appearance and dermatologic Utrecht,Utrecht,Netherlands,6CenterfortheInvestigation abnormalities. We have previously reported that knock-in of Membrane Excitability Diseases (CIMED), Medicine, mice(BrafQ241R/+)expressingtheCFCsyndrome-associated Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, St. mutation, Braf Q241R, showed growth retardation because Louis, MO, United States, 7Center for the Investigation of of gastrointestinal dysfunction. However, other factors Membrane Excitability Diseases (CIMED), Medicine, associated with growth retardation, including chondrogen- Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, esis and endocrinological proﬁle, have not been examined. MO, United States, 8Dept of Medical Genetics, Sydney1092 Children’s Hospital, Randwick NSW, Australia, 9School of S.Cuvertino1,V.Hartill2,A.Colyer3,F.Nadat3,N.Nair4, Women’s and Children’s Health, University of New South A. Stevens5, T. Garner5, V. Faundes1, S. Kimber6, Wales,RandwickNSW,Australia,10DepartmentofClinical F. Flinter7, S. A. Lynch8, N. Canham9, The Deciphering Genetics, St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, Developmental Disorders Study, the 100,000 Genomes 11Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam Medical Project, B. Jackson3, G. M. Squeo10, S. Venuto10, Center,UniversityofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,Netherlands, G. Merla10, E. Sheridan2, C. A. Johnson2, S. Banka11 12DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,VUMedicalCenter,VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands 1Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine, and Cantú Syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in genes encoding the Kingdom, 2Leeds Institute of Medical Research, Faculty of pore-forming (Kir6.1, KCNJ8) and regulatory (SUR2, Medicine and Health, The University of Leeds, Leeds, ABCC9) subunits of ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) United Kingdom, 3Faculty of Biological Sciences, The channels.CSpatientspresentwithhypertrichosisandfacial University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Division of anomalies alongside a varying range of cardiovascular Musculoskeletal & Dermatological Sciences, School of abnormalities. To generate a critical mass patients to ﬁnd Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine, and further clinical characteristics of the disease as well as to Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United ensure a rapid progression towards future interventional Kingdom,5DivisionofDevelopmentalBiology&Medicine, studies we developed a standardized registry. Clinical data School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medi- is obtained during annual Cantú research clinics. CS is cine, and Health, The University of Manchester, Manche- debilitating with no targeted therapy available. Clinical ster,UnitedKingdom,6DivisionofCellMatrixBiologyand management currently involves symptomatic treatments to Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, address second-order complications such as heart failure. Faculty of Biology, Medicine, and Health, The University The off-patent KATP inhibitor glibenclamide which is of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Department already widely applied in clinic to block GOF KATP ofClinicalGenetics,Guy’s&StThomas’NHSFoundation channels involved in Type 2 diabetes holds promise as a Trust, London, United Kingdom, 8School of Medicine, potential treatment for CS. In order to perform therapeutic Children’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 9Clinical drugscreening,wehavedevelopednovelCSanimalmodels Genetics, Liverpool Women’s NHD Foundation Trust, in which disease-causing mutations were knocked-in to the Liverpool, United Kingdom, 10Division of Medical Genet- endogenous ABCC9 loci in zebraﬁsh and mice using ics,FondazioneIRCCSCasaSollievodellaSofferenza,San CRISPR/Cas9 genome engineering. Both models recapitu- Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy, 11Manchester Centre for late key cardiovascular features of CS which signiﬁcantly Genomic Medicine, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester reverse after glibenclamide administration. Hypercontracti- University Foundation NHS Trust, Health Innovation lity and abnormally high-output were reversed in zebraﬁsh Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom larvae whilst cardiac hypertrophy in mice was similarly attenuated. No sustained hypoglycemia was observed after Introduction: KMT2D encodes a H3K4 methyltransferase chronic exposure to glibenclamide in mice. These results made of 5537 amino acids. Loss-of-function KMT2D providekeypre-clinicalevidencefortheinvivoefﬁcacyof variants cause Kabuki syndrome (KS), characterised by glibenclamide for the treatmentof CS. Hence, we intend to intellectual disability, typical facial dysmorphism and perform a clinical trial to test glibenclamide in CS patients. multiple malformations of heart, kidneys and palate. E-Rare 2014 grant ‘CantuTreat’ (I-2101-B26) Results: Through targeted whole exome and genome H.I. Roessler: None. C. McClenaghan: None. Y. sequencing we ascertained 10 individuals with de novo or Huang: None. C.M. Halabi: None. T. Harter: None. S. inherited missense KMT2D variants restricted to highly Savelberg: None. F. Tessadori: None. J. Bakkers: None. conservedresidueswithinacentralregionpredictedtoform A. Kovacs: None. M.S. Remedi: None. E.P. Kirk: None. a coiled-coil dimer. All individuals presented with clinical I. Scurr: None. S.F. Smithson: None. M.M. van Haelst: features, strikingly distinct from KS, consisting of (a) None. D.K. Grange: None. C.G. Nichols: None. G. van varying combinations of branchial cysts, external ear mal- Haaften: None. formations, ear pits, semi-circular canal anomalies, hearing loss, microphthalmia, lacrimal duct problems, choanal C05.4 atresia, absent/hypoplastic nipples and hypothyroidism; (b) A restricted spectrum of KMT2D variants cause a absence of typical facial features of KS; and (c) normal multiple malformations disorder distinct from Kabuki developmentinmostindividuals.KMT2Dexpressionlevels syndrome in ﬁbroblast cells from two affected individuals were notAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1093 altered compared to controls. However, mutant ﬁbroblast 15Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, hadslightlydecreasedproliferationandmigrationcompared 16Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, to controls. The DNA methylation pattern in peripheral United States, 17Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, blood samples derived from affected individuals showed a SC, United States, 18University of British Columbia, speciﬁc signature distinct from that of KS. Circular Vancouver, BC, Canada, 19Institut Cochin, Paris, France, dichroism performed on the puriﬁed KMT2D coiled-coil 20Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 21University of domainshowedthatalpha-helicalsecondarystructureinthe California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United wild-type protein was perturbed by the missense variants. States,22UniversityofChicago,Chicago,IL,UnitedStates, Conclusion: We show that a restricted spectrum of 23A.I.duPont Hospital forChildren/Nemours,Wilmington, pathogenic KMT2D missense variants results in a novel DE, United States, 24Shefﬁeld Children’s Hospital, Shef- malformation disorder distinct from KS. This adds to the ﬁeld, United Kingdom, 25Boston Children’s Hospital, growing list of allelic disorders caused by mutations in Boston, MA, United States, 26University of Utah, Salt Lake chromatin remodelling genes and provides insights into City, UT, United States, 27Southern California Kaiser function of previously unstudied region of this important Permanente Medical Group, Anaheim, CA, United States protein. S.Cuvertino:None.V.Hartill:None.A.Colyer:None. The meningioma (disrupted in balanced translocation) 1 F. Nadat: None. N. Nair: None. A. Stevens: None. T. (MN1) gene encodes a transcriptional co-regulator without Garner: None. V. Faundes: None. S. Kimber: None. F. homology to other proteins, previously implicated in acute Flinter: None. S.A. Lynch: None. N. Canham: None. B. myeloid leukemia and development of the palate in mice. Jackson: None. G.M. Squeo: None. S. Venuto: None. G. We identiﬁed a cluster of de novo truncating mutations in Merla:None.E.Sheridan:None.C.A.Johnson:None.S. MN1 in a cohort of 21 individuals with strikingly similar Banka: None. dysmorphic facial features, especially midface hypoplasia, and intellectual disability with severe expressive language C05.5 delay. MN1 is comprised of two exons. All mutations, De novoC-terminaltruncatingmutations inMN1cause includingtherecurrentvariantp.Arg1295*observedin8/19 a neurodevelopmental syndrome with distinctive facial probands,fallintheterminal exonortheextreme3′region features of exon 1, and are therefore predicted to result in escape fromnonsense-mediatedmRNAdecay.Thiswasconﬁrmed C. T. Gordon1, C. Mak2, D. Doherty3, A. Lin4, N. Vegas1, in ﬁbroblasts from three individuals. The C-terminal 20 M. Cho5, G. Viot6, C. Dimartino1, J. Weisfeld-Adams7, amino acids of MN1, which are lacking in all patients, are D. Lessel8, S. Joss9, C. Li10, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui11, very highly conserved amongst vertebrate species, suggest- Y.Zarate12,D.Horn13,C.Troyer14,S.Kant15,G.Leung2, ing an important role for the C-terminal tail in MN1 A. Barone16, S. Yang5, E. Bend17, C. Roadhouse10, function.Previousstudieshavedescribedlargedeletionsof F.Zahir18,E.Stolerman17,T.Bienvenu19,N.Orenstein20, aregionencompassingMN1andothergenesinindividuals W. Dobyns3, J. Shieh21, D. Waggoner22, K. Gripp23, with variable neurodevelopmental anomalies and non- M. Parker24, J. Stoler25, S. Lyonnet1, V. Cormier-Daire1, speciﬁc facial features (dissimilar to the facial gestalt of D. Viskochil26, T. Hoffman27, J. Amiel1, B. Chung2 the patients reported here). We propose that the condition described here for the ﬁrst time, MEningioma 1 C-terminal 1Institut Imagine, INSERM U1163, Paris, France, 2Uni- Truncation (MECT) syndrome, is not due to MN1 versity of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 3University of haploinsufﬁciency but rather is the result of dominantly Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 4MassGeneral acting C-terminally truncated MN1 protein. In summary, Hospital for Children, Boston, MA, United States, 5Gen- our data show that MN1 plays a critical role in human eDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 6Hôpital Cochin, craniofacial and brain development. Paris, France, 7University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, C.T.Gordon:None.C.Mak:None.D.Doherty:None. United States, 8University Medical Center Hamburg- A. Lin: None. N. Vegas: None. M. Cho: None. G. Viot: Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 9West of Scotland None.C.Dimartino:None.J.Weisfeld-Adams:None.D. Regional Genetics Service, Glasgow, United Kingdom, Lessel: None. S. Joss: None. C. Li: None. C. Gonzaga- 10McMaster University Medical Center, Hamilton, ON, Jauregui: None. Y. Zarate: None. D. Horn: None. C. Canada, 11Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY, Troyer: None. S. Kant: None. G. Leung: None. A. Bar- United States, 12University of Arkansas for Medical one: None. S. Yang: None. E. Bend: None. C. Road- Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States, 13Institut für house: None. F. Zahir: None. E. Stolerman: None. T. MedizinischeGenetikundHumangenetik,Berlin,Germany, Bienvenu: None. N. Orenstein: None. W. Dobyns:None. 14University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States, J.Shieh:None.D.Waggoner:None.K.Gripp:None.M.1094 Parker: None. J. Stoler: None. S. Lyonnet: None. V. Canada, 19Centre de Génétique, Hôpital Couple-Enfant, Cormier-Daire: None. D. Viskochil: None. T. Hoffman: CHU de Grenoble-Alpes, La Tronche, Grenoble, France, None. J. Amiel: None. B. Chung: None. 20GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 21Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, C05.6 Switzerland De novo missense mutations in the X-linked TFE3 gene cause intellectual disability with pigmentary mosaicism Introduction: Pigmentary mosaicism (PM) manifests by and storage disorder-like features hypopigmentation along Blaschko’s lines, often associated with intellectual disability. Molecular etiologies are still D. Lehalle1,2,3, P. Vabres1, T. Bierhals4, M. T. Cho5, poorly elucidated. Together with new insights on the role B.Cogne6,7,M.Avila1,V.Carmignac1,L.Duplomb-Jego1, for lysosomal signaling in embryonic stem cell differentia- E. De Bont8, Y. Duffourd1, F. Duijkers9, O. Elpeleg10, tion, mutations in the X-linked transcription factor TFE3 A. Fattal-Valevski11, D. Genevieve12, A. Guimier13, have recently been reported in ﬁve patients with PM. D. Harris14, M. Hempel15, B. Isidor6,7, T. Jouan1, Functional analysis suggested these mutations to result in P. Kuentz1, K. Lichtenbelt16, V. Loik Ramey14, ectopic nuclear gain-of-function Tfe3 alleles. L.Pasquier17,J.St-Onge18,1,A.Sorlin1,2,J.Thevenon1,19, MaterialandMethods:Subsequentdatasharingallowed E. Torti20, K. Van Gassen16, M. Van Haelst9, S. van theclusteringofdenovoTFE3variantsidentiﬁedbyexome Koningsbruggen9, J. Riviere1,3,18, C. Thauvin1,2, sequencingorTFE3targetedsequencingonDNAextracted J. Betschinger21, L. Faivre1,2 from leucocytes in patients referred for syndromic intel- lectual disability with or without PM. 1Equipe GAD, INSERM LNC UMR 1231, Faculté de Results: We describe the clinical and molecular data of Médecine,UniversitédeBourgogneFranche-Comté,Dijon, the ﬁve previously published patients and six additional France, 2Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine individuals harboring a de novo missense TFE3 mutation. Translationnelle et Anomalies du Développement (TRANS- The seven females and four males presented with pigmen- LAD), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon et Université tation anomalies on Blaschko’s lines, severe intellectual de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3Department of Human disability, epilepsy, metabolic anomalies (hepatomegaly, Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Mon- obesity, hypoglycemia), growth retardation and recogniz- treal, QC, Canada, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Uni- able facial dysmorphism with progressive coarsening. The versity MedicalCenter Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistraße mutationwasatamosaicstateintwomalepatients.Twoof 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany, 5GeneDx, Gaithersburg, the eight identiﬁed mutations were localized in exon 3, six MD, Bethesda, MD, United States, 6CHU de Nantes, in exon 4; three were recurrent mutations. Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France, 7L'institut Conclusion: This series of 11 individuals further duthorax,INSERM,CNRS,UNIVNantes,CHUdeNantes, delineates the speciﬁc storage disorder-like phenotype with Nantes, France, 8Department of Pediatric Oncology/ pigmentary mosaicism ascribed to de novo TFE3 missense Hematology, Beatrix Children’s Hospital, University Med- mutationinexons3and4.Itconﬁrmstheidentiﬁcationofa ical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 9Depart- novel X-linked condition associated with mosaicism and ment of Genetics, AUMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, dysregulation within the mTOR pathway, as well as a link 10Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic between lysosomal signaling and human development. Research, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, D.Lehalle: None. P. Vabres:None.T. Bierhals:None. Jerusalem, Israel, 11Pediatric Neurology Institute, Tel Aviv M.T. Cho: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; SouraskyMedicalCenter, SacklerFaculty ofMedicine, Tel GeneDx. B. Cogne: None. M. Avila: None. V. Car- Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 12Department of Clinical mignac: None. L. Duplomb-Jego: None. E. De Bont: Genetics, Montpellier, France, 13Service de Génétique, None.Y.Duffourd:None.F.Duijkers:None.O.Elpeleg: Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, None. A. Fattal-Valevski: None. D. Genevieve: None. A. 14Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Guimier: None. D. Harris: None. M. Hempel: None. B. Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 15Institute of Human Isidor: None. T. Jouan: None. P. Kuentz: None. K. Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Lichtenbelt: None. V. Loik Ramey: None. L. Pasquier: Martinistraße 52, 20246,, Hamburg, Germany, 16Depart- None. J. St-Onge: None. A. Sorlin: None. J. Thevenon: ment of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht None. E. Torti: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- (UMCU), Utrecht, Netherlands, 17Service de génétique niﬁcant; GeneDx. K. Van Gassen: None. M. Van Haelst: médicale, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 18Child Health None. S. van Koningsbruggen: None. J. Riviere: None. and Human Development Program, Research Institute of C. Thauvin: None. J. Betschinger: None. L. the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Faivre: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1095 C06 Cellular dysfunctions approachesinacellularandazebraﬁshmodelweidentiﬁed loss-of-function in DTYMK as the cause of a novel C06.1 vanishing brain disease. DTYMK deﬁciency is the cause of a novel vanishing J.M.Vanoevelen:None.J.Bierau:None.E.Kamsteeg: brain disease None. R.A. Wevers: None. V.A. Bok: None. M. van der Knaap: None. M. Bugiani: None. M. O’ Driscoll: None. J. M. Vanoevelen1, J. Bierau1, E. Kamsteeg2, A. van den Wijngaard: None. H.G. Brunner: None. L. R. A. Wevers3, V. A. Bok4, M. van der Knaap5, Wang: None. C.T.R.M. Stumpel: None. M. Bugiani6, M. O’ Driscoll7, A. van den Wijngaard1, H. G. Brunner1, L. Wang8, C. T. R. M. Stumpel1 C06.2 DEGS1 Mutation causes sphingolipidosis 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University MedicalCentre+,Maastricht,Netherlands,2Departmentof V. A. Dolgin1, R. Straussberg2,3, R. Xu4, I. Mileva4, Human Genetics, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Y. Yogev1, C. Mao4, O. S. Birk5,1 3Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Radboud UMC, Nijmegen,Netherlands,4DepartmentofPediatrics,Màxima 1TheMorrisKahnLaboratoryofHumanGenetics,National Medical Center, Veldhoven, Netherlands, 5Department of Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev and Faculty of Child Neurology, VU UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Health Sciences,Ben-Gurion UniversityoftheNegev,Beer 6Department of Neuropathology, VU UMC, Amsterdam, Sheva, Israel, 2Neurogenetics Clinic, Neurology Unit, Netherlands, 7Genome Damage and Stability Centre, Schneider Children Medical Center, Petah Tikvah, Israel, University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom, 8Depart- 3SacklerFacultyofMedicine,TelAvivUniversity,TelAviv, ment of Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry, Swedish Israel, 4Department of Medicine and Stony Brook Cancer University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden Center, The State University of New York at Stony Brook, New York, NY, United States, 5Genetics Institute, Soroka Nucleotide metabolism is a complex process regulating University Medical Center, Beer Sheva, Israel processes including proliferation, DNA synthesis and repair. Here, we describe DTYMK deﬁciency as the cause Introduction: Mutations in enzymes of lipid synthesis and ofanovelvanishingbraindiseaseintwounrelatedpatients. metabolism have been demonstrated to cause DTYMK encodes TMPK (thymidylate monophosphate sphingolipidoses. kinase), a key enzyme in dTTP biosynthesis. The clinical Materials and Methods: linkage analysis, whole exome phenotype is characterized by microcephaly, no growth in sequencing, lipidomics analysis. length and severe developmental delay. MRI revealed Results: We describe an autosomal recessive neurologi- extreme loss of white matter in the cerebral cortex and cal disorder affecting consanguineous kindred. All four absence of basal ganglia. Two compound heterozygous affected individuals, born at term following normal preg- variants in DTYMK were detected in the ﬁrst patient nancies, had mild to severe intellectual disability, spastic whereas a second patient carried a (third) homozygous quadriplegia, scoliosis and epilepsy in most, with no dys- variant in DTYMK. TMPK activity was undetectable in morphic features. Brain MRI demonstrated leukodystrophy patientﬁbroblastsandaproliferationdefectthatwasabsent with abnormal hyperintense signal in the periventricular in control cells was observed. Homozygous dtymk mutant perioccipital region and thinning of corpus callosum. zebraﬁsh show microcephaly, developmental delay and Notably, affected individuals were asymptomatic at early massive brain edema. TMPK activity in mutant zebraﬁsh infancy and developed normally until the age of conﬁrmed that the allele represents a loss-of-function. 8–18 months, when deterioration ensued. Homozygosity Furthermore, a striking reduction of cell proliferation was mappingidentiﬁedasingle8.7Mbdisease-associatedlocus detected in the brain of mutant zebraﬁsh larvae, as well as on chromosome 1q41–1q42.13 between rs1511695 and an impairment of the DNA-damage repair mechanism. rs537250 (two-point LOD score 2.1). Whole exome These similarities between the human and zebraﬁsh sequencing identiﬁed within this locus a single disease- phenotype strongly suggest a causal link between TMPK associated homozygous mutation in DEGS1, encoding C4- deﬁciency and neurodegeneration. Current research is dihydroceramide desaturase, an enzyme of the ceramide focused on the identiﬁcation of the compensatory mechan- synthesis pathway. The missense mutation, segregating ism and the pathogenic mechanism underlying the vanish- withinthefamily asexpectedforrecessiveheredity,affects ing white matter but reduced proliferation and a deﬁcient an evolutionary-conserved amino acid of both isoforms of DNA repair mechanism are suspected to play major roles. DEGS1andwasnotfoundinahomozygousstateinExAC In summary, by combining genetic and biochemical and gnomAD databases or in 300 ethnically matched1096 individuals.Analysisofwholebloodofaffectedindividuals mutations). Expression of TUSC3, the homologue protein demonstrated augmented levels of dihydroceramides, ofMAGT1,wasincreasedinallpatient-derivedﬁbroblasts. dihydrosphingosine, dihydrosphingosine-1-phosphate and By radiolabelling we observed that the patient ﬁbroblasts dihydrosphingomyelins with reduced levels of ceramide, haveamildglycosylationdefect.Thisisinlinewithreports sphingosine, sphingosine-1-phosphate and mono- showing that enhanced expression of TUSC3 mitigates the hexosylceramides, as expected in malfunction of C4- MAGT1 defect. Interestingly, glycoproteins were strongly dihydroceramide desaturase. hypoglycosylated in P3 lymphocytes, as they don’texpress Conclusion: We demonstrate that a mutation in DEGS1 TUSC3.Lastly,complementationexperimentswithmutated causes a sphingolipidosis presenting at age 8–18 months MAGT1 did not rescue the defective glycosylation in with severe leukodystrophy, implying future treatment MAGT1-/-TUSC3-/- HEK293 cells, indicating that all three modalities for this severe neurologic disease. mutations are pathogenic. V.A. Dolgin: None. R. Straussberg: None. R. Xu: Conclusion:Weshowedthatglycosylationisimpairedin None. I. Mileva: None. Y. Yogev: None. C. Mao: None. all patients. Hence, we delineate MAGT1-CDG as a novel O.S. Birk: None. glycosylationdisorderassociatedwithtwodifferentclinical phenotypes. C06.3 Funding: ERA-NET N°64578, NIH N°GM43768 MAGT1-CDG vs. XMEN: two faces of a novel E. Blommaert: None. R. Péanne: None. N.A. Cher- glycosylation disorder epanova: None. D. Rymen: None. J. Jaeken: None. R. Schrijvers:None.F.Foulquier:None.R.Gilmore:None. E. Blommaert1, R. Péanne1, N. A. Cherepanova2, G. Matthijs: None. D. Rymen3, J. Jaeken4, R. Schrijvers5, F. Foulquier6, R. Gilmore2, G. Matthijs1 C06.4 Implication of LRP6 variants in familial 1Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, hypercholesterolemia Belgium, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical Y. Ghaleb1,2, S. ElBitar1,2, A. Loste1, P. El khoury1,2, School, Worcester, MA, United States, 3Division of Y.Abou-khalil1,2,G.Nicolas3,M.LeBorgne1,P.Moulin4, Metabolic Diseases, University Children’s Hospital, Zur- M. Di-ﬁlippo5, S. Charriere4, H. Iliozer4, J. Rabès6,7, ich, Switzerland, 4Center for Metabolic Diseases, KU C. Boileau1,8,9, M. Abifadel1,2, M. Varret1 Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Department of microbiology and clinical immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 1LVTS INSERM U1148, Paris, France, 2Faculty of 6UnitédeGlycobiologieStructuraleetFonctionnelle,Univ. Pharmacy, Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, Lille, Lille, France 3INSERM UMR 1149, Paris, France, 4Hospices Civils de Lyon, Louis Pradel Cardiovascular Hospital, Department Introduction: Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation of Endocrinology, nutrition and metabolic diseases, Lyon, (CDG) are a group of rare, genetic diseases. Here, we France,5HospicesCivilsdeLyon,DepartmentofBiochem- identiﬁedanovelCDGcausedbyhemizygousmutationsin istry and Molecular Biology, Lyon, France, 6AP-HP, the X-linked MAGT1. Patient 1 and 2, both boys, present HUPIFO, Ambroise Paré Hospital, Laboratory of Bio- withintellectualanddevelopmentaldisability.Furthermore, chemistry and Molecular Genetics, Paris, France, 7UVSQ, a third MAGT1-deﬁcient patient (P3) with an immunode- UFR des Sciences de la Santé Simone Veil, Montigny-Le- ﬁciency characterised by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infec- Bretonneux, France, 8Paris Diderot University, Paris, tions was identiﬁed. MAGT1 is a subunit of the France,9AP-HP,CHUXavierBichat,GeneticDepartment, oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex, with an impor- Paris, France tantroleinN-glycosylation.However,mutationsinMAGT1 have been described to cause an immunodeﬁciency Introduction: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a (XMEN), characterised by EBV infections. These studies genetic disorder characterized by elevated plasma LDL-C claim that MAGT1 is a Mg2+ transporter. levels. It is caused by mutations in ﬁve genes: LDLR, Methods:ProteinexpressionlevelsofOSTsubunitswere APOB, PCSK9, APOE, LDLRAP1. Other FH-causing evaluated in patient and CRISPR K.O. cell lines. Radi- genes remain to be characterized. The aim of this study olabelling of glycoproteins was performed to detect N- conducted in a large French family and in unrelated glycosylation defects. French hypercholesterolemic probands is to identify new Results:ProteinlevelsofMAGT1wereunaffectedforP1 FH-causing genes which can explain the mutation (missense mutation) and absent for P2 and P3 (nonsense negative cases.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1097 Materials:ThestudiedFHfamily(20membersincluding functional abnormalities of the brain. However, little is 6 affected over 3 generations) and probands were recruited known about the role of Gnb5 in heart sinus conduction. throughtheFrenchFHResearchNetworkandmutationsin Notably, all IDDCA individuals present heart bradycardia. LDLR, APOB, PCSK9, APOE were excluded. A whole HereweshowthatGnb5-inhibitorysignalingisessentialfor exome sequencing (WES) was realized in 3 affected parasympatheticcontrolofheartrate.Wemonitoredi)heart members of the family and Sanger sequencing in the 84 electrophysiology in homozygous (KO, n=8), heterozy- probands.Analysisofvarianteffectswasassessedinsilico. gous (HET, n=8) and wild-type (WT, n=7) mice using Thenweinvestigatedtheactivityofthecandidategeneand in vivo ECG telemetry, and ii) cardiac function by its variants in vitro. Wildtype and mutant plasmids were echocardiography. KO mice were smaller than WT and constructed and transfected into HEK293T cells. We HET mice, and had a smaller heart, but exhibited better determined protein expression and LDL uptake by FACS cardiac function, as judged by increased fractional short- analysis. eningandejectionfraction.WhereasbaselineECGwasnot Results: WES identiﬁed a heterozygous variant segre- different between groups, KO mice treated with carbachol gating in the family in LRP6 (p.(Val1382Phe)). Four other (CCh), a parasympathomimetic, presented signiﬁcant CCh- rareanddiseasecausingvariantsinthisgenewerefoundin induced bradycardia. In contrast, the anti-parasympathetic 4 unrelated probands (p.(Tyr972Cys), p.(Thr1479Ile), p. drug atropine had the same effect in KO, HET and WT (Tyr1584Asn),p.(Ser1612Phe)).Functionalstudiesshowed mice.KOandWTshowedsimilarresponsestoatenololand that two variants decrease signiﬁcantly the expression of isoprotenerol, respectively, agonist and antagonist of the LRP6 at the cell surface and increase slightly but not sig- β-adrenergic activity, suggesting that sympathetic modula- niﬁcantly LDL uptake. However, the expression of LDL tionofthecardiacstimulationisnotaltered.Altogether,our receptor was not affected by any variant. data demonstrate that loss of negative regulation on the Conclusion: This study brings new data concerning the inhibitory G-protein signaling causes heart rate perturba- role of LRP6 in LDL uptake. However, several points tions in Gnb5-KO mice. This effect is mainly driven by remain to be elucidated. impaired parasympathetic activity. We anticipate that Y.Ghaleb: None. S. ElBitar:None.A. Loste: None. P. unravelling the mechanistic of Gnb5-signaling in the El khoury: None. Y. Abou-khalil: None. G. Nicolas: autonomic control of the heart will pave the way for future None. M. Le Borgne: None. P. Moulin: None. M. Di- drug screening. ﬁlippo: None. S. Charriere: None. H. Iliozer: None. J. P. De Nittis: None. A. Sarre: None. J. Chrast: None. Rabès: None. C. Boileau: None. M. Abifadel: None. M. W.F. Simonds: None. T. Pedrazzini: None. A. Varret: None. Reymond: None. C06.5 C06.6 Deciphering altered inhibitor G-protein signaling in the PCYT2 Variants Disrupt Etherlipid Biosynthesis and cardiac dysfunction underlying Intellectual Cause a Complex Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Developmental Disorder with Cardiac Arrhythmia (IDDCA) syndrome J.H.McDermott1,F.Vaz2,M.Alders3,S.B.Wortmann4, S.Kölker5,M.L.Pras-Raves2,M.A.T.Vervaart2,H.Van P. De Nittis1, A. Sarre2, J. Chrast1, W. F. Simonds3, Lenthe2, A. C. M. Luyf2, H. L. Elfrink2, K. Metcalfe1, T. Pedrazzini4, A. Reymond1 S. Cuvertino6, P. E. Clayton7, R. Yarwood6, M. P. Lowe6, S. Lovell6, R. C. Rogers8, A. H. C. Van Kampen9, 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study, J. P. N. 2Cardiovascular Assessment Facility, University of Lau- Ruiter2, S. Ferdinandusse2, M. Van Weeghel2, sanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Metabolic Diseases M. Engelen10, S. Banka1 Branch/NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Experimental Cardiology Unit, 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of United Kingdom, 2Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Laboratory Genome Diagnos- tics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Institute of Human Genet- Inactivating mutations in the guanine nucleotide-binding ics, Munich, Germany, 5Division of Pediatric Neurology protein subunit-β-5 (GNB5) gene cause IDDCA syndrome, andMetabolicMedicine,Heidelberg,Germany,6University an autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder asso- of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Department ciated with cognitive disability and cardiac arrhythmia. of Pediatric Endocrinology, Manchester, United Kingdom, Knock-out of Gnb5 in mice results in structural and 8Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United1098 States,9UniversityofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,Netherlands, C07.1 10Department of Pediatric Neurology, Amsterdam, Experts’ opinions on genome editing in humans: a Netherlands collective construction of a disruptive technology Introduction: PCYT2 encodes CTP:phosphoethanolamine V. Romano, H. C. Howard cytidylyltransferase (ET), the rate-limiting enzyme for phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) synthesis via the CDP- Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden ethanolamine pathway. PE is the most abundant membrane lipid that is enriched in the CNS. Germlinegenomeediting(GLGE)isahighlycontroversial Results:Weidentiﬁedﬁveindividualsfromfourfamilies matter, tending to divide the expert community revolving with biallelic PCYT2 variants via exome sequencing. One around it. Todate, veryfew studies have explored in-depth patient had compound heterozygous missense variants the views of expert stakeholders. To help ﬁll this gap, we while all others possessed an identical homozygous last- interviewed 20 expert stakeholders in genome editing exon nonsense variant. All patients had mild to severe (academic laboratory and clinical researchers, bioethicists, globaldevelopmentaldelay,progressivespastictetraparesis, lawyers, patient advocates) from Europe, North America, seizures, regression and cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. China and Japan. In our semi-guidedinterviews, we posed, Nystagmus and poor visual acuity were reported in four among others, questions addressing legitimacy, roles and individuals. In patient ﬁbroblasts, mRNA levels were nor- responsibilities, engagement of the public about different mal whilst ET protein levels and enzyme activity were uses, and future scenarios in so doing constructing a signiﬁcantlydecreased(butnotabsent).Insilicoanalysisof collective idea of what GLGE is and could be. About missense variants showed that the substitutions probably legitimate uses, we found that many stakeholders are affected binding, catalysis and protein stability. Hypo- skeptical about the need to use GLGE because of ethical morphicG0PCYT2zebraﬁshgeneratedusingtheCRISPR- implications,environmentalrisksandtheexistenceofmore Cas9 system had abnormal tail-ﬁn morphology, whereas saferalternatives.Rolesandresponsibilitiesarecalledtobe zebraﬁsh with complete knockout of the gene were horizontal and diffused as much as possible to everybody incompatible with life. Lipidomic analysis of patient ﬁbro- (through adequate representation). The participation of the blasts demonstrated profound abnormalities in neutral wider public is considered essential for transgenerational etherlipid and etherphospholipids and revealed that in ethical dilemmas. Future scenarios are depicted as negative ET deﬁciency, the phosphatidyl-serine decarboxylase route for, above all, women and women’s bodies, the meaning is used to synthesize plasmalogens. Patient plasma and actual impact of parenting, and the creation of wider lipidomics showed signiﬁcant accumulation of phosphati- inequalities between social classes. In general, we under- dylcholine[O]. stood that certain views are common among experts, such Conclusion: Hypomorphic biallelic PCYT2 variants astheextremecautionwhichshouldguidethepathfromthe cause a novel syndromic progressive neurological disorder lab to clinical trials. However, there are also many andthecompletelossofETfunctionislikelyincompatible differencesinperceivedpriorities,basedontheanticipation with life. Lipidomic abnormalities in patient tissues could of different cost-beneﬁt balances and on the diverse be used as a biomarker facilitating diagnosis and inter- predictionsofGLGE’sdevelopmentanditspotentialimpact pretation of variants of uncertain signiﬁcance. Finally, this on human kind. studyhighlightstheimportanceofetherlipidhomeostasisin V. Romano: None. H.C. Howard: None. the development and function of the CNS. J.H. McDermott: None. F. Vaz: None. M. Alders: C07.2 None. S.B. Wortmann: None. S. Kölker: None. M.L. How will new reproductive genetic technologies change Pras-Raves: None. M.A.T. Vervaart: None. H. Van genetically at-risk couples’ reproductive decision Lenthe: None. A.C.M. Luyf: None. H.L. Elfrink: None. making? Views on NIPD and gene modiﬁcation K. Metcalfe: None. S. Cuvertino: None. P.E. Clayton: None. R. Yarwood: None. M.P. Lowe: None. S. Lovell: I. van Dijke1, P. Lakeman2, I. B. Mathijssen2, None.R.C.Rogers:None.A.H.C.VanKampen:None.J. M. C. Cornel3, L. Henneman3 P.N. Ruiter: None. S. Ferdinandusse: None. M. Van Weeghel: None. M. Engelen: None. S. Banka: None. 1Amsterdam UMC,AmsterdamReproductionandDevelop- mentResearchInstitute,Amsterdam,Netherlands,2Amster- dam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Dept of Clinical C07 Gene editing and reproduction Genetics, Amsterdam Reproduction and Development Research Institute (AR&D), Amsterdam, Netherlands,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1099 3Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Dept of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam Reproduction and Develop- Title: Perspectives of a Genetic Disease Community and ment Research Institute (AR&D), Amsterdam, Netherlands Genetic Professionals on Germline Gene Editing Introduction: Advances in CRISPR technology and the Genetically at-risk couples who want to avoid having an announcementoftheﬁrstgeneeditedbabieshavesparkeda affected child have several reproductive options including global conversation about the future of human germline prenatal diagnosis (PND) and preimplantation genetic gene editing (GLGE). ESHG recommended that basic and diagnosis (PGD). In the future, non-invasive prenatal pre-clinical germline research could be justiﬁed while diagnosis (NIPD), germline gene modiﬁcation (GGM) and acknowledging that therapeutic or preventive GLGE is not somatic gene modiﬁcation (SGM) might become available. warranted at this time and merits more debate. This study explores if, and how, availability of possible Internationally, policymakers, scientists and media have future reproductive options would inﬂuence couples’ called for a global conversation including the voices of the decision making. public and relevant stakeholders. Our study contributes to Interviews (n=25) were conducted with couples with a thisneedbyinvestigatingtheGLGEviewsofthesicklecell known increased risk of having a child with a genetic disease (SCD) community and genetic professionals. condition who received genetic counselling at one Dutch Methods: In 2017, we utilized a mixed-methods Clinical Genetics Centre between 2013–2018. approach, involving an original educational video on For couples, factors currently inﬂuencing decision- CRISPR genome editing, surveys, and 15 focus groups of making for or against PND or PGD (e.g. attitude towards United States-basedSCDcommunitymembers:six patient, pregnancytermination,theimpactofprocedure)alsoplayed six parent, and three physician groups. The ﬁndings were a role when discussing the new reproductive technologies. comparedtoaninternationalsurveyofgeneticprofessionals Couples were generally positive about NIPD as this would conducted from 2016–2017. be more safe and enables earlier testing compared to PND. Results: Compared to genetics professionals, where However, some who were against pregnancy termination 48.2% found GLGE to be morally acceptable, fewer in the would still prefer PGD. The perceived burden of PGD, SCD community supported GLGE (24.0%, p<0.0001). embryo disposal, and increasing opportunities of having a TheSCDdiseasecommunitysawthepromiseofGLGEasa ‘healthy’ embryo were considerations in favour of GGM. potential cure for the disease; however, many expressed However, some considered GGM as unsafe, feared misuse concerns about misuse of the technology. and ‘slippery slope’ scenarios. SGM was generally not Conclusion: As discourse surrounding GLGE advances, considered an option to anticipate on, since the affected itiscrucialthatweengagediseasecommunitieswhoselives child would still be born and subjected to treatment. could be altered by these interventions in the policy con- Genetically at-risk couples have mixed feelings: NIPD versations with researchers, bioethicists, and policymakers. and GGM were more positively evaluated than SGM. The Funding: NIH, National Human Genome Research results suggest that shifts in use towards new technologies Institute, USA. Research Funding: ZIAHG200394. can be expected. Users’ perspectives should be addressed B.M. Hollister: None. M. Gatter: None. K.E. Abdal- for responsible implementation. Grant: Amsterdam Repro- lah: None. A. Armsby: None. A.J. Buscetta: None. Y. duction and Development Research Institute Byeon:None.K.E. Cooper:None.S. Desine: None. M.J. I. van Dijke: None. P. Lakeman: None. I.B. Mathijs- Hahn: None. K.E. Ormond: None. V.L. Bonham: None. sen: None. M.C. Cornel: None. L. Henneman: None. C07.4 C07.3 National implementation of genome-wide non-invasive Perspectives of a Genetic Disease Community and prenatal testing as a ﬁrst-tier screening test in the Genetic Professionals on Germline Gene Editing Netherlands: evaluation of women’s perspectives B.M.Hollister1,M.Gatter1,K.E.Abdallah1,A.Armsby2, K. R. M. van der Meij1, M. N. Bekker2, J. T. Gitsels- van A. J. Buscetta1, Y. Byeon1, K. E. Cooper1, S. Desine1, derWal3,L.Martin3,E.H.vanVliet-Lachotzki4,D.R.M. M. J. Hahn1, K. E. Ormond3, V. L. Bonham1 Timmermans5, R. H. Galjaard6, E. A. Sistermans1, L. Henneman1, Dutch NIPT Consortium 1NationalHumanGenomeResearchInstitute,Bethesda,MD, UnitedStates,2OxfordUniversityHospitalsNHSFoundation 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Trust,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,3DepartmentofGeneticsand Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Dept StanfordCenterforBiomedicalEthicsatStanfordUniversity ofObstetricsandGynaecology,UtrechtUniversityMedical School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Dept of Midwifery Science,1100 Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amster- I. M.Bakkeren, A. Kater-Kuipers,E. M. Bunnik, A. T. J. dam, Netherlands, 4Dutch Genetic Alliance (VSOP), Soest, I. Go, I. D. de Beaufort, R. H. Galjaard, S. R. Riedijk Netherlands, 5Dept of Public and Occupational Health, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amster- Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands dam, Netherlands, 6Dept of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands The non-invasive prenatal test (NIPT) as ﬁrst trimester prenatal screening (FTS) for trisomies 21, 18 and 13 is The Netherlands is one of the ﬁrst countries to offer Non- offered to all pregnant women in the Netherlands. NIPT Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) within a governmentally usingwholegenomesequencingallowsforanexpansionof supported screening program as a ﬁrst-tier test for all thescopeofFTSandtheintroductionofNIPTgivesriseto pregnantwomen.SinceApril2017,allpregnantwomencan ethical and societal concerns about deliberated decision- choose between NIPT, First-trimester Combined Testing making, pressure to engage in screening and possible lack (FCT) (both ~€175) and no test, within the TRIDENT-2 of equal access due to the ﬁnancial contribution (€175) to study.DuetothefavorablecharacteristicsofNIPTtherehas NIPT. We explored the opinions and experiences of been a strong demand for implementation. However, pregnant women, who were offered FTS, about these concernshavebeenraisedregardingtheimpactoninformed concerns and about the possibility of a broadened scope. decision-making. This study evaluates women’s perspec- Nineteen pregnant women representing a diversity of tives on the offer of NIPT. backgrounds were interviewed using a semi-structured A nationwide questionnaire was completed by n=752 interview guide. Eight women (42.1%) did not opt for pregnant women, after receiving counseling for prenatal prenatal screening and eleven (57.9%) did (NIPT=4, screening by a certiﬁed counselor but before testing, combined test=7). Women experienced a free choice to assessing: test preferences, attitudes, perceived pressure to accept or decline prenatal screening, despite sometimes test, knowledge and deliberation. receiving advice from others. Prior to pre-test counselling, Of the respondents, 79% expressed a preference for some women had already deliberated about what an NIPT,2%forFCT,17%notestand2%wereunsure.Main abnormal test result would mean to them. Others accepted reasonforpreferringNIPTwas:‘highaccuracycomparedto or declined FTS without deliberation. The current Dutch FCT’(29%). Primary reason to refrain from testing was: policy of requiring a co-payment was acceptable to some, ‘every child is welcome’ (27%). Few women (<5%) who believed it functioned as a threshold to think carefully experienced societal or provider pressure (not) to test. Half aboutFTS.Otherswereconcernedthataﬁnancialthreshold (53%)thoughtthatchildrenwithDownsyndromewereless wouldleadtounequalaccesstoscreening.Finally,pregnant accepted in society. Nearly all women (97%) reported that womenfounditdifﬁculttoformulateopinionsonthescope they made a well-informed decision. Most women (94%) of FTS, because of lacking knowledge. Life expectancy, had adequate prenatal screening knowledge (≥4/7 correct severity and treatability were considered important criteria questions). Additional measures of informed choice will be for the inclusion of a condition in NIPT. presented. I.M. Bakkeren: None. A. Kater-Kuipers: None. E.M. The ﬁndings indicate that pregnant women experience Bunnik: None. A.T.J.I. Go: None. I.D. de Beaufort: little pressure to test, have adequate knowledge and a high None. R.H. Galjaard: None. S.R. Riedijk: None. level of perceived informed decision-making with NIPT offered within a governmentally supported screening C07.6 program. Thenotionof“serious”forgeneticdisease:Toqualifyor Grant: ZonMw Netherlands not, that is the question K.R.M. van der Meij: None. M.N. Bekker: None. J.T. Gitsels- van der Wal: None. L. Martin: None. E.H. van E. Kleiderman1, V. Ravitsky2, B. Knoppers1 Vliet-Lachotzki: None. D.R.M. Timmermans: None. R. H. Galjaard: None. E.A. Sistermans: None. L. 1Centre of Genomics and Policy, McGill University, Henneman: None. Montreal,QC,Canada,2UniversitédeMontréal,Montreal, QC, Canada C07.5 Implementing non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT): An Current advances and innovation in assisted reproductive interview study of pregnant women’s opinions about technologies aim to promote the health and well-being of and experiences with societal pressure, reimbursement futurechildren.Theyofferthepossibilitytoselectembryos and an expanding scope with the greatest potential of being born healthy (e.g. preimplantation genetic testing) and may someday correctAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1101 faultygenesresponsibleforheritablediseasesintheembryo county, including children born with a postnatally detected (e.g.humangermlinegenomemodiﬁcation-HGGM).Most chromosome aberration. lawsandpolicystatementssurroundingHGGMrefertothe Results:Therewere872(0.7%)chromosomeaberrations notionof“serious”asacoreparameterindeterminingwhat in the cohort. Common trisomies (21,18 and 13) or sex geneticconditionsshouldbetargetedbythesetechnologies. chromosome aberrations (SCA) constituted 86% of these The literature suggests that it is unrealistic to expect to and 14% were atypical chromosome aberrations (AChrA). deﬁne the concept universally, but that when employed it If an invasive test were offered to the 5779 (4.5%) women must be qualiﬁed and consider patient and physician with an increased risk for a trisomy, 84% of all clinically perspectives. Yet, this notion remains undeﬁned, rendering signiﬁcantchromosomeaberrationsand55%ofallAChrAs its application vague and decision-making subjective and would be detected. In total 93% of the chromosome aber- arbitrary. We begin by presenting two general conceptions rations were detectable with NIPT (trisomies/SCAs). of ‘disease’ and ‘health’: the objectivist (i.e. based on Investigating the 2323 (1.8%) women with the highest risk biological facts) and constructivist (i.e. based on human (≥1:50) after cFTS, 27% had a chromosome aberration, values) frameworks. We then consider the rationale for a 2.0%hadanAChrArequiringaninvasivetestfordiagnosis. rights-based approach (e.g. right to science and right to the Conclusion: If only analysis for common trisomies and highestattainablehealth).Thebasicchallengeissortingout SCAisofferedaftercFTS,theresidualriskforanAChrAin whether and to what extent social conditions have a role in women with a risk ≥1:200 is 1.0% (55/5779). Taking into helpingtodeﬁnewhatqualiﬁesasa“serious”disease-and accountthecasesresultinginamiscarriage/IUFDandthose whethertheclassiﬁcationof“serious”isﬂexible,depending detected due to malformation on ultrasound, the residual on shifting social conditions and landscapes. Ultimately, risk for a postnatal diagnosis of an AChrA is 0.7% (41/ decisions about what constitutes a “serious” condition 5779). That might be seen as a low residual risk, but would be contextualized to the individual but should also lookingfromanotherangle74%(41/55)oftheAChrAswill give appropriate weight and consideration to the broader remain undetected using such an approach. implications for the notion of ‘health’ and ‘disease’ in E. Iwarsson: None. P. Conner: None. society. E. Kleiderman: None. V. Ravitsky: None. B. C08.2 Knoppers: None. The PREGCARE study: precision genetic counselling via personalised evaluation of recurrence risk for families with a child affected by a disorder caused by a C08 Prenatal Genetics de novo mutation C08.1 U. B. Abdullah1,2, M. Bernkopf1,2, N. Koelling1,2, Increased risk at ﬁrst trimester screening: trisomies are S. J. McGowan3, J. Williams4, A. H. Németh5,6, noteverything,buttheriskforanatypicalchromosome H.Stewart6,P.Clouston4,A.O.M.Wilkie1,2,A.Goriely1,2 aberration is low. Experiences from the Swedish Pregnancy Register 1Clinical Genetics Group, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United E. Iwarsson1, P. Conner2 Kingdom, 2Nufﬁeld Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Clinical Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Analysis, Visualisation Genetics Unit, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska Uni- and Informatics Group, MRC Weatherall Institute of versity Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Center for Fetal Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Medicine, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Kingdom, 4Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratories, Oxford Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden UniversityHospitals NHS FoundationTrust,TheChurchill Hospital,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,5NufﬁeldDepartmentof Introduction:Thisstudyaimedtoinvestigatethedetection Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, rates of all types of chromosome aberrations if either NIPT United Kingdom, 6Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, or karyotype/array-CGH was used for further investigation Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, in pregnancies with an increased risk (≥1:200) following Nufﬁeld Orthopaedic Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom combined ﬁrst trimester screening (cFTS). Materials and Methods: Retrospective review of 129 While disorders caused by de novo mutations (DNMs) 493pregnanciesexaminedduring2010–2017inStockholm are usually assumed to be one-off events, in practice, the same mutation recurs in a subsequent pregnancy1102 in 1–2% of cases. However, this population-wide sequencing method embracing both advantages of targeted average does not reﬂect a family’s individual risk: while andgenome‐widesequencing,sothatitcansimultaneously most couples have a negligible risk, for a minority, the screen for fetal chromosomal aneuploidy and monogenic DNM is present in multiple parental gonadal cells diseases in a noninvasive manner. (mosaicism) and the risk of a future offspring being Methods:Thenovelmethod,calledTAGs‐seq,integrates affected is up to 50%. a multiplex PCR step into the genome‐wide NIPS library The PREGCARE (Precision Genetic Counselling and construction to simultaneously amplify whole genome and Reproduction) study aims to develop a systematic strategy target region in one tube. After NGS, the genome‐wide toidentifyhigh-riskmosaiccasesandprovidefamilieswith region displays a low sequencing depth (0.1‐0.5Χ) and the a personalised assessment of transmission risk. Individual target regions an ultra‐high depth (>1000Χ), which were risk stratiﬁcation is achieved through analysis of 14 tissue sufﬁcient for detecting chromosome aneuploidy and singe samples of various embryonic origin from the family trio base mutations, respectively. (including a father’s semen sample) using ultra-deep Illu- Results: We validated in‐blind in 517 plasma samples mina sequencing (~30,000x) and DNM haplotype-phasing withpreviouslyconﬁrmedoutcomesoffetal.TheTAGs‐seq via Nanopore long-read-sequencing, to determine the par- NIPSidentiﬁed23casesofcommonaneuploidy,9casesof ental origin. fetal de novo mutations, 27 cases of maternal monogenic Wepresentdatafromthe20ﬁrstfamiliestoillustratethe diseases carrier and 458 cases of normal controls. Fetal power of this approach. While we detected instances of results were concordant to the invasive diagnostic results, mosaicism, such as a maternally-originating KIF11 muta- while maternal carrier results were concordant to sanger tion (VAF=0.1–0.5%), for most families, the DNM was sequencing results. undetectable by deep-sequencing of parental samples Conclusion: We developed a novel TAGs‐seq NIPS, (includingsperm).Next,long-read-haplotypingpermittedto which exploited whole‐genome sequencing data and tar- single-out DNMs of paternal origin, conﬁrming that these geted sequencing data, providing a convenient, low‐cost, families have an extremely-low risk (≤0.1%) of having and expandable solution to detect fetal chromosome aneu- another affected child. ploidyanddenovomutations,aswellasmaternalcarrierof Given our current understanding of mosaicism, this monogenic diseases in a single experiment. strategy should reassure up to ~75% of couples that their recurrence risk is negligible. The ability to provide perso- Details of positive cases detected by TAGs-seq in 517 nalised transmission risk prior to conception is likely to prenant women plasma samples impactuponclinicalpracticeandfamilyplanningdecisions. U.B. Abdullah: None. M. Bernkopf: None. N. Koel- Disease Mutation NO. ling: None. S.J. McGowan: None. J. Williams: None. A. Fetal chromosomal aneuploidy H.Németh: None.H. Stewart: None. P. Clouston: None. A.O.M. Wilkie: None. A. Goriely: None. Down Syndrome T21 14 Edward Syndrome T18 5 C08.3 Patau Syndrom T13 4 Validation of simultaneous detection of fetal Fetal de novo monogenic disease chromosome aneuploidy and monogenic diseases by a novel noninvasive prenatal testing method: Targeted Achondroplasia FGFR3 c.1138G > A 8 AndGenome-widesimultaneoussequencing(TAGs-seq) Achondroplasia FGFR3 c.1118A > G 1 Maternal monogenic disease carrier W. Yicong1,2, S. Zhang1, L. Yang1, D. Chen1, Y. Gao1, Y. Zhang1, F. Chen1 β thalassemia HBB: c.-78A>G 1 β thalassemia HBB: c.316-197C>T 1 1BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 2School of Bioscience β thalassemia HBB: c.216_217insA 1 andBioengineering,SouthChinaUniversityofTechnology, Galactosemia GALT: c.940A>G 7 Guangzhou, China Wilson’s disease ATP7B: c.3443T>C 1 Introduction: Next generation sequencing (NGS)‐based Wilson’s disease ATP7B: c.2755C>G 4 cell‐free DNA (cfDNA) analysis has been widely adopted Wilson’s disease ATP7B: c.2333G>T 1 for non‐invasive prenatal screening (NIPS) for fetal Methylmalonic acidemiaMUT: c.1663G>A 1 chromosome aneuploidy and monogenic diseases through Cystic ﬁbrosis CFTR: c.2909G>A 1 different experiment strategies. We developed a newAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1103 Niemann-Pick Disease NPC1: c.2073G>A 1 States, 11Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia Uni- Biotinidase Deﬁciency BTD: c.1336G>C 1 versity Medical Center, New York, NY, United States Hereditary Hearing SLC26A4: IVS7-2A>G3 Clinical genetic screening in prenatal and pediatric cohorts Impairment have traditionally required a decision to test targeted genes Hereditary Hearing GJB2: c.235 delC 1 ormutationalclasses,asevaluationofallvariantclasseshas Impairment beenintractable.Wholegenomesequencing(WGS)hasthe Hereditary Hearing SLC26: c.2027T>A 2 potential to transform diagnostic testing by capturing all Impairment classes variation with a single technology. Here, we Hereditary Hearing GJB3: c.538C>T 1 compared diagnostic yields from WGS to those from Impairment karyotype,CMA,andwholeexomesequencing(WES)ina pediatric cohort of 2,100 quartet families with a proband diagnosedwithautismspectrumdisorder(ASD;n=8,400) and a prenatal cohort of 218 cases with a structural defect W. Yicong: None. S. Zhang: None. L. Yang: None. D. detectedonultrasound.Weﬁrstbenchmarked ourbioinfor- Chen: None. Y. Gao: None. Y. Zhang: None. F. matic pipelines on 519 ASD quartets, discovering 3.4M Chen: None. SNVs, 0.3Mindels,and 5,863structural variants (SVs)per genome. WGS recapitulated 99.6% of all CMA-predicted C08.4 CNVsand>97%ofalldenovocodingvariantsfromWES. Systematic evaluation of prenatal and pediatric Molecular validation of 171 de novo SVs revealed a 97% diagnostic yields from whole-genome sequencing in conﬁrmation rate. The yield from WGS exceeded all other 8,954 individuals technologies,butprovidedonly~0.3%increaseddiagnostic yieldoverthecombinationofallconventionalmethods.We C. Lowther1,2, H. Brand1,2, B. B. Currall1, nextevaluatedWGSinthefetalstructuralanomalysamples J. L. Giordano3, V. S. Aggarwal4, H. Z. Whang1, and discovered a diagnostic variant in 9.8% of cases that X. Zhao1,2, D. Lucente1, L. Margolin2, D. M. Werling5, had negative karyotype and CMA results. This study J. Y. An5, S. Dong5, S. J. Sanders5, B. Devlin6, suggests a modest overall increased diagnostic yield of K. Gilmore7, B. Powell8, A. Brandt9, A. H. O’Donnell- WGS compared to the combination of all conventional Luria1,2,10, N. J. Lennon2, D. B. Goldstein11, methods, and should temper enthusiasm regarding sub- H.L.Rehm1,2,N.L.Vora7,D.G.MacArthur1,2,B.Levy4, stantial increases in interpretable pathogenic variants from R. Wapner3, M. E. Talkowski1,2 WGS. Nonetheless, WGS was superior to any individual method thus warranting evaluation as a ﬁrst-tier screen in 1Center for Genomic Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, prenatal and pediatric diagnostic testing. 2Program in Population and Medical Genetics and C. Lowther: None. H. Brand: None. B.B. Currall: Genomics, The Broad Institute of M.I.T. and Harvard, None. J.L. Giordano: None. V.S. Aggarwal: None. H.Z. Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Department of Obstetrics Whang: None. X. Zhao: None. D. Lucente: None. L. & Gynecology, Columbia University Medical Center, New Margolin:None.D.M.Werling:None.J.Y.An:None.S. York, NY, United States, 4Department of Pathology and Dong: None. S.J. Sanders: None. B. Devlin: None. K. Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New Gilmore: None. B. Powell: None. A. Brandt: None. A.H. York, NY, United States, 5Department of Psychiatry, UCSF O’Donnell-Luria: None. N.J. Lennon: None. D.B. Weill Institute for Neurosciences, University of California, Goldstein:None.H.L.Rehm:None.N.L.Vora:None.D. SanFrancisco,SanFrancisco,CA,UnitedStates,6Depart- G.MacArthur:None.B.Levy:None.R.Wapner:None. ment of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of M.E. Talkowski: None. Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 7Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Maternal-Fetal C08.5 Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of sickle cell disease by Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 8Center for Genomic next generation sequencing of cell-free DNA Medicine Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, J. C. van Campen1, L. Silcock2, M. Yau3, Y. Daniel4, NC, United States, 9Department of Genetics, School of J. W. Ahn1, C. M. Ogilvie1,5, K. Mann3, E. Oteng-Ntim6 Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 10Division of Genetics and 1Genetics Laboratories, Guy’s and St. Thomas’ NHS Genomics,BostonChildren’sHospital,Boston,MA,United Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Nonacus1104 Ltd., Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Viapath Genetics I. Lund1,2,3, N. Becher1,2,3, E. Vestergaard2, Laboratories, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, R. Christensen1,2, O. Petersen2,4,5, E. Steffensen2, 4Viapath Haematological Sciences Laboratories, Guy’s I. Vogel1,2,3 Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King’s College, London, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University United Kingdom, 6DepartmentofWomen’sServices, Guy’s Hospital, Aarhus N., Denmark, 2Center for Fetal Diag- and St. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United nostics, Aarhus University Hospital/Aarhus University, Kingdom Aarhus N, Denmark, 3Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark, 4Department of Gynecol- Introduction: Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of ogyandObstetrics,FetalMedicineUnit,AarhusUniversity paternally inherited and de novo autosomal dominant Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, 5Department of Clinical disorders is in diagnostic use in the UK. However, robust Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark NIPD of autosomal recessive conditions has proven more challenging as this requires detection of fetal inheritance of Objective:Toevaluatetheprevalenceandclinicaloutcome a maternal allele from a mixed maternal-fetal pool of cell of mosaicism in uncultured chorionic villus samplings free DNA. The autosomal recessive disorder sickle cell (CVS) using chromosomal microarray (CMA). disease is the most common referral indication for Materials and Methods: We retrieved all results of molecular genetic invasive prenatal diagnosis in the UK, chromosomal microarray after chorionic villus sampling however, NIPD is not yet available. from January 1st 2011 to November 30th 2017 registered in Methods:Weusetargetednextgenerationsequencingof our local laboratory database. Mosaic results from uncul- cell-freeDNAfrommaternalplasmatodiagnosefetalsickle tured chorionic villus samples and follow-up with amnio- cell disease based on a relative mutation dosage approach. centeses, fetal tissue or postnatal blood were studied and No paternal or proband samples are required. Unique matchedwithclinicaldatafromTheDanishFetalMedicine molecular identiﬁers (UMIs) were incorporated into library Database. preparation to enable accurate quantiﬁcation of mutant and Results: The prevalence of mosaicism in CVS was 93/ wildtype allele reads. 2,288,4.1%(95%CI:3.3–5.0%)ofwhich16cases(17.2%, Results: 24 plasma samples from pregnant sickle cell 95%CI: 10.5–26.7%) concerned submicroscopic copy disease carriers were analysed, of which 20 were con- numbervariations(CNVs)<10megabases(Mb).Follow-up cordant with the established genotype; two with low fetal analysis was performed in 62 cases. True fetal mosaicism fraction were inconclusive and two were discordant. In (TFM) was conﬁrmed in 7/38, 18.4%, when mosaicism silico size selection of cfDNA fragments was found to involvedwholechromosomeaneuploidy andin 6/24 cases, enhancethefetalfractionforallsamples,andmodiﬁcations 25.0%, when involving a CNV (p=0.59). Mean birth to UMI capture improved diagnostic accuracy. Samples weight z-score was higher in cases of conﬁned placental from as early as eight weeks gestation were successfully mosaicism for a CNV (0.21) than cases involving whole genotyped. chromosomes (−0.74) (p=0.02). Conclusion: We demonstrate that NIPD for sickle cell Conclusion: Prevalence of mosaicism in CVS is sig- disease is approaching clinical utility. Other autosomal niﬁcantly higher after CMA on uncultured cells than after recessive disorders may beneﬁt from a similar approach. conventional karyotyping. The risk of TFM is equally high This work was funded by the Guy’s and St. Thomas’ in cases of mosaicism for CNVs and whole chromosomes. Hospital Charity. I. Lund: None. N. Becher: None. E. Vestergaard: J.C. van Campen: None. L. Silcock: A. Employment None. R. Christensen: None. O. Petersen: None. E. (fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant;NonacusLtd..E.Ownership Steffensen: None. I. Vogel: None. Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Nonacus Ltd.. M. Yau: None. Y. Daniel: None. J.W. Ahn: None. C.M. Ogilvie: None. K. C09 Cancer genetics Mann: None. E. Oteng-Ntim: None. C09.1 C08.6 Germlinegeneticvariationdrivesthesomaticlandscape Prevalence and clinical outcome of mosaicism in of tumors uncultured chorionic villus samplings after chromosomal microarray N. Zaitlen1, S. Mangul1, A. Gusev2Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1105 1UCLA,LA,CA,UnitedStates,2DFCI,Boston,MA,United Oncology, Nancy University Hospital, Nancy, France, States 5Child and adolescent cancer Department, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France Hundreds of thousands of cancer patients have had their tumors sequenced to identify clinically actionable muta- Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare aggressive tions. This activity has produced valuable research data tumour that can be associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome leading to signiﬁcant discoveries in basic and translational (LFS),resultingfromgermlineTP53mutations.Theaimof domains. Unfortunately, the targeted nature of tumor this study was to establish the frequency of germline TP53 sequencing precludes powerful interrogation of germline- alterations in ACC from a large series of 147 French somatic interactions. To address this shortcoming we patients (98 children, 49 adults). Sanger sequencing and developed a computational approach to infer genome-wide QMPSF screening for genomic rearrangements revealed a germline variation, including HLA, TCR/BCR, and micro- deleterious germline TP53 alteration in 53 cases (36%), bial sequences, from off-target sequencing reads. We among which only 32 (60%) had a familial history applied our method to the DFCI PROFILE cohort suggestive of LFS. Re-analysis of 55 negative cases, using (n>20,000), producing the world’s largest germline- NGS performed at high depth, subsequently identiﬁed 2 somatic data set by over an order of magnitude. Levering additional cases of mosaic mutations. The mutation thisresource,wetestforassociationsbetweengermlineand detection rate was 49% in children and 14% in adults, somaticvariation.Speciﬁcally,forthemutationalburdenin andreached72%infemalepatientspresentingwithanACC each PROFILE target gene as well for total mutational before2yearsofage.Among16ACCpatientstreatedfora burden (TMB), we conduct association, heritability, popu- secondarytumour,12carriedagermlineTP53alteration.p. lationprevalence,andpolygenicriskscoreassociationtests. (Arg158His) and p.(Arg337His) mutations were recurrent Our completed analysis of the lung adenocarcinoma andthemajority ofthealterationsweremissensemutations (LUAD) sub-cohort has already produced strongly sig- without dominant-negative effect. This contrasts with the niﬁcant associations between germline and somatic events. general distribution of germline TP53 alterations character- We identify over forty signiﬁcant germline associations (p- ized by the predominance of dominant-negative missense value<5e-8) to mutations inoncogenes including BRCA1, mutationswithhigherpenetranceandconﬁrmsthatmostof ALK, DNMT3A, EPHA3/5, GLI2, as well total mutational the germline TP53 alterations detected in ACC patients are burden. We estimate heritability over 60% for multiple associated with a lower penetrance. This study shows that genes including BRCA1, EPHA3/5. We show that asian germline TP53 alterations are the main cause of ACC, in genetic ancestry is associated with EGFR and KRAS particular in childhood, which is probably explained by a mutations. Finally, we show that polygenic risk for lung criticalroleofp53inthedevelopmentoftheadrenalcortex. cancer subtypesisassociated tomutations inspeciﬁcgenes These data justify ensuring an exhaustive analysis of TP53 and total mutational burden. These results demonstrate that in all ACC cases, independently of the familial history. germlinevariationisamajorcontributortothedynamicsof M. Renaux-Petel: None. F. Charbonnier: None. I. somatic mutations and cancer outcomes. Tournier: None. G. Lienard: None. J. Bou: None. E. N. Zaitlen: None. S. Mangul: None. A. Gusev: None. Kasper: None. B. Leheup: None. L. Mansuy: None. L. Guerrini-Rousseau:None.L.Brugières:None.A.Liard- C09.2 Zmuda: None. S. Baert-Desurmont: None. T. Frebourg: Germline TP53 mutations: the predominant genetic None. G. Bougeard: None. cause of adrenocortical carcinoma C09.3 M. Renaux-Petel1,2, F. Charbonnier1, I. Tournier1, Cell free-DNA pinpoints speciﬁc clonal expansion at G.Lienard1,J.Bou1,E.Kasper1,B.Leheup3,L.Mansuy4, disease progression in solid cancers L. Guerrini-Rousseau5, L. Brugières5, A. Liard-Zmuda2, S. Baert-Desurmont1, T. Frebourg1, G. Bougeard1 M. Palmieri1, M. Baldassarri2, F. Fava1,2, A. Fabbiani1,2, E. Gelli1, R. Tita2, P. Torre3, R. Petrioli3, 1Department of Genetics, Normandy Centre for Genomic T. Hadijstilianou4, D. Galimberti4, E. Cinotti5, and Personalized Medicine, Normandy University, UNI- M. Mencarelli2, A. Pinto2, S. Marsili3, E. Frullanti1, ROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, A. Renieri1,2 Rouen, France, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Surgery, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Nancy University 2Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Hospital, Nancy, France, 4Department of Paediatric Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Medical Oncology, Azienda1106 Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 4Depart- 1Molecular Medicine and Science for Life Laboratory, ment of Ophthalmology, Referral Center for Retinoblas- Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of toma, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, Italy, 5Department of Medical, Surgical and Neuro- 3Department of Pediatrics, Tromsø University and Uni- Sciences, Dermatology Unit, University of Siena, Siena, versity Hospital, Tromsø, Norway, 4Department of Clinical Italy Sciences, Pediatrics, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden, 55Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Karolinska Institutet, Tendifferentsolidtumorswereselectedinordertoidentify AstridLindgrenChildren’sHospital,KarolinskaUniversity clones escaping standard treatments. In a cohort of 39 Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Pediatrics and Adolescent patients, next generation sequencing of 52 cancer-driver Medicine,Rigshospitalet,andtheMedicalFaculty,Institute genes on cell free-DNA was able to pick up clones of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenha- responsible for disease progression in 60% of cases. Each gen, Denmark, 7Division of Hematology-Oncology and tumor had a mean of 1,3 mutated genes with 1–3 range. Stem Cell Transplantation, Children’s Hospital, Helsinki Diseaseprogressionwasassociatedwithanincreasedlevels University Central Hospital and University of Helsinki, ofcfDNA. Pointmutations inTP53,PIK3CA, andCNVin Helsinki,Finland,8DepartmentofWomen’sandChildren’s FGFR3wereamongthemostresponsible,witharateof41, Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden 16,and13%,respectively.IncreasedCNVofFGFreceptors wereidentiﬁedinadditiontononsmallcelladenocarcinoma Introduction: Recurrent chromosomal alterations in pedia- of lung also in pancreatic, gastric and cholangiocarcinoma. tric B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP- Other clones had mutation in ESR1 (breast), CTNNB1 ALL) are important markers for cytogenetic subgrouping (uterus), KRAS and CCND2 (pancreas), EGFR and BRAF and risk-directed therapy stratiﬁcation. Many of these (lung). Retinoblastoma cases not responsible to repeated alterations are strongly associated with speciﬁc gene cyclesofintraocularMelphalanshowedexpandingmutated expression and DNA methylation patterns that can be used clones in PTEN or SMAD4. These results show that for ALL subtype classiﬁcation. Amongst the Nordic BCP- irrespective to tumor mutational burden at origin and ALL cases diagnosed between 1996 and 2012, subtype- subsequent complex clonal evolution, a simpliﬁed muta- deﬁning aberrations were not detected at diagnosis in tional load is present at disease progression. One or few approximately 25% of cases, representing a large group of “sniper” clones drive progression and the molecular proﬁle uncharacterized cases collectively referred to as B-other. hasaweakcorrelationwiththeprimarytumor.Singledriver MaterialsandMethods:WedesignedandappliedDNA mutations in TP53 remain the main target of a not yet methylation classiﬁers as a tool for subtype discovery in developed speciﬁc therapy in most tumors such as breast, 1142 Nordic ALL patients including 284 patients with B- ovarian, uterine, lung, gastric cancers and glioblastoma. other phenotype. Classiﬁers were designed for 10 recurrent Among the actionable mutations, PIK3CA were found not ALL subtypes including the recently described DUX4- and onlyinbreastcancersbutalsoinuterinecarcinoma,Sezary ZNF384-rearranged BCP-ALL subtypes. The classiﬁcation syndrome and glioblastoma, pinpointing the needs of results were validated by RNA-sequencing for fusion gene speciﬁc trials in these tumors. detection and copy number analysis. M. Palmieri: None. M. Baldassarri: None. F. Fava: Results: DNA methylation classiﬁcation successfully None. A. Fabbiani: None. E. Gelli: None. R. Tita: None. assignedan unambiguous new subtypeto >50% ofthe 284 P. Torre: None. R. Petrioli: None. T. Hadijstilianou: patients in the B-other group. With RNA-sequencing, we None. D. Galimberti: None. E. Cinotti: None. M. Men- veriﬁed the DNA methylation result by identifying fusion carelli: None. A. Pinto: None. S. Marsili: None. E. genesinvolvingDUX4,ZNF384,orMEF2Dgenes,fusions Frullanti: None. A. Renieri: None. common in the BCR-ABL1-like and ETV6-RUNX1-like groups, and fusion genes/mutations affecting PAX5. Fur- C09.4 thermore, we show the clinical relevance of these new Molecular classiﬁcation of B-other pediatric B-cell groups in Nordic ALL patients by differing event free and precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia by DNA overall survival rates. methylation and RNA-sequencing Conclusion: DNA methylation classiﬁcation is a power- ful tool for subtype discovery that in combination with Y. Marincevic-Zuniga1, S. Nystedt1, S. Nilsson1, RNA-sequencing and copy number analysis enables J. Almlöf1, H. Lilljebjörn2, T. Fioretos2, T. Flaegstad3, improveddelineationofthegeneticalterationsofpreviously U. Norén-Nyström4, M. Heyman5, K. Schmiegelow6, uncharacterized BCP-ALL patients. J. Kanerva7, G. Lönnerholm8, J. Nordlund1 Y. Marincevic-Zuniga: None. S. Nystedt: None. S. Nilsson:None.J. Almlöf:None.H.Lilljebjörn: None. T.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1107 Fioretos: None. T. Flaegstad: None. U. Norén-Nyström: 573 mutation carriers were affected by BC (474 unilateral None. M. Heyman: None. K. Schmiegelow: None. J. BC, 99 bilateral BC), with a mean age at ﬁrst/secondary Kanerva: None. G. Lönnerholm: None. J. diagnosis of 45.7 (23–84)/49.2 (31–79) years, respectively. Nordlund: None. 112mutationcarrierswerenotaffectedbyBC(meanageat last follow-up: 53.1 years). Study design: A cohort C09.5 approach including retrospective and prospective events Polygenic risk scores modify age-dependent breast was applied. Recruitment was through genetic counselling cancer risk in CHEK2 germline mutation carriers centers including index patients and relatives. Genotyping of 77 BC-associated SNPs (Mavaddat et al., 2015) was J.Borde1,C.Ernst1,K.Weber-Lassalle1,D.Niederacher2, performed by Fluidigm® Access Array and NGS. PRS- J. Hauke1, J. Horváth3, N. Weber-Lassalle1, A. Meindl4, calculation was performed according to Kuchenbaecker E. Pohl-Rescigno1, N. Arnold5, A. Lee6, C. Engel7,8, et al., 2017. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that mutation B. Wappenschmidt1, M. Schmidt9, A. Antoniou6, carriers within the highest PRS decile reported a signiﬁ- R. K. Schmutzler1, K. Kuchenbäcker10,11, E. Hahnen1 cantly earlier age at ﬁrst onset compared with patients within the lowest decile (P=5e-06). Patients within the 1CenterforHereditaryBreastandOvarianCancer,Center highest decile show a mean age at ﬁrst diagnosis of 43.6 for Integrated Oncology (CIO), University of Cologne, (23–69) years vs. 48.7 (27–65) years in the lowest decile Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, (p=0.007). Thus, combined genotyping of BC-associated Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Gynaecology and SNPs may improve personal risk prediction for CHEK2 Obstetrics, University Hospital Duesseldorf, Heinrich- mutation carriers. Heine University Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany, J. Borde: None. C. Ernst: None. K. Weber-Lassalle: 3Institute for Human Genetics, University Hospital Muen- None. D. Niederacher: None. J. Hauke: None. J. Hor- ster, Muenster, Germany, 4Department of Gynecology and váth: None. N. Weber-Lassalle: None. A. Meindl: None. Obstetrics, LMU Munich, University Hospital Munich, E.Pohl-Rescigno:None.N.Arnold:None.A.Lee:None. Munich,Germany,5InstituteofClinicalMolecularBiology, C. Engel: None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. M. Schmidt: Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University None. A. Antoniou: None. R.K. Schmutzler: None. K. Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Christian- Kuchenbäcker: None. E. Hahnen: None. Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 6Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public C09.6 Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Application of genomics and cognitive technology in Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7Institute for Medical Infor- precision oncological medicine matics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 8LIFE ¬- Leipzig Research Centre for I. Sánchez Guiu1, D. Cantalapiedra1, V. Felipe-Ponce1, Civilization Diseases, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, S. Santillán1, J. García2, S. Lois2, J. Triviño2, Germany, 9Division of Molecular Pathology, Netherlands R. Miñambres3, B. Cortina3, M. Vázquez San Antonio4, Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 10Division of C. Collado Micó4, V. Fernández Pedrosa1, C. Rodriguez- Psychiatry, University College London, Maple House, 149 Antona5, O. Calvete6, A. Gonzalez Neira7, C. Martínez- Tottenham Court Road, London, United Kingdom, 11UCL Laperche8, I. Buño Bordeh8, L. Rodríguez Rojas9, Genetics Institute, University College London, Gower A. Zambrano10, J. Escobar11, J. Falla12, N. Tolaba13, Street, London, United Kingdom P. Bazzoni13, M. Montero Alvi13, E. de Álava14, D. Azuara15, J. Rufﬁnelli15, M. Varela15, E. Nadal15, CHEK2 germline mutations are associated with a 20–30% C. Lázaro15, C. Moya1, G. Ribas1 lifetime risk for breast cancer (BC). It is suggested that additional genetic factors, such as BC-associated SNPs 1Medical Genetics Unit, Sistemas Genómicos, Valencia, identiﬁed by GWAS, modify individual BC risks. For Spain, 2Bioinformatics Department, Sistemas Genómicos, BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, the combined effects of BC- Valencia,Spain,3I+D+iDepartment,SistemasGenómicos, associated SNPs (polygenic risk score, PRS) have been Valencia,Spain,4Next-Generation SequencingLaboratory, shown to be informative for individual risk-stratiﬁcation. Sistemas Genómicos, Valencia, Spain, 5Hereditary Endo- The question ariseswhether PRS-based risk-stratiﬁcationis crineCancerGroup,HumanCancerGeneticsProgramme, applicable for CHEK2 mutation carriers. We analyzed 685 SpanishNationalCancerResearchCentre(CNIO),Madrid, femaleCHEK2germlinemutationcarriers(464c.1100delC Spain, 6Human Genetics Group, Spanish National Cancer and 143 carriers of other protein-truncating variants, 78 Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 7Human Geno- individuals with pathogenic missense variants). A total of typing Unit-CeGen, Human Cancer Genetics Programme,1108 SpanishNationalCancerResearchCentre(CNIO),Madrid, Cortina: None. M. Vázquez San Antonio: None. C. Spain, 8Gregorio Marañón Health Research Institute Collado Micó: None. V. Fernández Pedrosa: None. C. (IiSGM), Madrid, Spain, 9Genetics Service, Fundación Rodriguez-Antona:None.O.Calvete:None.A.Gonzalez Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia, 10Oncology Service, Neira: None. C. Martínez-Laperche: None. I. Buño Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia, 11Pathology Bordeh:None.L.RodríguezRojas:None.A.Zambrano: Department, Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia, None.J.Escobar:None.J.Falla:None.N.Tolaba:None. 12Research Centre, Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Spain, P. Bazzoni: None. M. Montero Alvi: None. E. de Álava: 13Pathology and Genetics Anatomy Program, Arturo None. D. Azuara: None. J. Rufﬁnelli: None. M. Varela: Oñativia Hospital, Salta, Argentina, 14Anatomical Pathol- None.E.Nadal:None.C.Lázaro:None.C.Moya:None. ogy, Virgen del Rocío Hospital, Sevilla, Spain, 15Catalan G. Ribas: None. Institute of Oncology, Duran I Reynals Hospital, Barce- lona, Spain C10 Cardiovascular disorders Introduction: Precision medicine uniﬁes clinical, anato- mopathological and molecular data, and gives a biological C10.1 proﬁle tumor for each patient, favoring not only the Sequence variants associated with resistant diagnosis but giving personalized treatment alternatives hypertension implicate mechanisms affecting potassium and monitoring disease progression. New technologies are levels necessaryinordertoovercomethesechallenges.Thisstudy tested the robustness and feasibility of such technology, V. Tragante1, P. Sulem1, G. Thorleifsson1, M. L. Frigge1, called IBM Watson for Genomics (WFG), which uses J. G. Arthur2, F. W. Asselbergs3, D. C. Crawford4, natural language processing to obtain evidence-based A. M. Deaton1, G. I. Eyjolfsson5, S. Gretarsdottir1, targeted therapy and clinical trial options in an automated G. H. Halldorsson1, A. Helgadottir1, I. Jonsdottir1, manner. R.P.Kristjansson1,P.Melsted1,A.Oddson1,I.Olafsson6, Material and Methods: 39 different types of cancer R. Palsson6, O. Sigurdardottir7, E. Sigurdsson8, indifferentstages(colon,lung,gastric,myeloidleukemia, J. K. Sigurdsson1, G. Sveinbjornsson1, G. Masson1, angiosarcoma, bone, thyroid and renal sarcoma) D. O. Arnar1, G. Thorgeirsson1, U. Thorsteinsdottir1, were sequenced using different options of NGS panels D. F. Gudbjartsson1, H. Holm1, K. Stefansson1 (Trusight-170, LMA-NEOPLASMeproﬁle, Oncomine- fusion-assay and Archer-FusionPlex) on the HiSeq/ 1deCODE Genetics/Amgen, Reykjavik, Iceland, 210x Geno- MiSeq and S5-XL platforms of IonTorrent. The resulting mics, Pleasanton, CA, United States, 3University Medical data was interpreted by WFG. Results: WFG detected Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Case Western actionable alterations in 28 tumors. In 17%of cases WFG Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States, 5The agreed with the treatment applied by the oncologists or Laboratory in Mjodd, Reykjavik, Iceland, Reykjavik, Ice- detected resistance to drugs in patients who did not land, 6Landspitali–The National University Hospital of respond to treatment. 64% of patients whose ﬁrst line Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 7Akureyri Hospital, Akureyri, treatment failed, WFG detected alternative therapies and Iceland, 8University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland classiﬁed patients as candidates for clinical trials and/or for those pending approval. In oncohaematological Resistant hypertension (rHTN) is a severe form of tumors, it was possible to evaluate the genomic proﬁle hypertension associated with marked cardiovascular mor- throughoutthedisease(diagnosis,relapseandrecurrence) bidity. We performed a genome-wide association study of as well as its clonal evolution. This approach allowed the 14,756 rHTN cases using 24,006 controlled hypertensives selection of drugs that led to the maximum beneﬁcial ascontrols(cHTN),bothdeﬁnedbasedondrugprescription effect. andblood pressure data from Iceland, theUKBiobankand Conclusion: Genetic characterization of tumors through eMERGE. We found four genome-wide signiﬁcant rHTN NGS, complemented by evidence-based therapeutic loci, all known blood pressure loci, and identiﬁed eight intervention options, provides accurate molecular more rHTN loci using reported blood pressure associations diagnosis, tumor sub-classiﬁcation and treatment options. asaprior.Severalofthestrongesthypertensionvariantsdo Additionally, this strategy offers new information to eval- not show association with rHTN while others increase the uate patients. risk of rHTN more than that of hypertension. Parent-of- I. Sánchez Guiu: None. D. Cantalapiedra: None. V. origin analysis shows increased risk of rHTN associated Felipe-Ponce:None.S.Santillán:None.J.García:None. withtransmissionbythefatherforthreevariants(rs880315 S.Lois:None.J.Triviño:None.R.Miñambres:None.B. near CASZ1, rs569550 near LSP1 and rs1006096 nearAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1109 RXFP2). Nine of the twelve rHTN variants associate with C10.2 bloodpotassiumlevels,withtheriskalleleassociatingwith Multi-omics approach identiﬁes three novel genes for lower potassium levels, and the potassium effect of blood bicuspid aortic valve related aortopathy pressure variants predicts their association with rHTN beyond their blood pressure effect. Furthermore, a genetic I. Luyckx1, A. A. Kumar1, E. Gillis1, R. A. Gould2, risk score of the rHTN variants associates with hyper- H. Aziz2, C. E. Woods2, M. A. Seman-Senderos2, aldosteronism. We also observed that, before therapy, G. MacCarrick2, E. Sparks2, A. S. MacCallion2, L. Van individuals with rHTN have lower potassium levels than Laer1, H. C. Dietz2, A. Verstraeten1, B. L. Loeys1 bothnormotensivesandthosewithcontrolledhypertension. The most signiﬁcant rHTN variant is in KCNK3, a 1Center for Medical Genetics, Edegem, Belgium, potassium channel gene that has been associated with 2McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns pulmonary arterial hypertension in men and hyperaldoster- Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, onism in mice. In conclusion, we show genetic differences United States between hypertension and rHTN and a prominent role of mechanisms affecting potassium homeostasis for develop- Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common ment of rHTN, implicating mineralocorticoid-related path- congenital heart defect (CHD), affecting 1–2% of the ways, aldosterone in particular. population. Although the associated development of V. Tragante: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAAs) was historically attrib- niﬁcant;deCODEGenetics.P.Sulem:A.Employment(full uted to altered blood ﬂow, high heritability (89%) suggests or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. G. Thor- a strong genetic contribution. Incomplete penetrance and leifsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; variable clinical expression hampered gene identiﬁcation. deCODE Genetics. M.L. Frigge: A. Employment (full or TheonlyestablishedBAV/TAA-geneisNOTCH1,accoun- part-time);Signiﬁcant;deCODEGenetics.J.G.Arthur:A. table for less than 1%. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; 10x genomics. Combined approach of copy number variation (CNV) F.W. Asselbergs: None. D.C. Crawford: None. A.M. analysis, resequencing of candidate genes and exome Deaton: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; sequencing of families identiﬁed three novel candidate Amgen. G.I. Eyjolfsson: None. S. Gretarsdottir: A. genes which were further validated in a large BAV/TAA- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE cohort (n=637). Genetics. G.H. Halldorsson: A. Employment (full or part- CNV analysis revealed a 89kb duplication upstream of time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. A. Helgadottir: A. the T-box transcription factor TBX20. Fine-mapping of the Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE duplicationconﬁrmedinvolvementofaTAD-boundaryand Genetics.I.Jonsdottir:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); two of nine region-overlapping Decipher patients, carrying Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. R.P. Kristjansson: A. a bigger deletion, presented with syndromic CHD. After Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE resequencing, variant burden analysis strengthened the Genetics. P. Melsted: A. Employment (full or part-time); genetic evidence for TBX20 involvement in BAV/TAA Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. A. Oddson: A. Employ- (1.1%;p=0.03). ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. I. Targeted resequencing of 22 candidate genes unveiled Olafsson: None. R. Palsson: None. O. Sigurdardottir: SMAD6 as the most common BAV/TAA-gene (2.5%;p= None. E. Sigurdsson: None. J.K. Sigurdsson: A. 0.002). Investigation of an additional cohort of 473 TAA- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE patients, demonstrated that although only 14% also pre- Genetics.G.Sveinbjornsson:A.Employment(fullorpart- sented BAV, all novel likely pathogenic SMAD6 variants time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. G. Masson: A. (n=7) were identiﬁed in BAV/TAA individuals, further Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE consolidatingtheroleofSMAD6variantstotheBAV/TAA- Genetics. D.O. Arnar: A. Employment (full or part-time); aetiology. Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. G. Thorgeirsson: A. Finally, exome sequencing discovered a ROBO4 splice- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE site mutation segregating in a BAV/TAA-family. Rese- Genetics. U. Thorsteinsdottir: A. Employment (full or quencing revealed enrichment for rare ROBO4 variants part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. D.F. Gudb- (1.8%;p=0.04). ROBO4 silencing or mutant ROBO4 jartsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; expression in endothelial cells results in impaired barrier deCODEGenetics.H.Holm:A.Employment(fullorpart- function and a synthetic repertoire suggestive of time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE Genetics. K. Stefansson: A. endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition; concordant ﬁndings Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; deCODE are observed in patient aortic walls and Robo4-deﬁcient Genetics. animal models.1110 I. Luyckx: None. A.A. Kumar: None. E. Gillis: None. A. Sartori: None. K. Thanopoulou: None. C. Borel: R.A.Gould:None.H.Aziz:None.C.E.Woods:None.M. None. M. Manioudaki: None. I. Galani: None. E. A. Seman-Senderos: None. G. MacCarrick: None. E. Andreakos: None. E.T. Dermitzakis: None. Sparks: None. A.S. MacCallion: None. L. Van Laer: None. H.C. Dietz: None. A. Verstraeten: None. B.L. C10.4 Loeys: None. Metabolomic proﬁling of ANGPTL3 deﬁciency C10.3 E. Tikkanen, P. Würtz Investigatingatherosclerosisprogressionthroughsingle- cell transcriptional proﬁling of immune cells of the Nightingale Health Ltd., Helsinki, Finland atherosclerotic plaque Introduction: Loss-of-function variants in the A.Sartori1,K.Thanopoulou2,C.Borel1,M.Manioudaki2, angiopoietin-like 3 gene (ANGPTL3) have been associated I. Galani2, E. Andreakos2, E. T. Dermitzakis1,3,4 with low levels of plasma lipoproteins and decreased coronary artery disease risk. We aimed to determine 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Biomedical detailedmetaboliceffectsofgenetically-inducedANGPTL3 Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Athens, deﬁciency in fasting and postprandial state. Greece, 3Health 2030 Genome Center, Geneva, Switzer- Materials and Methods: We studied individuals carry- land, 4iGE3 Institute of Genetics and Genomics ofGeneva, ing S17X loss-of-function mutation inANGPTL3 (6 homo- Geneva, Switzerland zygous and 32 heterozygous carriers) and 38 noncarriers. Nuclear magnetic resonance metabolomics was used to Atherosclerosis is a chronic vascular disease characterized quantify225circulatingmetabolicmeasures.Wecompared by the deposition of lipid molecules into the arteria intima metabolic differences between loss-of-function carriers and and the formation of plaques. The pathogenesis of the noncarriers in fasting state and after a high fat meal. plaqueisadynamicprocessanditscellularcompositionisa Results: In fasting, ANGPTL3 deﬁciency was char- major determinant factor in disease development. In this acterized by similar extent of reductions in low-density study, we propose a single-cell RNA-seq approach to lipoprotein cholesterol (0.74 SD-units lower concentration characterizetheimmunecelltypecompositionoftheplaque per loss-of-function allele [95%CI 0.42–1.06]) as observed atdifferentdiseasestagesfromCD45+sortedimmunecells for many triglyceride-rich lipoprotein measures, including from carotid tissue. We aim to reveal the degree of very-low-densitylipoproteincholesterol(0.75[0.45–1.05]). heterogeneityandvariabilityofcellcompositioninplaques Within most lipoprotein subclasses, absolute levels of amongindividuals,itsinﬂuenceinplaquedevelopment,and cholesterol were decreased more than triglycerides, result- transcriptional differences between individuals with plaque ing in the relative proportion of cholesterol being reduced ﬁssuring (symptomatic) vs. asymptomatic individuals. We within triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and their remnants. havesequenced16225single-cellsfrom3symptomaticand Further, beta-hydroxybutyrate was elevated (0.55 7 asymptomatic patients (median 1152 genes; 360k reads [0.21–0.89]). Homozygous ANGPTL3 loss-of-function per cell). The top highly expressed genes including carriers showed essentially no postprandial increase in MALAT1, CD74, B2M and TMSB4X were associated with triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and fatty acids, without evi- atherosclerotic lesions, inﬂammation and adverse cardio- dence for adverse compensatory metabolic effects. vascularoutcome.Weidentiﬁed15clustersofco-expressed Conclusion: In addition to overall triglyceride and low- genes differentiating between immune cell subtypes at the density lipoprotein cholesterol lowering effects, ANGPTL3 plaquelevelcompositionwithamajorproportionofTcells deﬁciency results in reduction of cholesterol proportion and macrophages, suggesting that the plaque exhibits the within triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and their remnants. characteristics of a classically chronic inﬂamed site. We Further, ANGPTL3 loss-of-function carriers had elevated identiﬁed 4976 differentially expressed genes among ketone body production, suggesting enhanced hepatic fatty clusters suggesting the presence of a high degree of cell acid beta-oxidation. The detailed metabolic proﬁle in heterogeneity in the plaque. Moreover, Gene Ontology human knockouts of ANGPTL3 reinforces inactivation of revealed enrichment of pathways involved in pathogenesis ANGPTL3 as a promising therapeutic target for decreasing ofinﬂammatorydiseases,apoptosis,immuneresponse,such cardiovascular risk. as NF-kB and TNF. Further work aims to investigate the E. Tikkanen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- presence of an expression signature between symptomatic niﬁcant;NightingaleHealthLtd.P.Würtz:A.Employment and asymptomatic patients to better characterize disease (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Nightingale Health Ltd. progression.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1111 C10.5 beneﬁtsforﬁnemappingusingdiversecohorts,andinsights The Future is Now: Genomic Studies Must be Globally into clinical implications. We fear that the lack of repre- Representative sentation of diverse populations in genetic research will result in inequitable access to precision medicine for those G. L. Wojcik1, M. Graff2, K. Nishimura3, R. Tao4, with the highest burden of disease. Thus, we strongly J. Haessler3, C. R. Gignoux1, H. M. Highland5, advocate for continued, large genome-wide efforts in Y. M. Patel6, S. A. Bien3, S. Buyske7, C. Haiman8, diverse populations to maximize genetic discovery and C. Kooperberg9, L. Le Marchand10, R. J. F. Loos11, reduce health disparities. T. C. Matise7, U. Peters9, E. E. Kenny12, C. S. Carlson9, G.L. Wojcik: None. M. Graff: None. K. Nishimura: K. E. North2 None. R. Tao: None. J. Haessler: None. C.R. Gignoux: None. H.M. Highland: None. Y.M. Patel: None. S.A. 1StanfordUniversity,Stanford,CA,UnitedStates,2Depart- Bien: None. S. Buyske: None. C. Haiman: None. C. ment of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Kooperberg:None.L.LeMarchand:None.R.J.F.Loos: Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 3Fred Hutchinson Cancer None. T.C. Matise: None. U. Peters: None. E.E. Kenny: Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Vanderbilt None. C.S. Carlson: None. K.E. North: None. University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States, 5University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United C10.6 States, 6Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern Genetics of human plasmalipidome and its link to California, Los Angeles CA, Los Angeles, CA, United cardiovascular diseases States, 7Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, United States, 8Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern R. Tabassum1, J. T. Rämö1, P. Ripatti1, J. T. Koskela1, California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 9Fred Hutch- M. Kurki1,2,3, J. Karjalainen1,4,5, S. Hassan1, J. Nunez- inson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, United States, 10Uni- Fontarnau1, T. T. Kiiskinen1, S. Soderlund6, versity of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, United States, 11Icahn N. Matikainen6,7, M. J. Gerl8, M. A. Surma8,9, C. Klose8, School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York NY, New N.O.Stitziel10,11,12,H.Laivuori1,13,14,A.S.Havulinna1,15, York, NY, United States, 12Icahn School of Medicine at S. K. Service16, V. Salomaa15, M. Pirinen1,17,18, Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States F. Project1, M. Jauhiainen15,19, M. J. Daly1,4, N. B. Freimer16, A. Palotie1,4,20, M. Taskinen6, The technological revolution in human genetics is empow- K. Simons8,21, S. Ripatti1,4,22 ering population-level investigations into the biology of complex traits, drug development, and clinical guidelines. 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, HiLIFE, Uni- Althoughthesediscoveriesrelyongeneticvariationpresent versity of Helsinki, Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Broad acrossindividuals,associationstudieshaveoverwhelmingly Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United been performed in populations of European descent. States, 3Psychiatric & Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, In light of differential genetic architecture between Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United populations, biased representation in research can exacer- States, 4Broad Institute of the Massachusetts Institute of bate existing disease and health care disparities. Critical Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, variants may be missed if they are at a low frequency or United States, 5Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, completely absent in European populations, especially as Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical the ﬁeld shifts its attention towards rare variants, which are School, Boston, MA, United States, 6Research Programs morelikelytobepopulation-speciﬁc.Moreconcerning,the Unit, Diabetes & Obesity, University of Helsinki and effect sizes and their derived risk prediction scores derived Department of Internal Medicine, Helsinki University in one population will not accurately extrapolate to other Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 7Endocrinology, Abdominal populations. Center, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, Herein, we describe our recent work of the Population 8Lipotype GmbH, Dresden, Germany, 9PORT, Wroclaw, Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) Poland, 10Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medi- study, where we have conducted a GWAS of 26 cardio- cine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint metabolic phenotypes in 49,839 non-European individuals. Louis, MO, United States, 11Department of Genetics, We identify 27 novel loci and 38 secondary signals at Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, known cardiometabolic loci, as well as replicate 1,444 MO, United States, 12McDonnell Genome Institute, GWAS catalog associations across these traits. Our data Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, shows strong evidence of effect-size heterogeneity across MO, United States, 13Department of Obstetrics and ancestries for published GWAS associations, substantial Gynecology, Tampere University Hospital and University1112 of Tampere, Helsinki, Finland, 14Medical and Clinical thanclinicallyusedlipidmeasures,whichinturnmighthelp Genetics, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University guide future disease biomarker discovery. Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 15National Institute for Health R. Tabassum: None. J.T. Rämö: None. P. Ripatti: and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 16Center for Neurobeha- None. J.T. Koskela: None. M. Kurki: None. J. Karja- vioral Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and lainen: None. S. Hassan: None. J. Nunez-Fontarnau: Human Behavior, University of California, Los Angeles, None. T.T. Kiiskinen: None. S. Soderlund: None. N. CA, United States, 17Department of Public Health, Matikainen: None. M.J. Gerl: A. Employment (full or University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 18Helsinki Insti- part-time); Signiﬁcant; Lipotype GmbH. M.A. Surma: A. tute for Information Technology HIIT and Department of Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; PORT. E. MathematicsandStatistics,UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki, Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Finland, 19Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Lipotype GmbH. C. Research, Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland, 20Psychiatric & Klose: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Department of Psy- Lipotype GmbH. N.O. Stitziel: None. H. Laivuori: None. chiatry, Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Depart- A.S. Havulinna: None. S.K. Service: None. V. Salomaa: ment of Medicine, and the Department of Neurology, None. M. Pirinen: None. F. Project: None. M. Jauhiai- Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United nen: None. M.J. Daly: None. N.B. Freimer: None. A. States,21MaxPlanckInstituteofCellBiologyandGenetics, Palotie: None. M. Taskinen: None. K. Simons: E. Own- Dresden, Germany, 22Department of Public Health, Clin- ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intel- icum,FacultyofMedicine,UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki, lectual property); Signiﬁcant; Lipotype GmbH. S. Finland Ripatti: None. Introduction: Human plasma comprises of numerous molecular lipid species that outperform traditional risk C11 Statistical and population genetics factors in cardiovascular diseases (CVD) risk prediction. Methods: We performed a genome-wide association C11.1 study (GWAS) of 141 lipid species in 2,181 individuals, Maximum likelihood method quantiﬁes the overall followedby phenome-wide scans (PheWAS) with 23 CVD contributionofgene-environmentinteractiontocomplex end-points in >500,000 individuals from the Finnish and traits: an application to obesity traits UK Biobanks. We also determined (1) how heritable are lipid species and do they share genetic components and (2) J. Sulc1, N. Mounier1, T. Winkler2, A. Wood3, could we gain mechanistic insights into lipid metabolism. T. Frayling3, I. M. Heid2, M. R. Robinson4, Z. Kutalik1,3 Results: SNPbased heritabilities for lipid species ranged from 10–54%. Long polyunsaturated lipids showed highest 1University Center for Primary Case and Public Health, heritability and genetic sharing, suggesting considerable Lausanne,Switzerland,2DepartmentofGeneticEpidemiol- genetic regulation at fatty acids levels. The observed low ogy, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, genetic sharing between traditional lipids and lipid species 3Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical suggested that routine lipid screens may fail to capture School, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, potential disease risk factors. GWAS identiﬁed 35 lipid- 4Department of Computational Biology, University of species-associated loci (P<5x10−8), with 15 new lipid loci Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland and 37 new SNP-lipid species pair associations e.g. asso- ciation between ABCG5/8 and CE(20:2;0). We show that Introduction: As genome-wide association studies LPL(lipoproteinlipase)mayhavemoreefﬁcienthydrolysis (GWAS) increased in size, numerous gene-environment of medium length TAGs (triacylglycerides) than other interactions (GxE) have been discovered, many of which TAGs. The association patterns of SYNGR1, MIR100HG, however explore only one environment at a time and may and PTPRN2 suggested their probable roles in desaturation suffer from statistical artefacts leading to biased interaction and/orelongationoffattyacids.PheWASrevealedthat7of estimates. 35 lipid-species-associated loci also associate with CVD Materials and Methods: Here we propose a maximum related outcomes, including ABCG5/8, APOA1, BLK, likelihood method to estimate the contribution of GxE to FADS2, LPL, and two new loci-COL5A1and GALNT16 complex traits taking into account all interacting environ- (false discovery rate <0.05). mental variables at the same time, without the need to Conclusion: We demonstrate that lipidomics enable measure any. This is possible because GxE induces ﬂuc- deeperinsightstothegeneticregulationoflipidmetabolism tuations in the conditional trait variability, the extent of whichdependsonthestrengthofGxE.TheapproachcanbeAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1113 applied to continuous outcomes and for single SNPs or prior and observed effects (up to ~40%). We use Bayes genetic risk scores (GRS). Factors(BFs)toquantifytheevidenceinfavouroftheprior Results: Extensive simulations covering a wide range of and derived an analytical formula for the null BFs scenarios demonstrated that our method yields unbiased distribution, which led to a 6-fold reduced runtime and a interactionestimates.Wealsoofferastrategytodistinguish more accurate estimation of P-values, compared to speciﬁcGxEfromgeneralheteroscedasticity(scaleeffects). permutation-based approaches. We are able to gauge Applying our method to 32 obesity-related traits in the UK genetic risk score (GRS) performance using only summary Biobankrevealsthatforbodymassindex(BMI)theGRSxE statistics from training and test samples. Its application explains an additional 1.9% variance on top of the 5.2% revealed that GRSs based on posterior effects outperform GRS contribution. However, this interaction is not speciﬁc standard GRS. Applying this technique to human lifespan, to the BMI-GRS and holds for any variable equally corre- we identiﬁed 7 new loci (P<5e-8), which were missed by lated with BMI. On the contrary, the GRSxE interaction standardGWAS.Themethodandvisualizationofitsresults effect for leg impedance (0.07) is signiﬁcantly (P<10−56) have been implemented in an R package (https://github. larger than it would be expected for a similarly correlated com/n-mounier/bGWAS). variable (−0.16). N. Mounier: None. P.R.H.J. Timmers: None. J.F. Conclusion: We showed that our method could robustly Wilson: None. P.K. Joshi: None. Z. Kutalik: None. detect the global contribution of GxE to complex traits, which turned out to be substantial for some obesity C11.3 measures. One and a half million genome wide-association studies J.Sulc:None.N.Mounier:None.T.Winkler:None.A. of brain morphometry: a proof-of-concept study Wood: None. T. Frayling: None. I.M. Heid: None. M.R. Robinson: None. Z. Kutalik: None. G.Roshchupkin1,M. A. Ikram1, K. Wittfeld2, M.Zwiers3, N. Jahanshad4, A. Teumer2, P. Thompson4, B. Franke3, C11.2 H. Grabe2, W. Niessen1, H. H. H. Adams1 Leveraging correlated risks to increase power in Genome-Wide Association Studies 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 3Radboudumc, Nijme- N. Mounier1,2, P. R. H. J. Timmers3, J. F. Wilson3,4, gen, Netherlands, 4University of Southern California, Los P. K. Joshi3, Z. Kutalik1,2 Angeles, CA, United States 1University Center for Primary Care and Public Health, Objective:Thehumanbrainhasanintricatestructurethatis Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, partly determined by genetics. While neuroimaging can Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Centre for Global Health discern millions of morphometric features, genome-wide Research, Usher Institute of Population Health Sciences association studies have been limited to only a number of and Informatics, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4MRC aggregate measures due to technical reasons. Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Methods:Westudied18.000individualsfrom12cohorts Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom within the CHARGE consortium and UK Biobank partici- pants. The structure of the cortical and subcortical grey Genome-WideAssociationStudies(GWASs)arenowadays matterwascharacterizedusingvoxel-basedmorphometry,a often conducted in >1M samples. Improved discovery, by technique that generates a volume for each of the 1.5 mil- further increasing study sizes is not the only strategy. lionvoxels.Subsequently,genome-wideassociationstudies Leveraging published studies of related traits can improve were performed for all these voxels using a newly devel- inference. To this end, we developed a Bayesian GWAS oped software algorithm. The genome-wide brain-wide approach that builds informative priors from GWASs of signiﬁcance threshold was determined at p=5×10−13. related risk factors. Mendelian Randomisation is used to Results: The association analyses between 9 million derive multivariate causal effects of a set of iteratively genetic variants and 1.5 million brain voxels took 17h to selected risk factors on the target outcome. These causal compute, which would require over 2 years using conven- effectsoftheriskfactorsontheoutcomearethencombined tional software. We found 1.270.907 genome-wide brain- withtheSNP’seffectontheidentiﬁedriskfactorstobuilda wide signiﬁcant associations between genetic variants and Bayesian prior for the SNP’s effects on the outcome. We grey matter voxels, distributed between 55 brain regions found a set of universally optimal parameters (instrument with minimum p-value=2×10−87. These associations strength, clumping stringency and shrinkage intensity) that camefrom930variantsthatmappedto29independentloci. maximizes the out-of-sample squared correlation between1114 We found 62.920 unique voxels signiﬁcantly associated at (P=10e-250)anda10p11.21deletionassociatedwithIBD least with one variant. (P=9.1*10e-7)thatoverlapsthetightjunction-relatedgene Conclusion: The genome-wide interrogation of high- PARD3, which has been associated with IBD in candidate resolution neuroimaging data is a powerful approach to gene studies. Genome-wide CNV association studies help identify genetic determinants of brain structure, even at us to better understand/ﬁne-map the underlying genetic samplesizesconsiderablysmaller thanstudies ofaggregate mechanisms for complex diseases. Our analyses are a ﬁrst measures. This successful ﬁrst attempt at high-throughput step in compiling a large CNV-trait database. GWAS could be extended to various ﬁne-grained (endo) M. Lepamets: None. K. Lepik: None. Z. Kutalik: phenotypes,whichmightproveusefulforunderstandingthe None. R. Mägi: None. genetic architecture of other complex traits. G. Roshchupkin: None. M.A. Ikram: None. K. Witt- C11.5 feld: None. M. Zwiers: None. N. Jahanshad: None. A. Fine-scale population structure and demographic Teumer:None.P.Thompson:None.B.Franke:None.H. change through time and space in the Netherlands Grabe: None. W. Niessen: None. H.H.H. Adams: None. R. P. Byrne1, W. van Rheenen2, L. H. van den Berg2, C11.4 J. H. Veldink2, R. L. McLaughlin1 Genome-wide copy number variant association study reveals several novel disease-associated loci 1Smurﬁt institute of genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 2Department of Neurology, Brain Centre M. Lepamets1,2, K. Lepik3,1, Z. Kutalik4, R. Mägi1 Rudolf Magnus, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands 1Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, Univer- sity of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Molecular and Introduction: We present a detailed genetic analysis of Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute populationstructure,migrationanddemographicchangesin of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, the Netherlands using powerful methods incorporating 4Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, Lausanne haplotype sharing and local geographic origin. University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland Methods: We combined genome-wide SNP and geo- graphic origin data (N=1422) to explore the interplay Genome-wide association study (GWAS) is a successful between genetics and geography in the Netherlands. Using tool for identifying common single nucleotide polymorph- ChromoPainter/ﬁneSTRUCTURE we partitioned our data isms (SNPs) contributing to complex human traits and basedonpatternsofhaplotypesharingtoidentifyﬁne-scale diseases. However, relatively little of heritability of those population structure. We analysed patterns of identity-by- traits has been explained by SNPs due to their small effect descent (IBD) sharing for segments of different lengths to sizes. Therefore, it is necessary to analyze other types of estimate the time depth of the structure. We investigated genetic variations including DNA copy number variations whetherthestructurereﬂectsbarrierstogeneﬂowusingthe (CNVs). Estimated Effective Migration Surfaces (EEMS) method. Eventhoughlarge(>100kbp)rareCNVsarestudiedfora We also analysed spatial clines in haplotype sharing from widerangeofcomplextraitsanddiseases,detectingshorter neighbouring countries using a European reference (N= CNVsfromSNPgenotypingarraydataremainschallenging 4514). Finally, we estimated recent changes in effective duetolargenumberoffalsepositives.Toaddressthisissue, population size using the IBDNe method. wehavedevelopedastatistical model topredictthequality Results:Weidentiﬁed16geneticclusterswhichcorrelate of possible CNV regions detected by PennCNV software. closely with regional geography. At its ﬁnest level, clus- Our model outperforms the best currently published CNV tering distinguishes subtly different eastern and western quality score. geneticgroupsintheNorth-Brabantprovince,whiledeeper Using our CNV quality measure, we conducted genome- clustering delineates a north-south split bisecting the wide CNV analysis on ten complex diseases (incl. type 2 country. We estimate that this north-south genetic structure diabetes,inﬂammatoryboweldisease(IBD)andrheumatoid is at least 2700 years old, while east-west structure is more arthritis(RA),etc.)inupto398,662unrelatedwhiteBritish recent. EEMs revealed a strong migrational cold spot individualsfromUKBiobank cohort.Intotal,wefound 18 splitting the country north to south, overlapping the Rhine. genome-wide signiﬁcant (P<1.7*10e-6) CNV-disease Overlaying this deep structure we observe strong opposing associations, out of which 15 are novel. Noteworthy northeast-southwest spatial clines in German and Belgian examplesareassociationbetweenRAanda6p21.3deletion haplotype sharing. Finally we infer a super-exponential (P=8.5*10e-7) overlapping a known strong GWAS signal population growth in the past 50 generations.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1115 Grants: MND Association (957–799); Science Founda- C12 Intellectual Disability tion Ireland (17/CDA/4737) R.P. Byrne: None. W. van Rheenen: None. L.H. van C12.1 den Berg: None. J.H. Veldink: None. R.L. Phenotypic spectrum of novel intellectual disability McLaughlin: None. syndrome due to de novo variants in KMT2E C11.6 A. O’Donnell-Luria1,2,3, L. S. Pais1,2, V. Faundes4,5, The landscape of pervasive horizontal pleiotropy in KMT2E Consortium, X. Soto6, N. Papalopulu6, human genetic variation is driven by extreme S. Banka5,7, L. H. Rodan1,3 polygenicity of human traits and diseases 1Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, M. Verbanck, D. M. Jordan, R. Do 2Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, TheCharlesBronfman InstituteforPersonalizedMedicine, United States, 4Instituto de Nutrición y Tecnología de los Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, Alimentos (INTA), Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile, United States 5Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Understanding the nature of horizontal pleiotropy, where Kingdom,6DivisionofDevelopmentalBiology&Medicine, one genetic variant has independent effects on multiple The University of Manchester, Manchester, United King- observable traits, is vitally important for our understanding dom, 7School of Medical Sciences, The University of of the genetic architecture of human phenotypes. Many Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom recent studies have pointed to the existence of horizontal pleiotropy, but its extent remains unknown, largely due to KMT2E encodes a histone methyltransferase epigenetic difﬁcultyindisentanglingtheinherentlycorrelatednatureof protein,atranscriptionalregulatorreportedtoplaykeyroles observable traits. We have developed a statistical frame- in diverse biological processes, including cell cycle work to quantify horizontal pleiotropy in human genetic progression, and genomic stability maintenance. Here we variation, using a two-component score computed from describe the neurodevelopmental phenotype that results summary statistics. This score uses a whitening procedure from disruption of KMT2E in 38 affected individuals from to remove correlations between observable traits and 36 families. From the Genome Aggregation Database normalize effect sizes across all traits. When applied to (gnomAD), KMT2E is a candidate haploinsufﬁcient gene simulatedassociationsummarystatistics,ourscoresuccess- with a LOEUF score of 0.06. This case series includes 28 fullydetectshorizontalpleiotropyunderarangeofdifferent protein truncating variants (PTVs), four missense variants, models.Whenappliedto372heritablephenotypesfromthe and four large deletions encompassing KMT2E, most of UK Biobank, our pleiotropy score detects a signiﬁcant which were conﬁrmed to be de novo. Most affected excess ofhorizontalpleiotropy whichispervasivethrough- individuals with protein truncating variants presented with out the human genome and especially prominent among mildintellectualdisability,autismand/orepilepsy.Epilepsy highly polygenic phenotypes. We identify 24,968 variants more common in females and autism more common in in7,831lociwithextremehorizontalpleiotropy,amajority males; many had relative macrocephaly and hypotonia. ofwhichhaveneverbeenreportedinanypublishedGWAS. There appears to be a subtle facial gestalt characterized by Examining functional annotations, the pleiotropy score is dolichocephaly,deepseteyeswithdown-slantingpalpebral signiﬁcantly higher in active regions and lower in inactive ﬁssures, and infraorbital creases. Individuals with micro- regions. In addition, the pleiotropy score correlates with deletionsencompassingKMT2Eshowedagreaterdegreeof transcriptional measures of pleiotropy, it is signiﬁcantly developmental delay. Individuals with missense variants in higher for variants which are eQTLs i) for many genes KMT2E presented with the most severe developmental across many tissues; ii) for genes whose orthologs are delays and treatment-resistant infantile epileptic encephalo- associated with multiple phenotypes in mice or yeast. Our pathy; microcephaly was common in this group. Haploin- results highlight thecentral role horizontal pleiotropy plays sufﬁciency versus gain-of-function or dominant negative in the genetic architecture of human phenotypes. effects speciﬁc to these missense variants in KMT2E may M. Verbanck: None. D.M. Jordan: None. R. Do: B. explain this divergence in phenotype but requires indepen- Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or dentvalidation.Tosupportourﬁndingsforlossoffunction consultant and pending grants as well as grants already inKMT2E,weperformedfunctionalanalysisbygenerating received); Signiﬁcant; AstraZeneca, Goldﬁnch Bio. a kmt2e knockout Zebraﬁsh using CRISPR-Cas9 technol- ogy. The G0 ﬁsh revealed dose-dependent phenotypes that1116 were consistent with the human syndrome further proving George’s Healthcare NHS Trust, St. George’s, University the importance of this gene in development. of London, London, United Kingdom, 19Department of A. O’Donnell-Luria: None. L.S. Pais: None. V. Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Faundes: None. X. Soto: None. N. Papalopulu: None. S. Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 20Department of Pediatrics, Banka: None. L.H. Rodan: None. Division of Genetics and Metabolism, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 21Division of C12.2 Molecular and Human Genetics, Columbus, OH, United CTCF variants in 31 individuals with a variable States, 22Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland neurodevelopmental disorder broaden the mutational University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 23Division of Genet- and clinical spectrum ics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, E. D. H. Konrad1, N. Nardini1, M. Blyth2, K. Prescott2, United States, 24Adult Metabolic Diseases Clinic, Vancou- A. M. Bouman3, E. H. Brilstra4, A. Caliebe5, R. Ibitoye6, ver General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 25Service V. Y. Chang7, A. Gupta8, G. Le Guyader9, R. A. Jamra10, de Génétique, CHU d’Angers, Angers, France K. Platzer10, M. C. J. Jongmans11, A. Kenney12, M. Kempers11, R. Pfundt11, D. Khattar13, O. Kuismin14, Background: Pathogenic variants within the chromatin E. Legius15, K. D. Lichtenbelt16, T. J. Maarup17, organizer CTCF were identiﬁed as causative for a variable M. McEntagart18, K. Õunap19, M. E. Pierpont20, neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) in four individuals, S.L. Santoro21, H.M.Schnelle22,E. Fassi23,D.Young24, so far. A. Ziegler25, Deciphering Developmental Disorders Methods: Through an international collaboration we (DDD) study, A. Gregor1, H. Van Esch15, C. Zweier1 collected molecular and clinical data from 31 individuals with pathogenic variants in CTCF. We performed tran- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2York- scriptome analysis on RNA extracted from patient blood shire Regional Genetics Service, Chapel Allerton Hospital, samples and utilized Drosophila melanogaster to investi- Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United gatetheimpactofCtcfdosagealterationonnervoussystem Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus development and function. Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Results: The variants identiﬁed in CTCF included two Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, large deletions, seven truncating, two splice site and 16 Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Institute for different missense variants, one of them in a mosaic state. Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig Holstein One case was familial. The associated phenotype was very Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 6North West Thames variable and ranged from mild developmental delay and Regional Genetics Service, Northwick Park Hospital, normal IQ to severe intellectual disability. Feeding difﬁ- Harrow, United Kingdom, 7Division of Pediatric Hematol- culties, failure to thrive (67%) and behavioral (76%) and ogy-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen vision anomalies (57%) were common. Variable other fea- School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, United States, turesincludedmicrocephaly(38%),shortstature(21%),and 8Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Roche- cardiac defects (29%). RNA-Seq in ﬁve individuals identi- ster, MN, United States, 9Service de Génétique Clinique, ﬁed 3,828 deregulated genes enriched for known NDD CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 10Institute of Human genes and biological processes such as transcriptional reg- Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, ulation. Ctcf knockdown and overexpression in Drosophila Germany, 11Department of Human Genetics, Radboud showed unaltered morphology of neuromuscular synapses University Medical Center and Radboud Institute for andmultipledendriteneuronsbutresultedinimpairedgross MolecularLifeSciences,Nijmegen,Netherlands,12Division neurologicalfunctioningintheclimbingassayandlearning of Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children’s Hospital and memory deﬁcits in the courtship conditioning of the King’s Daughters, Norfolk, VA, United States, paradigm. 13Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children’s Conclusion: We broaden the mutational and clinical Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, spectrum of CTCF-associated NDDs and gain insights into 14Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospi- the functional role of CTCF by identifying deregulated tal, Oulu, Finland, 15Center for Human Genetics, Uni- genes and showing that Ctcf dosage alterations result in versity Hospital Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, nervous system defects in Drosophila, modeling important 16Department of Genetics, University Medical Center aspects of the human condition. Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 17Department of Genetics, E.D.H. Konrad: None. N. Nardini: None. M. Blyth: Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, CA, United States, None. K. Prescott: None. A.M. Bouman: None. E.H. 18South West Thames Regional Genetics Centre, St. Brilstra:None.A.Caliebe:None.R.Ibitoye:None.V.Y.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1117 Chang:None.A.Gupta:None.G.LeGuyader:None.R. POU3F3, most of which are de novo variants. All A. Jamra: None. K. Platzer: None. M.C.J. Jongmans: individuals had developmental delays and/or intellectual None. A. Kenney: None. M. Kempers: None. R. Pfundt: disability. Impairments in speech and language skills were None. D. Khattar: None. O. Kuismin: None. E. Legius: common, along with characteristic prominent and cupped None. K.D. Lichtenbelt: None. T.J. Maarup: None. M. ears. POU3F3 is an intronless gene, insensitive to McEntagart: None. K. Õunap: None. M.E. Pierpont: nonsense-mediated decay, and thirteen individuals carried None. S.L. Santoro: None. H.M. Schnelle: None. E. variantsthatwerepredictedtoyieldatruncatedprotein.All Fassi: None. D. Young: None. A. Ziegler: None. A. truncating variants that we tested in cellular models led to Gregor: None. H. Van Esch: None. C. Zweier: None. aberrant subcellular localization of the encoded protein. Luciferase assays demonstrated negative effects of these C12.3 alleles on transcriptional activation of a reporter with a Denovovariantsdisturbingthetransactivationcapacity FOXP2-derived binding motif, also bound by POU3F2. In of POU3F3 cause a characteristic neurodevelopmental addition to the loss-of-function variants, ﬁve individuals disorder had missense variants that clustered at speciﬁc positions within the functional domains, and one small in-frame- L.SnijdersBlok1,2,T.Kleefstra1,H.Venselaar1,S.Maas3, deletion was identiﬁed. Some missense variants showed H.Y. Kroes4, A. M. A. Lachmeijer4, K. L. I. van Gassen4, reduced transactivation capacity in our assays, and one H. V. Firth5, S. Tomkins6, S. Bodek6, t. DDD study5, variant displayed gain-of-function effects, suggesting a K. Õunap7, M. Wojcik8, C. Cunniff9, K. Bergstrom9, distinctpathophysiologicalmechanism.InBioluminescence Z. Powis10, S. Tang10, D. N. Shinde10, C. Au11, Resonance Energy Transfer (BRET) interaction assays, all A.D.Iglesias11,K.Izumi12,J.Leonard12,A.A.Tayyoun12, the truncated versions of POU3F3 that we tested had S. W. Baker12, M. Tartaglia13, M. Niceta13, signiﬁcantly impaired dimerization capacities, while all M. L. Dentici13, N. Okamoto14, N. Miyake15, missense variants showed unaffected dimerization with N.Matsumoto15,A.Vitobello16,L.Faivre16,C.Philippe16, wild-type POU3F3. Taken together, our identiﬁcation and C. Gilissen1, L. van de Wiel1, R. Pfundt1, P. Deriziotis2, functional cell-based analyses of pathogenic variants in H. G. Brunner1,17, S. E. Fisher2 POU3F3, coupled with in-depth clinical characterization, implicate disruptions of this gene in a potentially recogniz- 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether- able neurodevelopmental disorder. lands, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijme- L. Snijders Blok: None. T. Kleefstra: None. H. Ven- gen, Netherlands, 3Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, selaar:None.S. Maas:None.H.Y.Kroes:None.A.M.A. Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Lachmeijer:None.K.L.I.vanGassen:None.H.V.Firth: Netherlands, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, None.S.Tomkins:None.S.Bodek:None.T.DDDstudy: United Kingdom, 6University Hospitals Bristol NHS None. K. Õunap: None. M. Wojcik: None. C. Cunniff: Foundation Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 7Tartu Uni- None. K. Bergstrom: None. Z. Powis: None. S. Tang: versity Hospital and Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu, None. D.N. Shinde: None. C. Au: None. A.D. Iglesias: Estonia, 8the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cam- None.K.Izumi:None.J.Leonard:None.A.A.Tayyoun: bridge, MA, United States, 9Weill Cornell Medicine, New None.S.W.Baker:None.M.Tartaglia:None.M.Niceta: York,NY,UnitedStates,10AmbryGenetics,AlisoViejo,CA, None. M.L. Dentici: None. N. Okamoto: None. N. United States, 11New York Presbyterian Hospital, New Miyake:None.N.Matsumoto:None.A.Vitobello:None. York, NY, United States, 12the Children’s Hospital of L.Faivre:None.C.Philippe:None.C.Gilissen:None.L. Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 13Bambino vandeWiel:None.R.Pfundt:None.P.Deriziotis:None. Gesù Children Hospital, Rome, Italy, 14Osaka Women’s H.G. Brunner: None. S.E. Fisher: None. and Children’s Hospital, Izumi, Japan, 15Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, C12.4 Japan, 16CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 17Maas- De novo variants in MAPK8IP3 cause intellectual tricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands disability with variable brain anomalies The POU3F3 protein, also referred to as Brain-1, is a well- K. Platzer1, H. Sticht2, S. L. Edwards3, W. Allen4, known transcription factor involved in development of the K. M. Angione5, M. T. Bonati6, C. Brasington7, central nervous system, but it has not previously been M. T. Cho8, L. A. Demmer7, T. Falik-Zaccai9,10, associated with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Here, we C. N. Gamble11, Y. Hellenbroich12, M. Iascone13, report the identiﬁcation and phenotypic characterization of F. Kok14, S. Mahida15, H. Mandel9, T. Marquardt16, nineteen individuals with heterozygous disruptions of K. McWalter8, B. Panis17, A. Pepler18, H. Pinz19,1118 L. Ramos14, D. N. Shinde20, C. Smith-Hicks15, A. P. A. thirteen unrelated individuals with an overlapping pheno- Stegmann21,P.Stöbe18,C.T.R.M.Stumpel21,C.Wilson4, type of mild to severe intellectual disability and variable J. R. Lemke1, N. Di Donato22, K. G. Miller3, R. Abou brain anomalies such as perisylvian polymicrogyria, Jamra1 cerebral or cerebellar atrophy and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.Denovovariantscomprisesixmissensevariants, 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofLeipzigMedical three of which are recurrent, and three truncating variants. Center, Leipzig,Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry, Emil- Brainanomalieswereconsistent amongindividualsharbor- Fischer Center, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen- ingrecurrentdenovomissensevariants,indicatingpossible Nürnberg,Erlangen,Germany,3GeneticModelsofDisease variantspeciﬁcphenotypiceffects.Weprovideseverallines Laboratory, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, of evidence for causation through (1) the signiﬁcant Oklahoma City, OK, United States, 4Department of enrichment of de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 within our Genetics, Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC, United cohort,(2)structuralmodellingofvariantsthatlieinknown States, 5Department of Pediatrics, Section of Clinical (template) structures and (3) through using the CRISPR- Genetics and Metabolism, University of Colorado School Cas9systemtotargetsixconservedaminoacidpositionsin ofMedicine,Aurora,CO,UnitedStates,6ClinicofMedical Caenorhabditis elegans to demonstrate increased axonal Genetics,IRCCSInstitutoAuxologicoItaliano,Milan,Italy, lysosomal density for two and an adverse locomotion 7Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics, Levine phenotypeforﬁveofthesixinvestigatedhumanvariantsin Children’s Hospital at Carolina Healthcare System, this model. Taken together, we ﬁrmly establish hetero- Charlotte, NC, United States, 8GeneDx, Gaithersburg, zygousdenovovariantsinMAPK8IP3asanovelcauseofa MD, United States, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Galilee neurodevelopmentaldisorderwithintellectualdisabilityand Medical Center, Nahariya, Israel, 10The Azrieli School of variable brain anomalies. Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, Safed, Israel, 11Department K. Platzer: None. H. Sticht: None. S.L. Edwards: of Pediatrics, UT Health Medical School, Houston, TX, None. W. Allen: None. K.M. Angione: None. M.T. United States, 12Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonati: None. C.Brasington: None. M.T. Cho: None. L. Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 13Laboratorio di Genetica A.Demmer:None.T.Falik-Zaccai:None.C.N.Gamble: Medica, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy, None.Y.Hellenbroich:None.M.Iascone:None.F.Kok: 14Mendelics Genomic Analysis, Sao Paulo, Brazil, None. S. Mahida: None. H. Mandel: None. T. Mar- 15Department of Neurology, Kennedy Krieger Institute, quardt: None. K. McWalter: None. B. Panis: None. A. The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Pepler: None. H. Pinz: None. L. Ramos: None. D.N. Baltimore, MD, United States, 16Department of Pediatrics, Shinde: None. C. Smith-Hicks: None. A.P.A. Stegmann: UniversityHospitalMünster,Münster,Germany,17Depart- None. P. Stöbe: None. C.T.R.M. Stumpel: None. C. ment of Pediatrics, Zuyderland Medical Center, Heerlen Wilson: None. J.R. Lemke: None. N. Di Donato: None. and Sittard, Netherlands, 18CeGaT GmbH and Praxis für K.G. Miller: None. R. Abou Jamra: None. HumangenetikTübingen,Tübingen,Germany,19Divisionof Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Saint Louis C12.5 University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, United Defective DNA polymerase a-primase leads to X-linked States, 20Division of Clinical Genomics, Ambry Genetics, intellectual disability associated with severe growth Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, 21Department of Clinical retardation, microcephaly and hypogonadism Genetics and School for Oncology and Developmental Biology,MaastrichtUniversityMedicalCenter,Maastricht, H. Van Esch1, R. Colnaghi2, K. Freson3, Netherlands, 22Institute for Clinical Genetics, Carl Gustav P. Starokadomskyy4, A. Zankl5, L. Backx1, Carus Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Dresden, I. Abramowicz2, E. Outwin2, L. Rohena6, C. Faulkner7, Germany G. Leong8, R. Newbury-Ecob9, R. Challis10, K. Ounap11, P. Witters12, E. Seuntjens13, K. Devriendt1, E. Burstein4, MAPK8IP3 has been shown to be part of the axonal K. Low9, M. O’Driscoll2 transport machinery which is essential for the function and maintenance of neurons. Therefore, MAPK8IP3 was an 1Center for Human Genetics,LEUVEN,Belgium,2Genome appealing candidate gene for further investigation after the Damage&StabilityCentre,UniversityofSussex,Brighton, initial identiﬁcation of a de novo missense variant in an United Kingdom, 3Center for Molecular and Vascular individual with a neurodevelopmental disorder. Through Biology, LEUVEN, Belgium, 4University of Texas South- international collaboration and exome sequencing in a western Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States, 5The cohort that sums up to 27232 affected individuals, we Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia, identiﬁed heterozygous de novo variants in MAPK8IP3 in 6Department of Pediatrics, San Antonio Military MedicalAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1119 Center, San Antonio, TX, United States, 7Bristol Genetics C12.6 Laboratory,SouthmeadHospital,Bristol,UnitedKingdom, Non-penetrance of a frameshifting SHANK3 deletion is 8Department of Paediatrics, Nepean Hospital, Kingswood, associated with compensatory mechanisms in both Australia,9ClinicalGenetics,StMichaelsHospital,Bristol, alleles United Kingdom, 10Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United B. Haukanes, T. Nordtveit, G. Houge Kingdom, 11Tartu University Hospital and Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tartu, Estonia, 12Center for Metabolic Department of Medical Genetics, Bergen, Norway Diseases, LEUVEN, Belgium, 13Developmental Neurobiol- ogy, KU Leuven, LEUVEN, Belgium In three brothers with severe learning problems, mild ID, and variable degrees of autism, we found an early Replicating thehuman genomeefﬁciently and accurately is frameshifting and maternally derived SHANK3 deletion, a daunting challenge, involving the duplication of upwards (NM_033517.1):c.1030+2929_1688+71delinsG p. of three billion base pairs. At the core of the complex (Val344AlafsTer71), removing 10–13 of the 22 exons. machinery that achieves this task are three members of the The non-mosaic SHANK3 deletion carrier mother is in B family of DNA polymerases; DNA polymerase α, δ and regularworkwithoutlearningdifﬁcultiesorotherproblems. ε. Collectively these multimeric polymerases ensure DNA To explore how the mother can be non-penetrant, we replication proceeds at optimal rates approaching 2x103 collectedbloodandﬁbroblastcellsfromallfamilymembers nucleotides/min, and with an error rate of less than one per for epigenetic-, RNA- and protein studies. In ﬁbroblasts, million nucleotides polymerised. The majority of DNA deep sequencing-basedmRNAquantiﬁcationindicated that replication of undamaged DNA is conducted by DNA the mother had a 3.5 fold higher SHANK3 mRNA expres- polymerases δ and ε. DNA polymerase α-primase complex sionfromthenormalallelethanhersons,possiblyrelatedto performslimitedsynthesistoinitiatethereplicationprocess, an enhancer triplication 17.5 kb upstream only detected in alongwithOkazakifragmentsynthesisonthediscontinuous the mother. This enhancer triplication has a population lagging strand. An increasing number of human disorders prevalence of 20% (561/2771). A more pronounced dif- caused by defects in different components of the DNA ference was found for the terminal SHANK3 exons 17–22 replicationapparatushavebeendescribedtodate.Theseare alsoincludedintwoterminalisoforms(isoE/Promoter5and clinically diverse, involving a wide range of features isoF/Promoter6) located downstream of the deletion. To including variable combinations of growth delay, immuno- investigate the epigenetic status of the CpG islands related deﬁciency, endocrine insufﬁciencies, lipodystrophy and to the SHANK3 promoters P1-P6, we performed cancer predisposition. Here, using various complementary methylation-sensitive amplicon based deep sequencing of approaches including classical linkage analysis, targeted DNA puriﬁed from blood and ﬁbroblasts after bisulphite next generating sequencing and whole exome sequencing, treatment. The putative isoF promoter (core Promoter6 w/ we describe distinct missense and splice-impacting muta- nine CpGs) was hypomethylated (x̅=1.5 ±0.94%) in tionsinPOLA1inﬁveunrelatedfamiliespresentingwithan ﬁbroblast-DNA from all deletion carriers compared to X-linkedsyndromeinvolvingintellectualdisability,propor- control subjects (x̅=15.5 ±0.74%). tionate short stature, microcephaly and hypogonadism. In conclusion, non-penetrance of an early SHANK3 POLA1 encodes the p180 catalytic subunit of DNA deletion in a carrier mother is associated with i) higher polymerase α-primase. A range of replicative impairments SHANK3 expression from her normal allele, possibly rela- could be demonstrated in patient-derived lymphoblastoid ted to a common enhancer triplication only in the mother, cell lines. Our ﬁndings describe the presentation of and ii) increased expression of C-terminal SHANK3 iso- pathogenic mutations in a catalytic component of a B forms from both alleles. family DNA polymerase member; DNA polymerase α. B. Haukanes: None. T. Nordtveit: None. G. H. Van Esch: None. R. Colnaghi: None. K. Freson: Houge: None. None. P. Starokadomskyy: None. A. Zankl: None. L. Backx:None.I.Abramowicz:None.E.Outwin:None.L. Rohena: None. C. Faulkner: None. G. Leong: None. R. C13 Pharmacogenomics Newbury-Ecob: None. R. Challis: None. K. Ounap: None. P. Witters: None. E. Seuntjens: None. K. Dev- C13.1 riendt: None. E. Burstein: None. K. Low: None. M. Metabolomic consequences of PCSK9 inhibition O’Driscoll: None. compared with statin therapy P. Würtz, S. Ruosaari1120 Nightingale Health Ltd., Helsinki, Finland Groningen,Netherlands,4JebsenCoeliacDiseaseResearch Centre, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway Introduction: Both statins and PCSK9 inhibitors lower bloodlow-densitylipoproteincholesterol(LDL-C)levelsto Interactionbetweenthehumangenomeandgutmicrobiome reduceriskofcardiovascularevents.Weperformeddetailed is vital to human health. While the human genome is set at metabolic proﬁling of a large randomised statin trial and birth, the gut microbiome can undergo dynamic changes comparedtheresultswiththeeffectsofgeneticinhibitionof over the course of an individual’s life. However, we still PCSK9, acting as a naturally occurring trial. know little about temporal shifts in the human gut Materials and Methods: Altogether 228 circulating microbiome, nor about the causes and consequences of metabolic measures were quantiﬁed by nuclear magnetic temporal shifts. We performed a longitudinal analysis on resonance spectroscopy, including lipoprotein subclass the gut microbiome of 341 participants in the Dutch concentrations and their lipid composition, fatty acids, and population-based cohort Lifelines-DEEP, each individual amino acids, for 5,359 individuals in the PROSPER trial. havingmetagenomicsanddeepphenotypicdataattwotime The corresponding metabolic measures were analysed in points (~5 years apart). Signiﬁcant temporal changes in the eight cohorts (N=72,185) using PCSK9 rs11591147 to gut microbiome were detected at the levels of microbial mimic the therapeutic effects of PCSK9 inhibitors. composition, function and antibiotic resistance. Abundance Results: Scaled to an equivalent lowering of LDL-C, the difference was observed for 40% of taxonomies, 60% of effects of genetic inhibition of PCSK9 on 228 metabolic functionalpathwaysand40%ofantibioticresistancegenes. markers were generally consistent with those of statin Furthermore, genetic stability analysis at strain level has therapy(R2=0.88).However,discrepancieswereobserved revealed several species are under high evolution rate, for very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) lipid measures. including gastrointestinal disease associated Ruminococcus For instance, genetic inhibition of PCSK9 had weaker torques. Notable, temporal changes were associated to effects on lowering of VLDL-cholesterol compared with individual phenotypic variation and lifestyle factors. For statin therapy (54 vs. 77% reduction, relative to the low- instance, the genetic variation in Coprococcus sp ART55/ ering effect on LDL-C). Genetic inhibition of 1strains was higher in individuals with larger changes in PCSK9 showed no signiﬁcant effects on amino acids, BMI, while Streptococcus thermophilus and Biﬁdobacter- ketones, or a marker of inﬂammation, whereas statin treat- ium longum showed higher mutation rates in proton pump ment weakly lowered GlycA levels. inhibitor and non-steroidal anti-inﬂammatory users, as Conclusion: Genetic inhibition of PCSK9 had similar compared to non-users. Our data show that the gut metabolic effects as statin therapy on detailed lipid and microbiome sees dynamic changes not only in microbial metabolite proﬁles. However, PCSK9 inhibitors are pre- composition and functional proﬁles but also in microbial dicted to have weaker effects on VLDL lipids compared genetic variation and antibiotic resistance. Our ﬁndings with statins for an equivalent lowering of LDL-C, which yieldnovelinsightsintothegutmicrobiome’simpactonthe potentially translate into smaller reductions in cardiovas- development of complex diseases and traits over time. cular disease risk. L. Chen: None. S. Garmaeva: None. A. Kurilshikov: P.Würtz:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; None. R. Gacesa: None. A. Vich Vila: None. R. Nightingale Health Ltd. S. Ruosaari: A. Employment (full Weersma: None. C. Wijmenga: None. A. Zhernakova: or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Nightingale Health Ltd. None. J. Fu: None. C13.2 C13.3 Longitudinal analysis of the gut microbiome reveals Lifelong genetically lowered sclerostin and risk of dynamic changes in relation to medications & cardiovascular disease phenotypes J. Bovijn1,2, K. Krebs3, C. Chen4,5,6, R. Boxall7,8, L. Chen1,2, S. Garmaeva1, A. Kurilshikov1, R. Gacesa3, J. C. Censin1,2, T. Ferreira1, S. L. Pulit1,9,10, A. Vich Vila3, R. Weersma3, C. Wijmenga1,4, C.A.Glastonbury1,S.Laber1,2,I.Y.Millwood7,8,K.Lin7, A. Zhernakova1, J. Fu1,2 L. Li11, Z. Chen7, L. Milani3, R. G. Walters7,8, R. Mägi3, B. M. Neale4,6, C. M. Lindgren1,2,9,12, M. V. Holmes1,7,8,12 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of 1Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Pediatrics, University Medical Center Groningen, Gronin- Kingdom, 2Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, Nufﬁeld gen, Netherlands, 3Department of Gastroenterology and Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, Hepatology, University Medical Center Groningen, United Kingdom, 3Estonian Genome Center, Institute ofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1121 Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Analytic Conclusion: Genetically and therapeutically lowered and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General sclerostin leads to higher risk of cardiovascular events. Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Psychiatric and Rigorous evaluation of the cardiovascular safety of romo- Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Boston, MA, United sozumab and other sclerostin inhibitors is warranted. States, 6Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad J. Bovijn: None. K. Krebs: None. C. Chen: None. R. Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United Boxall:None.J.C.Censin:None.T.Ferreira:None.S.L. States, 7Clinical Trial Service Unit and Epidemiological Pulit:None.C.A.Glastonbury: None.S.Laber:None.I. Studies Unit (CTSU), Nufﬁeld Department of Population Y.Millwood:None.K.Lin:None.L.Li:None.Z.Chen: Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, None. L. Milani: None. R.G. Walters: None. R. Mägi: 8Medical Research Council Population Health Research None. B.M. Neale: None. C.M. Lindgren: None. M.V. Unit (MRC PHRU), Nufﬁeld Department of Population Holmes: None. Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad C13.4 Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 10Department of Advanced renal cancer patients with tumor KDM5C Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, mutations show improved response to anti-angiogenic Netherlands,11DepartmentofEpidemiology&Biostatistics, therapy Peking University Health Science Centre, Peking Univer- sity,Bejing,China,12NationalInstituteforHealthResearch M. Santos1, J. Roldan-Romero1, J. Lanillos1, F. García1, Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford University B. Calsina1, M. Pulgarín1, Á. Martínez1, R. Letón1, Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, John Radcliffe Hospital, C. Montero-Conde1, A. Cascón1,2, M. Robledo1,2, Oxford, United Kingdom B.Beuselinck3,J.García-Donas4,C.Rodríguez-Antona1,2 Introduction:Inhibitionofsclerostinisanoveltherapeutic 1SpanishNationalCancerResearchCentre,Madrid,Spain, approach to lowering fracture risk. However, phase III 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enferme- randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of romosozumab, a dadesRaras,Madrid,Spain,3UniversityofLeuven,Leuven, sclerostin inhibitor, suggest an imbalance of serious Belgium, 4Clara Campal Comprehensive Cancer Center, cardiovascular events. Madrid, Spain Methods: We used two independent variants in SOST (encoding sclerostin) associated with bone mineral density Introduction: Survival of metastatic renal cell carcinoma (BMD) as proxies for therapeutic inhibition of sclerostin. (mRCC) has doubled in the last decades with the approval We estimated the effects on risk of osteoporosis, fracture, of targeted drugs and recently immunotherapies. However, coronary heart disease (CHD) and a further 22 cardiome- responses are very heterogeneous and we lack predictive tabolic traits, by combining data from 478,967 participants biomarkers. Anti-angiogenic therapies are key ﬁrst-line from three cohorts and up to 1,030,836 participants from drugs in mRCC. Our objective was to identify mutations nine GWAS consortia. In addition, we performed meta- associated with angiogenesis inhibitors response that could analysis of cardiovascular outcomes from RCTs of help personalizing mRCC treatment. romosozumab. Materialand Methods: Sampleswere collected through Results: RCT meta-analysis identiﬁed a higher risk of an observational study from the Spanish Oncology Geni- cardiac ischaemic events in patients randomised to romo- tourinary Group and Leuven Hospital. Whole exome sozumab (25 events among 4,298 individuals; odds ratio sequencing(WES)wasperformedontumorandbloodfrom [OR] 2.98; 95% conﬁdence interval [CI], 1.18–7.55; P= 28 mRCC patients with extreme response to ﬁrst-line 0.017). Scaled to the equivalent dose of romosozumab sunitinib.45genesweresequencedon156additionaltumor (210mg/month; 0.09 g/cm2 higher BMD), the SOST var- cases. Patients were classiﬁed as anti-angiogenic drug iants associated with lower risk of fracture (OR, 0.59; 95% responders (PFS>18 months), non-responders (PFS< CI, 0.54–0.66; P=1.4×10−24), and osteoporosis (OR, 6 months) or intermediate-responders (remaining patients). 0.43; 95% CI, 0.36–0.52; P=2.4×10−18). The SOST var- A KDM5C knockout (KO) model in 786-O cells was gen- iants associated with higher risk of myocardial infarction eratedusingCRISPR/Cas9andcharacterizedbyproteomics and/or coronary revascularisation (69,649 cases; OR, 1.18; (iTRAQ technology). 95% CI, 1.06–1.32; P=0.003) and type 2 diabetes (OR Results: WES revealed that mutations in KDM5C, 1.15; 95% CI, 1.05–1.27; P=0.003), higher systolic blood encoding a chromatin remodeling protein, were over- pressure (1.3mmHg; 95% CI 0.8–1.9; P=5.9×10−6) and represented among responder patients, and full series ana- waist-to-hip-ratio adjusted for BMI (0.05 SDs; 95% CI, lysis conﬁrmed the association (OR=0.23; 95%CI= 0.02–0.08; P=8.5×10−4). 0.07–0.77; P=0.017). Proteomic analysis in the KDM5C1122 cellular model revealed 414 proteins differentially expres- gene family, suggesting shared pathomechanisms in sed (FC=0.3/3.3; P=0.01). The proangiogenic proteins SCNxA/CACNA1x genes. We then use sequence- and SPHK2, SRC and RHOC were overexpressed (P<0.01) in structure-based features (not including gene names or the KO cells suggesting that mutated tumors are more positions) to develop a machine learning method that can dependent on angiogenesis. predictwhetheramissensevariantresultsinaLOForGOF Conclusion: Mutations in KDM5C are associated with associated disease phenotype (ROC=0.85). We validate improved response to anti-angiogenic treatment in mRCC, the GOF and LOF effect prediction on functionally tested potentially due to an overexpression of proangiogenic pro- variants in SCN1A, SCN2A and SCN8A (ROC=0.83) and teins. Supported by: Spanish Ministry of Economy and in large exome-wide datasets of individuals with diseases Competiveness, an unrestricted educational grant from Pﬁ- likeautismandepilepsy.Ourworkalsohasimplicationsfor zer and the Spanish Ministry of Education, Culture and disease modeling and mechanisms of ion channels. Ulti- Sport (FPU16/05527). mately, functional prediction of missense variants in these M. Santos: None. J. Roldan-Romero: None. J. Lanil- clinicallyrelevantgenesmayenhanceprecisionmedicinein los: None. F. García: None. B. Calsina: None. M. Pul- clinical practice. garín: None. Á. Martínez: None. R. Letón: None. C. This work was supported by German Research Founda- Montero-Conde: None. A. Cascón: None. M. Robledo: tion stipends HE7987/1–1 and HE7987/1-2 awarded None. B. Beuselinck: None. J. García-Donas: None. C. to HOH. Rodríguez-Antona: None. H.O. Heyne: None. S. Iqbal: None. D. Palmer: None. K.Johannesen:None.J.Lemke:None.H.Lerche:None. C13.5 P. May: None. R.S. Moeller: None. E. Perez: None. U. Predicting Functional Effects of Missense Variants in Scholl: None. S. Syrbe: None. A.J. Campbell: None. D. Voltage-Gated Sodium and Calcium Channels Lal: None. H. Wang: None. M.J. Daly: None. H. O. Heyne1, S. Iqbal1, D. Palmer1, K. Johannesen2, C13.6 J.Lemke3,H.Lerche4,P.May5,R.S.Moeller2,E.Perez6, Taurine supplementation as a potential therapy for U.Scholl7,S.Syrbe8,A.J.Campbell1,D.Lal9,H.Wang1, progressive retinal degeneration due to biallelic M. J. Daly10 pathogenic variants in the Taurine transporter SLC6A6 1Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, E. Ranza1,2,3, M. Ansar1, M. Shetty4, S. A. Paracha5, United States, 2The Danish Epilepsy Center, Dianalund, M. T. Sarwar5, I. Kern6, O. Farooq7, C. J. Pournaras8, Denmark, 3University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 4Uni- A. Malcles9, F. A. Santoni1,10, P. Makrythanasis1,11, versity of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 5University of J. Ahmed5, K. Henry4, S. E. Antonarakis1,2,12 Luxemburg, Luxemburg, Luxembourg, 6University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Berlin Institute of Health, 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Charite Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Service of 8University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 9Cleve- GeneticMedicine,UniversityHospitalsofGeneva,Geneva, land Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States, 10Institute for Switzerland, 3current address,Medigenome, Swiss Institute Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland of Genomic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine and Health Malfunctions of multiple voltage-gated sodium (Na s Sciences, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND, v encoded by SCNxA genes) and calcium channels (Ca s United States, 5Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber v encoded by CACNA1x genes) have been associated with Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan, 6Pediatric severeneurological,psychiatric,cardiacandotherdiseases. Nephrology and Metabolism Unit, Pediatric Subspecialties In Na s and Ca s, altered channel activity is frequently Service, Children’s Hospital, Geneva University Hospitals, v v grouped into gain or loss of ion channel function (GOF or Geneva, Switzerland, 7Bahria University Medical and LOF, respectively). This can lead to speciﬁc diseases, e.g. Dental College, Karachi, Pakistan, 8Hirslanden Clinique SCN5A LOF variants to Brugada syndrome and SCN5A La Colline, Geneva, Switzerland, 9Department of Ophthal- GOF variants to Long QT syndrome. Based on 19 known mology, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzer- gene-disease-mechanisms,weinferLOF(521variants) and land, 10Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and GOF (304 variants) of likely pathogenic variants from Metabolism, University hospital of Lausanne, Lausanne, disease phenotypes of variant carriers. Switzerland, 11Biomedical Research Foundation of the We show regional clustering of inferred GOF and LOF Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 12iGE3 Institute of variants, respectively, across the alignment of the entire Genetics and Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, SwitzerlandAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1123 We have studied a Pakistani consanguineous family with Introduction: In the context of serious mental illness two children suffering from progressive visual impairment (SMIs, i.e. schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and schizoaf- and identiﬁed a pathogenic homozygous missense variant fective disorder) medication non-adherence is an important Gly399Val in the 8th transmembrane domain of SLC6A6. andcomplexproblem,forwhichnoeffectivegoldstandard 3D modeling of this variant has indicated that it likely solution exists. Beliefs about illness etiology inﬂuence causes displacement of the Tyr138 (TM3) side chain, behaviours like medication adherence, thus genetic coun- importantfortransportoftaurine.Thetwoaffectedchildren seling(GC),whichhelpspeopleunderstandillnessetiology exhibited very low blood taurine levels (6 and 7µmol/l), and how it relates to recommended treatments could heterozygous parents had intermediate levels (24 and plausibly inﬂuence medication adherence. 34µmol/l),andanunaffectednon-carriersiblinghadnormal Materials and Methods: We recruited 110 people with levels (71µmol/l) (normal values:37–127µmol/l). In-vitro SMI to a study designed to test the hypothesis that GC experiments showed a reduced K and V for taurine would increase adherence to psychotropic medications. M MAX uptake by HEK-293 cells expressing the mutant (Gly399- Participants completed the Brief Adherence Rating Scale Val) SLC6A6 providing only 11–18% of transport (BARS) twice (1month apart) before receiving GC (T1: compared to wild type SLC6A6. Similar results were baseline and T2: immediately pre-GC) and twice after GC obtained with ﬁbroblasts derived from affected individuals. (T3andT4,1and2monthspost-GCrespectively).Weused Clinical evaluation showed that the affected boy has mixed effects logistic regression and validated criteria to complete visual loss, while the affected girl retained some model BARS scores as a binary variable (adherent =Y/N) visual acuity. In addition, both affected siblings have mild over the 4 time-points, and accounted for repeated hypokinetic cardiomyopathy with systolic dysfunction. measures. Slc6a6 knockout in a previously reported mouse model Results: Using 392 observations from 108 participants causes progressive retinal degeneration, cardiomyopathy (schizophrenia n=23, schizoaffective n=14, bipolar n= and very low taurine levels in blood and other tissues. 71), there was a signiﬁcant relationship between the prob- Following ethics approval from the Swiss authorities we ability of adherence and timepoint (p=0.031). Post-hoc have initiated a taurine supplementation to both affected pairwise comparisons with holm-corrected p-values indi- individuals.Clinicalexaminationsperformedafteroneyear cated the probability of adherence was higher at T4 (86%) of taurine supplementation (100mg/kg/day, in 3 doses) compared to T2 (78%) (p=0.04, OR=7.08 (95% CI 1.73 showed normal taurine levels in blood and no progression to 28.99)). of retinal degeneration in the affected girl. Conclusion: Our data suggest that GC can improve We conclude that the supplementation of taurine could adherence to psychotropic medications in individuals with stop the progressive visual loss caused by hypomorphic SMI and that the effect size is large. Further work on the functional defect in the SLC6A6 transporter in humans. impact of GC on medication adherence, as well as mental E. Ranza: None. M. Ansar: None. M. Shetty: None. S. health and economic outcomes is warranted. Supported by A. Paracha: None. M.T. Sarwar: None. I. Kern: None. Pﬁzer Canada. O. Farooq: None. C.J. Pournaras: None. A. Malcles: J. Austin: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, None. F.A. Santoni: None. P. Makrythanasis: None. J. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Ahmed:None.K.Henry:None.S.E.Antonarakis:None. grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Pﬁzer Canada. E. Morris:None.R.Batallones:None.P.Carrion:None.C. Slomp: None. J. Ryan: None. A. Albert: None. C14 Genetic counselling developments C14.2 C14.1 Psychiatric Genetic Counselling: Efﬁcacy of training Effect of genetic counseling on adherence to and implications for practice psychotropic medication in people with serious mental illness K. A. McGhee1, M. Watson2, A. Inglis3, E. Morris3, R. Moldovan4,5, J. C. Austin3 J. Austin1, E. Morris1, R. Batallones1, P. Carrion1, C. Slomp1, J. Ryan1, A. Albert2 1Faculty of Science & Technology, Bournemouth Univer- sity, POOLE, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Clinical Genetics 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Service,UniversityHospitalSouthamptonNHSFoundation 2Women’s Health Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Trust,Southampton,UnitedKingdom,3UniversityofBritish Canada Columbia, Departments of Psychiatry & Medical Genetics,1124 Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Babes Bolyai University, Cluj- British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 6Division of Napoca, Romania, 5University of Manchester, Manchester, Medical Oncology, University of British Columbia, Van- United Kingdom couver, BC, Canada Introduction: Accompanying our growing understanding Introduction: Novel streamlined models for genetic of the complex nature of major psychiatric disorders is a counselling are being developed in response to increasing parallelneedtoassistpatientsandfamiliesinunderstanding demandfor cancergeneticservices. Toimproveaccessand the mechanisms and adapting to the implications of decrease wait times, we are trialing large scale group psychiatric disorders, including risk factors that might genetic counselling in a publicly funded population-based contribute to illness occurrence in families. Psychiatric health care setting. genetic counselling (PGC) is not routinely offered, with a Methods: This initiative compares pre-test group genetic few exceptions. In order to address patients and profes- counselling sessions (up to 50 patients per group) to tradi- sionalsinterestsandneeds,wedesignedandimplementeda tional one-on-one genetic counselling. A secondary objec- training course aimed at equipping them with theoretical tive is to trial genetic testing in unaffected individuals. knowledge and practical skills. The impact of the course Patients are provided the option of either the large group was assessed. armorthetraditionalarmwiththeaimtoenroll400patients Method: Data was collected from ﬁve free training in total. All patients receive a post-test one-on-one results courses involving 125 professionals from 18 countries, session. Eligibility includes unaffected adult individuals between 2015 and 2019. Responses were anonymised. with a family history meeting clinical testing criteria. Questionnaires assessing participants knowledge and self Patients are invited to complete the Genetic Counselling efﬁcacy were ﬁlled out before and after the training. Outcome Scale, a satisfaction survey and the Multi- Results: There was a signiﬁcant increase in both dimensional Impact of Cancer Risk Assessment. knowledge [t(124)=2.05, p<.004)] and self-efﬁcacy [t Results: To date, 344 patients (176 group; 168 one-on- (124)=27.1, p<001] following the course, suggesting one)havebeenenrolledinthetrial.Ofthe174patientswho participantsnotonlygainedknowledgeandskillsduringthe have completed testing, 15 (8.6%) have had a pathogenic/ coursebutalsofeltmoreempoweredtoofferPGCafterthe likely pathogenic variant identiﬁed, most commonly in course. BRCA1/BRCA2. Both the large group arm and traditional Conclusion:Adaptingexistingservicesordesigningnew one-on-one arm have shown high patient satisfaction. ones will take time, requiring further empirical evidence to Conclusion: Emerging data shows that a large scale show the impact and implications of PGC training. Estab- group genetic counselling model is feasible, effective and lishing practice recommendation and standardised training acceptable to patients; this model may be included in a guidelines that include a good understanding of psychiatric multi-prongedapproachtodeliverqualityhereditarycancer disordersandgenomics,aproﬁcientmasteryofcounselling care while balancing the needs of the patient, the provider, skillsandethicalstandardsisclearlytimelyandessentialin and the public medical system. order to ensure quality of future PGC services. Z. Lohn: None. J. Nuk: None. A. Fok: None. M. K.A. McGhee: None. M. Watson: None. A. Inglis: Richardson: None. S. Mung: None. J. Yuson: None. M. None. E. Morris: None. R. Moldovan: None. J.C. Jevon: None. K. Schrader: None. S. Sun: None. Austin: None. C14.4 C14.3 Genetic counselling experience in Iceland of web-based Large scale group genetic counselling: a novel service return of BRCA2 research results delivery model V.Stefansdottir,E.T.Thorolfsdottir,B.B.Gunnarsdottir, Z.Lohn1,2,J.Nuk1,2,A.Fok3,M.Richardson4,S.Mung1, A. Ulfarsdottir, T. Jonsdottir, H. B. Hognason, J. Yuson1, M. Jevon1, K. Schrader1,5, S. Sun1,6 J. J. Jonsson 1BC Cancer Hereditary Cancer Program, Vancouver, BC, Landspitali National University Hospital, Reykjavik, Canada, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Iceland British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Canada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer, Increasingly, genetic results from research are being Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Department of Interdisciplinary returned to study participants, usually with their prior Oncology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, knowledge and consent. deCODE Genetics, a genetic Canada,5DepartmentofMolecularOncology,Universityof research company has genotypic and medical data fromAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1125 more than 160.000 Icelanders. The company opened the Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 8Digital website arfgerd.is, on May 15th 2018 where research Culture, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway participants can query their genotype regarding the Icelandic pathogenic founder variant (PV) BRCA2: Introduction: Nearly 50% of patients with breast cancer c.771_775del5. Positive individuals are advised to contact meet the current Norwegian BRCA1/2-testing criteria, the genetic counselling unit (GC) at Landspitali-National requiring the health care system to develop sustainable University Hospital for conﬁrmatory testing and further solutions for genetic testing and counselling. As the advise. capacity to meet the increased demand for personalized WereporttheexperienceoftheGCuptotheendof2018. counselling is limited, we need new information and Atthetime,44.300individualshadsignedontothewebsite. communication tools for this purpose. Atotalof340(averageage44years),hadreceivedpositive Aim: Design and implement chatbot technology as an results.Weestimatethatatleast40ofthe340hadreceived easy, reliable and safe communication tool to support their results and genetic counselling earlier. A total of 175 individuals undergoing genetic testing for hereditary breast of the 300 remaining had contacted the GC unit by cancer. 31.12.2018. The remaining 125 (40%) had not but the Materials and methods: We are developing and imple- reasonisnotclear.Additionally,118relativescontactedthe menting a new app that can perform chat conversations GCunit.OftheBRCA2positive(n=175),(66)37%knew about genetic testing with patients, using so-called Chatbot about the PV in the family while 95 (54%) did not. Most technology, based on artiﬁcial intelligence. User experi- weregratefulfortheknowledge.Surprisedabouttheresults encesrelatedtotrustandusefulnessoftheChatbotiscentral were46(24%),andnot61(29%).Worried,scared,upsetor tothestudy,andwillbeevaluatedthroughusability testing had difﬁculties coping with the positive results were 49 and focus group interviews. Results from the ﬁrst pilot-test (29%), and 13% not. The increased need for counselling will be presented. and surveillance was signiﬁcant, especially given the small Discussion: The use of Chatbots in health care is emer- size of the units involved. This emphasizes the importance ging, thus the project is expected to be timely. We expect of collaboration and consultation when such projects are thatthisBRCA-Chatbotwillserveasanimportantproof-of- launched. principle concept and public innovation process, to sup- V. Stefansdottir: None. E.T. Thorolfsdottir: None. B. plement and improve traditional genetic counselling. The B. Gunnarsdottir: None. A. Ulfarsdottir: None. T. BRCA-Chatbot may personalize counselling and put the Jonsdottir: None. H.B. Hognason: None. J.J. patients in a proactive role in their search for information. Jonsson: None. We anticipate that the patients using the BRCA-Chatbot will be better prepared for face-to-face consultations in the C14.5 hospital,andthatthetoolwillbeausefulandtrustedaidin The making of the BRCA-chatbot - A patient centered mastering their lives after these consultations. The study is digital counselling tool to support individuals funded by the Norwegian Cancer Society and the Norwe- undergoing genetic testing for hereditary breast and gian Breast Cancer Society. ovarian cancer E. Siglen: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as E. Siglen1,2, H. Høberg-Vetti2,1, M. Tveit Haavind2, grantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;TheNorwegianBreast V. Steen3,1, A. Hamang4, S. Tronsli Nergård5, Cancer Society. H. Høberg-Vetti: None. M. Tveit Haa- N. Strømsvik6, T. Akselberg Hatlebrekke7, H. Skarbø8, vind: None. V. Steen: None. A. Hamang: None. S. C. Bjorvatn1,2,3 Tronsli Nergård: None. N. Strømsvik: None. T. Aksel- bergHatlebrekke:None.H.Skarbø:None.C.Bjorvatn: 1Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 2Western Norway Familial consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Cancer Center, Bergen, Norway, 3Department of Clinical received); Modest; The Norwegian Breast Cancer Society. Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 4Depart- ment of Medical Genetics, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim C14.6 University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, 5Department of myKinMatters intervention: developing an online MedicalGenetics,OsloUniversityHospital,Oslo,Norway, intervention to support patients in communicating 6FamilialCancerCenter,DepartmentofMedicalGenetics, relevant health information to at-risk relatives University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 7Helse Vest IKT, Department for business development, L. M. Ballard, A. Fenwick, A. M. Lucassen1126 University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands Introduction: Genetic testing can reveal implications for individuals as well as their relatives. Though patients Introduction: In cancer genome diagnostics analysis of understand the importance of sharing information, espe- next-generation sequencing (NGS) gene panel data is cially for those with risks of preventable and treatable focused on the subset of genes with a proven association diseases, many relatives do not receive this in a timely to the phenotype that prompted referral. In this study we fashion. Interventions which make it clear for patients investigated which pathogenic variants are detected as whom to inform, how to inform, and what information to secondaryﬁndingswhengenesproventobeassociatedwith convey, are urgently needed. other familial cancer types were analyzed as well. Methods: We employed a Person Based Approach to Materials and Methods: We have analyzed NGS panel ensuretheinterventionwasgroundedintheexperiencesand data of 2,090 patients referred for genome diagnostics for needs of patients attending a genomic medicine service. familialcancer.WeanalyzedSNVs,IndelsandCNVsinall This involved: a meta-synthesis of previous interventions; 73 or 85 genes from the targeted panel for all patients, synthesizing communication barriers/facilitators; inter- regardless of the cancer type prompting referral. Also we viewing 27 participants from the UK’s 100,000 Genomes screened 1,326 people from the general Dutch population Project; and Systems Thinking to map inﬂuences on the for pathogenic variants in the 85 cancer genes of our target behaviour. targeted panel. Results:Weidentiﬁedseveralinterventionstoaidfamily Results: In 10.2% of patients we detected a variant communicationofgeneticresults,thoughmostwereofpoor matching their families’ cancer phenotype. We detected quality, ineffective, and lacked theoretical underpinning. secondary ﬁndings in 3.9% of patients. In the general Interview data showed that (a) many participants had not population3.2%ofindividualscarriedapathogenicvariant told many or any relatives they were undergoing genomic in one of the panel genes. Limiting secondary ﬁndings to testing, and (b) that they would like help to communicate the genes listed by the EGAPP, ACMG and SFMPP their results to relatives. These results, along with barriers, societies as targets for screening and reporting 0.3, 0.7 and facilitators, and inﬂuences, were used to create the inter- 1.4% actionable secondary ﬁndings would have been vention content. reported,respectivelyinpatients.Forthegeneralpopulation Conclusion: myKinMatters could provide a useful addi- these numbers are 0.1, 0.4 and 1.5%. tional tool for clinicians to direct patients towards. As Conclusion: Over 1 in 30 persons in the Dutch popula- genomicmedicinebecomesevermorewidelyavailable,we tion carries a pathogenic variant in a cancer predisposing hope such online interventions will facilitate at least some gene. This ﬁnding gives an estimate on what to expect if communication with relatives that otherwise might not screening for those genes would be offered as extension of happen. Relatives can then make informed decisions about diagnostic testing. their own testing, surveillance, or preventative options. L.F.Johansson:None.K.K.vanDijk-Bos:None.A.H. Future research involves piloting the intervention. Fellow- van der Hout: None. A.P. Knopperts: None. B. Leegte: ship: Health Education England None. J. ter Beest: None. Y.J. Vos: None. C.C. van L.M. Ballard: None. A. Fenwick: None. A.M. Diemen: None. K. Kok: None. I.M. van Langen: None. Lucassen: None. M.A. Swertz: None. C. Wijmenga: None. R.K. Weersma:None.R.J.Sinke:None.B.Sikkema-Raddatz: None. R.H. Sijmons: None. H. Westers: None. C16 Personalized and predictive medicine C16.2 C16.1 European Landscape of CDH1 germline mutations: a What if we would turn a diagnostic multi-cancer gene newtooltounderstandhereditarydiffusegastriccancer panel into a screening tool? (HDGC) L.F.Johansson,K.K.vanDijk-Bos,A.H.vanderHout, J.GarcíaPeláez1,A.Monteiro1,L.Sousa1,S.Castedo1,2,3, A. P. Knopperts, B. Leegte, J. ter Beest, Y. J. Vos, L. Garrido2, G. Michils4, V. Bours5,6, R. de Putter7, C. C. van Diemen, K. Kok, I. M. van Langen, L. Golmard8, M. Blanluet8, C. Colas8, P. Benusiglio9, M. A. Swertz, C. Wijmenga, R. K. Weersma, R. J. Sinke, S. Aretz10,11, I. Spier10,11, R. Hüneburg11,12, L. Gieldon13, B. Sikkema-Raddatz, R. H. Sijmons, H. Westers E. Schröck13, E. Holinski-Feder14,15, V. Steinke14,15, D. Calistri16, G. Tedaldi16, G. Nadia-Ranzani17, M. Genuardi18,19, C. Silveira20, M. Krajc21, A. Blatnik21,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1127 S.Novakovic21,A.Patiño-García22,J.Soto23,C.Lázaro24, ofMedicalGenetics.NationalInstituteforHealthResearch G. Capellá24, J. Brunet-Vidal25, J. Balmaña26, Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, University of E. Domínguez-Garrido27, M. Ligtenberg28, E. Fewings29, Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 30MRC Cancer R. Fitzgerald30, E. Woodward31,32, G. Evans33, Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, University of H. Hanson34, K. Lagerstedt-Robinson35, S. Bajalica- Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 31NW Genomic Lagercrantz35, M. Teixeira36, N. Hoogerbrugge28, Laboratoryhub,ManchesterCentreforGenomicMedicine, M. Tischkowitz29, C. Oliveira1,3 Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 32Division of Evolution and 1IPATIMUP/i3s, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro Hospitalar Uni- Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty versitárioS.João,Porto,Portugal,3FacultyofMedicineof ofBiology,MedicineandHealth,UniversityofManchester, the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4Centre for Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Labora- United Kingdom, 33Manchester Centre for Genomic tory of Human Genetics, GIGA-Institute, University of Medicine, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Liège, Liège, Belgium, 6Center of Genetics, University Manchester, United Kingdom, 34St Georges NHS Founda- Hospital (CHU), Liège, Belgium, 7Clinical Genetics tion Trust, London, United Kingdom, 35Department of department, University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, MolecularMedicineandSurgery,KarolinskaInstitutet and 8Genetic Department, Institut Curie, Paris, France, DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,KarolinskaUnivHospital, 9Département de Génétique, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, Stockholm, Sweden, 36IPO, Instituto Português de Oncolo- France, 10Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, gia do Porto, Porto, Portugal Bonn, Germany, 11National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 12Depart- CDH1 germline mutations/deletions cause Hereditary ment of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Bonn, Diffuse Gastric Cancer-HDGC that predisposes for early- Bonn, Germany, 13Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizi- onsetdiffusegastriccancer-DGCandlobularbreastcancer- nische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, Technische LBC. Carriers of Pathogenic/Likely pathogenic-P/LP var- Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 14Medizinische iants undergo intensive screening and/or risk-reduction Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der gastrectomy/mastectomy. Herein, we explored the pheno- Universität, Munich, Germany, 15MGZ - Medizinisch typic landscape of a European-cohort of CDH1-mutation- Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 16Biosciences carriers to demonstrate the value of genetic-testing driven Laboratory, Istituto Scientiﬁco Romagnolo per lo Studio e by phenotype and clinical-criteria. laCuradeiTumori(IRST)IRCCS,Meldola(Forlì-Cesena), We collected and curated variant classiﬁcation, clinical- Italy,17DepartmentofBiologyandBiotechnology“Lazzaro criteria and phenotypes from 700 European CDH1-muta- Spallanzani”, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 18Fonda- tion-carriers of 10 European Countries belonging to ERN- zione Policlinico Universitario “A. Gemelli” IRCCS, UOC GENTURIS. We excluded those presenting 3′-UTR, 5′- di Genetica Medica, Rome, Italy, 19Istituto di Medicina UTR, intronic variants outside splicing-regions and Genomica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, unclassiﬁabletodate.Wefocusedon389probandsbearing Italy, 20Genomed Diagnósticos de Medicina Molecular, S. 214 different CDH1 variants. A., Lisboa, Portugal, 21Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, In our cohort, 137 families fulﬁlled HDGC, 31 had bor- DepartmentofMolecularDiagnostics,Ljubljana,Slovenia, derline-HDGC-criteria, 221 lacked clinical criteria. While 22Clinical Genetics Unit and CIMA LAB Diagnostics. 85% of HDGC/borderline-HDGC cases carried large- University Clinic of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 23Molecu- rearrangements or truncating variants, 90% of those lack- lar Genetics Laboratory, Elche University Hospital, Elche, ing criteria carried missense mutations. Based on ACMG Spain, 24Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of classiﬁcation,155familiescarriedP/LPactionable-variants: Oncology, IDIBELL and CIBERONC, Barcelona, Spain, 76% HDGC; 15% borderline-HDGC, and 10% lacking 25Hereditary Cancer Programme, Catalan Institute of criteria. Large-rearrangements occurred in 20% of HDGC/ Oncology (ICO), Bellvitge Institute for Biomedical borderline-HDGC families. Families bearing rearrange- Research (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet Del Llobregat, Barce- ments either presented DGC only or LBC only, while lona and Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBGI), Girona, familiesbearingpoint-mutationsmoreoftendisplayedDGC Spain,26HospitalValld’HebronandUniversitatAutonoma only. The most common CDH1 germline mutation in Eur- de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 27Molecular Diagnostics ope is Del_Ex1-2 found in 18 families from 6 different Laboratory, Fundación Rioja Salud, Logroño, Spain, countries.TwentyP/LPvariantsarerecurrentin90families 28Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University across Europe. Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life This is the ﬁrst family-driven analysis performed in a Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 29Academic Laboratory curated-cohort of CDH1-mutation-carriers. It demonstrates1128 the value of genetic-testing driven by phenotype and clin- retrospectively calculated by simulating an individual to be ical-criteria,highlightingrearrangementsasgeneticcausein atanageofoneyearandunaffected(forcases),i.e.,lifetime 20% of families fulﬁlling/borderline HDGC, one of which risk at birth, given the family history. is the most frequent in European HDGC families. Results:ThemeansPRSforbreastcancercaseswas0.65 Funding: SolveRD/H2020-Grant/Ref. 779257; ERN- (SD=0.88, 95%CI=[0.62–0.69]). We found a signiﬁcant GENTURIS; Portuguese FCT/FEDER-COMPETE-POCI- association between sPRS and breast cancer, OR=1.70, 01-0145-FEDER-030164 95%CI[1.67–1.72], p-value<2e-16. Including the sPRS to J. García Peláez: None. A. Monteiro: None. L. Sousa: BOADICEA family based risk prediction would have None. S. Castedo: None. L. Garrido: None. G. Michils: changed screeningrecommendationsin26,33,and36%of None. V. Bours: None. R. de Putter: None. L. Golmard: the cases according to breast cancer screening guidelines None.M.Blanluet:None.C.Colas:None.P.Benusiglio: from the USA, United Kingdom and the Netherlands None. S. Aretz: None. I. Spier: None. R. Hüneburg: (NCCN,NICE,andIKNL),respectively.Forthepopulation None. L. Gieldon: None. E. Schröck: None. E. Holinski- controls, lacking family data, this was 5, 12 and 5% Feder: None. V. Steinke: None. D. Calistri: None. G. respectively. Tedaldi: None. G. Nadia-Ranzani: None. M. Genuardi: Conclusion: Our results conﬁrm the association between None. C. Silveira: None. M. Krajc: None. A. Blatnik: breastcancerandthe313-SNPPRSintheDutchpopulation None. S. Novakovic: None. A. Patiño-García: None. J. andsupporttheapplicationofthePRSinriskpredictionfor Soto: None. C. Lázaro: None. G. Capellá: None. J. genetically unexplained breast cancer families. Brunet-Vidal: None. J. Balmaña: None. E. Domínguez- I.M.M. Lakeman: None. M. Rodriguez-Girondo: Garrido:None.M.Ligtenberg:None.E.Fewings:None. None.A.Lee:None.A.Hollestelle:None.M.K.Schmidt: R. Fitzgerald: None. E. Woodward: None. G. Evans: None. C.J. van Asperen: None. P. Devilee: None. None.H.Hanson:None.K.Lagerstedt-Robinson:None. S. Bajalica-Lagercrantz: None. M. Teixeira: None. N. C16.4 Hoogerbrugge: None. M. Tischkowitz: None. C. Highpolygenicriskcontributestoanearlydiseaseonset Oliveira: None. in common cardiometabolic diseases and cancers C16.3 N. J. Mars1, J. Koskela1, P. Ripatti1, T. Kiiskinen1, Clinical applicability of the 313-SNP based polygenic A.S.Havulinna1,2,L.Groop1,3,A.Palotie1,4,5,M.Daly1,4,5, risk score for breast cancer risk prediction V. Salomaa2, E. Widén1, S. Ripatti1,6,7 I. M. M. Lakeman1, M. Rodriguez-Girondo1, A. Lee2, 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, HiLIFE, Uni- A. Hollestelle3, M. K. Schmidt4, C. J. van Asperen1, versityofHelsinki,Helsinki,Finland,2NationalInstitutefor P. Devilee1, HEBON consortium Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University Diabetes Centre, Malmö, 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, Sweden, 4Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Mas- 2University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, sachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 3Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5StanleyCenterforPsychiatricResearch,BroadInstituteof 4Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United Introduction: Breast cancer associated SNPs are presently States, 7Department of Public Health, University of not used to guide clinical management. We explored Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland whether a genetic test that incorporates a 313-SNP-based PolygenicRiskScore(PRS)isclinicallymeaningfulinnon- While polygenic risk scores (PRS) have shown promise in BRCA1/2 Dutch breast cancer families. risk stratiﬁcation in common diseases, evidence about their MaterialsandMethods:Weincluded2186breastcancer ability to predict future cases alongside clinical risk factors cases from 1907 Dutch non-BRCA1/2 breast cancer famil- is scarce. Leveraging up to 23 years of prospective data ies. The 313-SNP PRS was calculated and standardised to fromthepopulation-basedFINRISKstudy(n=21,951),we 3479 Dutch population controls (sPRS). The association of built genome-wide PRSs with >6 million variants for the sPRS with breast cancer was estimated using a logistic coronaryheartdisease(CHD),atrialﬁbrillation(AF),type2 regression model, adjusted for family history. Standard diabetes (T2D), breast cancer, and prostate cancer and errors were corrected to account for relatedness of indivi- testedtheir1)associationswithincidentcases,2)impacton duals. Using the recently extended BOADICEA model, age at disease onset, and 3) impact in prediction alongside with and without individual PRS, lifetime risks were established clinical risk factors.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1129 A high PRS (>97.5th percentile) was strongly associated recessive conditions. Removing biallelic hemochromatosis with higher disease incidence (hazard ratios 3.73–38.29 for variants, the positive rate is 9.8%. Limiting to those topvsbottom2.5%,p-values0.0003–6.65x10−22).Thisrisk reportable per ACMG59 criteria (i.e. excluding MUTYH increasetranslatedintoearlierdiseaseonsetby9to29years heterozygotes, APC I1307K carriers, and variants in non- in the high-risk group. For example, for T2D the age at ACMG59 genes, like CHEK2 and PALB2), positive rate is onset in the high-risk group was 29.0 years earlier than in 3.7%. Of all positives, only 5.5% would have qualiﬁed for the low-risk group. publicly-funded genetic testing. Of 297 early-onset CHD (age <55) cases, the clinical Conclusion: A substantial rate of clinically actionable ASCVD risk calculator for cardiovascular diseases identi- geneticﬁndings isseenina“healthy”Canadian population ﬁed only 13.1% as high risk (≥7.5%); high (>80th percen- who would not otherwise access genetic testing. Long- tile) CHD PRS was the only risk factor in 31.0% and a itudinal data are needed to determine whether proactive familial hypercholesterolemia mutation was present in genomic screening leads to improved health outcomes, and 0.3%. Excluding age as a risk factor, the PRS had a higher whether the cost-beneﬁt balance warrants consideration of effectforCHDriskthandidtheroutinelymeasuredclinical population screening within the public healthcare system. risk factors combined, with similar ﬁndings for AF H.J. Andrighetti: A. Employment (full or part-time); and T2D. Signiﬁcant; Medcan. J.Y.J. Gu: A. Employment (full or In summary, high polygenic risk predicts future disease part-time);Signiﬁcant;Medcan.A.Hazell:A.Employment and is strongly associated with premature disease onset. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Medcan. J. Furnival: A. N.J. Mars: None. J. Koskela: None. P. Ripatti: None. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Medcan. M. T. Kiiskinen: None. A.S. Havulinna: None. L. Groop: Zarb: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; None. A. Palotie: None. M. Daly: None. V. Salomaa: Medcan. L. Velsher: A. Employment (full or part-time); None. E. Widén: None. S. Ripatti: None. Signiﬁcant; Medcan. C16.5 C16.6 Clinicallyactionableresultsfromamulti-genescreening Population genomic screening of all young adults in a panel in an unselected “healthy” Canadian population health-care system: a cost-effectiveness analysis H. J. Andrighetti1, J. Y. J. Gu1, A. Hazell1, J. Furnival1, L. Zhang1, Y. Bao1,2, M. Riaz1, J. Tiller1, D. Liew1, M. Zarb1, L. Velsher1,2 X. Zhuang2, D. J. Amor3, A. Huq4, L. Petelin5, M. Nelson6, P. J. James7, I. Winship7, J. J. McNeil1, 1Medcan, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2North York General P. Lacaze1 Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada 1Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Introduction: Integrating genomic screening into primary School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash care may help individualize medical management, ideally University,Melbourne,Australia,2SchoolofPublicHealth, leading to early disease detection and reduced mortality. Nantong University, Nantong, China, 3Victorian Clinical Data are limited regarding prevalence and penetrance of Genetics Services; Murdoch Children’s Research Institute; “rare” actionable genetic conditions in the unselected DepartmentofPaediatrics,UniversityofMelbourne;Royal (“healthy”) population. We aim to quantify the prevalence Children’s Hospital, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, of clinically actionable variants in a healthy Canadian 4epartment of Genomic Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospi- population. tal; Department of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Methods: Since September 2017, patients of Medcan, a University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 5Familial preventivewellnessclinicinToronto,mayoptin(self-pay) Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Mel- to Invitae’s proactive screening panel of 130+ genes, with bourne, Australia, 6Discipline of General Practice, Uni- pre- and post-test genetic counselling. Gene list is derived versity of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia, 7Department of from ACMG59 recommendations with additional clinically GenomicMedicine,RoyalMelbourneHospital;Department actionable genes, primarily hereditary cancer and cardiac of Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, University of predispositions. Those positive for pathogenic or likely Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia pathogenicvariantsarereferredforadditionalscreeningand management per existing clinical guidelines. Background: Genomic screening of the adult population Results: Data collection is ongoing, anticipating 1700+ has signiﬁcant potential to prevent disease. Some single- patients by June 2019. Data from our ﬁrst 1300 patients payer or state-funded healthcare systems are already reveal a positive rate of 14.2%, excluding carriers of considering offering population genomic testing to all1130 members. Yet the necessary cost-effectiveness analysis of 3Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, population screening for multiple genetic conditions con- 4Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore currently has been lacking. Aim: To forecast the combined impact and cost- Introduction: Being the 6th most common and 2nd most effectiveness of offering population genomic screening to fatal cancer in the world, prognosis for hepatocellular all young adults in a single-payer healthcare system. carcinoma (HCC) patients is poor. It is thus important to Methods: We modelled screening of 2,688,192 indivi- better understand its molecular pathogenesis to identify duals, all adults aged 18–25yo in Australia, for pathogenic actionable targets. Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) variants in BRCA1/BRCA2/MLH1/MSH2 genes, and con- have recently been shown to be de-regulated in various current preconception carrier screening for cystic ﬁbrosis cancers,includingHCC.WehypothesizethatlncRNAscan (CF), spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and fragile X syn- serveasmasterregulatorstode-regulategeneexpressionin drome (FXS), at 71% testing uptake, using per-test costs cancer pathways to modulate the prognosis of HCC ranging AUD$200-$1,200 (~€125-$760). Investment costs patients. included genetic counseling, surveillance and interventions Materials and Methods: The proﬁle of lncRNAs and (reimbursed only) for at-risk individuals/couples. Cost- mRNAs were determined in the tumor and adjacent non- effectiveness was deﬁned below AUD$50,000/DALY tumorous tissues of HCC patients. Pearson Correlation (Disability-Adjusted Life Year) prevented, using an incre- analysiswasemployedtoidentifymRNAsthatarestrongly mental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER), compared with tar- correlated with lncRNAs. These lncRNAs and their corre- geted testing. Outcomes were cancer incidence/mortality, lated mRNAs were then evaluated for association with disease cases, and treatment costs reduced. clinical phenotypes (e.g.tumorgrade).lncRNA-mRNAco- Results: Population screening would reduce mutation- expressionnetworkanalyseswasthenperformedtoidentify attributablecancersby28·8%,cancerdeathsby31·2%,and oncogenic or tumor suppressive Potential Master lncRNA CF/SMA/FXS cases by 24·8%, compared with targeted regulator(s) (PMR) which is signiﬁcantly correlated with testing. Assuming AUD$400 per-test (~€250), investment themostmRNAs whichsharesimilarclinical phenotypeas would be between 4–5 times higher than current expendi- the PMR. ture. However, screening would lead to substantial savings Results: We identiﬁed a total of 37 co-expression net- in medical costs and DALYs prevented, at a highly cost- workswith 453clinically associated lncRNA-mRNA pairs. effective ICER (AUD$4,038/DALY). At AUD$200 per- Anotablenetworkcomprises5upregulatedPMRlncRNAs test, screening would approach cost-saving for the health with 91 correlated genes which are signiﬁcantly associated system (ICER=AUD$22/DALY). with tumor grade. Genes in this network are enriched in Conclusion: Preventive genomic screening in early cell-cycle function. Another signiﬁcant network comprises adulthood would be highly cost-effective, potentially cost- 2 downregulated lncRNAs signiﬁcantly correlated with 8 saving, in a single-payer healthcare system. But a range of mainly metallothionein protein family genes and are sig- ethical and service-related issues exist. niﬁcantly associated with tumor invasion. L. Zhang: None. Y. Bao: None. M. Riaz: None. J. Conclusion:ThesePMRlncRNAsthushavepotentialto Tiller: None. D. Liew: None. X. Zhuang: None. D.J. serve as actionable targets for therapeutic intervention. Amor:None.A.Huq:None.L.Petelin:None.M.Nelson: C.G. Lee: None. L.J. Lim: None. J. Yu: None. H.C. None. P.J. James: None. I. Winship: None. J.J. McNeil: Toh:None.P.K.H.Chow:None.A.Y.F.Chung:None.L. None. P. Lacaze: None. L.P.J. Ooi: None. S.S. Chong: None. C17.2 C17 Genetic mechanisms in cancer Germline DGCR8 p.E518K alters miRNA proﬁles and predisposes to thyroid goiter and schwannomatosis C17.1 Identiﬁcation of lncRNA-mRNA network(s) that B.Rivera1,J.Nadaf1,M.Apellaniz-Ruiz1,S.Fahiminiya1, modulate prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma A. Saskin1, A. Chong1, S. Sharma1, R. Wagener2, patients T. Revil1, Z. Harra1, N. Hamel1, N. Sabbaghian1, K. Muchantef1, C. Thomas1, M. Hébert-Blouin1, C. G. Lee1,2,3, L. J. Lim1, J. Yu2, H. C. Toh2, P. K. H. A. Bassenden1, O. Mete3, R. Paschke4, M. Pusztaszeri1, Chow4, A. Y. F. Chung4, L. L. P. J. Ooi4, S. S. Chong1 W. Paulus5, A. Berghuis1, J. Ragoussis1, R. Siebert2, S. Albrecht1, R. Turcotte1, M. Hasselblatt2, M. Fabian1, 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, W. Foulkes1 2National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1131 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Ulm Uni- R. Barbosa-Matos1,2, P. Oliveira1,2, B. Mesquita1,2, versity, Ulm, Germany, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, A. André1,2, H. Pinheiro1,2, J. Carvalho1,2, J. Senz3, ON,Canada,4UniversityofCalgary,Calgary,AB,Canada, P. Kaurah4, R. Bordeira-Carriço5,2, J. Bessa5,2, 5Munster University, Munster, Germany D. Huntsman3,6,7, A. Ferro1,2, C. Oliveira1,2,8 Micro-(mi)RNAbiogenesisutilizesDROSHAandDGCR8, 1IPATIMUP, Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immu- which cleave primary miRNA transcripts into miRNA nology, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2i3S,Institute precursors, aswell asDICER1, which processes precursors for Investigation and Innovation in Health, University of into mature miRNAs. DICER1 is the only known miRNA Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Centre for Translational and biogenesis component associated with an inherited tumor Applied Genomics, British Columbia Cancer Agency, syndrome, which features multinodular goiter (MNG) and Vancouver,BC,Canada,4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics, rare pediatric-onset lesions, including Wilms tumor (WT). University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Whole exome sequencing in six affected and three non- 5IBMC,InstituteforMolecularandCellBiology,University affected individuals from a kindred with early-onset MNG of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 6Genetic Pathology Evaluation identiﬁed a germline missense variant in DGCR8, Centre, University of British Columbia and Vancouver c.1552G>A;p.E518K, perfectly segregating with the dis- GeneralHospital,Vancouver,BC,Canada,7Departmentof ease. Five of the six affected individuals also have Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British schwannomatosis and one developed a choroid plexus Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 8Department of papilloma (CPP). The variant has never been described in Pathology, Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, the germline, it is a recurrent somatic mutation in WT and Porto, Portugal has been reported in differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC). We performed a genome wide screen for copy number Introduction: Genomic structural variations in cis-regula- alterations in the schwannomas, MNG, DTC, Wilms tumor tory elements (CREs) can affect gene regulatory networks and CPP tumors heterozygous for p.E518K, and found a leading to disease development. E-Cadherin loss-of-func- copy number loss of Chrom22q, leading to loss of tion (LoF) correlates with metastatic spread in most heterozygosityatthep.E518Klocusinallsamples.DGCR8 epithelial cancers (somatic), early-onset gastric and breast lies on chromosome 22q, immediately adjacent to the three cancer (germline EOGC/EOBC) and cleft-lip/palate, how- best known schwannoma genes: LZTR1, SMARCB1 and ever the underlying mechanisms are vastly unknown. NF2. DGCR8-c.1552G>A;p.E518K. MicroRNA and RNA CDH1 70Kb-intron 2 full-deletion was shown to induce sequencing show that this variant disrupts pri-miRNA to E-cadherin LoF, therefore we hypothesized that structural pre-miRNAprocessingandimpactslevelsofcanonicaland variation at CDH1 intronic CREs could further explain non-canonical miRNAs, leading to overexpression of CDH1-associated disease phenotypes. effectors involved in schwannoma development. In sum- Materials and Methods: Bioinformatics analysis of mary,weidentiﬁedDGCR8asthecauseofwhatappearsto genomic/epigenomic regulatory features revealed several be an autosomal dominant mendelian tumor susceptibility CDH1 CREs, which were sequenced in the germline of syndrome: familial MNG with schwannomatosis. Funded: EOGC/EOBC patients (n=250). Using CRISPR/Cas9, CIHR FDN-148390 (WDF). The ALSF and the Mia-Neri selectedCREswereedited,genotypedandcharacterizedfor Foundation (BR) CDH1/E-cadherin expression in GC cell lines using qRT- B. Rivera: None. J. Nadaf: None. M. Apellaniz-Ruiz: PCR, allele-speciﬁc expression assay, western-blotting and None. S. Fahiminiya: None. A. Saskin: None. A. Chong: immunocytochemistry. CREs enhancer activity was asses- None. S. Sharma: None. R. Wagener: None. T. Revil: sed in zebraﬁsh embryos. None.Z.Harra:None.N.Hamel:None.N.Sabbaghian: Results:AllCREsharborednovelSNVsand/orCNVsin None. K. Muchantef: None. C. Thomas: None. M. EOGC/EOBC patients. Homozygous editing of two CREs Hébert-Blouin: None. A. Bassenden: None. O. Mete: ledtoCDH1RNAandproteinexpressionloss inGCcells. None. R. Paschke: None. M. Pusztaszeri: None. W. CDH1 LoF was caused by inversions and/or deletions Paulus:None.A.Berghuis:None.J.Ragoussis:None.R. affecting CRE sequences. In vivo, both CREs displayed Siebert:None.S.Albrecht:None.R.Turcotte:None.M. tissue-speciﬁc enhancer activity, particularly in the mouth Hasselblatt: None. M. Fabian: None. W. Foulkes: None. and/or midline of Zebraﬁsh embryos, areas where CDH1 plays a crucial role during development. C17.3 Conclusion:Withourcombineddry/wet-labapproaches, Structural variations at CDH1 intronic cis-regulatory we narrowed down regions within CDH1 intronic regions elements cause CDH1/E-cadherin loss of function able to control CDH1/E-Cadherin expression and function. We further unveiled that both deletions and inversions of1132 CREs may lead to E-cadherin LoF, suggesting novel unambiguously,asnullallelesandclassiﬁedaspathogenic. mechanisms worth screening in CDH1-associated disease However, a fraction of such variants could maintain phenotypes. function through their impact on RNA splicing. To test Funding: 1) Solve-RD project received funding from this hypothesis, we used the alternatively spliced BRCA2 European Union’s Horizon2020 research and innovation exon12(E12)asamodel,sinceitsin-frameskippingleads programme, grant agreement Nº:779257;2)FEDER/COM- toa potentiallyfunctional protein. AllBRCA2 E12 variants PETE,“POCI-01-0145-FEDER-030164”. corresponding to putative null variants or predicted to alter R. Barbosa-Matos: None. P. Oliveira: None. B. Mes- splicing (n=39) were selected from databases and quita: None. A. André: None. H. Pinheiro: None. J. characterized for their impact on splicing in minigene Carvalho: None. J. Senz: None. P. Kaurah: None. R. assays and in patient lymphoblastoid cell lines, when Bordeira-Carriço: None. J. Bessa: None. D. Huntsman: available.Moreover,aselectionofvariantswasanalyzedin None. A. Ferro: None. C. Oliveira: None. mouse embryonic stem cell-based functional assays. Using these complementary approaches, we demonstrate that a C17.4 subset of variants, including nonsense variants, (i) induces Skipping nonsense to maintain function: the paradigm in-frame E12 skipping through the modiﬁcation of splice of BRCA2 exon 12 sitesorregulatoryelementsand,asaconsequence,(ii)leads to the production of an internally deleted but partially L. Meulemans1, R. Mesman2, S. M. Caputo3,4, functionalprotein. Thesedataprovideevidencefortheﬁrst S. Krieger1,5,6, M. Guillaud-Bataille7, V. Caux- time in a cancer predisposition gene that variant-induced Moncoutier3,8, M. Léone9, N. Boutry-Kryza9, perturbationofsplicingcan,atleastpartially,rescuetheloss J. Sokolowska10, H. Tubeuf1,11, O. Soukarieh1, of function of certain presumed null variants. Additional F. Révillion12, C. Delnatte13, F. Bonnet-Dorion14, studies are required to estimate cancer-risk associated with V. Guibert13, F. Rousselet10, V. Bourdon15, S. Lizard10, these hypomorphic variants. The existence of such rescue P. Vilquin16, C. Grout1, A. Drouet1, F. M. G. R. Calléja2, mechanism may question the pathogenic classiﬁcation of L. Golmard3, H. Vrieling2, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet3,8, certainnullvariantsidentiﬁedindisease-causinggenes.Our C. Houdayer1,3,17, T. Frebourg1,17, M. Vreeswijk2, ﬁndings emphasize the importance of RNA-based analyses A. Martins1, P. Gaildrat1 and assessment of protein function to ensure accurate variant classiﬁcation, a paramount step in genomic 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, Normandy medicine. Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, L.Meulemans:None.R.Mesman:None.S.M.Caputo: France,2DepartmentofHumanGenetics,LeidenUniversity None. S. Krieger: None. M. Guillaud-Bataille: None. V. Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Caux-Moncoutier: None. M. Léone: None. N. Boutry- Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 4Paris Sciences Kryza:None.J.Sokolowska:None.H.Tubeuf:None.O. Lettres Research University, Paris, France, 5Laboratory of Soukarieh: None. F. Révillion: None. C. Delnatte: None. Cancer Biology and Genetics, Centre François Baclesse, F.Bonnet-Dorion:None.V.Guibert:None.F.Rousselet: Caen, France, 6Normandie University, UNICAEN, Caen, None. V. Bourdon: None. S. Lizard: None. P. Vilquin: France, 7Department of Genetics, Institut Gustave Roussy, None. C. Grout: None. A. Drouet: None. F.M.G.R. Villejuif, France, 8Inserm U830, University Paris Des- Calléja: None. L. Golmard: None. H. Vrieling: None. D. cartes, Paris, France, 9Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. C. Houdayer: None. T. Fre- France, 10Department of Genetics, Nancy University bourg: None. M. Vreeswijk: None. A. Martins: None. P. Hospital,Nancy,France,11InteractiveBiosoftware,Rouen, Gaildrat: None. France, 12Unit of Human Molecular Oncology, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France, 13Department of Genetics, C17.5 Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France, 14Inserm Genome-wide association study identiﬁes pathways U916, Department of Genetics, Institut Bergonié, Bor- associated with cervical cancer risk deaux, France, 15Department of Genetics, Institut Paoli- Calmettes, Marseille, France, 16Department of Pathology D. Ramachandran1, J. Dennis2, L. Fachal2, and Oncobiology, Montpellier University Hospital, Mon- P. Schürmann1, I. Runnebaum3, M. Dürst3, tpellier, France, 17Department of Genetics, Rouen Uni- P. Hillemanns1, D. F. Easton2,4, T. Dörk1 versity Hospital, Rouen, France 1Gynaecology Research Unit, Hannover Medical School, Germline nonsense and canonical splice site variants Hannover, Germany, 2University of Cambridge, Centre for identiﬁedindisease-causinggenesaregenerallyconsidered, Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of PublicAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1133 Health and Primary Care, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Inca. Balearic Islands Health Investigation Institute 3Department of Gynecology, Jena University Hospital, (IDISBA) Oncologicas (CNIO), Inca, Spain Friedrich -Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany, 4Uni- versity of Cambridge, Centre for Cancer Genetic Epide- Type I gastric neuroendocrine tumors (gNETs) arise from miology, Department of Oncology, Cambridge, United hypergastrinemia in patients with autoimmune chronic Kingdom atrophic gastritis. According to the classical model, the gastric H+/K+ATPase was the causative autoantigen Cervical cancer is triggered by human papillomavirus recognized by CD4+ T cells in chronic autoimmune infection but only a minority of HPV infected women scenario that produces the parietal cell atrophy, which showprogresstowardsinvasivedisease.Geneticfactorsand correlateswithgastricachlorhydriaandincreasestheriskfor pathways underlying cervical cancer are largely unknown. gNETs andgastric neoplasms.However, themechanism by We performed a genome-wide association study to unravel which the inﬂammatory response correlates with IL-17 low-risk cervical cancer susceptibility variants in the secretionandPCatrophyisnotclearlydeﬁned.Recently,we German population. A series of 375 patients with invasive foundthattheATP4Ap.R703CmutationimpairedPCfunction cervical cancer and 866 healthy controls were directly andnormalgastricacidiﬁcation,whichdrovefamilialgNET. genotypedfor~570,000variantsontheIlluminaOncoArray Our group constructed a knock-in mouse model for the BeadChip. After genotype calling, QC, PCA, and imputa- ATP4A mutation, which at one year recapitulated human tion, we used PLINK to analyze 21,326,396 variants for premalignant conditions and achlorhydria. We have mon- their association with cervical cancer. We did not identify itored the mouse model for one more year and have served single variants at the level of genome-wide signiﬁcance. us to better understand the relation between impaired However, a gene-based analysis using MAGMA through capability to export protons across the plasma membrane mapping SNPs to 19,213 protein-coding genes indicated a of PCs and tumor progression. The ATP4Ap.R703C mutation signiﬁcant role for OSGIN1 (p=1.12x10E-8) encoding a drives gastric achlorhydria, but also deregulates the acid- p53-regulated tumor suppressor. Pathway analyses using basebalancewithinPCs,affectingmitochondrialbiogenesis. MAGMAdetected anenrichmentfor theGOterm“Protein Mitochondrial malfunction activates ROS signaling, which kinases” (p=0.02). To look deeper into possible pathways triggerscaspase-3-mediatedapoptosis.Therefore,mitochon- involved, the SNPs were ﬁltered more stringently using dria alteration would initiate the chronic inﬂammation and ANNOVAR positional mapping, eQTL, 3D chromatin does not involve an IL-17 secretion-mediated mechanism interaction mapping and common features of chromatin ratherthantheclassicalexplanation.Inaddition,byrestoring regulation, and 180 prioritized genes were tested gastric euchlorhydria, mitochondrial function is recovered. using GENE2FUNC. We found signiﬁcant enrichment Finally, infection by H. pylori promotes destabilization of for genes residing in a breast cancer 12q amplicon (p= themitochondriaofthePCs byamechanismsimilartothat 1.9x10E-14) and for genes that had emerged from a described for APT4Ap.R703C carriers, which suggests that previousGWAS for “Response toplatinum-basedneoadju- restoring gastric euchlorhydria might be indicated for the vant chemotherapy in cervical cancer” (p=3.6x10E-18). treatment of these patients. Takentogether,ourﬁndingsstronglysupportthehypothesis O. Calvete: None. R. Marra: None. J. Reyes: None. J. that geneticfactorsplay asigniﬁcant role intheetiology of Benitez: None. invasive cervical cancer. Funded by the Bruno and Helene Jöster Foundation. D. Ramachandran: None. J. Dennis: None. L. Fachal: C18 Therapies None. P. Schürmann: None. I. Runnebaum: None. M. Dürst:None.P.Hillemanns:None.D.F.Easton:None.T. C18.1 Dörk: None. AAVHSC15 Packaging Human Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Results in Sustained in vivo Correction of C17.6 Phenylketonuria Following a Single IV Administration Mitochondrial damage due to a genetic origin explains in the Murine Model the autoimmune response that leads to gastric neuroendocrine tumors S. S. Ahmed, M. Wang, J. L. Ellsworth, O. L. Francone, D. Faulkner, A. Sengooba, H. Rubin, S. Dollive, O. Calvete1, R. Marra1, J. Reyes2, J. Benitez1 D. Lamppu, T. Wright, D. Kinch, A. Seymour 1Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncologicas (CNIO), Homology Medicines Inc, Bedford, MA, United States Madrid,Spain, 2Centro Nacional deHospital Comarcalde1134 Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a rare hepatic metabolic disease C18.2 caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase Viral vector therapy as a therapeutic option for (PAH) gene causing elevated levels of phenylalanine that peripheral nerve disease associated with metachromatic lead to neurocognitive defects. Current treatments do not leukodystrophy address the underlying genetic defect. A suite of Clade F adeno-associated viruses was isolated from human periph- S. K. Newman, T. Rupar eral blood CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells (AAVHSCs) and show high hepatic afﬁnity and potential for gene University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada therapy.HerewedescribetheabilityofAAVHSC-mediated genetherapytodurablycorrectthediseasephenotypeinthe Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is an autosomal Pahenu2 mouse model of severe PKU. recessive neurodegenerative disease caused by the deﬁ- GenetherapyvectorscontainingahumanPAHtransgene ciency of the lysosomal enzyme arylsulfatase A (ARSA) driven by ubiquitous or liver-speciﬁc promoters packaged leading to accumulation of sulfatide, causing degeneration in AAVHSC15 were tested in Pahenu2 mice. Vectors were of myelin in the CNS and PNS. Currently, no treatment administered in a single intravenous dose followed by exists. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) periodic assessment of serum phenylalanine and tyrosine providesmodestbeneﬁtinpre-symptomaticpatientsbutthis (byproduct of phenylalanine metabolism). At study termi- wellshortofarealistictreatment.Genetransferexperiments nation, livers were processed to measure vector genomes, using lenti viral vectors have shown success in decreasing mRNA and PAH enzyme activity. sulfatide accumulation in the CNS of ARSA−/− mouse Oneweekpost-doseofaninitialresearchvectorusingan models; however, this treatment has shown no success in ubiquitous promoter, phenylalanine levels decreased from targeting the peripheral nervous system. In the present 2000μMto<150μM(p<0.0001)andweresustainedoutto study, we compared single stranded (ss) AAV serotypes- >28 weeks (p<0.0001). To enhance long-term durability AAV-9 and AAVrh10, packaged with a codon-optimized with decreased doses, vector sequences in AAVHSC15- ARSA gene or eGFP. The vectors were delivered via tail PAH were optimized using different liver-speciﬁc pro- vein injection for PNS distribution to ARSA−/− mice at moters. We selected a vector, HMI-102, that decreased 6 months of age at a dose of 2x1010 vector grams per serum phenylalanine and increased serum tyrosine at ten- mouse. The gene transfer facilitated both GFP bio fold lower doses compared to the initial research vector. A distribution (measured via PCR and histopathology) and durableresponsewasseenoutto48weeks,consistent with ARSAbiodistribution(measuredviaHPLCandPCR)along the model’s lifespan. These data demonstrate that a single with detectable enzymatic activity throughout the sciatic dose of HMI-102 resulted in long-term correction of PKU nerve, spinal cord and liver. Histopathological analysis of in Pahenu2 mice on protein-containing chow. the spinal cord and sciatic nerve show presence of GFP S.S. Ahmed: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- indicating positive vector transfection, with AAV-9 show- niﬁcant; Homology Medicines Inc. M. Wang: A. ing the most evident GFP presence. In summary, we Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Homology demonstrate for the ﬁrst time that tail vein injection of Medicines Inc. J.L. Ellsworth: A. Employment (full or AAV-9 and AAVrh10 to an ARSA-/- mouse as a treatment part-time); Signiﬁcant; Homology Medicines Inc. O.L. strategyforMLDissuccessfullyabletotargetthePNSand Francone: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; signiﬁcantly decrease sulfatide accumulation in PNS Homology Medicines Inc. D. Faulkner: A. Employment associated tissue which has a direct therapeutic beneﬁt. (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;HomologyMedicinesInc.A. S.K. Newman: None. T. Rupar: None. Sengooba: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Homology Medicines Inc. H. Rubin: A. Employment (full C18.3 or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Homology Medicines Inc. S. Safe and efﬁcient personalised TALEN- and CRISPR/ Dollive: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Cas9-based gene correction therapy for β-thalassaemia Homology Medicines Inc. D. Lamppu: A. Employment by non-viral delivery to primary cells (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;HomologyMedicinesInc.T. Wright: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; P. Patsalis1,2, G. Turchiano3,4, P. Papasavva1,5, Homology Medicines Inc. D. Kinch: A. Employment (full M.Romito3,4,C.Loucari1,5,C.Stephanou1,2,S.Christou6, or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Homology Medicines Inc. A. M. Sitarou6, C. Mussolino3,4, T. I. Cornu3,4, Seymour: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; M. N. Antoniou2, C. W. Lederer1,5, T. Cathomen3,4, Homology Medicines Inc. M. Kleanthous1,5Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1135 1Molecular Genetics of Thalassemia Department, The C18.4 Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Therapeutic gene editing for Hutchinson-Gilford Cyprus, 2Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, progeria syndrome King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Insti- tute for Transfusion Medicine and Gene Therapy, Medical D. Whisenant1, K. Lim2, G. Revêchon1, M. Eriksson1, Center – University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, J. S. Kim2 4Center for Chronic Immunodeﬁciency, Medical Center – UniversityofFreiburg,Freiburg,Germany,5CyprusSchool 1Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, of Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6Thalassemia 2Institute for Basic Science, Seoul, Korea, Republic of Centre, Cyprus Ministry of Health, Nicosia, Cyprus Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is a rare Introduction: Homology-directed repair dependent gene premature ageing disorder with clinical manifestations therapies can suffer from low efﬁciencies unsuitable for including severe growth retardation, skeletal dysplasia, clinicalapplication.Thisstudydemonstratesthatcorrection alopecia, scleroderma-like skin changes, loss of subcuta- of the common HBBIVSI-110(G>A) β-thalassemia splice muta- neous adipose tissue and loss of vascular smooth muscle tion may be achieved by efﬁcient non-homologous end cells. More than 90% of the cases are caused by a de novo joining-mediated disruption of the aberrant regulatory pointmutationinexon11oftheLMNAgene(LMNAc.1824 elements (DARE) created by the mutation. C>T,p.G608G).Thismutationactivatesacrypticsplicesite MaterialandMethods:DAREcorrectionwasevaluated within the LMNA gene and results in a production of a + in patient-derived CD34 cells by nucleofection of in vitro truncated unprocessed lamin A protein called progerin. In synthesized TALEN mRNAs and of CRISPR/Cas9 RNA- this study, we use a conditional humanized mouse model guided nuclease (RGN) ribonucleoprotein complexes. with tissue-speciﬁc expression of the common HGPS Correction efﬁciency was assessed as restoration of correct mutation in keratinocytes of the skin, as well as patient- splicing at RNA (RT-qPCR), protein (HPLC) and cell- derivedcellcultures.Forprecisesinglebaseediting,weare morphology (differential counts) levels, and off-target using a CRISPR-Cas9 adenine editor (ABE) in order to activity by targeted deep sequencing. Results: Proof-of- reverse the c.1824C>T point mutation by adeno-associated + principle was achieved in patient-derived CD34 cells for virus(AAV)delivery.CellcultureexperimentswithBcell- bothnucleases,reachinghighbulkdisruptionefﬁcienciesof derived lymphoblastoid cells from a HGPS patient show a upto90%.Restorationofcorrectsplicingestablishedupto signiﬁcant reduction of the c.1824 C>T mutation with a 63 and 77% of normal β-globin synthesis for TALENs and correction efﬁciency up to 76% and a reduction of the RGN, respectively. RGN- off-target activity for the c.1824 C>T mutant allele frequency down to12% by ABE RNF219_AS1 gene was abolished at high on-target correc- treatment. In ongoing experiments we are assessing the tion,byevaluatingstrategicmismatchesandemployingthe AAVdeliverysystemaswellastheABEefﬁciencyinvivo high-ﬁdelity AltR_HiFi_Cas9. Across primary samples, in order to improve the HGPS phenotype. Using this DARE achieved signiﬁcant correctionofthetwohallmarks method we have the possibility to target the disease on a of β-thalassaemia pathology, β-globin synthesis and late- genetic level before complex downstream mechanisms are stage erythroid differentiation. taking place, with the future aim of a highly precise and Conclusion:Ourstudyshowsthatmutation-speciﬁcgene efﬁcient gene editing approach for clinical use in HGPS therapy by DARE is highly efﬁcient and holds great patients. potential for many human diseases caused by aberrant D. Whisenant: None. K. Lim: None. G. Revêchon: regulatorymotifs.Highlevelofcorrectionachievedwithout None. M. Eriksson: None. J.S. Kim: None. enrichment,lowlevelofoff-targetinganduseofvirus-and + DNA-free delivery in patient-derived CD34 cells in this C18.5 study indicate biosafety and efﬁciency suitable for direct High efﬁciency of CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing of clinical translation. T158Mhot spot mutation in MECP2 gene P. Patsalis: None. G. Turchiano: None. P. Papasavva: None. M. Romito: None. C. Loucari: None. C. Stepha- S. Croci1, S. Daga1, K. Capitani1,2, F. Donati2, nou: None. S. Christou: None. M. Sitarou: None. C. M. L. Carriero1, E. Frullanti1, V. Lamacchia1,3, R. Tita3, Mussolino: None. T.I. Cornu: None. M.N. Antoniou: A. Giliberti1, E. Benetti4, S. Furini4, C. Lo Rizzo3, None. C.W. Lederer: None. T. Cathomen: None. M. A. M. Pinto3, A. Auricchio5, S. G. Conticello2, Kleanthous: None. A. Renieri1,3, I. Meloni11136 1MedicalGenetics,UniversityofSiena,Siena,Italy,2Mole- 1Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, IRCCS, cular Mechanism of Oncogenesis, ITT Core Research Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy, 2Bam- Laboratory (CRL), Florence, Italy, 3Genetica Medica, bino Gesù Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 3Divi- Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, sion of Medical Genetics, Department of Biomedical 4Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Sciences and Human Oncology, University of Bari “Aldo Siena, Siena, Italy, 5TIGEM (Telethon Institute of Genetics Moro”, Bari, Italy, 4Vascular Anomalies Center, Boston and Medicine), Naples, Italy Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5ArQule, Inc., Burlington, MA, United States Rett syndrome, due to MECP2 mutations, is the second most common cause of intellectual disability in girls. Introduction: The PI3K/AKT signaling pathway is con- Effectivetherapiesarenotyetavailable.Wereportherethe stitutively active in a number of human malignancies and successfulgeneeditingofoneofthemostcommonhotspot overgrowth syndromes, including PROS and PS. ARQ 092 mutations, c.473C>T-p.T158M, using CRISPR/Cas9 in is an oral, allosteric, selective pan-AKT inhibitor that patient-derived cells. Atwo-plasmidsystem was developed potently inhibits both active and inactive forms of AKT. It suitable for AAVdelivery.The Reporterplasmidexpresses is currently being evaluated in oncology and overgrowth the mutation-speciﬁc sgRNA and the Donor DNA, which syndromes clinical trials. contains the template for the correction. The Cas9 plasmid Materials and Methods: Safety, tolerability and pre- encodes for the Cas9 ﬂanked by two targets for self- liminaryefﬁcacyofARQ092havebeentestedin15pts(8 cleavage of the Cas9 coding sequence, in order to avoid F and 7 M; age range 2.6–41.1), 14 with PIK3CA and 1 long-termexpression.Wethenselected4unrelatedpatients with AKT1 mutations. Assessments include physical with the same de novo hot spot mutation. Starting from examination, vital signs, Karnofsky/Lansky performance patient-derivedﬁbroblasts,weobtainedinducedPluripotent scale (K/LPS), laboratory tests imaging, pain and patient- Stem Cells (iPSCs) and iPSC-derived neuronal precursors reportedoutcomes.AllptsreceiveARQ092atadoseof15 and neurons. NGS analysis of FACS-isolated cells from mg/m2 QD with an option to increase to 25 mg/m2. All 15 three independent patients demonstrated an exceptionally pts are ongoing and have been on treatment between 3 and high editing efﬁciency, ranging from 60 to 80% of HDR 22 months. with a very low rate (1%) of insertions/deletions. Further- Results: Treatment-emergent adverse events (AE) were more, a good AAV9 co-infection was demonstrated in observed in 15 pts (100%), all were grade ≤2. Drug-related neurons differentiated from iPSCs. To further validate AEs were reported in 2 pts: hyperinsulinemia (1 pt); sto- efﬁcacy and safety, in vivo experiments on the Mecp2- matitisandneutropenia(1pt).ThemostcommonAEswere T158M mouse are ongoing. The described approach is pyrexia (60%); cough (47%); abdominal pain (33%); diar- patented at University of Siena and ISPRO (application n. rhea,vomiting(each,27%);upperrespiratoryinfectionand 102018000020230). rhinitis (each, 20%). No pts were discontinued or dose S. Croci: None. S. Daga: None. K. Capitani: None. F. reduced due toxicity. Radiologically-conﬁrmed stability of Donati: None. M.L. Carriero: None. E. Frullanti: None. lesions and signiﬁcant improvement in K/LPS, movement V. Lamacchia: None. R. Tita: None. A. Giliberti: None. ﬂuidity, fatigability and pain relief were noted by parents E.Benetti:None.S.Furini:None.C.LoRizzo:None.A. and clinicians in most pts. M. Pinto: None. A. Auricchio: None. S.G. Conticello: Conclusion: ARQ092 has demonstrated manageable None. A. Renieri: None. I. Meloni: None. toxicity and preliminary efﬁcacy in PROS/PS pts. Description of the pivotal study design, updated safety and C18.6 efﬁcacy data will be presented. An open-label, phase 1/2 study of miransertib (ARQ G. Zampino: None. C. Leoni: None. P.S. Buonuomo: 092), an oral pan-AKT inhibitor, in patients (pts) with None. I. Rana: None. R. Onesimo: None. M. Mac- PIK3CA-related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS) and chiaiolo: None. A. Diociaiuti: None. S. Livadiotti: None. Proteus Syndrome (PS): study design and preliminary N. Resta: None. Y. Sheldon: None. R. Savage: A. results(NCT03094832) Employment (full or part-time); Modest; ArQule. M. Lamar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; G. Zampino1, C. Leoni1, P. S. Buonuomo2, I. Rana2, ArQule. K. Tith: A. Employment (full or part-time); R. Onesimo1, M. Macchiaiolo2, A. Diociaiuti2, Modest;ArQule.J.Kazakin:A.Employment(fullorpart- S. Livadiotti2, N. Resta3, Y. Sheldon4, R. Savage5, time); Modest; ArQule. B. Schwartz5: A. Employment M. Lamar5, K. Tith5, J. Kazakin5, B. Schwartz55, (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; ArQule. D.M. Adams: D. M. Adams4, A. Bartuli2 None. A. Bartuli: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1137 C19 From genome architecture to RNA biology None. C. Shaw: None. P. Hastings: None. J.R. Lupski: None. C19.1 Phasing of complex genomic rearrangements reveal C19.2 involvement of both homologous chromosomes in pre- Cytogenetically detected chromosomal inversions are and post-zigotic events rarely formed by ectopic recombination between inverted repeats C. M. Carvalho, C. Beck, Z. Akdemir, F. Sedlazeck, Q.Meng,J.Hu,H.Doddapaneni,E.Chen,S.Jhangiani, M. Pettersson1, C. M. Grochowski2, J. Eisfeldt1,3, A. English, D. Muzni, R. Gibbs, C. Shaw, P. Hastings, J. Wincent1, J. R. Lupski2,4, J. Ottosson5, L. Lovmar5, J. R. Lupski J. Gacic6, E. Syk Lundberg1,7, D. Nilsson1,3,7, C. M. B. Carvalho2, A. Lindstrand1,7 Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States 1Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Baylor College Introduction: Complex genomic rearrangements (CGRs) of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 3Science for Life are deﬁned as structural variants consisting of two or more Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Texas Children’s Hospi- breakpoint junctions and can contribute to asmuch as 30% tal, Houston, TX, United States, 5Sahlgrenska University of pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) in genomic Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 6Linköping University disorders.CGRsarehypothesizedtoresultofanerrorprone Hospital, Linköping, Sweden, 7Karolinska University Hos- mechanismduringrepairofasingleended,doublestranded pital, Stockholm, Sweden DNA that utilizes a poorly processive DNA polymerase resulting in multiple fork collapses and template switching Cytogenetically detected chromosomal inversions are gen- (TS). Majority of CGRs studied show TS within the same erally assumed to be copy number and phenotypically chromosome. neutral events. Early cytogenetic studies of inversions Objectives: to gain mechanistic insights into the forma- suggested that non-allelic homologous recombination tion of CGRs. (NAHR) between inverted repeats could be the underlying Material and Methods: we studied six trios on which mechanism of formation, and the prevalence of NAHR- probands were referred with congenital malformations car- mediated inversions has been estimated to 67%. rying de novo autosomal CGRs. Trios were studied by Here we used short-read whole-genome sequencing combined array comparative genomic hybridization (WGS) on 16 unique, cytogenetically detected chromoso- (aCGH), SNP array, targeted 7Mb Illumina short read, malinversionsandwereabletocharacterize10/16(62.5%) PacBio or Nanopore long-read sequencing. on the nucleotide level. We found that two seemingly Results: This combined approach enabled to resolve recurrent inversions were identical by descent and follow- breakpoint junctions in 6/8 cases. Phasing was obtained by upanalysisconﬁrmedthattheunrelatedcarrierssharedboth B-allelefrequencyanalysiswithintheCNVprovidedbythe common and more rare haplotypes on these chromosomes. triojoint-calling.Surprisingly,ineachofthecaseshere,the Outofthe10inversionsthatwecharacterizedindetail,nine ampliﬁedsegmentsareconstituted byamixofcopies from showed little to no microhomology in the breakpoint both homologues rather than originated from only one junctions, similar to what is commonly seen in reciprocal ancestral chromosome. Two informative cases indicated translocations.Onlyoneinversionwasmediatedbyrepeats that the CGRs were formed pre-zygotically, whereas one (Alu-Alu), and had duplications that had been formed con- case was formed post-zygotic. comitantly to the inversion, also through Alu-Alu interac- Conclusion: CNV segments originated from two distinct tions. Finally, the gene disruption frequency was similar to chromosomes contributing to formation of the same rear- the frequency obtained for balanced translocations (6/25 rangement strongly support a TS model of generating breakpoints, 24%). In summary, the study indicates that CGRs.TheresultsshownherepredictthatCGRareformed short-read WGS can detect a substantial fraction of chro- by replication-based mechanisms, and can have further mosomal inversions and resolves the breakpoints on the implications for sporadic disease, cancer and human gene nucleotide level. Finally, NAHR is likely not the major evolution. mechanismunderlying theformationofnon-recurrentlarge C.M. Carvalho: None. C. Beck: None. Z. Akdemir: chromosomal inversions. None. F. Sedlazeck: None. Q. Meng: None. J. Hu: None. Grants: The Royal Physiogtaphic Society in Lund H. Doddapaneni: None. E. Chen: None. S. Jhangiani: (Nilsson-Ehle donations), Karolinska Institutet funding for None. A. English: None. D. Muzni: None. R. Gibbs: doctoral education, SciLifeLab national sequencing1138 grant, the Swedish Research Council, the Stockholm signal screening, alleles were de novo assembled by tiling CountyCouncil,theUlfLundahlmemoryfundthroughthe ﬁbers based on matching colors and distances between the Swedish Brain Foundation probes. M. Pettersson: None. C.M. Grochowski: None. J. Results:LCR22haplotypingin24individualsuncovered Eisfeldt: None. J. Wincent: None. J.R. Lupski: None. J. the presence of 26 different alleles for LCR22-A. These Ottosson: None. L. Lovmar: None. J. Gacic: None. E. alleles range in size between 200kb and 2Mb. Subunits Syk Lundberg: None. D. Nilsson: None. C.M.B. Car- cluster in larger substructures, which vary in orientation, valho: None. A. Lindstrand: None. copy number, and presence. In addition, the rearranged allelesof22q11.2DSpatientsweremappedinninefamilies. C19.3 Differencesinthelocationofthedeletionbreakpointswere Optical mapping of 22q11.2 low copy repeats reveals identiﬁed. Findings were validated by Bionano optical structural hypervariability mapping. Conclusion: Forthe ﬁrst time, the overall architecture of L. Vervoort1, W. Demaerel1, Y. Mostovoy2, F. Yilmaz3,4, the 22q11.2 locus was successfully unraveled. The LCR22 S. Pastor5,6, M. Hestand7,8, A. Swillen1, E. Vergaelen1, hypervariability implicates interindividual gene dosage E. A. Geiger4, C. R. Coughlin4, S. K. Chow2, differences. As a consequence, copy number variations D. McDonald-McGinn5,6, B. E. Morrow9, P. Kwok2, could inﬂuence gene expression proﬁles. Additionally, M. Xiao10, B. S. Emmanuel5,6, T. H. Shaikh4, mapped rearrangement breakpoints vary among patients. J. R. Vermeesch1 We hypothesize this variability could provide a genetic explanation for some of the phenotypic variability char- 1Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, acterizing the 22q11.2DS. Belgium,2CardiovascularResearchInstitute,UCSFSchool Funding: FWO GOE1117N, Jerome Lejeune of Medicine, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Depart- project 1665 ment of Integrative Biology, University of Colorado L.Vervoort:None.W.Demaerel:None.Y.Mostovoy: Denver, Denver, CO, United States, 4Department of None. F. Yilmaz: None. S. Pastor: None. M. Hestand: Pediatrics, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, None. A. Swillen: None. E. Vergaelen: None. E.A. Gei- UniversityofColoradoDenver,Aurora,CO,UnitedStates, ger: None. C.R. Coughlin: None. S.K. Chow: None. D. 5Division of Human Genetics, Children’s Hospital of McDonald-McGinn: None. B.E. Morrow: None. P. Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6Depart- Kwok: None. M. Xiao: None. B.S. Emmanuel: None. T. ment of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the H. Shaikh: None. J.R. Vermeesch: None. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States,7DivisionofHumanGenetics,CincinnatiChildren’s C19.4 Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, Submicroscopic 13q32.1 deletions causing congenital 8Department of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children’s microcoria modify the regulatory landscape of Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, neighboring genes by enhancer adoption 9Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,Bronx,NY,UnitedStates,10SchoolofBiomedical L. Fares Taie1, B. Nedelec1, P. David1, C. Angée1, Engineering, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, United S. Crippa2, B. Passet3, J. Vilotte3, N. Chassaing4, States J. Kaplan1, C. Kostic5, P. Calvas4, J. Rozet1 Introduction: The 22q11.2 locus is structurally one of the 1INSTITUTE IMAGINE, Paris, France, 2University of most complex areas of the human genome due to the Lausanne,Lausanne,Switzerland,3UMR1313-INRA,Paris, presenceoflowcopyrepeats(LCR22s).Despitethenewest France, 4Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Purpan, sequencing technologies, the human reference genome Toulouse, France, 5University of Lausanne, Lausanne, hg38 still comprises three unresolved sequence gaps in France LCR22-A.Therecurrentdeletion/duplicationbreakpointsof 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2DS) are embedded Introduction:Previously,wereported13q32.1deletionsas within these repeats, but the exact location remains the cause of congenital microcoria (MCOR), a rare unclariﬁed. dominant disorder of iris development characterized by Materials and Methods: We performed an LCR22 absent dilator muscle. GPR180 and TGDS were consis- de novo assembly using ﬁber-FISH. Long DNA molecules tently altered, but the loss of either one individually does were extracted from cells, stretched onto coverslips, and notcauseMCOR.Thegenomicarchitectureofthe13q32.1 hybridized with LCR22 speciﬁc probes. Following manual region is consistent with the existence of adjacent TADs,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1139 the boundary of which could be altered by MCOR context ofthe frequency of such mutations and the level of deletions. wild-type transcripts generated from the mutation alleles, Methods: We generated mouse models carrying the remain unknown. Herein, combining data derived from a minimal MCOR deletion (35KB) or three smaller deletions meta-analysis of 45 informative disease-causing 5′SS within this region encompassing binding sites for the GT>GC mutations (from 42 genes) and a cell culture- insulator CTCF, respectively and analyzed their morpho- based full-length gene splicing assay of 103 5′SS GT>GC logical, histological and molecular phenotypes. mutations (from 30 genes), we estimate that ~15–18% of Results: Heterozygous animals carrying the 35 KB thecanonicalGT5′SSsarecapableofgeneratingbetween1 deletion display moderate reduction in pupil diameter and and 84% normal transcripts as a consequence of the ectopicexpressionofaneighboringgeneintheirisstarting substitution of GT by GC. We further demonstrate that during embryonic life, before the formation of the dilator the canonical 5′SSs whose substitutions of GT by GC muscle, through to adulthood. Smaller deletions encom- generated normal transcripts show stronger complementar- passing putative insulator sites do not cause ectopic ity to the 5′ end of U1 snRNA than those sites whose expression of the neighboring gene. This suggests that the substitutionsofGTbyGCdidnotleadtothegenerationof 35KB MCOR deletion may lead to the adoption of a nor- normal transcripts. We also observed a correlation between mally distant enhancer by the deregulated gene, due to the generation of wild-type transcripts and a milder than reduced distance between the two, instead of a TAD- expected clinical phenotype but found that none of the boundary disruption. 4C sequencing to characterize the available splicing prediction tools were able to accurately chromosomal interactions generated by the 35KB deletion predict the functional impact of 5′SS GT>GC mutations. and the generation of mice lacking an excellent candidate Our ﬁndings imply that 5′SS GT>GC mutations may not enhancer are ongoing, to assess this hypothesis. invariably cause human disease but should also help to Conclusion: Here, we show that MCOR deletions alter improve our understanding of the evolutionary processes thegenomicarchitectureof13q32.1andgeneexpressionin that accompanied GT>GC subtype switching of U2-type thedevelopingiris,changingthefateoftheprogenitorsthat introns in mammals. should give rise to the dilator muscle. J.H. Lin: None. X.Y. Tang: None. A. Boulling: None. L. Fares Taie: None. B. Nedelec: None. P. David: W.B. Zou: None. E. Masson: None. Y. Fichou: None. L. None.C.Angée:None.S.Crippa:None.B.Passet:None. Raud: None. M. Le Tertre: None. S.J. Deng: None. I. J. Vilotte: None. N. Chassaing: None. J. Kaplan: None. Berlivet: None. C. Ka: None. M. Mort: None. M. Hay- C. Kostic: None. P. Calvas: None. J. Rozet: None. den: None. G. Le Gac: None. D.N. Cooper: None. Z.S. Li: None. C. Férec: None. Z. Liao: None. J.M. C19.5 Chen: None. First estimation of the scale of canonical 5′ splice site GT>GCmutationsgeneratingwild-typetranscriptsand C19.6 their medical genetic implications Novel regulatory elements control translation of key stress response factors linked to disease J. H. Lin1,2,3, X. Y. Tang2,3, A. Boulling1, W. B. Zou2,3, E. Masson1,4, Y. Fichou1, L. Raud1, M. Le Tertre1, J. Rendleman1, V. Hronová2, D. Sultanov1, S. Maity1, S. J. Deng2,3, I. Berlivet1, C. Ka1, M. Mort5, M. Hayden5, A. Lei1, M. Hatzoglou3, L. Valášek2, C. Vogel1 G. Le Gac1, D. N. Cooper5, Z. S. Li2, C. Férec1,4, Z. Liao2,3, J. M. Chen1 1New York University, New York, NY, United States, 2Institute of Microbiology ASCR, Prague, Czech Republic, 1EFS,UnivBrest,Inserm,UMR1078,GGB,Brest,France, 3Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United 2Department of Gastroenterology, Changhai Hospital, the States Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China, 3Shanghai Institute of Pancreatic Diseases, Shanghai, Introduction: The accumulation of misfolded proteins in China, 4CHU Brest, Service de Génétique, Brest, France, the endoplasmic reticulum, known as ER stress, is a 5Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff hallmarkofmanydiseasesincludingcancer.TocombatER University, Cardiff, United Kingdom stress, cells employ the Unfolded Protein Response, which includestranslationinductionofstressresponsefactors.For It has long been known that canonical 5′ splice site (5′SS) a subset this induction is achieved through upstream open GT>GCmutationsmaybecompatiblewithnormalsplicing. readingframesinthe5′UTR,howevermechanismsarenot However, to date, the true scale of canonical 5′SS GT>GC well understood for many others. mutations generating wild-type transcripts, both in the1140 Material and Methods: We performed ribosome proﬁl- possible, enabling us to evaluate its contribution to ing in human cells undergoing ER stress and searched 5′ neuromuscular disorders. UTRs for ribosome-enriched motifs. Using reporters, we We investigated a cohort of 10,782 unrelated individuals tested signiﬁcant motifs for their impact on protein synth- with a range of neuromuscular disorders using high- esis under stress. To further characterize their function, we coverage next-generation sequencing (NGS) with simulta- used the CRISPR/Cas9 system to engineer mutations in neous sequence and exon-level CNV detection for subsets cell lines. of 232 genes related to these disorders to better understand Results: We identiﬁed a short motif in the 5′ UTR with diagnostic yield, mutation spectrum, and complexities of signiﬁcant enrichment in ribosomal occupancy; reporter variant interpretation. assays conﬁrmed the functionality of this sequence. This Deﬁnitive diagnosis was obtained in 2,484 individuals new element is common among transcriptional regulators, (23%). Diagnostic yields ranged from 10% for dystonia to including a key factor of the Unfolded Protein Response, 53% for spinal muscular atrophy or dystrophinopathy. As and correlates with reduced translation of downstream expected,94.8%ofpathogenicCNVswerefoundinSMN1, coding regions, suggesting a translation inhibitory element. PMP22, and DMD, however, the remaining pathogenic Importantly, cross-referencing with The Cancer Genome CNVs were found across 31 other genes and intragenic Atlas revealed overlap with cancer risk variants. CNVs accounted for as much as 20% of all clinically sig- Conclusion: The 5′ UTR is a critical component of a niﬁcant results. Separately, we evaluated the rate of gene; however, much is unknown regarding its role in reclassiﬁcation of variants of uncertain signiﬁcance and expression, particularly through translation. Traditional observed that up to 15% of such variants in some genes cancer exome studies miss mutations in undescribed reg- were reclassiﬁed to likely pathogenic or pathogenic. ulatory regions in the UTR. The element we have dis- Our data represent one of the largest studies demon- covered notonly hasthepotentialtorevisealong-standing strating the utility of NGS-based genetic testing in neuro- model in the ﬁeld of translation regulation, but also high- muscular disorders and the important contribution of exon- lights novel mutations that may contribute to oncogenesis. level CNV analysis to inform clinical management of J. Rendleman: None. V. Hronová: None. D. Sultanov: individuals with these disorders. None. S. Maity: None. A. Lei: None. M. Hatzoglou: E. Decker: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- None. L. Valášek: None. C. Vogel: None. niﬁcant; Invitae. T.L. Winder: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. C.A. Tan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. S. Klemm: A. C20 Neuromuscular and neurodegenerative disorders Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. H. White: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; C20.1 Invitae. J.M. Westbrook: A. Employment (full or part- Large clinical cohort undergoing simultaneous single time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. J. Wang: A. Employment (full nucleotide and copy number variant analysis reveals or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. A. Entezam: A. broad mutation spectrum and high diagnostic yield for Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. R. neuromuscular disorders Truty: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. McNally: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Sig- E. Decker1, T. L. Winder1, C. A. Tan1, S. Klemm1, niﬁcant;Invitae.S.Aradhya:A.Employment(fullorpart- H. White1, J. M. Westbrook1, J. Wang1, A. Entezam1, time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. R. Truty1, E. McNally2, S. Aradhya1 C20.2 1Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2Center for MutationsintheGolgiproteinGBF1asanovelcauseof Genomic Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, distal hereditary motor neuropathy United States N. Mendoza Ferreira1,2,3, M. Karakaya1,2,3, I. Hölker1,2,3, Molecular genetic testing for hereditary neuromuscular D. Beijer4,5, B. Schrank6, K. Brigatti7, C. Gonzaga- disorders has been increasingly used to conﬁrm clinical Jauregui8, E. Puffenberger7, G. Wunderlich9, P. De diagnoses, identify subtype, and inform management and Jonghe4,5,10, T. Deconinck4,5, K. Strauss7, J. Baets4,5,10, prognosis. These important uses of genetic testing have B. Wirth1,2,3 been corroborated in several small studies, but large data setsareneededtofullyilluminatetheutilityandcomplexity 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, of genetic analysis. Moreover, universal high-resolution Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Molecular Medicine analysisofintrageniccopynumbervariation(CNV)isnow Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Center for Rare DiseasesAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1141 Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Neurogenetics Group, Cen- Puffenberger: None. G. Wunderlich: None. P. De ter for Molecular Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, Jonghe:None.T.Deconinck: None.K.Strauss:None.J. 5Laboratory of Neuromuscular Pathology, Institute Born- Baets: None. B. Wirth: None. Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 6DKD HELIOS Kliniken, Department of Neurology, Wiesbaden, C20.3 Germany, 7Clinic for Special Children, Strasburg, PA, Recessivemutationsinmuscle-speciﬁcisoformsofFXR1 United States, 8Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron cause congenital multi-minicore myopathy Pharmaceuticals Inc, Tarrytown, NY, United States, 9Department of Neurology, University Hospital Cologne, E. Fernández-Núñez1, M. Estañ1,2, M. S. Zaki3, Cologne, Germany, 10Neuromuscular Reference Centre, M. Esteban4, S. Donkervoort5, C. Hawkins6, Department of Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, J.A.Caparros-Martin1,2,7,D.Saade5,Y.Hu5,V.Bolduc5, Antwerp, Belgium K. Chao8, J. Nevado9, A. Lamuedra10, R. Largo10, G. Herrero-Beaumont10, J. Regadera11, C. Hernández- Introduction: Distal hereditary motor neuropathies Chico2,12, E. F. Tizzano2,13, V. Martinez-Glez2,9, (dHMN) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous J. J. Carvajal14, R. Zong15, D. Nelson15, G. A. Otaify3, diseases characterized by motor neuron (MN) degeneration S. Temtamy3, M. Aglan3, M. Issa3, C. G. Bönnemann5, and progressive muscle atrophy. For 50% of individuals P. Lapunzina2,9, G. Yoon16,17, V. L. Ruiz-Perez1,2 with dHMN, the disease-causing gene is unknown. Materials and Methods: WES and WGS were used to 1Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas “Alberto Sols” identify the monogenic causes of dHMN. Patient-derived (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain, 2CIBER de enfermedades ﬁbroblasts were used to assess the functional consequence raras (CIBERER-ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 3Department of of candidate variants on splicing, protein abundance, and Clinical Genetics. Human Genetics and Genome Research subcellular localization. Division, Centre of Excellence of Human Genetics, Results: We identiﬁed putative pathogenic variants in National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 4Departamento GBF1 (Golgi Brefeldin-A-Resistant Guanine Nucleotide de Anatomía Patológica. Hospital Universitario La Paz- Exchange Factor-1) in four unrelated families with domi- IdiPaz-UAM, Madrid, Spain, 5Neuromuscular and Neuro- nant or sporadic dHMN. Other known dHMN-implicated genetic Disorders of Childhood Section, National Institute genes were excluded. De novo or inherited mutations ofNeurologicalDisordersandStroke,NationalInstitutesof (c.2945G>A, p.Cys982Tyr; c.3410C>T, p.Ala1137Val; Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 6Division of Pathol- c.4382G>A, p.Arg1461Gln; and c.3524G>A, p.Trp1175*) ogy, Department of Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The were associated with slowly progressive distal muscle HospitalforSick Children,UniversityofToronto,Toronto, weakness and atrophy accompanied by musculoskeletal ON,Canada,7SchollofPharmacyandBiomedicalSciences deformities (scoliosis, pes cavus, hammer toes). Electro- and Curtin Health Innovation Research Institute, Curtin physiological studies consistently revealed axonal motor University, Perth, Australia, 8Center for Mendelian Geno- neuropathy; three patients also had distal sensory loss. mics, PrograminMedicalandPopulationGenetics,Broad GBF1playsapivotalroleinCOPI-vesiculartrafﬁckingand Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston, MA, United States, Golgi maintenance. Functional studies conﬁrmed that the 9Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), variantsc.3410C>T,locatedafterthe3′spliceacceptorsite HospitalUniversitarioLaPaz-IdiPaz-UAM,Madrid,Spain, (SAS), and c.4382G>A, predicted to introduce a novel 10Bone and Joint Research Unit, The Institution of Health SAS, do not affect splicing. Protein levels from patients Research (IIS)-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, UAM, Madrid, ﬁbroblasts conﬁrmed GBF1 haploinsufﬁciency for the Spain, 11Departamento de Anatomía, Histología y Neuro- W1175*mutation,whereasA1137VandR1461Qexhibited ciencia, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de moderately increased GBF1 levels. Preliminary immunos- Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 12Unidad de Genética Molecular, taining analyses revealed Golgi fragmentation in ﬁbroblast Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 13Department of lines p.Ala1137Val and p.Arg1461Gln. Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Diseases Unit, Conclusion: Previous studies have linked disrupted Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 14Centro COPI-transport and Golgi fragmentation with other motor Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CSIC-UPO-JA), neuropathies. Our results emphasize the role of GBF1 in Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Sevilla, Spain, 15Depart- thesecontextsandindicatethatGBF1mutationsareanovel ment of Molecular and Human Genetics, Jan and Dan cause of dHMN. DuncanNeurologicalResearchInstitute,BaylorCollegeof N. Mendoza Ferreira: None. M. Karakaya: None. I. Medicine, Moursund Street, Houston, TX, United States, Hölker: None. D. Beijer: None. B. Schrank: None. K. 16Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department Brigatti: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. E. ofPaediatrics,TheHospitalforSickChildren,Universityof1142 Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 17Division of Neurology, J. Stavusis1, J. Geist2, B. Lace1,3, N. Wright4, DepartmentofPaediatrics,TheHospitalforSickChildren, D. Haubenberger5, C. Bonneman6, C. Ward7, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada A. Kontrogianni-Konstantopoulos2 FXR1 is an alternatively spliced gene encoding several 1Latvian Biomedical Study and Research Centre, Riga, protein isoforms (FXR1P) with RNA-binding properties. Latvia, 2Univeristy of Maryland School of Medicine, Unlike other tissues, cardiac and skeletal muscle only Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, expresstwoFXR1P isoforms thatincorporateanadditional Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Centre Hospitalier Uni- exon-15. Using exome sequencing, we identiﬁed recessive versitaire de Quebec, Quebec city, QC, Canada, 4James mutations in the muscle-speciﬁc exon-15 of FXR1 in two Madison University, Department of Chemistry and Bio- unrelated families with congenital myopathy, one of them chemistry, Harrisonburg, VA, United States, 5Clinical having a neonatal lethal phenotype. To investigate the Trials Unit, Ofﬁce of the Clinical Director, NINDS pathogenicity of exon-15 mutations, we generated a Intramural Research Program, National Institute of CRISPR-Cas9 mouse model carrying the same mutation Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD, as the family with lethal phenotype (delACAG) and a UnitedStates,6NeuromuscularandNeurogeneticDisorders different exon-15mutant(dupA)thatresultsinlowFXR1P of Childhood Section, Neurogenetics Branch, National levels. Mutant homozygous mice were found with Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, decreasedmusclevolume,musclestrengthandbonedensity Bethesda, MD, United States, 7University of Maryland by MRI, behavioural tests and DEXA respectively, while Baltimore, Department of Orthopedics, Baltimore, MD, histopathological studies showed muscle ﬁbers of reduced United States diameter, increased centralized nuclei, and type I predomi- nance. Ultra-structural analysis of ﬁbers from mutant mice Introduction: MYBPC1 encodes slow Myosin Binding also revealed multiple cores and Z-band disruption. Protein-C (sMyBP-C), a modular sarcomeric protein with Notably, phenotypic severity was greater in delACAG structural and regulatory roles expressed in skeletal mutants than in dupA mice. Histopathology of a triceps muscles. sMyBP-C interacts with both actin and myosin biopsy from a FXR1 patient was consistent with these ﬁlaments in a dynamic manner. Recently our studies ﬁndings. We additionally demonstrate that the delACAG identiﬁed novel mutations in MYBPC1 associated with a mutation leads to abnormal FXR1P isoforms which new form of myopathy. accumulate in a new type of cytoplasmic granules in MaterialsandMethods:Exomesequencingandinsilico human and mouse muscle cells. In conclusion, we report prognostic tools were used to identify novel MYBPC1 that mutations in exon-15 of FXR1 are associated with a pathogenic variants. Biochemical assays and molecular multi-minicore myopathy which varies in severity depend- dynamics were performed to examine the impact of the ingontotheeffect ofeachmutation ontheprotein.Thisis MYBPC1variantsonactomyosinbinding,thestructure and theﬁrsttimethatmutationsinFXR1aredemonstratedtobe stability of sMyBP-C. A knock-in mouse model containing associated with a human condition. Funding: MINECO/ one of the pathogenic mutations was generated. CIBERER/NINDS Results: We have identiﬁed novel autosomal dominant E. Fernández-Núñez: None. M. Estañ: None. M.S. mutationsinMYBPC1thatco-segregatewithanewformof Zaki: None. M. Esteban: None. S. Donkervoort: None. myopathy characterized by muscle weakness, hypotonia, C. Hawkins: None. J.A. Caparros-Martin: None. D. facial/body deformities, and tremor of possibly myogenic Saade: None. Y. Hu: None. V. Bolduc: None. K. Chao: origin. The individual mutations differentially affect the None. J. Nevado: None. A. Lamuedra: None. R. Largo: stability, structure and ability of sMyBP-C to bind myosin. None. G. Herrero-Beaumont: None. J. Regadera: None. The generated knock-in mouse model faithfully recapitu- C. Hernández-Chico: None. E.F. Tizzano: None. V. lates the myopathic phenotype and disease progression Martinez-Glez: None. J.J. Carvajal: None. R. Zong: observed in patients. Heterozygous knock-in mice are sig- None.D.Nelson:None.G.A.Otaify:None.S.Temtamy: niﬁcantly smaller and exhibit behavioural, morphological None.M.Aglan:None.M.Issa:None.C.G.Bönnemann: and contractile deﬁcits compared to their wild-type None. P. Lapunzina: None. G. Yoon: None. V.L. Ruiz- littermates. Perez: None. Conclusion: Our work expands the range of myopathies associated with MYBPC1 mutations, which was limited to C20.4 severe and lethal forms of distal arthrogryposis. We now Novel mutations in MYBPC1 associated with myogenic present evidence for a MYBPC1-linked myopathy asso- tremor ciated with tremor.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1143 ThisworkwassupportedbyNIH/NIAMS(T32AR007592- NFASC mutation. Taken together, our results strongly 17 to JG & R21AR072981 to AKK), Muscular Dystrophy suggest that loss of NFASC isoform NF186 causes Association (313579 to AKK), European Regional Develop- perturbed neurogenesis and impaired neuronal biophysical ment Fund (No. 2010/0223/2DP/2.1.1.1.0/10/APIA/VIAA/ properties resulting in a novel early onset autosomal 025 to BL) and FULBRIGHT PROGRAM (PS00266997 recessive ataxia syndrome. to JS). Funding:Financialsupportwasprovidedbygrantsfrom J. Stavusis: None. J. Geist: None. B. Lace: None. N. the Swedish Medical Research Council and the Stockholm Wright: None. D. Haubenberger: None. C. Bonneman: County Council. Grant from Swedish Research Council None. C. Ward: None. A. Kontrogianni- (2015-02424, 2017-03407, 2017-02936), Stiftelsen för Konstantopoulos: None. strategisk forskning, SSF (IB13-0074), Hjärnfonden, The Hållsten Research Foundation and Stiftelsen Sävstaholm. C20.5 M.Kvarnung:None.M.Shahsavani:None.F.Taylan: AbsenceofNFASCisoformNF186causesanautosomal None.N.Breeuwsma:None.L.Laan:None.J.Schuster: recessive ataxia syndrome None. Z. Jin: None. D. Nilsson: None. A. Lieden: None. B. Anderlid: None. M. Nordenskjöld: None. E. Syk M. Kvarnung1,2, M. Shahsavani3, F. Taylan1, Lundberg: None. B. Birnir: None. N. Dahl: None. A. N. Breeuwsma3, L. Laan4, J. Schuster4, Z. Jin5, Nordgren: None. A. Lindstrand: None. A. Falk: None. D. Nilsson1,2, A. Lieden1,2, B. Anderlid1,2, M. Nordenskjöld1,2, E. Syk Lundberg1,2, B. Birnir5, C20.6 N. Dahl4, A. Nordgren1,2, A. Lindstrand1,2, A. Falk3 Peripheral monitoring of neurodegeneration using cell- free DNA methylation 1Dept of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Dept of Clinical Genetics, Z. Chatterton1,2, R. Landin-Romero1, C. T. Liang1, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Dept K. Phan1, W. Carr3, G. Kamimori3, M. Beeri2, Y. Ge2, of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Biomedicum, Stock- A. Dwork4, F. Haghighi2,5, O. Piguet1, G. Halliday1, holm, Sweden, 4Dept of Immunology, Genetics and J. Kwok1 Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala Univer- sity, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Dept of 1The University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia, 2Icahn Neuroscience, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United Uppsala, Sweden States, 3Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, MD, United States, 4Columbia University, New The etiology of hereditary ataxia syndromes is hetero- York, NY, United States, 5James J. Peters VA Medical geneousandthemechanismsunderlyingthesedisordersare Center, Bronx, NY, United States oftenunknown.Here,weutilizedexomesequencingintwo siblingswithprogressiveataxiaandmuscularweaknessand Introduction: Neurodegeneration occurs in a variety of identiﬁed a novel homozygous mutation (c.3020-1G>A) in human diseases, but molecular proﬁling of the brain is neurofascin (NFASC). In RNA extracted from ﬁbroblasts difﬁcult.CellfreeDNA(cfDNA)derivedfromneurological weshowedthatthemutationresultedininframeskippingof tissue holds great potential for very early detection and exon 26, with deprived expression of the transcript that monitoring of neurodegeneration. corresponds to NFASC isoform NF186. To further inves- Materials and Methods: We characterised DNA tigate the disease mechanisms, we assessed the NFASC methylation speciﬁc to human brain-cells and brain-region mutation in our established in vitro neural cell model. using genome-wide epigenetic proﬁles and compared these Fibroblasts from one affected sibling and the unaffected with targeted deep-sequencing (bisulﬁte) of cfDNA parents were reprogrammed to pluripotent stem cells methylationinacuteandchronicneurodegenerativedisease (iPSCs), directed to long-term neuroepithelial stem cells subjects. To detect brain-derived cfDNA we developed a (NESCs) and ﬁnally differentiated to neurons. In early new statistical approach for analysing DNA methylation at neurogenesis,differentiatingcellswithaselectivedepletion the single-molecule level using k-mers. of the NF186 isoform showed signiﬁcantly reduced neurite Results:WedetectedanacuteappearanceincfDNAfrom outgrowthaswellasfeweremergingneurites.Furthermore, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex neurons (DLPFC-neuron) whole-cellpatch-clamprecordingsofpatientderivedneural following blast exposure within a unique cohort of active cells revealed a lower threshold for openings, indicating duty military personnel involved in operational breaching. + altered Na channel kinetics suggesting a lower threshold We also detected brain-derived cfDNA during cognitive for openings as compared to neural cells without the decline within a unique cohort of type-2 diabetic patients1144 with and without cognitive decline in which we identiﬁed Italy, 7Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative stage-dependentpatternsofDLPFC-neuroncfDNAandthe Medicine,SchoolofBiologicalSciences,FacultyofBiology presence of cerebellar-derived cfDNA. Finally, we identi- Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manche- ﬁed signiﬁcant (p<0.05) DLPFC-neuron cfDNA among ster, United Kingdom, 8Department of Experimental patients with DLPFC neurodegeneration validated by Cardiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amster- longitudinal structural magnetic resonance brain-imaging. dam UMC, AcademicMedicalCenter, Amsterdam,Nether- Conclusion:Herewereporttheﬁrstevidenceofcerebral lands,9DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,AmsterdamUMC, cortical neuron-derived cfDNA and cerebellar cfDNA Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Laboratory Genetic Meta- within acute neurotrauma and chronic neurodegeneration, bolic Diseases, Departments of Clinical Chemistry and establishing the ﬁrst class of peripheral biomarkers with Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of speciﬁcity for the cell-type and brain-region undergoing Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 10Department of injury or neurodegeneration. Biology, Miami University, Oxford, Columbus, OH, United Funding: VA Merits I01RX001705 and I01CX001395. States,11DepartmentofBiology,MiamiUniversity,Oxford, NIDA T32 postdoctoral training fellowship (3 T32 DA Oxford, OH, United States, 12Center for Clinical and 7135-31-S1). Sample collections were supported by Broad TranslationalResearch,TheResearchInstitute,Nationwide Agency Announcement Award No. W81XWH-16-2-0001. Children’s Hospital, Columbus, Columbus, OH, United Z. Chatterton: None. R. Landin-Romero: None. C.T. States, 13Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Liang: None. K. Phan: None. W. Carr: None. G. Biotechnology, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Kamimori: None. M. Beeri: None. Y. Ge: None. A. Italy, 14Medical Genetics Division, Department of Life, Dwork: None. F. Haghighi: None. O. Piguet: None. G. HealthandEnvironmentalSciences,UniversityofL’Aquila, Halliday: None. J. Kwok: None. L’Aquila, Italy, 15Pathology Division, Department of Life, L’Aquila, Italy, 16Department of ClinicalGenetics, Amster- dam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The C21 Internal organs Netherlands, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 17Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, C21.1 Amsterdam UMC, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Loss-of-functionvariantsinmyocardincausecongenital Netherlands, 18Center for Clinical and Translational megabladder in humans and mice Research, The Research Institute, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, United States, 19Cardiovascular A. Houweling1, G. Beaman2, A. Postma3, B. Gainous4, ResearchInstitute,UniversityofCalifornia,SanFrancisco, K.Lichtenbelt5,F.Brancati6,F.Lopes7,I.vanderMade8, CA, United States, 20Division of Evolution and Genomic A. Polstra9, M. Robinson10, K. Wright11, A. Jackson12, Sciences,SchoolofBiologicalSciences,FacultyofBiology R. Genesio13, L. Camerota14, E. D’Angelo15, E. Meijers- Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manche- Heijboer16, V. Christoffels17, K. McHugh18, B. Black19, ster Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University W. Newman20, A. Woolf21, E. Creemers8 NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health, Manchester, United Kingdom, 21Division of Cell Matrix 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Divi- Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, sion of of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of University of Manchester, Royal Manchester Children’s Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology Medicine and Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Manchester Aca, Manchester, United Kingdom Kingdom, 3Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam UMC, Academic Myocardin(MYOCD)isthefoundingmemberofaclassof Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amster- transcriptionalco-activatorsthatbindserumresponsefactor damCardiovascularSciences,AmsterdamUMC,Academic to activate gene expression programs coding for contractile MedicalCenter, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Cardiovascular and other cytoskeletal proteins critical in smooth- and ResearchInstitute,UniversityofCalifornia,SanFrancisco, cardiac muscle development. Insights into the molecular SanFrancisco,CA,USA,SanFrancisco,CA,UnitedStates, functions of MYOCD have been obtainedfrom cell culture 5Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical studiesand,todate,ourinvivoknowledgeaboutMYOCD Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Laboratory of comesexclusivelyfromexperimentalanimals.Forexample, Molecular and Cell Biology, Istituto Dermopatico dell’Im- expressionofdominantnegativeMyocddisruptsmyocardial macolata, IDI-IRCCS, Department of Life, Health and differentiation in embryonic frogs, while Myocd null mice Environmental Sciences, University of L’Aquila, Rome, die midgestation with failed vascular smooth muscle (SM)Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1145 cell differentiation. Here, we deﬁne adevastating andoften patients remains unsolved. In search of novel causative lethal human congenitaldiseaseassociated with inheritance genes,westudiedafamilywithrenalinadditiontoskeletal, of pathogenic MYOCD variants, with 14 affected indivi- eye, ear malformations inone sibling, and earanomalies in dualsinfourfamilies.Thisdiseasemanifestsasamassively another sibling and their mother. Whole-exome sequencing dilated urinary bladder, or megabladder, with a disrupted yielded a rare heterozygous missense variant in the growth SMwall.Thesehumanresultsaresupportedbyevidenceof differentiation factor 6 (GDF6) gene known to cause megabladder in two distinct mouse models with reduced autosomal-dominant Klippel-Feil syndrome type 1 (KFS1) Myocdlevels.Together,theseﬁndingshighlightavitalrole in all affected family members. While skeletal and hearing for MYOCD in mammalian organogenesis. In conclusion, abnormalities are characteristic of KFS1, renal anomalies wedemonstratefortheﬁrsttimethatvariationsinMYOCD have not been described as a hallmark. To assess whether result in human disease, and propose that loss-of-function GDF6 is involved in the pathogenesis of renal malforma- variants in MYOCD cause semi-dominant congenital tion, we performed mutational analysis of 193 further megabladder. This has important implications for genetic patients identifying two more cases with rare GDF6 counseling of families with congenital megabladder, sheds missense variants. A CRISPR/Cas9-derived knockout in new light on bladder development, and expands the murine IMCD3 cells showing that Gdf6-deﬁciency attenu- pathophysiological spectrum of inherited SM disorders. ated cell migration was rescued by expression of human A. Houweling: None. G. Beaman: None. A. Postma: wildtype but not mutant GDF6, indicating variant patho- None. B. Gainous: None. K. Lichtenbelt: None. F. genicity with respect to a developmental phenotype. RNA Brancati:None.F.Lopes:None.I.vanderMade:None. in situ hybridization on murine embryo sections revealed A.Polstra:None.M.Robinson:None.K.Wright:None. expressionofGdf6inthedevelopingurogenitalsystem.As A. Jackson: None. R. Genesio: None. L. Camerota: gdf6 expression was also observed in the pronephros of None.E.D’Angelo:None.E.Meijers-Heijboer:None.V. Xenopus laevis, this model was used for in vivo gdf6 Christoffels: None. K. McHugh: None. B. Black: None. knockdown studies, resulting in impaired pronephros W.Newman:None.A.Woolf:None.E.Creemers:None. development in embryos with downregulated gdf6 expres- sion.Altogether,wedemonstraterareheterozygousdeleter- C21.2 ious GDF6 variants in patients with renal malformation Rare heterozygous deleterious GDF6 variants in (1.6%), and renal combined with ear, eye or skeletal patients with renal anomalies anomalies(5.2%),andprovideevidenceforaninvolvement of GDF6 in early nephrogenesis. (EKFS grant no. H. Martens1, I. Hennies2, M. Getwan3, A. Kosfeld1, 2014_A234). F.Brand1,A.Weiss4,A.Gjerstad5,Z.Gucev6,R.Geffers7, H. Martens: None. I. Hennies: None. M. Getwan: A. Christians8, T. Seeman9, A. Kispert4, V. Tasic6, None. A. Kosfeld: None. F. Brand: None. A. Weiss: A. Bjerre5, S. S. Lienkamp3, D. Haffner2, R. G. Weber1 None. A. Gjerstad: None. Z. Gucev: None. R. Geffers: None.A.Christians:None.T.Seeman:None.A.Kispert: 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical None. V. Tasic: None. A. Bjerre: None. S.S. Lienkamp: School, Hannover, Germany, 2Department of Pediatric None. D. Haffner: None. R.G. Weber: None. Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Department of Medicine, C21.3 Renal Division, Medical Center, University of Freiburg, Exome sequencing identiﬁes phenocopies in every ﬁfth Freiburg,Germany,4InstituteofMolecularBiology,Hann- solved case in a cohort of 174 patients with hereditary over Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 5Division of nephropathies Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 6Medical Faculty Skopje, Uni- K. M. Riedhammer1,2, M. C. Braunisch2, R. Guenthner2, versity Children’s Hospital, Skopje, Macedonia, The M. Wagner1,3,4, B. Uetz5,6, B. Lange-Sperandio7, FormerYugoslavRepublicof,7GenomeAnalyticsResearch J. Hoefele1 Group,HelmholtzCentreforInfectionResearch,Braunsch- weig, Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, Division of 1Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Neuropathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, Germany, 9Department of Paediatrics, Second Faculty of 2Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Insti- tute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Although around 50 genes are known to cause renal Neuherberg, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, malformation when mutated, the genetic basis of most Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany,1146 Table1 Overviewofthestudycohort AS ADTKD CAKUT Ciliopathy FSGS/SRNS VACTERL Other Total Numberofindexcases(%ofcohort) 34(20) 6(3) 30(17) 19(11) 49(28) 9(5) 27(16) 174(100) male(%) 59 50 63 37 51 56 52 53 Medianageand 15(8.0–26.0) 53(47.0–65.0) 6(0.1–25.0) 9(0.8–19.0) 31(19.0–42.0) 10(1.0–12.5) 24(7.0–37.0) 19(7.0–35.0) IQRatgenetictestinginyears Diagnosticyield(%) 47 50 27 47 16 0 30 30 Numberofphenocopies(%ofdiseasegroup) 3(9) – – 1(5) 3(6) – 3(11) 10(6) 5München-Klinik Schwabing, Klinikum rechts der Isar, M. Bedin1, O. Boyer1,2, A. Servais3,1, L. Villoing-Gaudé1, Technical University of Munich, Children’s Hospital, O. Gribouval1, C. Bole1, F. Jabot-Hanin1, P. Nitschké1, Pediatric Nephrology, Munich, Germany, 6KfH Center of C. Antignac1, M. Simons1 Pediatric Nephrology, Munich, Germany, 7Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Dr. v. Hauner Children’s Hospital, 1INSERM U1163, Imagine Institute, Université Paris Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany Descartes, Paris, France, 2Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 3Department Introduction: Hereditary nephropathies are both clinically of Nephrology, Necker Hospital, Paris, France and genetically heterogeneous disorders. In some patients the phenotype resembles a speciﬁc disease, but they do not The loss of proteins into the urine (or proteinuria) is carry the established genotype (phenocopy). Exome consideredtobeanimportantdriverofkidneydisease.The sequencing has been successfully employed in various main reason is a defective glomerular ﬁltration barrier hereditarykidneydisorders.Thisstudyshowsthespectrum allowing the passage of serum proteins, including albumin, and frequency of phenocopies identiﬁed by exome sequen- into the urine. Largely overlooked, a failure of reabsorbing cing in a cohort encompassing monogenic inherited kidney the ﬁltered proteins in the proximal tubular segment can disorders. alsoleadtoamildtubularproteinuria,butitisunclearifitis Materials and Methods: 174 index patients with a pre- harmful for the kidney. Here, we combine targeted and sumed hereditary kidney disease were recruited for exome exome sequencing to explore the contribution of tubular sequencingandcategorizedin7diseasegroupsaccordingto genes to chronic subnephrotic proteinuria (0,5-3 g/24h). their clinical presentation (Table 1). Variants were rated as Altogether, we identiﬁed 24 patients with recessive per ACMG criteria. “Likely pathogenic” and “pathogenic” mutations in the tubular uptake receptor cubilin (CUBN). variants led to the designation “solved case”. Meta-analyzing our in-house genetic database, we further Results: In 52/174 (30%), a genetic diagnosis could be identify a signiﬁcant association between loss-of-function made,in10/52(19%),aphenocopycouldbeidentiﬁed(6% CUBN mutations and proteinuric conditions. The tubular of total cohort, see table 1). 5 phenocopies were Alport proteinuria in the CUBN patients was atypical, lacking syndrome presenting clinically as FSGS/SRNS or vice important tubular proteinuria markers and consisting of versa. See Table 2 for the complete spectrum of more than 50% albumin. Importantly, the renal function phenocopies. was normal, even in old patients, suggesting that the Conclusion: Phenocopies where found in every 5th proteinuriaisbenign.Allidentiﬁedmutationslocalizetothe solved case. A comprehensive picture of phenocopies is C-terminal half of the protein, which is in contrast to the drawn illustrating the huge spectrum of clinical presenta- known N-terminal Imerslund-Gräsbeck mutations for tions of hereditary nephropathies and highlighting that CUBN featured by Vitamin B12 malabsorption in addition exome sequencing is an appropriate diagnostic tool to totheproteinuria.Somemutationshaveanallelefrequency account for this heterogeneity. of 0.5% suggesting that this kind of proteinuria is not K.M. Riedhammer: None. M.C. Braunisch: None. R. uncommon. This is supported by the gnomAD database Guenthner: None. M. Wagner: None. B. Uetz: None. B. showing a high prevalence of damaging CUBN variants, Lange-Sperandio: None. J. Hoefele: None. mostly localizing to the C-terminal half. In summary, we identify C-terminal CUBN mutations as a common but C21.4 benign cause of chronic proteinuria. NovelC-terminalCUBNvariantsassociatewithchronic M.Bedin:None.O.Boyer:None.A.Servais:None.L. proteinuria and normal renal function Villoing-Gaudé: None. O. Gribouval: None. C. Bole: None. F. Jabot-Hanin: None. P. Nitschké: None. C. Antignac: None. M. Simons: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1147 Inheritance Motherandfather Mother Undetermined Motherandfather Motherandfather Mother Motherandfather Undetermined Mother Mother Zygosity/heteroplasmy Compoundheterozygous Heterozygous Heterozygous Compoundheterozygous Compoundheterozygous Hemizygous Homozygous Heterozygous Hemizygous Homoplasmicinblood Aminoacidchange p.(?)p.(Leu1474Pro) – p.(Asp75_Ser85del) p.(Gly611Arg)p.(Leu1474Pro) p.(Leu449Pro)p.(Pro563Arg) p.(Arg98*) p.(Leu687Ser) p.(?) p.(Gln76Lysfs*79) – Nucleotidechange c.2126-1G>Cc.4421T>C– c.224_256del c.1831G>Ac.4421T>C c.1346T>Cc.1688C>G c.292C>T c.2060T>C +c.6451G>T c.225delA m.616T>C Transcript NM_000091.4 – NM_022489.3 NM_000091.4 NM_000439.4 NM_001127899.3 NM_004998.3 NM_000495.4 NM_000495.4 NC_012920.1 Gene/CNV COL4A3 1,2MbDeletionChr17q12(comprisingHNF1B) INF2 COL4A3 PCSK1 CLCN5 MYO1E COL4A5 COL4A5 MT-TF Ageatgeneticdiagnosis 32years 4months 26years 21years 2years 5years 34years 42years 9years 4years pathies MIMphenotypenumber 203780 614527 613237 203780 600955 300009 614131 301050 301050 – o hereditarynephr Geneticdiagnosis Alportsyndrome,autosomalrecessive Chromosome17q12deletionsyndrome Glomerulosclerosis,focalsegmental,5 Alportsyndrome,autosomalrecessive Obesitywithimpairedprohormoneprocessing Dentdisease* Glomerulosclerosis,focalsegmental,6 Alportsyndrome,X-linked Alportsyndrome,X-linked Maternallyinheritedepilepsywithtubulointerstitialkidneydisease 4indexcaseswith Previousgenetictests – – PMP22,MPZ,COL4A3,COL4A4,COL4A5,WT1,NPHS2inconspicuous COL4A3,COL4A4,COL4A5inconspicuous ATP5V0A4,ATP6V1B1,CA2,SLC4A1,SLC4A4,VIPAS39,VPS33B,OCRLinconspicuous– COL4A3,COL4A4,COL4A5,MYH9inconspicuous– – Mitochondriopathypanelinconspicuous ohortof17 Ageatclinicaldiagnosis 29years(kidneybiopsy)ﬁWithrstmanifestation ﬁWithrstrespectivemanifestation 12years(kidneybiopsy)ﬁWithrstmanifestation 4years(kidneybiopsy) 3years(kidneybiopsy) 32years(kidneybiopsy)ﬁWithrstmanifestation ﬁWithrstmanifestation phenocopiesinac ﬁAgeatrstmanifestationandcorephenotype 26years(nephroticproteinuria) Prenatal(hyperechogenickidneysonultrasound) 4years(neuropathy)15years(proteinuriaandsensorineuraldeafness) 3years(proteinuria,hematuria) 3weeks(hyperchloremicacidosis,hypercalciuria,nephrocalcinosis) 4years(microscopichematuria,proteinuria,hypercalciuria,nephrocalcinosis) 2years(microscopichematuria) 5years(hematuriaandproteinuria) 3years(microscopichematuriawithintermittentinfection-associatedmacroscopichematuria)ﬁ3years(rstseizureandrenalsaltwasting) ﬁed Sex m f m f f m f f m f ofidenti DiseaseGROUP FSGS/SRNS Ciliopathy AS FSGS/SRNS Other AS AS FSGS/SRNS Other Other y e2Summar Clinical(tentative)diagnosis FamilialFSGS ARPKD Alportsyndromeandsensorimotorneuropathy MCD dRTA CollagentypeIVdisease Alportsyndrome FamilialFSGS IgAN RasmussenencephalopathywithtubulopathyandCKD Tabl Index ATS-F9-II-1 HN-F13-II-1 HN-F20-II-1 ATS-F29-III-1 HN-F46-II-1 HN-F56-II-1 HN-F203-II-2 ATS-F261-II-1 ATS-F486-II-1 HN-F542-II-11148 C21.5 H.R. Wilman: None. C.A. Parisinos: None. N. Ata- Genome-wide association study of MRI liver iron baki-pasdar:None.M.Kelly:None.E.L.Thomas:None. content in 9,800 individuals yields new insights into its S. Neubauer: None. A. Hingorani: None. A. Mahajan: link with hepatic and extrahepatic diseases None. R. Patel: None. H. Hemingway: None. P.W. Franks: None. J. Bell: None. R. Banerjee: None. H. H. R. Wilman1,2, C. A. Parisinos3, N. Atabaki-pasdar4, Yaghootkar: None. M. Kelly2, E. L. Thomas1, S. Neubauer5, A. Hingorani3, A. Mahajan5, R. Patel3, H. Hemingway3, C21.6 P. W. Franks4,6,7, J. Bell1, R. Banerjee2, H. Yaghootkar8 Complex compound inheritance of lethal lung developmental disorders due to disruption of the TBX- 1University of Westminster, London, United Kingdom, FGF pathway 2Perspectum Diagnostics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Uni- versity College London, London, United Kingdom, 4Lund J. A. Karolak1, M. Vincent2, G. Deutsch3, T. Gambin4, University, Malmö, Sweden, 5University ofOxford,Oxford, B. Cogné2, O. Pichon2, H. C. Mefford5, J. N. Dines5, United Kingdom, 6Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden, 7Har- M. Dishop6, D. Mowat7, A. J. Gifford8, A. F. Lee9, vard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, C. F. Boerkoel10, T. M. Bartell11, C. Ward-Melver12, 8University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom T. Besnard2, F. Petit13, I.Bache14, Z. Tümer15, M. Denis- Musquer16, M. Joubert16, J. Martinovic17, E. Bieth18, Excessliverironiscommonandassociateswithhepaticand N. Chassaing18, L. Devisme19, L. Pasquier20, M. Don21, extrahepatic diseases. Genome-wide association studies M. Orsaria22, S. Küry2, S. Bézieau2, D. A. Scott1, (GWAS) liver iron, compared to circulating iron traits, C. W. Brown23, F. Scaglia1, A. C. Tsai24, W. K. Chung25, permit detection of liver-speciﬁc susceptibility loci. G. Schauer26, C. L. Mercer27, A. van Haeringen28, We performed the ﬁrst GWAS of MRI determined liver Q.Liu1,E.Popek29,Z.H.CobanAkdemir1,J.R.Lupski1, iron in 8,289 individuals in UK Biobank and validated our P.Szafranski1,B.Isidor2,C.LeCaignec2,P.Stankiewicz1 results in 1,513 individuals from DIRECT. Liver iron was calculated from MRI data using LiverMultiScanTM. We 1Dept of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of used GEMMA, which corrects for relatedness and popula- Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Service de Génét- tionstructure,andadjustedourmodelforage,sex,BMIand ique Médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 3Dept of genotyping array. Pathology,SeattleChildren’sHospital,Seattle,WA,United We identiﬁed three independent genetic variants States, 4Inst of Computer Science, Warsaw Univ of (rs1800562 & rs1799945 in HFE, rs855791 in TMPRSS6) Technology, Warsaw, Poland, 5Dept of Pediatrics, Univ associated with liver iron (P<5x10-8). Both HFE and of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 6Pathology & TMPRSS6 are involved in hepcidin production, the key Laboratory Medicine, Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Phoe- hormone responsible for iron balance in the body. We nix, AZ, United States, 7Centre for Clinical Genetics, estimated the heritability of liver iron to be 7.39%. The Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 8School of most genetically correlated traits in LD score regression Women’s & Children’s Health, Univ of NSW, Sydney, analysis were transferrin (rG=−0.78) and ferritin (rG= Australia, 9Dept of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, 1.24)withnominalsigniﬁcantcorrelation.InourMendelian Univ of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 10Dept randomisationanalysis,wefoundsomeevidencethathigher ofMedicalGenetics,UnivofBritishColumbia,Vancouver, central obesity, measured as waist-to-hip ratio, is casually BC, Canada, 11Dept of Genetics, Kaiser Permanente associated with higher liver iron content (IVW P=0.003). Sacramento Medical Center, Sacramento, CA, United Phenome-wide association analysis demonstrates shared States, 12Div of Medical Genetics, Akron Children’s aetiology of elevated liver iron with high blood pressure, Hospital,Akron,OH,UnitedStates,13ServicedeGénétique liver cirrhosis, extrahepatic malignancies, neuropsychiatric, Clinique, CHU Lille, Lille, France, 14Dept of Cellular & endocrine and rheumatological conditions, and an inverse Molecular Medicine, Univ of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, association with anaemias, lipidaemias and ischaemic heart Denmark, 15Dept of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen Univ disease. Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 16Service Our study provides genetic evidence that mechanisms d’anatomo-pathologie, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, underlying excess liver iron are likely systemic not organ 17Unit ofFetalPathology,AntoineBeclereHospital,Paris, speciﬁc.Ourdataprovidesnewinsightsintothebiologyof France, 18Service de génétique médicale, CHU Toulouse, liver iron and its link to metabolic and non-metabolic dis- Toulouse, France, 19Inst de Pathologie, CHU Lille, Lille, ease outcomes. France, 20Service de génétique médicale, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 21Sant’Antonio General Hospital,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1149 Pediatric Care Unit, San Daniele del Friuli, Udine, Italy, J.A. Karolak: None. M. Vincent: None. G. Deutsch: 22Dept of Medical & Biological Sciences, Univ of Udine, None. T. Gambin: None. B. Cogné: None. O. Pichon: Udine,Italy,23DeptofPediatrics,UnivofTennesseeHealth None.H.C.Mefford:None.J.N.Dines:None.M.Dishop: Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States, 24Dept of None. D. Mowat: None. A.J. Gifford: None. A.F. Lee: Pediatrics, The Children’s Hospital, Univ of Colorado None. C.F. Boerkoel: None. T.M. Bartell: None. C. School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States, 25Dept of Ward-Melver:None.T.Besnard:None.F.Petit:None.I. Pediatrics & Medicine, Columbia Univ, New York, NY, Bache: None. Z. Tümer: None. M. Denis-Musquer: United States, 26Dept of Pathology, Kaiser Permanente None. M. Joubert: None. J. Martinovic: None. E. Bieth: Oakland Medical Center, Oakland, CA, United States, None. N. Chassaing: None. L. Devisme: None. L. Pas- 27Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Univ Hospital South- quier:None.M.Don:None.M.Orsaria:None.S.Küry: ampton NHS Foundation Trust, Princess Anne Hospital, None.S. Bézieau: None. D.A. Scott: None. C.W. Brown: Southampton,UnitedKingdom,28DeptofClinicalGenetics, None. F. Scaglia: None. A.C. Tsai: None. W.K. Chung: Leiden Univ Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 29Dept None. G. Schauer: None. C.L. Mercer: None. A. van of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Haeringen: None. Q. Liu: None. E. Popek: None. Z.H. Houston, TX, United States Coban Akdemir: None. J.R. Lupski: None. P. Sza- franski: None. B. Isidor: None. C. Le Caignec: None. P. Introduction: Primary defects in lung branching morpho- Stankiewicz: None. genesis,resultinginneonatallethalpulmonaryhypoplasias, are incompletely understood. Materials and Methods: To elucidate the pathogenetics C22Ethical,policyandpsychosocialaspectsingenomics of human lung development, using WGS, ES, SNP and CGH arrays, Sanger sequencing, and qPCR, we studied C22.1 samples obtained from deceased individuals with clinically “Toﬁndoutifit’sgeneticornot”:Motivations,concerns and histopathologically diagnosed interstitial neonatal lung and perceived impact of genome sequencing among disorders: acinar dysplasia (n=14), congenital alveolar young people dysplasia (n=2), and other lethal lung hypoplasias (n= 10). Seventeen family members and control individuals C. Lewis1,2, C. Patch3,4,5, M. Hill1,2, L. S. Chitty1,2, with 17q23.1q23.2 (n=13), 5p12 (n=3), or an intragenic S. C. Sanderson1,6 TBX4 (n=1) deletion but without a developmental lung disease were also investigated. 1Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Results: We identiﬁed rare heterozygous copy-number London, United Kingdom, 2UCL Great Ormond Street variant deletions or single nucleotide variants (SNVs) InstituteofChildHealth,London,UnitedKingdom,3Geno- involving TBX4 (n=8 and n=2, respectively) or FGF10 mics England, London, United Kingdom, 4Florence Night- (n=2 and n=2, respectively) in 16/26 (61%) affected ingale Faculty of Nursing and Midwifery, King’s College individuals. In addition to TBX4, the overlapping ~2 Mb London, London, United Kingdom, 5Counselling, Society recurrent and nonrecurrent deletions at 17q23.1q23.2 iden- and Ethics Research, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cam- tiﬁedinsevenindividualswithlunghypoplasiaalsoremove bridge, United Kingdom, 6Institute of Health Informatics, a lung-speciﬁc enhancer region. Individuals with coding University College London, London, United Kingdom variants involving either TBX4 or FGF10 also harbored at least one non-coding SNV in the predicted lung-speciﬁc Background and methods: Until recently, many children enhancerregion,whichwasabsentin13controlindividuals with rare diseases were undiagnosed. Genome sequencing with the overlapping deletions but without any structural has been shown to signiﬁcantly increase diagnostic yield lung anomalies. and is therefore set to have a profound impact for children Conclusion: The occurrence of rare coding variants and young people with rare diseases. Although the current involving TBX4 or FGF10 with the putative hypomorphic legal perspective is that children below a jurisdiction- non-codingSNVsimpliesacomplexcompoundinheritance speciﬁedageareunabletoprovideinformedconsent,young ofthesepulmonaryhypoplasias.Moreover,theysupportthe people, particularly adolescents, do frequently have the importance of TBX4-FGF10-FGFR2 epithelial- capacity to be actively involved in discussions about their mesenchymal signaling in human lung organogenesis, and health. We sought to characterise the attitudes of young helptoexplainthehistopathologicalcontinuumobservedin peopletowardsthistechnologybyconducting27interviews these rare lethal developmental disorders of the lung (NIH- with 11–18 year olds (excluding those with learning R01HL137203). difﬁculties) taking part in the 100,000 Genomes Project.1150 Results:Aroundtwothirdsofmotivationscitedbyyoung mild distress, they generally cope quite well with receiving people related to the potential beneﬁts to themselves, UF and appreciate receiving information about their including getting a diagnosis, “pinpointing” the gene increased risk. While many participants felt that most causing the condition, understanding if the condition was patients generally understand what a VUS means, a pro- inheritedandmightbepassedontofuturechildren,guiding portion of GHPs found VUS quite difﬁcult to convey to treatmentchoices,ending furtherinvestigationsandputting patientsandhadconcernsfortheirlevelofunderstanding.A an end to the ongoing question of “why”. Young people considerable proportion of participants mentioned chal- don’t appear to be concerned about data security or com- lenges associated with non-genetic HPs misinterpreting the panies having access to data, although some had concerns signiﬁcance of VUS and conveying this information to the results might reveal something “life threatening” and patients. This could have negative implications for patients somewereworriedtheywouldbe“disappointed”iftheydid and impacts on their own practice. not get a result. Most were realistic that a result from TheseresultshelpusunderstandthechallengesGHPsare genome sequencing would not necessarily lead to their experiencinginreturningresultsfromGStopatients,which condition being cured. has important implications for clinicians’ training. Conclusion: Young people are capable of grasping the D.F. Vears: None. K. Sénécal: None. P. Borry: None. potentialbeneﬁtsandlimitationsofgenomesequencingand where possible should be actively engaged in the decision- C22.3 making process. Parentexperienceswithultra-rapidgenomicsequencing C.Lewis: None.C.Patch:A.Employment (full orpart- in paediatric acute care time); Modest; Secondment with Genomics England as Clinical Lead for Genetic Counselling since October 2016. G. R. Brett1,2,3, M. Martyn3,2,4, M. de Silva1,2,5, M.Hill:None.L.S.Chitty:None.S.C.Sanderson:None. K. Boggs5,6,7, A. Baxendale8,5, S. Borrie8,5, S. King- Smith5,9, S. Ayres1,3,5, L. Gallacher1,2, J. Pinner6, C22.2 S. Sandaradura7, M. Wilson7, C. Barnett8, C. Patel10, Genetic health professionals’ experiences returning A. Vasudevan11, E. Krzesinski12,13, S. Lunke1,2,5, results from diagnostic genomic sequencing to patients Z. Stark1,2,5 D. F. Vears1,2,3, K. Sénécal4, P. Borry3 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of 1University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 2Murdoch Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Melbourne Genomics Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 3Centre Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, 4Murdoch Chil- for Biomedical Ethics and Law, KU Leuven, Leuven, dren’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 5Austra- Belgium, 4Centre of Genomics & Policy, Mc Gill Uni- lian Genomics Health Alliance, (national), Australia, versity, Montreal, QC, Canada 6SydneyChildren’sHospitalsNetwork-Randwick,Sydney, Australia, 7Sydney Children’s Hospitals Network - West- Despite widespread use of genomic sequencing (GS) in mead, Sydney, Australia, 8Paediatric and Reproductive clinical care, there has been little exploration of actual Genetics Unit, South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, experiences of genetic health professionals (GHPs) using Adelaide, Australia, 9Centre for Cancer Biology, SA these new technologies in their practice. To address this, Pathology, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Aus- semi-structured interviews were conducted with 31 clinical tralia, 10Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane and geneticists and genetic counsellors from 30 institutions Women’s Hospital, Brisbane, Australia, 11Royal Women’s across Europe, Australia and Canada to explore their Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 12Monash Children’s experiences with returning results from GS, including Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 13Department of Paedia- positive and negative results, unsolicited ﬁndings (UF), trics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia and variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS), to patients. GHPs remarked that patients’ reactions to receiving Background: Emerging evidence that rapid turnaround positive results varied; some patients are relieved or times impact the clinical utility of genomic testing in acute appreciative at the identiﬁcation of a genetic cause, whilst paediatrics is driving widespread adoption. However, little others express negative emotions, including frustration that is known about the experience that parents of critically ﬁnding an answer does not lead to a treatment. Participants unwell infants and children have during the testing process discussed the importance of managing expectations in pre- and beyond. testcounsellingsessionstominimisedisappointment.GHPs Methods: Participants were recruited as part of the felt that even though some patients/families experienced Australian Genomics Acute Care study, a national rapidAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1151 genomic diagnosis program for infants and children 1GeneticsDepartment,ReferenceCenterforDevelopmental admitted to intensive care with suspected genetic condi- Disorders Sud East, HCL, Bron, France, 2Clinical tions. Pre- and post-test counselling was provided by Psychology Laboratory, Psychopathology, Psychoanalysis genetic health professionals. Over 95% of parents offered (EA4056), ED 261, Univ. Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris testing gave consent. Results were available within ﬁve Cité, Paris, France, 3Sociology and anthropology labora- days of sample receipt. Parents were surveyed >12 weeks tory LaSA, EA3189, CIC, INSERM 1431, Univ. de after results return. We explored parental experiences with Bourgogne Franche-Comté, CHRU Besançon, Besançon, consent processes, perceived impact of testing on child France, 4FHU TRANSLAD, GAD INSERM UMR 1231, health, relationships and reproductive decisions. This Univ.deBourgogneFranche-Comté,Dijon,Dijon,France, questionnaire included the Decision Regret, Short Form 5Economy laboratory of Dijon (LEDI), EA7467, Univ. de GeneticCounselling Outcomesand PedsQL FamilyImpact Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 6Genetics Module scales. Department, Reference Centre for Hereditary Cardiac Results: From 21 respondents in the ﬁrst six months Disorders, GH APHP, Paris, France, 7INSERM U1028, (RR=54%), most felt they received enough information CNRS UMR5292, CRNL, GENDEV Team, Univ. Claude during pre-test (n=21, 100%) and post-test (n=18, 86%) Bernard Lyon 1, Bron, France, 8Genetics Department, counselling. No respondents reported decisional regret Reference Center for Developmental Disorders Sud East, regarding testing. Perceptions varied about the beneﬁts of HCL, Lyon, France, 9Genetics Department, Reference rapid genomic sequencing for the child. The majority of Center for Developmental Disorders, Dijon University respondents(n=13,62%)wereextremelyconcernedabout Hospital,Dijon,France,10GeneticsDepartmentGHAPHP, theconditionoccurringinfuturechildren,regardlessoftheir Paris, France, 11CH Le Vinatier, Bron, France, 12INSERM actual or self-perceived recurrence risk. Eight respondents CIC-EC 1432, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France, (38%) reported the test impacted their reproductive plans. 13Institute of Myology, GH APHP, Paris, France Importance: Understanding parental experiences, opi- nions, and the short and long term impacts on families will Introduction: Access to active search for actionable guide the design and delivery of rapid genomic diagnosis secondary ﬁndings (SFs) in diagnostic practice is debated programs. in Europe. The French FIND study has been set up to G.R. Brett: None. M. Martyn: None. M. de Silva: determine the short and longer-term beneﬁts and risks None. K. Boggs: None. A. Baxendale: None. S. Borrie: according to the patients/families of returning SFs from None. S. King-Smith: None. S. Ayres: None. L. Galla- diagnostic ES. cher: None. J. Pinner: None. S. Sandaradura: None. M. Materials and Methods: A mixed methodology imple- Wilson: None. C. Barnett: None. C. Patel: None. A. mented in three centers of expertise. This study offered to Vasudevan:None.E.Krzesinski:None.S.Lunke:None. 330 patients with an undiagnosed developmental disorder Z. Stark: None. the search for actionable a list of SFs from ES: SF1) pre- disposition to late-onset diseases (122 genes); SF2) carrier C22.4 status of recessive or X-linked diseases that could impact The French FIND study (preliminary results). reproductive projects (114 genes); SF3) pharmacogenomic Psychological effects of actionable secondary ﬁndings variants that could impact medical treatment (3 genes). obtained from exome sequencing in patients/families Results: Quantitative data show that 21% of patients did with undiagnosed rare diseases not wish to access SFs, citing anxiety, timing, or the study constraints.94%wishedtoaccessallSFs;2%refusedSF1, F. Houdayer1,2, A. Chassagne3,4, A. Pélissier4,5, 1.6% SF2 and 3% SF3. Semi-directive interviews were C. Peyron4,5, S. Staraci2,6, D. Sanlaville1,7, P. Edery1,7, scheduled with 15 patients whose SF results were positive, M. Rossi8, G. Lesca1, A. Putoux1, L. Pons1, A. Cadenes1, immediately after the results were returned. None of the A. Baurand9, C. Sawka9, G. Bertolone9, M. Spentchian10, patients expressed regrets regarding access to the SFs. M. Yousﬁ9, D. Salvi5, E. Gautier9, A. Vitobello4, Patients found it difﬁcult to anticipate the psychological A. Dénommé-Pichon4, A. Faudet10, B. Keren10, consequences of announcing an elevated risk of disease A. Labalme7, N. Chatron7, C. Abel1, S. Dupuis-Girod1, (SF1). Heterozygous carrier patients found it difﬁcult to A. Poisson11, J. Buratti10, C. Mignot10, A. Afenjar10, imagine the effects of sharing their results with their S. Whalen10, P. Charles10, S. Heide10, L. Mouthon10, families (SF2). As for SF3, the medical beneﬁts were not C. Thauvin-Robinet4,9, C. Philippe4,9, F. Tran Mau- yet clear. Them9,S.Moutton9,A.Sorlin9,S.Nambot9,C.Binquet12, Conclusion: Literature showed that patients/families D. Héron10, M. Gargiulo10,13, L. Faivre4,9 massivelydesiretoknow all SFsinhypothetical situations,1152 contrasting with a 21% of refusal and with psychological identiﬁcation and the potential for further contact for effects in a real-life context. research. We concluded with providing further analysis on F. Houdayer: None. A. Chassagne: None. A. Pélissier: the adequacy of the current consent and privacy policies of None. C. Peyron: None. S. Staraci: None. D. Sanlaville: the laboratories and databases in the view of relevant data None. P. Edery: None. M. Rossi: None. G. Lesca: None. protection regulations. A. Putoux: None. L. Pons: None. A. Cadenes: None. A. M.Shabani:None.S.Dyke:None.L.Marelli:None.P. Baurand: None. C. Sawka: None. G. Bertolone: None. Borry: None. M. Spentchian: None. M. Yousﬁ: None. D. Salvi: None. E. Gautier: None. A. Vitobello: None. A. Dénommé- C22.6 Pichon: None. A. Faudet: None. B. Keren: None. A. Are requirements to deposit data in research Labalme: None. N. Chatron: None. C. Abel: None. S. repositories compatible with the GDPR? Dupuis-Girod:None.A.Poisson:None.J.Buratti:None. C.Mignot:None.A.Afenjar:None.S.Whalen:None.P. D. Mascalzoni1,2, H. B. Bentzen3, I. Budin-Ljøsne4, Charles: None. S. Heide: None. L. Mouthon: None. C. L. A. Bygrave3, J. Bell5,6, E. S. Dove7, C. Fuchsberger1, Thauvin-Robinet: None. C. Philippe: None. F. Tran K. Hveem8, M. T. Mayrhofer9, V. Meraviglia1, Mau-Them:None.S.Moutton:None.A.Sorlin:None.S. D.R.O’Brien10,C.Pattaro1,P.P.Pramstaller1,V.Rakić11, Nambot: None. C. Binquet: None. D. Héron: None. M. A. Rossini1, M. Shabani12,13, D. J. B. Svantesson14, Gargiulo: None. L. Faivre: None. M. Tomasi15,16, L. Ursin8, M. Wjst17,18, J. Kaye5,6 C22.5 1Eurac Research, Bolzano, Italy, 2Uppsala University, Variant data sharing by clinical laboratories through Uppsala, Sweden, 3University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, public databases: consent, privacy and further contact 4Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway, for research policies 5University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Univer- sity of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 7University of M. Shabani1, S. Dyke2, L. Marelli1, P. Borry1 Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 8Norwegian UniversityofScienceandTechnology,Trondheim,Norway, 1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2McGill, Montreal, QC, 9BBMRI-ERIC, Graz, Austria, 10Harvard University, Bos- Canada ton,MA,UnitedStates,11UniversityofBelgrade,Belgrade, Serbia, 12KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 13Leuven Institute Access to detailed variant data is key to inform and verify forHumanGenomicsandSociety,Leuven,Belgium,14Bond theinterpretation ofgenomicdata.Clinicallaboratoriescan University, Gold Coast, Australia, 15University of Trento, play a signiﬁcant role in sharing patients’ data through Trento,Italy,16FreeUniversityofBozen-Bolzano,Bolzano, public variant databases. In order to facilitate data sharing, Italy, 17Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, various public databases such as ClinVar (in collaboration 18Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany with ClinGen) and DECIPHER have been established, which accept data submission from laboratories, clinicians, Increasingly, journals’ and funding bodies’ policies require researchers and patients. Despite clear beneﬁts to sharing, researchers to deposit individual level data in research questions may arise about the adequate form of consent to repositories. The aim is noble: to increase data sharing be obtained from patients when sharing data from their which facilitates reproducibility and new discoveries. clinical tests through public databases. In particular, how However, data deposit requirements may conﬂict with much information should be communicated to the patients ethicalandlegalobligations,includingtheEUGeneralData regarding data sharing? Should patients have the option to ProtectionRegulation(GDPR).Themainobstaclesrelateto opt-out? Under what conditions could laboratories share i) loss of control over further processing; ii) realization of more detailed information (e.g. supporting individual-level rights and obligations; iii) national derogations; iv) data) about the patients than simply the aggregate variant- jurisdictional issues; and v) accountability. These ethical levelclassiﬁcations?Inordertoaddressthesequestions,we and legal challenges of depositing individual level genetic conductedacontentanalysisoftherelevantconsentpolicies data in research repositories such as dbGaP will be of the major public databases and of the consent forms of described and illustrated with practical real-life examples clinical laboratories who share variant data. Our study fromsomeofEurope’slargestbiobanks.Theframeworkof showed that despite the guidance provided by the data research data deposition, if not adapted, could lead to the repositories,theapproachestowardsconsentvaryacrossthe unwanted consequence of researchers complying with the studied laboratories. Moreover, we analyzed the informa- lawfacingdifﬁcultiespublishingtheirwork,irrespectiveof tionprovidedintheconsentformsregardingtherisksofre- its scientiﬁc qualities. Such de facto inequities in theAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1153 scientiﬁc evaluation process, may endanger scientiﬁc variants relative to those associated with pediatric, neuro- excellence and evidence-based medicine. In addition to logical, or cardiovascular disorders. Later onset diseases bringing current repositories in compliance, further poten- were associated with lower levels of mosaicism in affected tial solutions to optimize responsible data sharing will be individuals compared to diseases with early onset (p= described, including i) dynamic consent, ii) data tagging, 0.002; Wilcoxon signed rank). In relation to hereditary andiii)federateddatasharing.Thepolicypaperspringsout cancer, individuals with mosaic variants were considerably from work done in the COST Action CHIP ME, an EU older than those without mosaic variants (p=6.5 X 10−48; funded European research network of researchers working Student’s t-test). Finally, among individuals who had a on ethics and law related to genomics. Additionally, legal disease with pathognomonic features, those with mosaic researchersfromtheUS,Canada,andAustralia,theleaders variants showed non-classical phenotypes compared to of some of Europe’s largest biobanks and a representative those with non-mosaic variants (p=0.0009; Fisher’s exact from the European biobank network BBMRI-ERIC have test). These exhaustive analyses provide insight into contributed to the work. mosaicisminMendeliandiseasegenesandinformexpecta- D. Mascalzoni: None. H.B. Bentzen: None. I. Budin- tions for diagnostic testing, clinical correlations, and Ljøsne: None. L.A. Bygrave: None. J. Bell: None. E.S. recurrence risk. Dove:None.C.Fuchsberger:None.K.Hveem:None.M. D. Pineda Alvarez: None. R. Truty: A. Employment T.Mayrhofer:None.V.Meraviglia:None.D.R.OBrien: (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. T. Hambruch: None. C. Pattaro: None. P.P. Pramstaller: None. V. None. C. Kautzer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Rakić: None. A. Rossini: None. M. Shabani: None. D.J. Signiﬁcant;Invitae.M.Kennemer:A.Employment(fullor B. Svantesson: None. M. Tomasi: None. L. Ursin: None. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. K. Kosheleva: None. V. M. Wjst: None. J. Kaye: None. Kulkarni: None. J. Rhees: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. A. Stafford: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. R. Nussbaum: A. C24 Mosaicisms Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. S. Aradhya: None. C24.1 Analysis of Mosaicism for Sequence and Copy Number C24.2 VariantsinaBroadDiversityofHereditaryDisordersin Uniparental disomy in the Rare Disease Programme of a Large Clinical Cohort the UK’s 100,000 Genomes Project D. Pineda Alvarez, R. Truty, T. Hambruch, C. Kautzer, K.R.Smith1,2,M.Bleda2,D.Kasperaviciute1,2,K.Ibanez2, M. Kennemer, K. Kosheleva, V. Kulkarni, J. Rhees, A. Rueda Martin2, E. Thomas2, E. Baple2, A. Tucci2, A. Stafford, R. Nussbaum, S. Aradhya M. J. Caulﬁeld1,2, A. Rendon3,2 Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States 1Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2Genomics England, London, United Kingdom, Analysis of mosaic variants in hereditary diseases can 3University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom provideinsightintoanalyticrequirementsfordetectingsuch variantsandtheirclinicalimplications.Wevalidatedanext- Uniparental disomy (UPD) occurs when one parent generationsequencing method with high depth of coverage contributes two homologous copies of a particular chromo- to detect mosaic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), indels, somal segment and the other parent none. UPD can cause and copy number variants (CNVs) using Genome-in-a- geneticdisordersbydisruptingimprintingorhomozygosing Bottle (GiaB) sample dilution series. In a clinical cohort of heterozygous disease alleles. We present data on 421,220 individuals, we identiﬁed 1,799 mosaic SNVs and chromosomal-scale UPD detection using whole genome small indels and 84 mosaic CNVs across 245 genes, sequence (WGS) data from parent-child pairs in the Rare correspondingto0.6%ofreported variants. This represents DiseaseprogrammeoftheUK’s100,000GenomesProject. an incidence of 0.9% among individuals who had at least Routine quality control ﬂags duos with atypical identity by one reported variant. Approximately 40% of mosaic descent sharing patterns or elevated Mendelian inconsis- variants were classiﬁed as likely or deﬁnitively pathogenic tency rates; signatures typical of UPD are reviewed to andthesecontributedto1.1%ofdeﬁnitivediagnosesinthis conﬁrm and characterise the event. cohort.Nearly80%ofclinicallysigniﬁcantmosaicvariants Wehavecurrentlyidentiﬁed42UPDevents(27maternal, were associated with autosomal dominant disorders. There 14 paternal) at a rate of 0.34%. Both parents were werenearlytwiceasmanycancer-relatedgeneswithmosaic sequenced for 37 events. Thirty-eight involved whole1154 chromosomes while four were partial. Only four hetero- single individual generates a dense lineage tree that allows disomyeventsweredetected,whereasisodisomyandmixed us to obtain the clonal structure of developmental variants iso-and-heterodisomy occurred at similar frequencies. For for this individual. Variant deep targeted-sequencing on 38 families UPD was detected in the only affected family bulkDNAextractedfromserialcoronalsectionsofanentire membersocouldplausiblybethecauseoftheraredisorder. humancerebralhemisphererevealsgradual,clonalsegrega- Thirteen events occurred on ﬁve chromosome/parent com- tionacrossthecortexwithapersistentpolyclonalendresult, binations where UPD can cause imprinting disorders, while analysis of 22 other organs and tissues reveals a enabling potential diagnoses invisible to small variant mosaic architecture of organs deriving from distinct germ pipelines. layers. Inferring the developmental cell stages of variant Clinical interpretation has been completed for 9/42 occurrence discloses key aspects of human embryogenesis families. Four events were conﬁrmed from four attempts and numbers of effective progenitor cells at different steps and three cases reported as solved. All three cases resulted suchasblastocystformationandgastrulation.Weshowthat from UPD homozygosing the disease allele (n=2) or dis- sSNVs permit cell lineage maps of any human at rupting imprinting (n=1). Our work shows that UPD can postmortem, of density and breadth limited only by bedetectedusingWGSfromtriosorduoswheretheunder- sequencing depth, with clonal analyses directly revealing transmitting parent is sequenced. UPD detection can key aspects of human embryonic development. Grant lead to additional diagnoses in rare disease sequencing references: NINDS R01NS032457, Manton Center for programmes. Orphan Disease Research Fellowship K.R.Smith:None.M.Bleda:None.D.Kasperaviciute: S. Bizzotto: None. J. Ganz: None. Y. Dou: None. R.N. None. K. Ibanez: None. A. Rueda Martin: None. E. Doan: None. E. Maury: None. M. Kwon: None. T. Bae: Thomas: None. E. Baple: None. A. Tucci: None. M.J. None. A. Abyzov: None. P.J. Park: None. C.A. Caulﬁeld: None. A. Rendon: None. Walsh: None. C24.3 C24.4 Somatic mutation cell lineage analysis reveals Basal and mutagen-driven somatic mutagenesis shape progressive clonal determination in human embryo the genome of healthy human cells S. Bizzotto1, J. Ganz2, Y. Dou3, R. N. Doan2, E. Maury2, I. Franco1, H. Helgadottir1, A. Moggio1, M. Larsson2, M.Kwon3,T. Bae4,A.Abyzov4, P.J.Park3, C.A. Walsh5 P. Vrtacnik1, A. Johansson3, N. Norgren4, P. Lundin5, D. Mas-Ponte6, J. Nordström7, T. Lundgren7, 1Boston Children’s Hospital, Department of Genetics and P. Stenvinkel7, L. Wennberg7, F. Supek6, M. Eriksson1 Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan Disease, Boston, MA, United States, 2Boston Children’s Hospital, Depart- 1Karolinska Institutet, HUDDINGE, Sweden, 2Science for mentofGeneticsandGenomics,Boston,MA,UnitedStates, Life Laboratories, Linköping, Sweden, 3Science for Life 3Harvard Medical School, Department of Biomedical Laboratories, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Science for Life Labora- Informatics, Boston, MA, United States, 4Mayo Clinic, tories, Umeå, Sweden, 5Science for Life Laboratories, Department of Health Sciences Research, Rochester, MN, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Institute for Research in Biomedicine United States, 5Boston Children’s Hospital, Department of (IRBB),Barcelona,Spain,7KarolinskaUniversityHospital, GeneticsandGenomics,HowardHughesMedicalInstitute, HUDDINGE, Sweden Boston, MA, United States Analyses of somatic mutations in healthy tissues can Little is known about embryogenesis and organ speciﬁca- identify mutagens active in speciﬁc organs. We generated tion in humans due to the inherent difﬁculty of studying WGS data from freshly isolated single cells clonally these processes directly in vivo. However, next-generation expanded in vitro (N=69) and created a genetic atlas of sequencing (NGS) techniques are providing useful and somatic mutations in healthy human tissues (kidney, skin, unprecedented tools that can be applied to reveal unex- subcutaneous fat and visceral fat). Multi-organ biopsies plored mechanisms. We combine single cell DNA sequen- fromthesameindividualallowedwell-controlledinspection cing and high coverage (250X whole genome) DNA of tissue-speciﬁc differences, while donors of two age sequencing in three normal individuals to identify somatic groups (30s and 60s) provided data on the effects of aging. single nucleotide variants (sSNVs) that arose during This analysis, complemented with a meta-analysis of embryogenesis, and use them as forensic barcodes for cell somatic mutations from healthy (N=161) and tissue- lineage tracing in postmortem adult humans. Analysis of matched cancer genomes (N=192), showed a stereotyped 1,000singleneuronsandnon-neuronalcellsisolatedfroma mutational pattern across multiple cell types. Conversely,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1155 cells derived from the kidney tubules grouped into two and/or hyperpigmentation) is a rare symptom strongly separate populations showing either the stereotyped or a evocative of an underlying genetic mosaicism. These post- unique mutation pattern with high mutation burden, high zygotic events are challenging for conventional diagnostic signaturesSBS5andSBS40andenrichmentofmutationsin tools,astheyconcernonlyafractionofcellsoftenconﬁned transcribedgenes.Theseﬁndingschallengedtheconceptof to the affected tissue. Thus, genetic basis of MCD still a tissue-speciﬁc mutation accumulation and instead sup- remained poorly understood. ported the idea that speciﬁc mutagenic processes shape the Materials and Methods: The M.U.S.T.A.R.D. cohort genome of distinct cell types. A number of cells, including gathers DNA from skin biopsies of patients with develop- fat, skeletal muscle, kidney and blood progenitors, showed ment anomalies including MCD and their parents, pheno- no signs of exposure to external mutagens, but a common typed at the reference center for rare diseases MAGEC “basal mutagenesis”that wehave characterised.The DNA- (Dijon), and referred to either targeted ultra-deep sequen- repair machinery counteracted the basal mutagenesis but cing (60,000X) of candidate genes, or trio exome sequen- was less efﬁcient with aging and continuous mutagen cing (ES) at 200X. Data are analysed with a tailored exposure. Complete understanding of the mutagenic forces pipeline, allowing detection of low-rate nucleotidic varia- active in healthy cells will be important for the prevention tions or chromosomal events (mosaic CNV, mosaic uni- of mutations and consequent cancer development. parental disomy (UPD)). Supported by Swedish Research Council; Center for Results:From2014to2019,122patientswereincluded. Innovative Medicine; Hagelen, Jeanssons and Osterman ES was performed for 42, with identiﬁcation of mosaic Foundations; Svenska Läkaresällskapet; Riksbanken SNV in 5 candidate genes in 10 patients, and mosaic CNV Jubileumsfond. (monosomy/trisomy/tetrasomy/triploidy) or UPD in 9. I. Franco: None. H. Helgadottir: None. A. Moggio: Based on the recognisable clinical presentations therefore None. M. Larsson: None. P. Vrtacnik: None. A. identiﬁed, we selected 40 patients for targeted sequencing Johansson: None. N. Norgren: None. P. Lundin: None. of at least one candidate gene, with a conﬁrmed mosaic D.Mas-Ponte:None.J.Nordström:None.T.Lundgren: SNV in 14, and a global diagnostic yield of 40%. None. P. Stenvinkel: None. L. Wennberg: None. F. Conclusion: This work highlights the importance of a Supek: None. M. Eriksson: None. versatile bioinformatic approach combined to a clinical expertise, to decipher the chromosomal and molecular C24.5 aetiologies of developmental anomalies with MCD. It also Geneticbasisofmosaicpigmentarydisordersoftheskin pinpoints common pathogenesis pathways, which will help and how to detect them: the M.U.S.T.A.R.D. cohort’s enhancing our understanding of MCD, and may ultimately experience result in novel therapeutic opportunities. A. Sorlin: None. V. Carmignac: None. P. Kuentz: A. Sorlin1,2,3, V. Carmignac2,3, P. Kuentz3,4, É. None.É.Tisserant:None.Y.Duffourd:None.J.Rivière: Tisserant2,3, Y. Duffourd2,3, M.U.S.T.A.R.D. cohort’s None. P. Callier: None. C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin: investigators, J. Rivière2,3, P. Callier3,5, C. Philippe2,3, None. L. Faivre: None. P. Vabres: None. C. Thauvin1,2,3, L. Faivre1,2,3, P. Vabres3,6,7 C24.6 1Centre de Génétique, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, The Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome mutation is France, 2Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic a somatic mutation in chronic kidney disease génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3INSERM 1231, Génét- M. Eriksson1, H. T. Helgadottir1, N. Viceconte1, ique des Anomalies du Développement, Université Bour- A. Witasp2, E. Wallén Arzt1, A. Sola Carvajal1, gogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 4Génétique G.Revechon1,A.Thorell3,D.McGuinness4,P.G.Shiels4, Biologique Histologie, CHRU de Besançon, Besançon, A. Wernerson2, P. Stenvinkel2 France, 5Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire et de Cytogénétique,PlateauTechniquedeBiologie,CHUDijon 1Karolinska Institutet, Dept of Biosciences and Nutrition, Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 6Centre de référence MAGEC Huddinge, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institutet, Department of Mosaïques, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 7Ser- Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Division of vice de Dermatologie, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, RenalMedicine,Stockholm,Sweden,3KarolinskaInstitutet, France Department of Clinical Sciences, Danderyds Hospital, DepartmentofSurgery,ErstaHospital,Stockholm,Sweden, Introduction: Mosaic cutaneous dyschromia (MCD: seg- 4University of Glasgow, Institute of Cancer Sciences, mental hypopigmentation, such as Hypomelanosis of Ito, Glasgow, United Kingdom1156 Background: Developing insight into tissue-speciﬁc tran- Introduction: Premature vascular aging is a hallmark of scriptionalmechanismscanhelpimproveourunderstanding chronic kidney disease (CKD). The phenotype include ofhowgeneticvariantsexerttheireffectsoncomplextraits arteriosclerosis, loss of vascular smooth muscle cells, and disease. By applying the principles of Mendelian calciﬁcation and increased arterial stiffness. A similar randomization,wehaveundertakenasystematicanalysisto vascular phenotype is also observed in children with the evaluate transcriptome-wide associations between gene premature aging disease Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syn- expression and 395 complex traits across 48 different drome (HGPS). HGPS is caused by a single-nucleotide tissue types. mutation in the LMNA gene, c.1824C>T. This mutation Results: Overall, we identiﬁed 59,810 gene-trait asso- leads to increased production of a truncated protein, ciations in at least 1 tissue type based on multiple testing progerin, and dysregulation of cell functions. Progerin has and genetic colocalization corrections. These results indi- been found at low levels in skin and arteries from non- catethatgeneticeffectsexpressedmoreubiquitouslyacross progeroid individuals, but the underlaying mechanism is different tissues are more likely to be pleiotropic (i.e. unknown. associatedwithmultiplediversephenotypes).Wehavealso Materialsand Methods: Herewe analyzedthepresence exploredtheseresultsindetailwithaseriesofanalysesthat ofprogerininepigastricarteriesobtainedfromCKDstage5 highlight tissue-dependent effects. For instance, TPO, patients (GFR <15 ml/min) and controls, and its contribu- NR3C2 and SPATA13 expression was only associated with tiontoprematurevascularaging.Somaticmutationanalysis thyroid disease in thyroid tissue, whereas FBN2 was asso- included DNA extracted from progerin stained sections ciated with both cardiovascular and lung function traits but from CKD arteries (n=27), using digital droplet PCR. only when analysed in heart and lung tissue respectively. Results: Immunoﬂuorescence showed progerin positive Wealsodemonstratethatphenome-wideinvestigationsof cellsin70%ofthearteries(46±2yrs,n=40).Progerinwas our results can be valuable for drug validation purposes. detected in up to 7.4% of cells. The number of progerin Finally, we have evaluated the tissue-dependency of ﬁnd- positive cells correlated with number of years with the ings from genome-wide association studies (GWAS). This disease (P=0.03, r=0.34). The arteries with higher fre- suggested that integrating tissue-speciﬁc data with GWAS quency of progerin had an increased activation of DNA results can help elucidate the causal genes and tissues repair (P=0.005, r=0.63). Somatic mutation analysis responsible for effects, as well uncover putative novel identiﬁed the LMNA c.1824C>T mutation in blood and ﬁndings. arteries. Conclusion: The atlas of tissue-dependent associations Conclusion: Our results suggest that rare somatic muta- we have constructed should prove extremely insightful to tionsmaybecomeariskwhenincreasedtissueregeneration future studies investigating the genetic determinants of is induced, and provide novel mechanistic insight to the complex disease. Follow-up analyses in this study are underlying phenotype of premature vascular aging. merely a guide for future research and similar evaluations M. Eriksson: None. H.T. Helgadottir: None. N. Vice- can be undertaken at http://mrcieu.mrsoftware.org/Tissue_ conte:None.A.Witasp:None.E.WallénArzt:None.A. MR_atlas/. Sola Carvajal: None. G. Revechon: None. A. Thorell: T.G. Richardson: None. G. Hemani: None. T.R. None. D. McGuinness: None. P.G. Shiels: None. A. Gaunt:None.C.L.Relton:None.G.DaveySmith:None. Wernerson: None. P. Stenvinkel: None. C25.2 Multivariate GWAS of inﬂammatory markers reveals C25 Bioinformatics and multiomics novel disease associations C25.1 S. E. Ruotsalainen1, J. Partanen1, I. Surakka1,2, A transcriptome-wide Mendelian randomization study M. Pirinen1,3,4, V. Salomaa5, M. Salmi6,7, S. Jalkanen6,7, to uncover tissue-dependent regulatory mechanisms M. J. Daly1,8, S. Ripatti1,3,8, J. Koskela1 across the human phenome 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of T. G. Richardson, G. Hemani, T. R. Gaunt, C. L. Relton, Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Internal G. Davey Smith Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Bristol, United University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Kingdom Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki,, Hel- sinki, Finland, 5National Institute for Health and Welfare,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1157 Helsinki, Finland, 6Medicity Research Laboratory, Uni- 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for versity of Turku, Turku, Finland, 7Institute of Biomedicine, Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 8Broad Institute of Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Centre for Molecular MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Multivariate analysis of correlated traits is known to Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Bio-informatica, HAN increase power compared to univariate analysis, although University of Applied Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, it remains highly underutilized in GWASs to date. Since 4Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for many inﬂammatory markers are both correlated and Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University associated with multiple diseases, we aimed to leverage Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Institute of correlated biomarkers in discovery of disease-related Genetic Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle genetic variants. University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom Weuseddatafromthepopulation-basedFINRISKStudy of up to 26,705 Finns and imputed genotypes to 13M var- We developed a novel concept based on protein domain iants. We analyzed 66 cardiovascular or immunologic homology in the human genome to improve variant relevant traits, including anthropometric and biomarkers interpretation. For this purpose we mapped population- such as blood lipids and inﬂammatory markers. Out of the based variation from the Exome Aggregation Consortium 66 traits, hierarchical clustering identiﬁed one highly cor- (ExAC) and disease-causing mutations from the Human related cluster, comprised of 12 inﬂammatory markers - GeneMutationDatabase(HGMD)onto5,250Pfamprotein mainly interleukins andgrowth factors. Wethen performed domainfamilies.Wethen aggregatedpopulation-based and multivariate GWAS on this cluster using metaCCA, a disease-causing variants across 30,853 homologous protein summary-statistic based multivariate method applying domains into 2,750 meta-domains. Canonical Correlation Analysis. Weﬁndthatgenetictoleranceisconsistentacross97%of Usingmultivariatemethod,weobserved89genome-wide domain homologues (p<0.05, Bonferroni corrected), and signiﬁcantloci,asubstantialincreaseoverthefullsetof28 that patterns of genetic tolerance faithfully mimic patterns thatweregenome-widesigniﬁcantinoneormoreofthe12 of evolutionary conservation (Pearson 0.97, p-value<1e- traits. To illustrate, protective variant for pulmonary 308). Interestingly, we ﬁnd that 2,201 of the aggregated embolism rs4656185 in F5 was genome-wide signiﬁcant domainpositionsarenotevolutionaryconserved,buthighly only using multivariate method (multivariate p-value= intolerantto population-based variation and containat least 7.9e-20, smallest univariate p-value=9.9e-4). In addition, one disease-causing missense variant. An informative out of 89 genome-wide signiﬁcant loci 13 were reported to exampleconcernsdomainpositions17and21inthe“EGF- associatewithatleastoneofthetraitsinthecluster,7with likedomain”(PF00008).Thesepositionsarenotconserved othercytokinesorleukocytecountsand19withatleastone but are depleted of population-based variation in 60 genes disease-endpoint (p<1e-5) in GWAS catalog, UKBB or and additionally cause disease in the NOTCH3, JAG1, and FinnGen. In conclusion, our study shows how multivariate CRB2 genes. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that the presence of method provides a remarkable boost in power for locus disease-causing missense variants at aggregated homo- discovery, but also emphasizes the advantage of large logousdomainpositionsisoftenpairedwiththeabsenceof biobank-based phenome-wide screening. population variation and vice versa. S.E. Ruotsalainen: None. J. Partanen: None. I. Sur- Werealizedthatthisinformationcouldbeofgreatbeneﬁt akka: None. M. Pirinen: None. V. Salomaa: None. M. to the genetic community and therefore developed Meta- Salmi: None. S. Jalkanen: None. M.J. Daly: None. S. Dome; a fast and easy-to-use web server that visualizes Ripatti: None. J. Koskela: None. meta-domaininformation andgene-wide proﬁlesofgenetic tolerance.MetaDomeallowstoeasilyinvestigatevariantsof C25.3 interest for the presence or absence of variation at corre- Analysis of genetic variants through aggregation of sponding positions within homologous domains and is homologous human protein domains via MetaDome freely accessible at https://stuart.radboudumc.nl/metadome. strongly improves diagnostic prediction of missense L. Wiel: None. C. Baakman: None. D. Gilissen: None. variants H. Venselaar: None. J.A. Veltman: None. G. Vriend: None. C. Gilissen: None. L. Wiel1,2, C. Baakman2, D. Gilissen1,3, H. Venselaar2, J. A. Veltman4,5, G. Vriend2, C. Gilissen1 C25.4 reg2gene: predicting enhancer-gene associations using ensemble learning approaches1158 I. Patarcic, V. Franke, A. Akalin Belgium, 4Department of Anthropology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, United States, MDC BIMSB, Berlin, Germany 5Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford UniversitySchoolofMedicine,Stanford,CA,UnitedStates, Modelling procedures such as JEME (Cao et al. 2017), 6Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford Univer- FOCS (Hait et al. 2018), GeneHancer (Fishillevich et al. sity School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 2017), and EnhancerAtlas(Gao et al. 2016) were recently 7Department of Biology, Indiana University Purdue Uni- used to associate regulatory regions and their target genes. versity Indianapolis (IUPUI), Indianapolis, IN, United These methods vary tremendously in the deﬁnition of States, 8Applied Clinical Research and Public Health, enhancer regions, prioritization of data sources, modelling School of Dentistry, College of Biomedical and Life approaches, selection of validation or benchmark datasets, Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, and the ﬁnal enhancer-promoter predictions. We set off to 9Department of Oral Biology, Center for Craniofacial and developasystematic,integrativeandaccessibleapproachto Dental Genetics, School of Dental Medicine, University of associate regulatory regions with their target genes while Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 10Department of overcoming inherited problems of previous methods. We Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, combined multiple deﬁnitions of enhancers, proposed by University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, aforementioned publications and our own deﬁnition, to 11Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, deﬁned 286,723 enhancer regions in the human genome. Australia We developed reg2gene R package, which we used to model gene expression and enhancer activity. Across-cell- Introduction: The role of inheritance in craniofacial typesignalsfrommultipleRoadmapdatasetsweremodelled morphology has repeatedly been demonstrated through using ﬁve different algorithms, and hierarchically majority twin and family studies. We further expand upon this voted. We obtained ﬁnal reg2gene predictions by majority concept by investigating and selecting facial resemblances voting reg2gene models and predictions from the afore- between full siblings in order to identify genomic regions mentioned publications. that underlie normal-range facial variation. We predicted 89,820 “elite” EP associations (conﬁrmed Methods: 3D facial shape was subdivided into distinct by minimum 3 publications), whereas 435,295 EP asso- segments and a sibling matching experiment was per- ciationswereconﬁrmedbyatleast2publications.Toassess formed. This led to the identiﬁcation of phenotypically the performance of reg2gene approach, we created a set of similarsibpairsfromwhichtheircommonfacialtraitswere positive and negative enhancer-gene associations combin- derived, each representing global or local aspects of facial ing information from experiments (Gasperini et al. 2019) morphology that were informative for accurately matching andtheRoadmap dataset. reg2gen achievedbetter statistics the siblings. Subsequently, these traits (N=1592) were (accuracy, PPV, speciﬁcity) than the previously published projected onto two independent European samples (N1= methods. 4680, N2=3566) and genome-wide meta-analyses were We annotated GWAS Catalog using reg2gene predic- conducted. tions:84%ofSNPswasannotatedtothenearestgene(N= Results: Consistent with the literature on facial herit- 88,016), and 13% to the reg2gene enhancers. We further ability, the sibling-derived traits mainly captured variations performed disease-orientated downstream analysis. involving the full face in addition to the nasal and orbital I. Patarcic: None. V. Franke: None. A. Akalin: None. regions. We identiﬁed 11,661 single nucleotide poly- morphisms (SNPs) at 310 separate loci that reached C25.5 genome-wide signiﬁcance (P<5×10−8), inﬂuencing both A GWAS on data-driven 3D facial phenotypes selected globalaspectsofthefaceaswellaslocal(e.g.thetipofthe by matching siblings reveals 310 genetic loci nose)aspectsonly.Themajorityoftheassociatedsegments represented variations in the nose. H. Hoskens1,2, K. Indencleef2,3, J. Li2,3, J. D. White4, Conclusion: We here report a data-driven approach to A. Ortega-Castrillon2,3, J. Wysocka5,6, S. Walsh7, facialphenotypingstartingfromfacialsimilaritiesobserved S. Richmond8, J. R. Shaffer9,10, S. M. Weinberg9,10, between siblings. Complex shape transformations were M. D. Shriver4, H. Peeters1, P. Claes2,3,11 convertedintosimpleunivariatedescriptionsoffacialshape throughvectorprojections,allowing fortheuseofstandard 1Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, meta-analysis techniques in testing for genotype-phenotype Belgium, 2Medical Imaging Research Center, University associations. Signiﬁcant associations were found among Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of 310loci,furtherenhancingourunderstandingofthegenetic Electrical Engineering, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven, Leuven, basis of human facial shape.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1159 H.Hoskens:None.K.Indencleef:None.J.Li:None.J. Fleischer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; D. White: None. A. Ortega-Castrillon: None. J. FDNA. Y. Hanani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Wysocka:None.S.Walsh:None.S.Richmond:None.J. Signiﬁcant;FDNA.T.Kamphans:A.Employment(fullor R. Shaffer: None. S.M. Weinberg: None. M.D. Shriver: part-time); Modest; GeneTalk. G. Nadav: A. Employment None. H. Peeters: None. P. Claes: None. (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA. P. Krawitz: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; FDNA. C25.6 GestaltMatcher: Identifying the second patient of its kind in the phenotype space C26 Mitochondrial disorder T. Hsieh1, A. Bar-Haim2, D. Đukić1, T. J. Pantel3, C26.1 M. Mensah3, Y. Gurovich2, N. Fleischer2, Y. Hanani2, Mutations in LIG3 are a novel cause of mitochondrial T. Kamphans4, G. Nadav2, P. Krawitz1 neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, E. BONORA1, F. Bianco1, C. Bergamini1, G. Kellaris2, Germany, 2FDNA, Boston, MA, United States, 3Charité F. Ullah2, F. Isidori1, I. Liparulo1, C. Diquigiovanni1, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4GeneTalk, L. Masin1, M. G. Cratere3, E. Boschetti1, V. Papa1, Bonn, Germany A. Maresca1, G. Cenacchi1, R. Casadio1, P. Martelli1, I.Matera4,I.Ceccherini4,R.Fato1,G.Raiola5,S.Arrigo4, Introduction: Recent advances in next-generation pheno- S. Signa4, M. S. Severino4, P. Striano4, C. Fiorillo4, typing (NGP) tools for syndromology such as DeepGestalt P. Picco4, V. Carelli1, N. Katsanis2, M. Seri1, R. De have learned phenotype representations of multiple dis- Giorgio6 ordersbytrainingonthousandsofpatientphotos.However, many of Mendelian syndromes are still not represented by 1UNIVERSITY OF BOLOGNA, BOLOGNA, Italy, 2Duke existing NGP tools as their disease-causing gene has not University, Durham, NC, United States, 3San Raffaele been identiﬁed yet. We therefore propose a facial gestalt Scientiﬁc Institute, Milano, Italy, 4IRCCS G. Gaslini matchingapproachtoquantifythesimilarityamongpatients Institute, Genova, Italy, 5Pugliese-Ciaccio Hospital, Cat- and further explore the unknown genotype-phenotype anzaro, Italy, 6University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy relationship. Materials and Methods: We compiled a dataset con- We identiﬁed the novel gene mutations in three male sisting of 679 patients with 105 different monogenic dis- siblings, born from healthy unrelated parents, presenting orders. For each individual a frontal photo and the disease- with neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy featuring causing mutation were available. We used additional net- severe gut dysmotility (i.e. chronic intestinal pseudo- work architectures such as FaceNet to extract facial obstruction, CIPO) and neurological impairment with a embeddings and constructed a Clinical Face Phenotype peculiar leukoencephalopathy characterized by a “leopard- Space (CFPS) that was corrected for the confounding skin pattern”. Whole exome sequencing (WES) performed effects of age and ethnicity. on peripheral blood-derived DNA of the affected siblings Results: Given only the phenotypes as input we could revealed two novel heterozygous variants, p.K537N visualize molecular interactions of genes by their close (paternal) and p.G964R (maternal) in LIG3, a DNA ligase proximityintheCFPS.Aprominentclusterwasformede.g. involved in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) by BRAF, PTPN11 and other genes of the MAPKinase maintenance. lig3 ablation in zebraﬁsh reproduced brain pathway that result in disorders such as Noonan or LEO- alterations and impaired gut transit, reminiscent of the PARDsyndromeandwhichareconsideredsimilar.Beyond human condition. Such phenotype was rescued with wild- this proof of concept, we were able to match two unrelated type LIG3 mRNA, but not with mRNA encoding the two patients with a novel progeria-like facial phenotype with variants, indicating a loss-of-function mechanism. The p. unknown molecular cause. They were also in close proxi- K537N variant, mapping to the last base-pair before the mity to cases with mutations in LMNA and PYCR1 and donorsplice-site,inducedtheskippingofthecorresponding exome sequencing identiﬁed in these patients the same exon, in patient-derived skin ﬁbroblasts. The p.G964R de novo mutation in a novel disease gene that can also be variant, residing in a C-terminal binding site for XRCC1, assigned to nuclear envelopathies. impaired LIG3/XRCC1 binding. Both mutations induced T. Hsieh: None. A. Bar-Haim: None. D. Đukić: None. signiﬁcant mtDNA depletion in skeletal muscle and T.J. Pantel: None. M. Mensah: None. Y. Gurovich: A. ﬁbroblasts resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction in cells. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; FDNA. N. Compared to controls, mutant skin ﬁbroblasts revealed1160 abnormal mitochondria with disorganized, degenerated Genetics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, cristae, a decreased ATP synthesis, and decreased mito- Cincinatti, OH, United States, 12Division of Human chondrialmembranepotential.Increaseincellviabilitywas Genetics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, obtained via glutamine addition to the culture medium. In Cincinnati, OH, United States conclusion, we identiﬁed a novel form of mitochondrial gastrointestinal encephalomyopathy due to mutations in Introduction: The majority of mitochondrial disorders LIG3, a gene not previously associated to any human resultfrommutationsincomponentsofthenuclear-encoded disease. mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) maintenance machinery and This work was supported by Telethon Grant GGP15171. oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) subunits; the role of E. Bonora: None. F. Bianco: None. C. Bergamini: the mtDNA transcription machinery remains relatively None. G. Kellaris: None. F. Ullah: None. F. Isidori: unknown.ThemitochondrialRNApolymerase(POLRMT) None. I. Liparulo: None. C. Diquigiovanni: None. L. is the sole RNA polymerase in mitochondria and is Masin: None. M.G. Cratere: None. E. Boschetti: None. responsible for mtDNA transcription. V. Papa: None. A. Maresca: None. G. Cenacchi: None. Patients and Methods:Using whole-exome sequencing, R.Casadio:None.P.Martelli:None.I.Matera:None.I. we identiﬁed novel recessive and dominant POLRMT var- Ceccherini: None. R. Fato: None. G. Raiola: None. S. iantsinﬁveindividualspresentingwithavarietyofclinical Arrigo: None. S. Signa: None. M.S. Severino: None. P. problems, ranging from global developmental delay, Striano: None. C. Fiorillo: None. P. Picco: None. V. hypotonia and growth defects in childhood to late onset Carelli: None. N. Katsanis: None. M. Seri: None. R. De progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO). Where Giorgio: None. investigated, these defects were accompanied by either a mosaic cytochrome c oxidase deﬁciency in skeletal muscle C26.2 and/or multiple respiratory chain enzyme deﬁciencies. Mutations in POLRMT impair mitochondrial Mitochondrial mRNA and OXPHOS protein levels were transcription and are associated with a spectrum assessed in mutant POLRMT ﬁbroblasts. In addition, we of mitochondrial disease presentations studied recombinant mutant POLRMT proteins to deter- mine the effect of POLRMT variants on mitochondrial M. Oláhová1, B. Peter2, H. Diaz2, Z. Szilagyi2, transcriptional activity in vitro. E. W. Sommerville1, E. L. Blakely1, J. Collier1, Results:Functional characterisation ofpatientﬁbroblasts V. Stránecký3, H. Hartmannová3, A. J. Bleyer4, revealed a defect in mitochondrial mRNA synthesis, K. L. McBride5, S. A. Bowden5, Z. Korandová6, although no mtDNA deletions or copy number abnormal- A. Pecinová6, H. Ropers7, K. Kimia8, H. Najmabadi8, ities were identiﬁed. Mild decreases in the levels of both M. Tarnopolsky9, L. I. Brady10, N. Weaver11, OXPHOS subunits and fully-assembled complexes were C. E. Prada12, T. Mráček6, S. Kmoch3, G. S. Gorman1, observed in vivo, whilst functional in vitro characterisation M. Falkenberg2, C. Gustafsson2, R. W. Taylor1 oftheinvestigatedrecombinant POLRMT variantsrevealed that patient mutations exhibited variable, but deleterious 1Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle effects on mitochondrial transcription. University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that pathogenic 2Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, variants in the POLRMT gene can cause a spectrum of University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Research clinical phenotypes ranging from childhood-onset devel- Unit for Rare Diseases, Charles University, Prague, Czech opmental delay to late-onset PEO and emphasise the Republic, 4Section on Nephrology, Wake Forest School of importance of defective mitochondrial transcription as a Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States, 5Nationwide disease mechanism. Children’s Hospital, The Ohio State University College of M. Oláhová: None. B. Peter: None. H. Diaz: None. Z. Medicine, Columbus, OH, United States, 6Department of Szilagyi: None. E.W. Sommerville: None. E.L. Blakely: Bioenergetics,InstituteofPhysiologyoftheCzechAcademy None. J. Collier: None. V. Stránecký: None. H. Hart- ofSciences,Prague,CzechRepublic,7MaxPlanckInstitute mannová: None. A.J. Bleyer: None. K.L. McBride: for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 8Genetics None. S.A. Bowden: None. Z. Korandová: None. A. Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Pecinová: None. H. Ropers: None. K. Kimia: None. H. Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Najmabadi: None. M. Tarnopolsky: None. L.I. Brady: 9Division of Neuromuscular and Neurometabolic Diseases, None. N. Weaver: None. C.E. Prada: None. T. Mráček: McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 10Depart- None. S. Kmoch: None. G.S. Gorman: None. M. Falk- ment of Pediatrics, McMaster University Children’s enberg:None.C.Gustafsson:None.R.W.Taylor:None. Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 11Division of HumanAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1161 C26.3 nuclear genes encoding mitoribosomal structural proteins Mutations in the MRPS28 gene encoding the small linked to mitochondrial disease. mitoribosomal subunit protein bS1m in a patient with J. Pulman: None. B. Ruzzenente: None. L. Bianchi: intrauterine growth retardation, craniofacial None. M. Rio: None. N. Boddaert: None. A. Munnich: dysmorphism and multisystemic involvement None. A. Rötig: None. M. Metodiev: None. J. Pulman1, B. Ruzzenente1, L. Bianchi1, M. Rio2, C26.4 N. Boddaert3, A. Munnich4, A. Rötig1, M. Metodiev1 Brain-on-a-chip - a neurophysiological model of MELAS disease and comorbid psychopathology 1UMR1163, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut IMAGINE, Paris, France, 2Departments of T. Kozicz1, T. Klein-Gunnewiek2, D. Cassiman3, Pediatrics, Neurology and Genetics, Hôpital Necker- T. Nelson1, R. Rodenburg2, E. Perales-Clemente1, Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 3Department of pediatric E. Morava1, N. Nadif Kasri2 radiology,INSERM1000andINSERMUMR1163,Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades AP-HP, Université Paris Des- 1MayoClinic,Rochester,MN,UnitedStates,2Radboudumc, cartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium France, 4INSERM UMR1163, Université Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, France Mitochondrialdysfunctionisincreasinglyrecognizedinthe Departments of Pediatrics, Neurology and Genetics, ethology of psychiatric disorders. More than half of Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France individuals with mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS), who carry the Mitochondria contain a dedicated translation system, pathogenic variant m.3243A>G in their mtDNA, have which is responsible for the intramitochondrial synthesis depression as a comorbidity. Mechanistic insights into of 13 mtDNA-encoded polypeptides essential for the mitochondrial dysfunction in psychiatric diseases are biogenesis of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) largelyelusive.Here,wereprogramedskinﬁbroblastsfrom complexes I and III to V. Mutations in nuclear genes MELAS patients with comorbid depression into induced encoding factors involved in mitochondrial translation pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). These cells exhibited result in isolated or multiple OXPHOS deﬁciencies and isogenic nuclear DNA but different levels of mtDNA mitochondrial disease. Here, we report the identiﬁcation heteroplasmy (i.e.: 0 and >80%) in m.3243A>G mutation. ofdisease-causingvariantsintheMRPS28gene,encoding Next, we differentiated iPS cells into excitatory cortical thesmallmitoribosomalsubunit(mtSSU)proteinbS1min neurons (iNeurons). We found that high levels of apatientwithintrauterinegrowthretardation,craniofacial m.3243A>G heteroplasmy (>80%) resulted in mitochon- dysmorphism and developmental delay. Whole exome drial dysfunction, accompanied by reduced span and sequencing helped identify a seemingly homozygous complexity of the dendritic arbors, as well as a reduction missense variant NM_014018.2:c.356A>G, p. in axonal mitochondria. Furthermore, we found fewer (Lys119Arg) which affected a highly conserved lysine excitatory synapses and accordingly a lower frequency of residue. The variant was present in the mother in a spontaneous postsynaptic currents. Neuronal network heterozygousstate,butnotinthefatherwholikelycarried recordings from microelectrode arrays showed less activity alargedeletionspanningexon2andpartsofintrons1and in general, as well as a decrease in synchronous network 2thatcouldaccountfortheapparenthomozygosityofthe bursts. We now provide conceptual advance on how patient. PCR ampliﬁcation and Sanger sequencing of impaired neuron energy metabolism disrupts synaptic MRPS28 cDNA from patient ﬁbroblasts revealed the structure and function, dendritic complexity, as well as presence of a truncated MRPS28 transcript, which lacked networkactivityandsynchronicity.Thesespeciﬁcneuronal exon 2. Molecular and biochemical characterization of features are impaired to various degrees in psychiatric patientﬁbroblastsrevealedadecreaseintheabundanceof diseasesaswell.Overall,ourresultsshowthatiNeuronsare the bS1m protein, decreased abundance of assembled aneffectivediseasemodelforimprovingourunderstanding mtSSU and inhibited mitochondrial translation. Conse- of the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in the aetiology of quently, OXPHOS biogenesis and cellular respiration psychopathology. iNeurons could also serve as screening werecompromisedinthesecells.Expressionofwild-type platforms for novel genetic and/or pharmacological ther- MRPS28 restored mitoribosomal assembly, mitochondrial apeutic discoveries. Support: Tjallingh Roorda Foundation, translation and OXPHOS biogenesis, thereby demonstrat- Stichting Stofwisselkracht, Marriott Family ing the deleterious nature of the identiﬁed MRPS28 T. Kozicz: None. T. Klein-Gunnewiek: None. D. Cas- variants. Thus, MRPS28 joins the increasing number of siman: None. T. Nelson: None. R. Rodenburg: None. E.1162 Perales-Clemente: None. E. Morava: None. N. Nadif ethanolaminesupplementationlargelyrestoredcellviability Kasri: None. and enhanced apoptosis in MG-132-stressed patient cells. Our data demonstrate that the bi-allelic hypomorphic PISD C26.5 variant p.(Cys266Tyr) is associated with a novel SEMD The homozygous variant c.797G>A/p.(Cys266Tyr) in form, which may be treatable with PE or ethanolamine PISD is associated with a spondyloepimetaphyseal administration. dysplasia with large epiphyses and disturbed L. von Elsner: None. K.M. Girisha: None. K. Nee- mitochondrial function thukrishna: None. M. Muranjan: None. A. Shukla: None. G.S. Bhavani: None. G. Nishimura: None. K. L. von Elsner1, K. M. Girisha2, K. Neethukrishna2, Kutsche: None. G. Mortier: None. M. Muranjan3,4, A. Shukla2, G. S. Bhavani2, G. Nishimura5, K. Kutsche1, G. Mortier6 C26.6 SSBP1 mutations cause a complex optic atrophy 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center spectrum disorder with mitochondrial DNA depletion Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal T. Pippucci1, V. Del Dotto2, F. Ullah3, I. Di Meo4, Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India, 3Depart- P. Magini1, M. Gusic5, A. Maresca6, L. Caporali6, ment of Clinical Genetics, Seth GS Medical College and F. Palombo6, F. Tagliavini6, E. H. Baugh7, C. La KEM Hospital, Mumbai, India, 4Consultant in Clinical Morgia6,2,P.Barboni8,M.Carbonelli6,M.L.Valentino6,2, Genetics, P.D. Hinduja National Hospital & MRC, R. Liguori6,2, V. Shashi9, J. Sullivan10, S. Nagaraj11, Mumbai, India, 5Department of Pediatric Imaging, Tokyo E. Bertini12, R. Carrozzo12, F. Emma12, I. Cutcutache13, Metropolitan Children’s Medical Center, Fuchu, Japan, M. Armstrong13, M. Page13, N. Stong7, E. Davies3, 6Centre of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp & D. Karall14, S. Boesch14, M. Seri1,15, M. Falkenberg16, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium H. Prokisch5, N. Katsanis3, V. Tiranti4, V. Carelli6,2 Spondyloepimetaphysealdysplasias(SEMD)areagroupof 1Medical Genetics Unit, Sant’Orsola-Malpighi University genetically heterogeneous skeletal disorders characterized Hospital,Bologna,Italy,2UnitofNeurology,Departmentof by abnormal vertebral bodies and epimetaphyseal abnorm- Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences (DIBINEM), Uni- alities.WeinvestigatedtwofamilieswithanewSEMDtype versity of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Center for Human withoneprobandeach.Theyshowedmildfacialdysmorph- Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, NC, United ism, ﬂat vertebral bodies (platyspondyly), large epiphyses, States,4MolecularNeurogeneticsUnit,IRCCSFoundation, metaphyseal dysplasia, and hallux valgus as common C. Besta Neurological Institute, Milano, Italy, 5Institute of clinical features. By trio exome sequencing, the homo- Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum, Munchen, Germany, zygousmissensevariantc.797G>Ap.(Cys266Tyr)inPISD 6IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna, was found in both affected individuals. PISD encodes Bellaria Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 7Institute for Genomic phosphatidylserine decarboxylase that is localized in the Medicine, Columbia University MedicalCenter, New York, inner mitochondrial membrane and catalyzes the decarbox- NY,UnitedStates,8ScientiﬁcInstituteSanRaffaele,MIlano, ylation of phosphatidylserine to phosphatidylethanolamine Italy, 9Division of Medical Genetics, Department of (PE) in mammalian cells. PE occurs at high abundance in Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, the mitochondrial membranes, and structural properties of NC,UnitedStates, 10DivisionofMedicalGenetics,Depart- this phospholipid play an important role for various ment of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, mitochondrial functions. To characterize the functional Bologna, Italy, 11Division of Nephrology, Department of effects of the PISD missense variant we used ﬁbroblasts Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, derived from one patient and healthy individuals. Western United States, 12Division of Nephrology, Department of blotanalysisrevealednodifferenceinPISDproteinamount Pediatric Subspecialties, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospi- inpatient-andcontrol-derivedﬁbroblasts.Incontrasttothe tal IRCCS, Roma, Italy, 13UCB Celltech, Slough, United control ﬁbroblasts, patient cells showed fragmented mito- Kingdom, 14Department of Neurology, Medical University, chondrialmorphology.Treatmentofpatientﬁbroblastswith Innsbruck, Austria, 15Department of Medical and Surgical MG-132 or staurosporine to induce oxidative stress Sciences (DIMEC), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, followed by the activation of the intrinsic apoptosis Bologna, Italy, 16Department of Medical Biochemistry and pathway showed signiﬁcantly decreased cell viability with Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, increased caspase-3 and −7 activation. Remarkably, SwedenAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1163 Introduction:Singlestrandbindingprotein1(SSBP1)isa C27.1 keytetramericproteinforreplicationofmitochondrialDNA Diagnostic utility of genome-wide DNA methylation (mtDNA), which together with the replicative polymerase testing in genetically unsolved patients with suspected POLG and the helicase Twinkle constitutes the “minimal” hereditary conditions replisome. Pathogenic mutations in POLG/Twinkle impair mtDNA replication and cause mitochondrial dysfunction B. sadikovic leading to human infantile or late-onset phenotypes. Materials and Methods: We analyzed by whole exome London Health Sciences Centre, Canada, London, ON, sequencing ﬁve families with an optic atrophy spectrum Canada disorder, including retinal dystrophy and kidney insufﬁ- ciency, associated with mtDNA depletion. Functional Conventionalgenetictestingofpatientswithneurodevelop- experiments evaluating effects of potentially pathogenic mental presentations and congenital anomalies (ND/CA), variants on protein amount and multimerization, mtDNA i.e., the analysis of sequence and copy number variants, replication and cellular bioenergetics were performed leaves a substantial proportion of the patients unexplained. invitro and/or inpatients’ﬁbroblasts. Optic nerve size was Some of these cases have been shown to result from DNA measured in zebraﬁsh after knock-down and wildtype or methylation defects at a single locus (epi-variants), while mutant overexpression. others can exhibit syndrome-speciﬁc DNA methylation Results: We identiﬁed four heterozygous and one changes across multiple loci (epi-signatures). Here, we homozygous missense mutations in the SSBP1 gene. They investigate the clinical diagnostic utility of genome-wide affect mtDNA maintenance and replication, leading to DNA methylation analysis of peripheral blood in unre- mtDNA depletion, which resulted in a variable phenotype solved ND/CA patients. We generate a computational of impaired oxidative phosphorylation, observed either in modelenablingconcurrentdetectionof14syndromesusing ﬁbroblasts or in affected tissues (kidney and skeletal mus- peripheral blood DNA methylation data with full accuracy. cle). SSBP1 suppression in zebraﬁsh reduced optic nerve We demonstrate the ability of this model to resolve 67 size, a phenotype rescued by wild-type protein but not by patients with uncertain clinical diagnoses, some of whom the SSBP1 mutations, suggesting that all dominant muta- had VUS’s in the related genes. We show that the tions induced loss of function, whereas the recessive provisional diagnoses can be ruled out in many of the behaved as a hypomorph. cases,someofwhomareshownbyourmodeltohaveother Conclusion: Mutations in SSBP1 cause defects in diseases initially not considered. By applying this model to mtDNA replication, mitochondrial dysfunction and human a cohort of 965 ND/CA patients without a previous disease. Further investigations will contribute to improve diagnostic assumption and separate assessment of rare knowledge about mtDNA replication, and enlarge the epi-variants in this cohort, we identify 15 patients with landscape of phenotypic expression of mitochondrial dis- syndromic genetic disorders, 12 patients with imprinting eases in humans. andtrinucleotiderepeatexpansiondisorders,aswellas106 Funding: Italian Ministry of Health (Ricerca patients with rare epi-variants, a portion of which involved Corrente) to VC genes clinically or functionally linked to the patients’ T.Pippucci:None.V.DelDotto:None.F.Ullah:None. phenotype. This study demonstrates that genomic DNA I. Di Meo: None. P. Magini: None. M. Gusic: None. A. methylation analysis can facilitate the molecular diagnosis Maresca:None.L.Caporali:None.F.Palombo:None.F. of unresolved clinical cases, and highlights the potential Tagliavini: None. E.H. Baugh: None. C. La Morgia: value of epigenomic testing in the routine clinical assess- None. P. Barboni: None. M. Carbonelli: None. M.L. ment of patients with ND/CA. Valentino: None. R. Liguori: None. V. Shashi: None. J. B. sadikovic: None. Sullivan: None. S. Nagaraj: None. E. Bertini: None. R. Carrozzo: None. F. Emma: None. I. Cutcutache: None. C27.2 M.Armstrong:None.M.Page:None.N.Stong:None.E. Multiomics Approach to Diagnosing Undiagnosed Davies:None.D.Karall:None.S.Boesch:None.M.Seri: Patients None. M. Falkenberg: None. H. Prokisch: None. N. Katsanis: None. V. Tiranti: None. V. Carelli: None. M.T.Wheeler,J.N.Kohler,D.E.Bonner,D.B.Zastrow, C.Reuter,M.Majcherska,L.Fernandez,C.McCormack, S.Marwaha,C.Curnin,A.Dries,M.Ruzhnikov,J.Hom, C27 Developmental disorders 2 J.Sampson,P.G.Fisher,UndiagnosedDiseasesNetwork, E. A. Ashley, J. A. Bernstein1164 Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, H. R. Davies1, K. Hodgson2, E. Schwalbe3, J. Coxhead2, United States N. Sinclair2, X. Zou4, S. Cockell2, A. Husain5, S. Nik- Zainal6, N. Rajan2 Introduction: Patients with undiagnosed syndromes repre- sent the most challenging and rare manifestations of 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United King- disease. The Center for Undiagnosed Diseases at Stanford dom, 2Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, (CUD), a clinical site of the NIH funded Undiagnosed United Kingdom, 3Department of Applied Sciences, North- Diseases Network, evaluates patients with rare, undiag- umbria University,NewcastleuponTyne,UnitedKingdom, nosed diseases in an effort to diagnose patients, improve 4MRCCancerUnit,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom,5Depart- mechanisticknowledgeofdiseases,andacceleratebioinfor- ment of Pathology, Royal Victoria Inﬁrmary, Newcastle matics tool development. upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Academic Department of Methods: We reviewed the ﬁrst 400 applicants to the Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom CUD to identify phenotypic characteristics, demographics, and prior genetics evaluations. 147 patients were enrolled Introduction: Patients with rare germline mutations in the withbothsubjectiveandobjectiveevidenceofundiagnosed tumour suppressor CYLD progressively develop multiple disease.Exomesequencing,sequencereanalysisfocusedon skin tumours over their lifetime. The diverse histological novel variant and gene discovery, and beyond exome patterns of hair follicle tumours seen in this syndrome approaches including short- and long-read genome suggest genetic heterogeneity across these tumours. sequencing, RNAseq, untargeted metabolomics, immu- Methods: To investigate this, we comprehensively pro- nomics,andmodelsystemswereappliedtoattempttoﬁnda ﬁled the genomic landscape of 42 benign and malignant diagnosis for each of these participants. tumours across 13 individuals in 4 multigenerational Results: The most common predominantly affected sys- families with CYLD cutaneous syndrome (CCS; syn. temsofapplicantsincludeneurologic,musculoskeletal,and Brooke-Spiegler syndrome). immunologic. Among the 147 enrolled participants todate, Results: We found recurrent mutations in epigenetic 114 have had evaluations completed, 34 participants modiﬁers DNMT3A and BCOR in 29% of tumours. Inte- received a conﬁrmed diagnosis using a variety of clinical, grated genomic and methylation proﬁling suggest that genomic and research approaches. Speciﬁc evaluations and mutant DNMT3A drives tumourigenesis mechanistically additionalresearchstudiesaredeterminedonacase-by-case through Wnt/ß-catenin pathway signaling. In malignant bases by CUD clinician-scientists due to the diversity of tumours, epigenetic modiﬁers CREBBP, KDM6A and presentationandpriorwork-upofeachparticipant.Todate, EP300 were mutated. Somepatients were heterozygous for the CUD has found a strong candidate diagnosis for 10 loss of function mutations in MBD4, with biallelic muta- (9%) patients. Each candidate diagnosis is undergoing fur- tionsdemonstratedinapoorlydifferentiatedmalignantskin ther functional investigation. tumour with an associated increase in mutational burden Conclusions: Together with local and international col- and the accrual of epigenetic modiﬁers. To obtain insights laborators, a multiomic approach to undiagnosed patients into mechanisms that cause these mutations, mutational has found success in the diagnosis and characterization of signature analysis was performed, and revealed UV-related rare diseases. Supported by NIH Common Fund signatures in sun-exposed lesions but not sun-protected U01HG010218 tumours suggesting that non-UV-related mechanisms con- M.T.Wheeler:None.J.N.Kohler:None.D.E.Bonner: tribute towards CCS tumourigenesis. We also demonstrate None. D.B. Zastrow: None. C. Reuter: None. M. Maj- that cutaneous tumours that metastasize to the lung carry a cherska: None. L. Fernandez: None. C. McCormack: targetable recurrent driver mutation in AKT, and a UV None. S. Marwaha: None. C. Curnin: None. A. Dries: signature, supporting the origin from the skin. None.M. Ruzhnikov:None.J. Hom:None.J. Sampson: Conclusion: These ﬁndings add new dimensions to the None. P.G. Fisher: None. E.A. Ashley: E. Ownership existing paradigms of UV-induced skin cancer and high- Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual light the utility of studying rare disease to gain novel property); Modest; Personalis Inc, Deep Cell Inc. J.A. insights into genetic mechanisms of tumour formation. NR Bernstein: None. was funded by a Wellcome Trust Fellowship WT097163MA. C27.3 H.R. Davies: None. K. Hodgson: None. E. Schwalbe: Mutated epigenetic modiﬁers in CYLD cutaneous None. J. Coxhead: None. N. Sinclair: None. X. Zou: syndrome None.S.Cockell:None.A.Husain:None.S.Nik-Zainal: None. N. Rajan: None.Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1165 C27.4 R. V. Jamieson1,2,3, A. Sabri1, J. R. Grigg4, A. Cheng1, Identiﬁcation and characterization of NEPRO-related T. H. Loi1 skeletal dysplasia resembling cartilage hair hypoplasia 1EyeGeneticsResearchUnit,Children’sMedicalResearch D. Narayanan1, N. Kausthubham1, G. S. Bhavani1, Institute, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Save Sight H. Shah1, A. Shukla1, G. Mortier2, K. M. Girisha1 Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Disci- pline of Genomic Medicine, Children’s Hospital at 1Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Manipal Academy of WestmeadClinicalSchool,FacultyofMedicineandHealth, Higher Education, Manipal, Manipal, India, 2Center of University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp Clinical Genetics, Western Sydney Genetics Program, The University Hospital,, Antwerp, Belgium, Belgium Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney Children’s HospitalsNetwork,Sydney,Australia,4SaveSightInstitute, Cartilage-hairhypoplasia(CHH),anauxeticdysplasia1and Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, anauxetic dysplasia 2 are rare metaphyseal dysplasias Sydney, Australia caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in RMRP and POP1, which encode the components of RNAse-MRP Introduction:ROSAHsyndrome:Retinaldystrophy,Optic endoribonucleasecomplex(RMRP)inribosomalbiogenesis nerve edema, Splenomegaly, Anhidrosis and Headaches is pathway. Nucleolus and neural progenitor protein newly described. Independent genome and exome sequen- (NEPRO), encoded by NEPRO (C3ORF17) interacts with cing,identiﬁedthesamecausativevariantinALPK1inﬁve multiple protein subunits of RMRP. We report a biallelic families*. We present phenotypic and functional studies pathogenic variant in NEPRO, which could disrupt the characterising additional inﬂammatory, ciliary and centro- normal function of RMRP and cause a similar skeletal somal abnormalities in six affected individuals from one of dysplasia. We ascertained a 6-year-old girl, with skeletal the families. dysplasia resembling CHH. Analysis of parents-child trio Materials and Methods: ROSAH syndrome patients exomes and effect of the variant on protein structure and heterozygous for ALPK1, c.710C>T, [p.Thr237Met]), stability were performed. Two families with four affected underwentimmunological,cerebralMRI,bonemarrowand individuals with a skeletal dysplasia and a homozygous ophthalmic investigations. Centrosomal and primary ciliary missensevariant,c.280C>T(p.Arg94Cys)inNEPRO,were analyses were conducted in human ﬁbroblasts, ARPE-19 identiﬁed from literature and their phenotype was critically and HeLa cells. HeLa cells were subject to overexpression re-evaluated. RMRP and POP1 in proband did not harbor of mutant and wildtype ALPK1, and ALPK1 knockdown. any causative variant. Trio exome sequencing identiﬁed a ALPK1 isoform characterisation was undertaken in human possible homozygous candidate variant, c. 435G>C and mouse tissues. (p.Leu145Phe)inNEPRO.Alltheﬁveaffectedindividuals Results: Additional clinical features indicated innate have short stature, acromelia, skin laxity, joint hypermobi- immunity dysfunction with marked susceptibility to viral lity and dislocations. They also have short metacarpals, infections, and indication of abnormal inﬂammatory broad middle phalanges, narrow acetabular angle and responsesincludingcerebralmanifestations.Primaryciliary metaphyseal irregularities. Protein modeling and stability andcentrosomalabnormalitiesincell culture investigations prediction showed that the mutant protein has decreased suggested a possible gain of function disease mechanism. stability. The reported variants are in the same domain of ALPK1 isoform differences were identiﬁed in human and theprotein.Wereporttheidentiﬁcationandcharacterization mouse retina providing additional insight to disease of a new syndrome caused by biallelic variants in NEPRO mechanisms. in ﬁve patients with features resembling CHH and thus Conclusion: Heterozygous abnormality in ALPK1 leads expandthephenotypicandgenotypicspectrumofribosome to the multisystem ROSAH disorder through impact on biogenesis pathway related skeletal dysplasia.SB/SO/HS/ retinal and other tissues. There are primary cilia and cen- 005/2014 trosomal abnormalities as well as indicators of immune D. Narayanan: None. N. Kausthubham: None. G.S. system dysfunction, and a likely gain of function disease Bhavani: None. H. Shah: None. A. Shukla: None. G. mechanism. Mortier: None. K.M. Girisha: None. *ALPK1 missense pathogenic variant in ﬁve families leads to ROSAH syndrome, an ocular multisystem auto- C27.5 somal dominant disorder. Williams LB~, Javed A~, Sabri Impact of ALPK1 causative variant in ROSAH A~, Morgan D~ et al., Jamieson RV^, DeAngelis MM^. syndrome, a newly characterised retinal and Genetics in Medicine, Accepted 12 February 2019. ~Equal multisystem autosomal dominant disorder ﬁrst; ^Equal last authors.1166 R.V. Jamieson: None. A. Sabri: None. J.R. Grigg: Michaelides: None. M.E. Cheetham: None. A.J. None. A. Cheng: None. T.H. Loi: None. Hardcastle: None. C27.6 New mechanism for retinal degeneration on chrXq27.1 C28 Late breaking abstracts J. C. Gardner1, K. Jovanovich1, D. Ottaviani1, C28.1 J. Jackson1, A. T. Moore1,2,3, K. Ziaka1, K. Hau1, Wholeexomesequencingandcharacterizationofcoding A. Lane1, M. Michaelides1,2, M. E. Cheetham1, variation in 49,960 individuals in the UK Biobank A. J. Hardcastle1 C. Van Hout1, I. Tachmazidou2, J. Backman1, 1UCLInstituteofOphthalmology,11–43BathStreet,EC1V J. Hoffman3, B. Ye1, A. Pandey3, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui1, 9EL, London, United Kingdom, 2Moorﬁelds Eye Hospital, S.Khalid1,D.Liu1,N.Banerjee1,A.Li1,C.O’Dushlaine1, 162 City Road, EC1V 2PD, London, United Kingdom, A. Marcketta1, J. Staples1, C. Schurmann1, A. Hawes1, 3Ophthalmology Department, University of California San E. Maxwell1, L. Barnard1, A. Lopez1, J. Penn1, Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA, United L. Habegger1, A. Blumenfeld1, A. Yadav1, K. Praveen1, States M. Jones1, W. Salerno1, W. K. Chung4, I. Surakka5, C. Willer5, K. Hveem6, J. Leader7, D. Carey7, X-linkedretinaldegenerationsareaheterogeneousgroupof D. Ledbetter7, L. Cardon3, G. Yancopoulos8, disorders that lead to progressive loss of vision and A. Economides8, G. Coppola1, A. Shuldiner1, photoreceptor cell death. Following exclusion of known S. Balasubramanian1, M. Cantor1, M. Nelson3, genesinamulti-generationfamily,wemappedthelocusto J. Whittaker2, J. Reid1, J. Marchini1, J. Overton1, Xq26.3–27.2. Analysis of genome sequence data excluded R. Scott2, G. Abecasis1, L. Yerges-Armstrong3, A. Baras1 coding variants in all genes in the interval, and revealed split-reads,indicativeofapotentialstructuralvariant.Using 1RegeneronGeneticsCenter,Tarrytown,NY,UnitedStates, long range PCR and DNA walking, we identiﬁed a 57 Kb 2GlaxoSmithKline, Brentford, United Kingdom, 3GlaxoS- inter-chromosomal insertion of chr9p24.3, within an mithKline, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Columbia intergenic palindromic region on chrXq27.1. Structural University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United variants can modulate mechanisms of gene regulation, States, 5University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United affect gene dosage, or as a result of position effects, States, 6Norwegian University of Science and Technology, inﬂuence the expression of genes proximal or distal to the Levanger,Norway,7Geisinger,Danville,PA,UnitedStates, breakpoints. We hypothesised that retinal degeneration is 8RegeneronPharmaceuticals,Tarrytown,NY,UnitedStates caused by dysregulated gene expression, either near the palindrome, or driven by expression of chr9p24.3 tran- The UK Biobank is a prospective study of 502,543 scriptsfromtheX-chromosome.Toexplorethemechanism individuals,combiningextensivephenotypicandgenotypic of disease with the insertion in genomic and cellular data with streamlined access for researchers around the context, we reprogrammed patient ﬁbroblasts to induced world. Here we describe the ﬁrst tranche of large-scale pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and differentiated 3D retinal exome sequence data for 49,960 study participants, organoids. RNAseq analysis of patient retinal organoids, revealing approximately 4 million coding variants (of comparedtocontrols,revealedtranscriptionaldysregulation which ~98.4% have frequency <1%). The data includes at this locus. Further analysis of the downstream effects 231,631 predicted loss of function variants, a >10-fold includes immunostaining to assess retinal organoid mor- increase compared to imputed sequence for the same phology and protein expression. We have subsequently participants. Nearlyall genes(>97%) had≥1predicted loss identiﬁedanotherfamilywithadifferentinter-chromosomal offunctioncarrier,and mostgenes (>69%)had ≥10loss of insertion within the same intergenic palindromic region of function carriers. We illustrate the power of characterizing chrX.Thesestudiesidentifyanewgenomicmechanismfor loss of function variation in this large population through retinal degeneration, and the utility of patient iPSC derived associationanalysesacross1,741phenotypes.Inadditionto retinal organoids to investigate dysregulated gene expres- replicating a range of established associations, we discover sion as the likely cause of disease. novel lossoffunctionvariants with largeeffectsondisease J.C. Gardner: None. K. Jovanovich: None. D. Otta- traits, including PIEZO1 on varicose veins, COL6A1 on viani: None. J. Jackson: None. A.T. Moore: None. K. corneal resistance, MEPE on bone density, and IQGAP2 Ziaka: None. K. Hau: None. A. Lane: None. M. andGMPRonblood celltraits. Wefurtherdemonstrate the value of exome sequencing by surveying the prevalence ofAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1167 pathogenic variants of clinical signiﬁcance in this popula- Regeneron Genetics Center. I. Surakka: None. C. Willer: tion, ﬁnding that 2% of the population has a medically None. K. Hveem: None. J. Leader: None. D. Carey: actionablevariant.Additionally,weleveragethephenotypic None. D. Ledbetter: None. L. Cardon: A. Employment data to characterize the relationship between rare BRCA1 (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;BioMarin.G.Yancopoulos: and BRCA2 pathogenic variants and cancer risk. Exomes A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron from the ﬁrst 49,960 participants are now made accessible Pharmaceuticals. A. Economides: A. Employment (full or to the scientiﬁc community and highlight the promise part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. G. offered by genomic sequencing in large-scale population- Coppola: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; based studies. RegeneronGeneticsCenter.A.Shuldiner:A.Employment C. Van Hout: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. niﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. E. Ownership Interest S. Balasubramanian: A. Employment (full or part-time); (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. M. Cantor: A. Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. I. Tachmazidou: Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Glax- Genetics Center. M. Nelson: A. Employment (full or part- oSmithKline. J. Backman: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; GlaxoSmithKline. J. Whittaker: A. time);Signiﬁcant;RegeneronGeneticsCenter.J.Hoffman: Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Glax- A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Glax- oSmithKline. J. Reid: A. Employment (full or part-time); oSmithKline. B. Ye: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. J. Marchini: A. Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. A. Pandey: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Glax- Genetics Center. J. Overton: A. Employment (full or part- oSmithKline. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. Employment (full time);Signiﬁcant;RegeneronGeneticsCenter.R.Scott:A. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. S. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Glax- Khalid: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; oSmithKline. G. Abecasis: A. Employment (full or part- Regeneron Genetics Center. D. Liu: A. Employment (full time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. L. Yerges- or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. N. Armstrong:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Banerjee: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; GlaxoSmithKline. A. Baras: A. Employment (full or part- RegeneronGenetics Center. A.Li: A.Employment (full or time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. C. O’Dushlaine: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- C28.2 niﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. A. Marcketta: A. A novel ciliary Joubert Syndrome-associated protein Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron module regulates axonemal post translational Genetics Center. J. Staples: A. Employment (full or part- modiﬁcations and cilium stability time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. C. Schur- mann: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; B. Latour1, T. Rusterholz2, J. Van de Weghe3, Regeneron Genetics Center. A. Hawes: A. Employment M. Gesemann4, S. C. F. Neuhauss4, D. Doherty5, (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. R. Roepman1, R. Bachmann-Gagescu2 E. Maxwell: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- niﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. L. Barnard: A. 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron lands, 2University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Genetics Center. A. Lopez: A. Employment (full or part- Switzerland, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. J. Penn: A. United States, 4University of Zurich- Molecular Life Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Sciences, Zürich, Switzerland, 5University of Washington, Genetics Center. L. Habegger: A. Employment (full or Seattle, WA, United States part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. A. Blumenfeld: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Joubert Syndrome (JBTS) is a recessive neurodevelop- niﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. A. Yadav: A. mental ciliopathy, characterized by a pathognomonic Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron hindbrainmalformationwithvariablepresenceofadditional GeneticsCenter.K.Praveen:A.Employment(fullorpart- ciliopathy phenotypes affecting kidneys, retina or skeleton. time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. M. Jones: Todate,>35geneshavebeenlinkedtoJBTS,butformany A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron families the genetic cause remains unknown. All JBTS- GeneticsCenter.W.Salerno:A.Employment(fullorpart- genes encode proteins involved in the structure or function time); Signiﬁcant; Regeneron Genetics Center. W.K. oftheprimarycilium,anantenna-likeorganelleessentialfor Chung: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; signal transduction. A majority of JBTS-proteins form1168 complexes at the ciliary transition zone, which acts as a comprehensively byasimpleregulatoryvocabularyreﬂect- gatekeeper controlling ciliary protein content. Recently, we ing their dominant program. This vocabulary, in turn, identiﬁed ARMC9, encoding a non-transition zone protein, enables comprehensive and quantitative regulatory annota- asanewJBTSgene.Inthiswork,weutilizetandem-afﬁnity tionofbothprotein-codinggenesandthevastarrayofwell- puriﬁcation and yeast two-hybrid screens to ﬁnd protein deﬁned but poorly-characterized non-coding RNA genes. interactors of ARMC9. We identify a novel ciliary module Finally, we show that regulatory vocabularies open new composedoftwoknownJBTS-proteins(ARMC9,CEP104) avenues for systematically interpreting non-coding genetic and two proteins not currently associated with human variation, and substantially empower the connection of disorders (TOGARAM1, CCDC66). We ﬁnd variants in disease-associated variation with speciﬁc cell and tissue TOGARAM1 in individuals with JBTS, and show that states. Taken together, our results provide a common and variantslocatedintheTOG2domaindisrupttheinteraction extensible coordinate system and vocabulary for human with ARMC9. We generate CRISPR-edited armc9 and regulatory DNA, and open a new global perspective on the togaram1zebraﬁshmutantswhichdisplayreducednumbers architecture of human gene regulation. of shortened cilia and typical ciliopathy phenotypes W. Meuleman: None. S. Muratov: None. E. Rynes: including curved bodies and pronephric cysts. Patient None. J. Stamatoyannopoulos: None. ﬁbroblasts with ARMC9 or TOGARAM1 mutations display ciliaryabnormalitieswithaxonemalshorteningandreduced C28.4 levels of post-translational modiﬁcations (acetylation and Modeling the pathological long-range regulatory effects polyglutamylation), which are also found in our zebraﬁsh of human structural variation with patient-speciﬁc models.Moreover,ciliary resorptioninduced bycold orby hiPSCs cell cycle reentry is affected in ARMC9 and TOGARAM1 mutant cell lines, suggesting a role for this new JBTS- M.Laugsch1,2,3,M.Bartsuel1,R.Rehimi1,H.Alirzayeva1, associated complex in axonemal microtubule stability. A. Karaolidou1, G. Crispatzu1, P. Zentis4, M. Nikolic1, B. Latour: None. T. Rusterholz: None. J. Van de T.Bleckwehl1,P.Kolovos5,W.F.J.vanIjcken6,T.Saric7, Weghe: None. M. Gesemann: None. S.C.F. Neuhauss: K. Koehler8, P. Frommolt4, C. Schaaf2,3, K. Lachlan9,10, None. D. Doherty: None. R. Roepman: None. R. Bach- J. Baptista11,12, A. Rada-Iglesias1,4,13 mann-Gagescu: None. 1Centre for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Uni- C28.3 versityofCologne,Cologne,Germany,2InstituteofHuman IndexandvocabularyofaccessibleDNAelementsinthe Genetics,UniversityHospital,Cologne,Germany,3Institute human genome of Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Cluster of Excellence Cellular W. Meuleman, S. Muratov, E. Rynes, Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), J. Stamatoyannopoulos University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of AltiusInstituteforBiomedicalSciences,Seattle,WA,United Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Erasmus Medical States Centre, University of Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute for Regulatory information encoded in the human genome is Neurophysiology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Ger- activated by sequence-speciﬁc DNA binding factors, many, 8Department of Pediatrics, University Clinic Carl creating focal alterations in chromatin structure that are Gustav Carus, Dresden, Germany, 9Human Genetics and hypersensitivetoDNaseI.Wecreateddeepreferencemaps Genomic Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Uni- of DNase I hypersensitive sites (DHSs) from 733 human versity of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, biosamples encompassing 439 cell and tissue types and 10Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospital South- states, and integrated these to precisely delineate and ampton NHS Foundation Trust, Princess Anne Hospital, numerically index ~3.6 million DHSs encoded within the Southampton, United Kingdom, 11Molecular Genetics humangenome,providingacommoncoordinatesystemfor Department, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation regulatory DNA. Here we show that the expansive scale of Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 12Institute of Biomedical cell and tissue states sampled exposes an unprecedented andClinicalScience,UniversityofExeter,MedicalSchool, degree of stereotyped actuation of large sets of elements, Exeter, United Kingdom, 13Institute of Biomedicine and signaling the operation of distinct genome-scale regulatory Biotechnology of Cantabria (IBBTEC), University of programs. We show further that the complex actuation Cantabria, Cantabria, Spain patterns of individual elements can be capturedAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1169 Elucidatingthepathologicalconsequencesofdisrupting3D 1University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United genomeorganizationisoftendifﬁculttoachieveinvivodue States, 2Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, United to differences in gene dosage sensitivity between mice and States humans. This is well illustrated by Branchiooculofacial Syndrome (BOFS), a rare congenital disorder mainly Introduction: The 16p11.2 isthe most common among all characterized by craniofacial malformations and orofacial rare copy number variants (CNVs) associated with Autism cleft (OC). BOFS is caused by heterozygous mutations Spectrum Disorder (ASD). We investigated neurodevelop- within TFAP2A, a master regulator of neural crest cells mental processes impacted by the dosage changes of (NCC)andcraniofacialdevelopmentforwhichhumans,but 16p11.2 CNV using cerebral organoid models. not mice, are haploinsufﬁcient. Here we present a BOFS Materials and Methods: We generated 3D cultures (i.e. patient carrying a heterozygous inversion with one break- human cerebral organoids) that model human fetal brain point located downstream of TFAP2A. As several hetero- development using iPSCs derived from skin ﬁbroblasts of zygous translocations breakpoints and risk haplotypes 16p11.2 deletion (DEL) and duplication (DUP) carriers. located downstream of TFAP2A were previously also Transcriptome sequencing, proteomic proﬁling and immu- associated with OC we asked if this region is important noﬂuorescence were carried out to investigate molecular for TFAP2A expression in NCC derived from hiPSCs. and cellular impact of the 16p11.2 CNV. Cell migration, Using CRISPR/Cas9 technology we showed that neuronal morphology and synaptogenesis were also TFAP2A is located within a Topologically Associating investigated. Domain (TAD) containing enhancers that are essential for Results: Cerebral organoid recapitulated macrocephaly TFAP2A expression and NCC development. Moreover, in and microcephaly phenotypes observed in 16p11.2 DEL NCC derived from patient-speciﬁc hiPSCs the inversion and DUP carriers. Increased proliferation of neuropro- disconnectsoneTFAP2Aallele fromitscognateenhancers, genitor cells was observed in DELs. Gene co-expression leading to monoallelic and haploinsufﬁcient TFAP2A network analyses identiﬁed co-expression modules that expression.Althoughtheinversionshufﬂeswithinthesame were strongly associated with 16p11.2 copy number status. TAD the TFAP2A NCC enhancers with potentially novel A module enriched in genes with cell migration and loco- target genes, this does not result in enhancer adoption. motion functions was downregulated in DELs. A module Our work illustrates the power of combining patient- enriched in genes with synaptic functions, was upregulated speciﬁc hiPSCs differentiation with different genomic and in DELs. Severe migration defects in DEL organoids were geneticengineeringtoolstoovercomecurrentlimitationsin conﬁrmedbyBoydenchamberassay.Neuronsderivedfrom unveiling the long-range pathological consequences of DELorganoidshadlongerneuritesandincreasedsomasize. human structural variation. ThenumberoffunctionalsynapseswasalsohigherinDEL ThisworkwasprimarilysupportedbyCMMCintramural organoids. Treatment with the RhoA inhibitor rhosin res- funding, Fritz Thyssen Stiftung, Else Kröner Fresenius cued cell migration defects. Stiftung and DFG. Conclusion: Cerebral organoids recapitulate patients M. Laugsch: None. M. Bartsuel: None. R. Rehimi: head size phenotypes and gene expression proﬁles of fetal None. H. Alirzayeva: None. A. Karaolidou: None. G. human brain. Genes associated with cell migration and Crispatzu: None. P. Zentis: None. M. Nikolic: None. T. synapticfunctions were dysregulatedbythe16p11.2 CNV. Bleckwehl: None. P. Kolovos: None. W.F.J. van Ijcken: Thesemolecularﬁndingswerevalidatedexperimentallyand None. T. Saric: None. K. Koehler: None. P. Frommolt: rescued by a small molecule inhibitor. None. C. Schaaf: None. K. Lachlan: None. J. Baptista: L. Iakoucheva: None. J. Urresti: None. P. Zhang: None. A. Rada-Iglesias: None. None.P.MoranLosada:None.P.Negraes:None.N.Yu: None. C. Trujillo: None. M. Amar: None. J. Yates III: C28.5 None. A. Muotri: None. Cerebral organoids provide insights into brain neurodevelopment disrupted by the 16p11.2 copy C28.6 number variants in autism Preclinical validation of allele-speciﬁc silencing in patient-derived directly reprogrammed neuronal cell L.Iakoucheva1,J.Urresti1,P.Zhang1,P.MoranLosada1, lines as effective treatment for Autosomal Dominant P.Negraes1,N.Yu2,C.Trujillo1,M.Amar1,J.YatesIII2, LeukoDystrophy A. Muotri1 E. Giorgio1, M. Lorenzati2, P. Rivetti di Val Cervo3, A. Brussino1, M. Cernigoj3, E. Della Sala1, A. Bartoletti Stella4, M. Ferrero1, M. Caiazzo5,6, S. Capellari7,4,1170 P. Cortelli4,8, L. Conti9, E. Cattaneo3,10, A. Buffo2, promising therapeutic option for ADLD, prompting further A. Brusco1,11 in vivo studies to validate our results before a clinical trial. Moreover,ourresultshaveabroadtranslationalvaluesince 1University of Torino-Dep Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, our strategy can be extended to all pathological conditions 2University of Torino-Department of Neuroscience Rita associated with gene copy number gain. Levi Montalcini and Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri E. Giorgio: None. M. Lorenzati: None. P. Rivetti di Ottolenghi (NICO), Torino, Italy, 3University of Milano- ValCervo:None.A.Brussino:None.M.Cernigoj:None. Department of Biosciences, Laboratory of Stem Cell E. Della Sala: None. A. Bartoletti Stella: None. M. Fer- BiologyandPharmacologyofNeurodegenerativeDiseases, rero: None. M. Caiazzo: None. S. Capellari: None. P. Milano,Italy,4IRCCSIstitutodelleScienzeNeurologichedi Cortelli: None. L. Conti: None. E. Cattaneo: None. A. Bologna, Bellaria Hospital, Bologna,Italy, 5Department of Buffo: None. A. Brusco: None. Pharmaceutics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences (UIPS), Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Department of MolecularMedicineandMedicalBiotechnology,University C29 Stakeholder perspectives in cancer genetics ofNaples “Federico,Napoli,Italy, 7University ofBologna, Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, C29.1 Torino, Italy, 8University of Bologna, Department of The public favours healthcare-mediated disclosure of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, Bologna, Italy, hereditarycancer risk toat-risk relatives:apopulation- 9University of Trento, Centre for Integrative Biology based survey in Sweden (CIBIO), Laboratory of Computational Oncology, Trento, Italy, 10National Institute of Molecular Genetics (INGM) A. Andersson1, C. Hawranek1, A. Öfverholm2, Romeo and Enrica Invernizzi, Milano, Italy, 11Città della H. Ehrencrona3, K. Grill4, S. Hajdarevic5, B. Melin1, Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Medical E. Tham6, B. Numan Hellquist1, A. Rosén1 Genetics Unit, Torino, Italy 1Department of Radiation sciences, Oncology, Umeå Allele-SPeciﬁcsilencingbyRNAInterference(ASP-RNAi) university, Umeå, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical holds promise as a therapeutic strategy for gain of function sciences,Oncology,UniversityofGothenburg,Gothenburg, and repeat-expansion diseases. Here, we propose ASP- Sweden, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund Univer- RNAi as effective therapeutic option also for genetic sity, Lund, Sweden, 4Department of historical, philosophi- disorders associated with gene/s duplication. As a proof- cal and religious studies, Philosophy, Umeå university, of-concept, we studied Autosomal Dominant adult-onset Umeå, Sweden, 5Department of Nursing, Umeå University, demyelinating LeukoDystrophy (ADLD), a hereditary, Umeå, Sweden, 6Department of Molecular Medicine and progressive and fatal disorder caused by Lamin B1 Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (LMNB1) duplication. We have identiﬁed three ASP- siRNAs able to speciﬁcally and effectively silence the Introduction: Family-mediated information to relatives at non-duplicated allele of LMNB1, maintaining transcription- risk is the current Swedish clinical practice in cancer ally active only two alleles as in healthy subjects, restoring genetics. We addressed individuals from the general its physiological mRNA/protein levels and ameliorating population to explore interest in being informed if a cancer disease-speciﬁc cellular phenotypes in ADLD ﬁbroblasts. genetic investigation, revealing an increased cancer risk, To determine ASP-silencing efﬁcacy in cell types more had been conducted in their family. We also investigated relevant to the disease, we generated neurons directly preferences on source and mode of information. reprogrammed from human ﬁbroblasts, and used rat Materials and Methods: A random sample of the gen- oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) overexpressing the eralpublicwasapproachedthroughaSwedishcitizenweb- human LMNB1. We initially proved that these cellular panel during October 2018. Respondents were given the models presented ADLD-speciﬁc cellular phenotypes, scenarios of being member of a family with an increased supporting their relevance as in vitro preclinical tools. risk of colorectal cancer (CRC), 10 and 70% lifetime risk, Then, we treated both cellular models with the selected and being a potential at-risk relative. Regular colonoscopy mostefﬁcientASP-siRNAattwodifferenttime-points.The waspresentedasapreventivemeasuretoindividualsatrisk. treatment reduced LMNB1 protein level and ameliorated Results: Out of 1900 invited, 977 responded (51%). For ADLD-speciﬁc cellular abnormalities (e.g., nuclear anoma- the scenario of 10 and 70% CRC-risk, 89.2 and 90.6% lies and neurite growth), further validating the therapeutic respectively, would like to receive information about the potential of our RNA molecule and its allele-speciﬁcity. investigation.Theproportionpreferringtobeinformedwas Overall, we demonstrated that ASP-RNAi is a suitable and higher among women (91.5%, 93.3%) than men (85.7%,Abstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1171 88.2%), (Chi2, p=0.044, p=0.047). There was no sig- Family culture inﬂuences communication, 4) Adversarial niﬁcant difference by age, educational level, place of resi- growth and connection, 5) Key events can be relational dence or parity. turningpoints,and6)Healthprofessionalscanhelp.Family Regarding source of the information, 79.7 and 74.9% identities were solidiﬁed through the incorporation of a respectively would prefer to receive the information from pathogenic variant in family scripts, while members of the health care and 16.9 and 19.1% from a family member. family who held differing views to their families expressed Conclusion: In this study a majority wanted to be lessagreeablenessandopennesstodisseminateinformation. informed about a completed cancer genetic investigation The collective family’s experience and perspective towards and preferred health care professionals to mediate this apathogenicvariantcaninﬂuenceayoungadult’sdecision- information. The presented lifetime risk did not affect the making about genetic testing, risk-management and family respondents’ interest in being informed. planning. The utilization of family therapy skills in routine Grants: Cancer research foundation in Norrland practicewouldbehelpfulinfacilitatingcommunicationand and Forte. the inclusion of standardized measures is beneﬁcial to A. Andersson: None. C. Hawranek: None. A. Öfver- identifyindividualsneedingongoingpsychologicalsupport. holm: None. H. Ehrencrona: None. K. Grill: None. S. Conclusion: Understanding relationship difﬁculties that Hajdarevic: None. B. Melin: None. E. Tham: None. B. arise from family members holding family-divergent views Numan Hellquist: None. A. Rosén: None. offersinsightforfutureresearchinquiryandareasoffurther training and clinical support. C29.2 A.L. Young: None. P.N. Butow: None. P. Rhodes: Communicationacrossgenerations:disclosureofBRCA None. K.M. Tucker: None. R. Williams: None. E. Hea- cancer risk with young adults ley: None. C.E. Wakeﬁeld: None. A.L.Young1,2,P.N.Butow1,P.Rhodes3,K.M.Tucker4,5, C29.3 R. Williams4,5, E. Healey6, C. E. Wakeﬁeld7,2 High-Risk Women’s Responses and Understanding of Polygenic Breast Cancer Risk Information 1Centre for Medical Psychology & Evidence-based Deci- sion-making (CeMPED), School of Psychology, The Uni- T. Yanes1, R. Kaur1, B. Meiser1, M. Scheepers-Joynt2, versity of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Behavioral Sciences S. McInerny2, K. Barlow-Stewart3, Y. Antill4, L. Salmon5, Unit Proudly Supported by the Kids with Cancer Founda- C. Smyth6, J. Halliday7, P. James2, M. Young8 tion, Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney,Australia,3SchoolofPsychology,TheUniversityof 1University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 2Park- Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4Hereditary Cancer Clinic, ville Familial Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 3Uni- Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales versity of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4Cabrini Health, Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 5Prince of Wales Clinical Melbourne, Australia, 5Austin Hospital, Melbourne, Aus- School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, tralia, 6Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 6Illawarra Shoalhaven Cancer & Haematology Network, 7Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Aus- Wollongong Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 7School of tralia, 8Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Sydney, Women’s and Children’s Health, University of New South Australia Wales, Sydney, Australia Background: It is estimated that polygenic risk scores Background: Family communication is vital to ensure (PRS) can explain up to 18% of familial breast cancer. disseminationofgeneticinformationtoat-riskrelativesand Implementationofpolygenictestinghasbegun,withseveral to facilitate supportive family interactions around genetic commercial laboratories now offering the test. Despite testing and risk management decisions. Yet, little is known implementation, there is little research investigating how about how young adults and their families perceive and women respond and understand PRS. This study aimed to manage these interactions. explore women’s experience receiving their personalized Materials and Methods: Analysis was based on family breast cancer PRS and compare responses of women at systems theory using a mixed-method approach: family different levels of polygenic risk. interviews (N=68 individuals; 21 families), young adults Methods: Eligible participants were affected and unaf- interviews (N=33), pedigree data and standardized fected women from families clinically assessed to be at measures. high-risk for breast cancer who had received their perso- Results:Six key themes were identiﬁed andexplored:1) nalizedPRSaspartoftheVariantsinPracticePsychosocial Responsibility to protect, 2) “It’s a woman’s problem”, 3) Study (ViPPs). In-depth semi-structured interviews were1172 conducteduptofourweeksafterreceivingPRS.Interviews can face uncertainties regarding likely treatment outcomes were transcribed verbatim and analysed using thematic and implications of genomic ﬁndings. ‘PRISM-Impact’ analysis. assessesfamilies’andhealthcareprofessionals’experiences Results: Twenty-one women participated in this qualita- with PRISM. tivestudy(meanage53.4years).Elevenwomenreceiveda Methods:Patientsaged<21yearswithahigh-riskcancer PRSthatwasinthetopquartileofPRSdistributionand10 are eligible for PRISM. Parents, patients (>12 years), and in the lowest quartile. Women’s lived experience with healthcare professionals opt-in to PRISM-Impact, complete breast cancer informed how they responded to their PRS, surveys at enrolment, after results delivery, and then constructed and made sense of breast cancer risk following annually for ﬁve years. We interview healthcare profes- receipt of their PRS, and how they integrated this new sionals annually. information into their breast cancer risk management. Results: Currently, 95 families have opted-in and 76 Regardlessofrisklevel,allparticipantsdemonstratedbroad parents (child’s mean age: 8.68 years [range=0–17]; knowledgeofconceptsrelatedtopolygenicinformationand 67.1% mothers) have returned surveys. We have inter- were able to accurately describe the implications of their viewed 54 healthcare professionals (59% oncologists). PRS. Receiving PRS did not appear to negatively impact Parents’expectationsofbeneﬁtvarywidely,possiblydueto women’s distress levels. feelings of uncertainty, with some reporting that their child Conclusion: Polygenic breast cancer information is well is ‘extremely likely’ to beneﬁt (7.9%) while others report received and understood by women at high-risk for breast there is ‘no chance at all’ of beneﬁt (6.6%). This contrasts cancer. with healthcare professionals’ expectations, with only T.Yanes:None.R.Kaur:None.B.Meiser:B.Research 18.5% of professionals ranking ‘current patients’ as the Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand stakeholder beneﬁtting most from PRISM. Parents’ intol- pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; erance of uncertainty ranged from 12–51 (out of 60) and Astrazeneca. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, parents’anxietywashigh,onaverage4.9(SD=2.99,range collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as 0–10). Parents’ intolerance of uncertainty and anxiety were grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Has received funding highly correlated (r=0.555, p<0.001). from Astrazeneca for a study unrelated to this project. M. Conclusion: Parents with higher intolerance of uncer- Scheepers-Joynt: None. S. McInerny: None. K. Barlow- tainty might be at greater risk of distress and may beneﬁt Stewart: None. Y. Antill: None. L. Salmon: None. C. from targeted psychosocial support. It will be important to Smyth: None. J. Halliday: None. P. James: None. M. analyze parents’ emotional reactions and coping after Young: None. PRISM results delivery, and to assess whether their coping isassociatedwiththeirbaseline(in)toleranceofuncertainty. C29.4 J. Vetsch: None. C.E. Wakeﬁeld: None. M. Warby: Families’ and healthcare professionals’ uncertainties in None. K. Tucker: None. E. Duve: None. G. Marshall: the era of cancer precision medicine: results from None. T. Trahair: None. T. O’Brien: None. L. Lau: PRISM None. D. Ziegler: None. J. Vetsch1,2, C. E. Wakeﬁeld1,2, M. Warby3, K. Tucker3,4, C29.5 E. Duve1,2, G. Marshall2,5,6, T. Trahair2,5, T. O’Brien2,5, Advanced cancer patient perspectives on consenting to L. Lau2,5, D. Ziegler2,5 molecular tumour proﬁling 1Behavioural Sciences Unit, Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney M. Best1, P. Butow2, N. Bartley2, C. Jacobs3, Children’s Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 2School of I. Juraskova2, A. Newson1, D. Goldstein4, J. Savard5, Women’s and Children’s Health, UNSW Sydney, Kensing- B. Meiser6, M. Ballinger7, B. Biesecker8, D. Thomas7 ton,Australia,3HereditaryCancerCentre,PrinceofWales Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 4Prince of Wales Clinical 1University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2School of School, UNSW Sydney, Randwick, Australia, 5Kids Cancer Psychology, University of Sydney, Australia, 3University Centre, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, Australia, ofTechnology,Sydney,Australia,4PrinceofWalesClinical 6Children’s Cancer Institute, Lowy Cancer Centre, UNSW, School, Sydney, Australia, 5Deakin University, Geelong, Kensington, Australia Australia, 6University of NSW, Sydney, Australia, 7Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 8RTI Background: The PRISM precision medicine trial uses International, Washington, DC, United States novel technologies to personalize treatment for children withhigh-riskcancer.FamiliesandhealthcareprofessionalsAbstractsfromthe52ndEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 1173 Molecular tumour proﬁling (MTP), aiming to link mole- 1School of Social Policy and Practice, Philadelphia, PA, cular targets in tumours to cognate therapies, has entered United States, 2Stanford University Center for Biomedical clinical practice. However, little is yet known about the Ethics, Stanford, CA, United States, 3National Cancer psychosocial and behavioural implications of MTP. The Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States MolecularScreeningandTherapeuticsprogramisrecruiting 1,000 patients with an advanced, solid, rare cancer to Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is an inherited cancer undertake MTP and, if an actionable variant is found, predisposition syndrome associated with germline muta- participate in a suitable therapeutic trial if available. The tionsinTP53.LFSischaracterizedbyearly-onset,multiple current mixed methods psychosocial sub-study (PiGeOn) primary malignancies with nearly 100% penetrance by age aims to explore participants’ understanding, experiences 70 years, and substantial uncertainty regarding diagnostic and views regarding MTP at three timepoints. Baseline timing and prognoses. An interdisciplinary team used qualitative results are reported here. PiGeOn participants Interpretive Description to analyze interviews with family werepurposivelysampledtoparticipateinasemi-structured groupsenrolledintheNationalCancerInstitute’sLFSstudy interview. Thematic analysis is employed to determine (NCT01443468).Interviewselicitednarrativesaboutcancer themes. Data saturation was reached at 20 (aged 41–77 experiences,evolvingfamilystructureandfunctioning,and years).Participants’motivationsinclude:fearofdeath,trust coping. intheironcologist,needforcontrolandasenseof‘nothing Families reported limited reprieve between cancer diag- lost’. Desperation and fear of dying dominate motivation, noses anddeaths,which oftenoccurredsimultaneouslyand but participants also value being able to help others. across generations. Consequently, participants lived with Participants tolerate uncertainty, hope for reduced prog- griefasanintegralfeatureoffamilylife.Extensivedisease- nostic uncertainty, but fear loss of hope if no actionable related uncertainty created ambiguous losses, with little result is found (the most likely outcome). They often lack guidance to interpret risk or prepare for the next change. understanding, but trust the science of MTP and the Family groups reported anticipatory losses, shared expec- research process. This is one of few studies to explore the tationsregardingpredictedfunctionalandemotionalchange experiences of people who have undergone MTP. Identify- resulting from a new cancer or death. Individuals reported ing new treatment options overshadows broader and embodied loss, impairment to physical or aesthetic func- familial implications of genetic testing in this population. tioning due to cancer treatment or prevention. These Thisincreasesthedifﬁcultyofsupportinginformedconsent types of grief occurred simultaneously, often went unac- and shared decision-making in MTP testing. The current knowledged, and were often neither recognized nor dis- data will inform future policy and practice. Funded cussed with social or provider networks. Unacknowledged by NHMRC. losses included survivor guilt, identity, hoped-for life M. Best: None. P. Butow: None. N. Bartley: None. C. experiences, and altered reproductive plans. Jacobs: None. I. Juraskova: None. A. Newson: None. D. Family experiences with loss may warrant clinical atten- Goldstein: None. J. Savard: None. B. Meiser: None. M. tionovertime,asopposedtosolelyatthetimeofdiagnosis. Ballinger: None. B. Biesecker: None. D. Thomas: None. Traditional medical teams may lack capacity to address the complex psychosocial needs of families grieving LFS- C29.6 related losses. Long-term engagement of mental health Dimensions of grief and loss for families living with Li providers with bereavement training may provide invalu- Fraumeni Syndrome ablesupporttofamilieswithLFSandfacilitateengagement with providers. A. Werner-Lin1, S. L. Merrill1, J. L. Young2, A. Werner-Lin: None. S.L. Merrill: None. J.L. Young: C. D. Wilsnack1, V. Groner1, J. T. Loud3, R. C. Bremer3, None.C.D.Wilsnack:None.V.Groner:None.J.T.Loud: J. A. Peters3, M. H. Greene3, S. A. Savage3, None. R.C. Bremer: None. J.A. Peters: None. M.H. P. P. Khincha3 Greene: None. S.A. Savage: None. P.P. Khincha: None.