EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2020)28:1–140 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-020-00740-6 ABSTRACTS COLLECTION Abstracts from the 53rd European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations ©EuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics2020.Modifiedfromtheconferencewebsiteandpublishedwithpermission2020 Volume 28 | Supplement 1 Virtual Conference June 6–9, 2020 Sponsorship:Publication ofthis supplement was sponsored by theEuropean Society ofHuman Genetics. All content was reviewed and approved by the ESHG Scientific Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract :,;)(0987654321 :,;)(0987654321 selections. DisclosureInformation:Inordertohelpreadersformtheirownjudgmentsofpotentialbiasinpublishedabstracts,authors are asked to declare any competing financial interests. Contributions of up to EUR 10 000.- (Ten thousand Euros, or equivalent value in kind) per year per company are considered “Modest”. Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered “Significant”. Presenting authors are indicated with asterisks in the contributor lists. Plenary Sessions somatic mutations affecting RNA splicing factors and tumorigenesis, the promise of correct mis-splicing for can- PL1 Opening Plenary cer therapy, and the recent creation of CRISPR/Cas-based technologies for conducting mRNA isoform-level genetic PL1.2 screens. RNA splicing defects in cancer R. K. Bradley: None. R. K. Bradley* PL2 What’s New? Highlight Session Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, PL2.1 United States Evaluation of DNA methylation episignatures for diag- nosis and phenotype correlations in 42 Mendelian neu- Alternative RNA splicing, the process whereby a single rodevelopmental disorders gene can give rise to many different proteins, has long been known to be dysregulated in many cancers. Recent E.Aref-Eshghi1,J.Kerkhof1,V.Pedro2,GroupeDIFrance, studies have provided concrete genetic evidence that spli- M. Barat-Houari3, N. Ruiz-Pallares4, M. Alders5, M. cing dysregulation directly promotes cancer initiation Mannens5, P. Henneman5, R. C. Hennekam6, A. Ciolfi7, S. and progression. For example, genes encoding RNA spli- Pizzi7,M.Tartaglia7,P.M.Campeau8,J.Rousseau8,M.A. cing factors are recurrently mutated in both hematologic Levy1,2, L. Brick9, M. Kozenko9, T. B. Balci1,2,10, V. M. malignancies and solid tumors. However, uncovering the Siu1,2, A. Stuart1, M. Kadour1,11, J. Masters1,11, K. specific mechanisms by which these mutations promote Takano12,T.Kleefstra13,14,N.deLeeuw13,14,M.Field15,M. tumorigenesis has proven challenging. Here, I will discuss Shaw16, J. Gecz16,17, G. Merla18, P. J. Ainsworth1,2, H. recent progress in establishing functional links between Lin1,2,D.I.Rodenhiser2,19,M.J.Friez20,M.Tedder20,J.A.2 J.delPicchia Lee20, B. R. DuPont20, R. E. Stevenson20, S. A. Skinner20, Conclusions: This study more than doubles the number C. E. Schwartz20, D. Genevieve4,21, B. Sadikovic1,2* of published syndromes with DNA methylation episigna- tures, and most significantly, opens new avenues for 1London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, accurate diagnosis and clinical assessment in individuals 2WesternUniversity,London,ON,Canada,3Universitairede affected by these disorders. Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Centre Hospitalier Uni- E.Aref-Eshghi:None.J.Kerkhof:None.V.Pedro:None. versitaire de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Amsterdam M.Barat-Houari:None.N.Ruiz-Pallares:None.M.Alders: University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Uni- None. M. Mannens: None. P. Henneman: None. R. C. versity of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Ospedale Hennekam: None. A. Ciolfi: None. S. Pizzi: None. M. Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 8University of Tartaglia:None.P.M.Campeau:None.J.Rousseau:None. Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 9McMaster University, M. A. Levy: None. L. Brick: None. M. Kozenko: None. T. Hamilton, ON, Canada, 10Lawson HealthResearchInstitute, B. Balci: None. V. M. Siu: None. A. Stuart: None. M. London, ON, Canada, 11St. Joseph’s Health Care, London, Kadour: None. J. Masters: None. K. Takano: None. T. ON,Canada,12ShinshuUniversityHospital,Nagano,Japan, Kleefstra: None. N. de Leeuw: None. M. Field: None. M. 13Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether- Shaw: None. J. Gecz: None. G. Merla: None. P. J. lands, 14Donders Center for Medical Neuroscience, Nijme- Ainsworth: None. H. Lin: None. D. I. Rodenhiser: None. gen, Netherlands, 15Hunter Genetics, Waratah, Australia, M.J.Friez:None.M.Tedder:None.J.A.Lee:None.B.R. 16The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 17South DuPont: None. R. E. Stevenson: None. S. A. Skinner: Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, None. C. E. Schwartz: None. D. Genevieve: None. B. Australia, 18IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Sadikovic: None. Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 19Children’s Health Research Institute,London,ON,Canada,20GreenwoodGeneticCenter, PL2.2 Greenwood, SC, United States, 21Montpellier University, Identity-by-descent detection across 487,409 British Montpellier, France samples reveals fine-scale population structure, evolu- tionary history, and trait associations Introduction: Genetic syndromes frequently present with overlapping clinical features and negative or ambiguous J. Nait Saada1*, G. Kalantzis1, D. Shyr2, M. Robinson3, geneticfindingswhichcanconfoundaccuratediagnosisand A. Gusev4,5, P. Palamara1,6 clinical management. An expanding number of genetic syndromeshavebeenshowntohaveuniquegenomicDNA 1Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, methylation patterns (episignatures). United Kingdom, 2Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T. Materials and Methods: Peripheral blood episignatures H Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United can be used for diagnostic testing as well as for the States, 3Department of Computer Science, University of interpretation of ambiguous genetic test results. We present Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Brigham & Women’s here an approach to episignature mapping of the largest Hospital, Division of Genetics, Boston, MA, United States, numberofgeneticsyndromesstudiedtodate(n=42),which 5Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer has allowed the identification of 34 robust disease-specific Institute, Boston, MA, United States, 6Wellcome Centre for episignatures. Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Results:Weexamineemergingpatternsofoverlap,aswell Kingdom as similarities and hierarchical relationships across these episignatures to highlight their key features as related to The sharing of identical-by-descent (IBD) genomic seg- geneticheterogeneity,dosageeffect,unaffectedcarrierstatus, ments is a key indicator of genetic relatedness between and incomplete penetrance. We demonstrate the necessity of individuals and plays an important role in a wide range of multiclassmodelingforaccurategeneticvariantclassification. genomic analyses. We developed a new method, called Wedemonstratetheutilityofthistoolinresolvingambiguous FastSMC, that enables accurate biobank-scale detection of clinical cases and identification of previously undiagnosed IBD segments transmitted by common ancestors living up cases through mass screening of a large cohort of subjects to several hundreds of generations in the past. FastSMC withdevelopmentaldelaysandcongenitalanomalies.Finally, combines a fast heuristic search for IBD segments with we outline and present early data from a Canadian national accurate coalescent-based likelihood calculations and esti- clinical trial EpiSign-CAN currently enrolling 4000 patients mates the age of common ancestors transmitting IBD to assess impact of this novel diagnostic technology on regions. We applied FastSMC to 487,409 phased samples diagnosis of neurodevelopmental conditions. from the UK Biobank and detected the presence of ~214 billionIBDsegmentstransmittedbysharedancestorswithinAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 3 the past 1,500 years. We quantified time-dependent shared Translational Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, ancestry within and across 120 postcodes, obtaining a fine- Italy, 12Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, grained picture of genetic relatedness within the past two Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy, 13Department of Psychiatry, millenniaintheUK.Sharingofcommonancestorsstrongly Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, correlates with geographic distance, enabling us to localise Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether- a sample’s birth coordinates from genomic data with a lands, 14Karakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Center, median error of 44 km. We analysed genomic regions with Nijmegen, Netherlands, 15Department of Psychiatry and unusually high density of shared ancestry, which is indi- Behavioral Sciences and the MIND Institute, University of cativeofrecentpositiveselection,anddetected12genome- California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, wide significant signals, including 7 novel sites. We found 16Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University IBD sharing to be highly predictive of the sharing of ultra- Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands, 17Depart- rare variants in exome sequencing samples from the UK ment of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Biobank,enablingustodetect29associations(20ofwhich Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 18Depart- novel) with 7 blood-related traits. These results underscore ment of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University the importance of modelling distant relatedness to reveal 2nd Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, subtlepopulationstructure,recentevolutionaryhistory,and Prague, Czech Republic, 19Department of Psychiatry, rare pathogenic variation. University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa city, J. Nait Saada: None. G. Kalantzis: None. D. Shyr: None. IA, United States, 20Department of Neurosciences, UC San M. Robinson: None. A. Gusev: None. P. Palamara: None. Diego Autism Center, School of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States, PL2.3 21Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Large-scaletargetedsequencingidentifiesrisk genesfor Antwerp, Belgium, 22Simons Foundation, New York, NY, neurodevelopmental disorders United States, 23Oasi Research Institute-IRCCS, Troina, Italy,24CentreforHumanGenetics,KULeuvenandLeuven M.Kvarnung1,2*,T.Wang3,K.Hoekzema3,D.Vecchio4,H. AutismResearch(LAuRes),Leuven,Belgium,25Department Wu5, A. Sulovari3, B. P. Coe3, M. A. Gillentine3, of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of A. B. Wilfert3, A. Lindstrand1,2, A. Nordgren1,2, Washington,Seattle,WA,UnitedStates,26AdelaideMedical B. Anderlid1,2, J. A. Rosenfeld6,7, P. Liu6,7, ASID School and the Robinson Research Institute, the University Consortium3, I. E. Scheffer8,9,10, N. Brunetti-Perri11,12, of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia, 27Genetics and N. Rommelse13,14, D. G. Amaral15, G. W. E. Santen16, Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South E. Trabetti17, Z. Sedláček18, J. J. Michaelson19, E. Australia, Australia, 28South Australian Health and Med- Courchesne20, F. R. Kooy21, The SPARK Consortium22, ical Research Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Austra- C. Romano23, H. Peeters24, R. A. Bernier25, J. Gecz26,27,28, lia, 29CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and K. Xia5,29, E. E. Eichler3,30,31, M. Nordenskjöld1,2 Intelligences Technology (CEBSIT), Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China, 30Howard Hughes Medical 1Dept of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical States, 31Corresponding author, Seattle, WA, United States Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Department of Genome Sciences, University of Introduction: Large-scale exome sequencing studies have Washington,Seattle,WA,UnitedStates,4RareDiseaseand identified hundreds of genes with significant excess of de Medical Genetics, AcademDepartment of Pediatrics, Bam- novo mutations (DNMs) in neurodevelopmental disorders bino Gesu Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 5Center of (NDDs). In this collaborative study, we assessed 125 can- Medical Genetics & Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical didate and high-confidence genes in a large cohort of Genetics,SchoolofLifeSciences,CentralSouthUniversity, NDD cases. Changsha, Hunan, China, 6Department of Molecular & MaterialsandMethods:Wetargeted63candidategenes HumanGenetics,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX, for resequencing among 16,321 NDD cases and an United States, 7Baylor Genetics, Houston, TX, United additional 62 high-confidence genes in 6,211 NDD cases. States,8MurdochChildren’sResearchInstitute,Melbourne, In order to test for significance at the level of case-control Australia, 9Department of Paediatrics, Royal Children’s mutation burden and integrating with previously published Hospital and Department of Medicine, Austin Health, data, we assessed these genes among NDD cases and University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 10The compared the mutation burden to nonpsychiatric controls Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, fromExAC.Thesegeneswereassessedalsoinacombined Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 11Department of set of 17,426 NDD parent-child trios. Furthermore,4 J.delPicchia thorough phenotype studies for seven of the genes with to search for low-allele frequency variants in a panel evidence of mutational burden were performed in a subset ofmTORpathwayandFCDgenesin99FCDpatients.We of the patients. report that~30% ofFCD-Ipatients carried somatic loss-of- Results:Weidentified48genes(25newlyreported)with function SLC35A2-variants and ~60% of FCD-II/HME a significant burden of ultra-rare (MAF < 0.01%) severe patients presented somatic gain-of-function MTOR, AKT3, mutations.Amongthe125targetedgenes,weshowthat90 PIK3CA and RHEB-variants or two-hit, germline and genesarealsoenriched forDNMsinparent-childtrios.We somatic loss-of function DEPDC5, NPRL3, TSC1 and here focus on seven genes (CTCF, HNRNPU, KCNQ3, TSC2 variants. Analysis by droplet digital PCR of ZBTB18, TCF12, SPEN and LEO1) for detailed clinical microdissected cells demonstrated that only DNs and BCs descriptions to delineate the associated phenotypes and inFCD-II/HMEcarrythepathogenicvariants,andthatloss- clinical presentation of these specific and newly described of-heterozygosity in DNs in DEPDC5-mutated cases neurodevelopmental disorders. represents a mutational mechanism in FCD. Global M.Kvarnung:None.T.Wang:None.K.Hoekzema:None. unsupervised analysis of RNAseq from frozen bulk tissues D. Vecchio: None. H. Wu: None. A. Sulovari: None. B. P. from 20 mutated patients showed clusters independent of Coe:None.M. A. Gillentine: None. A. B. Wilfert: None.A. the nature of the variant/gene. We therefore performed Lindstrand:None.A.Nordgren:None.B.Anderlid:None.J. single-nuclei RNAseq from mutated frozen resected brain A. Rosenfeld: None. P. Liu: None. -. ASID Consortium: tissuestobetterresolvethemosaicnatureofthelesionsand None. I. E. Scheffer: None. N. Brunetti-Perri: None. N. investigate the cellular heterogeneity characterizing FCD. Rommelse: None. D. G. Amaral: None. G. W. E. Santen: Cell-type specific transcriptomic profiling revealed novel None.E.Trabetti:None.Z.Sedláček:None.J.J.Michaelson: insights into epilepsy pathogenic mechanisms. None. E. Courchesne: None. F. R. Kooy: None. -. The Conclusions: Our novel findings represent an important SPARK Consortium: None. C. Romano: None. H. Peeters: advancement in understanding the genetic etiology and None.R.A.Bernier:None.J.Gecz:None.K.Xia:None.E. mechanisms underlying epilepsies associated to malforma- E. Eichler: None. M. Nordenskjöld: None. tionsofthecorticaldevelopment.Thisworkwasfundedby the ERC grant n.682345 and Easi-Genomics Access grant PL2.4 S. Baldassari: None. M. Chipaux: None. E. Marsan: Genomic and transcriptomic profiling of malformations None. S. Ferrand-Sorbets: None. G. Dorfmüller: None. H. of cortical development: from tissue to single-cell Adle-Biassette: None. S. Baulac: None. resolution PL2.5 S.Baldassari1,2,3*,M.Chipaux4,E.Marsan1,2,3,S.Ferrand- TAD-shuffling at the FGF8 locus causes Split-Hand/ Sorbets4, G. Dorfmüller4, H. Adle-Biassette5,6,7, S. Foot Malformation type 3 Baulac1,2,3 G.Cova1,2*,R.Schöpflin1,R.Falcone1,B.Timmermann1,L. 1ICM Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, Paris, Wittler1, O. Zuffardi3, M. Spielmann1,2, S. Mundlos1,2 France,2SorbonneUniversité,UPMCUnivParis06,UMR S 1127, INSERM, U1127, Paris, France, 3CNRS, UMR 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, 7225, Paris, France, 4Department of Pediatric Neurosur- Germany, 2Institute for Medical Genetics and Human gery, Rothschild Foundation Hospital, Paris, France, Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 5INSERM UMR 1141, Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris, Germany, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, University France, 6Faculté de Médecine Denis Diderot, Université of Pavia, Pavia, Italy Paris7,Paris,France,7Serviced’AnatomieetdeCytologie Pathologiques, Hôpital Lariboisière, APHP, Paris, France In recent years chromosome conformation capture assays such as Hi-C revealed that mammalian genomes are orga- Introduction: Malformations of cortical brain development, nized in genomic units called topologically associated such as focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) and hemi- domains (TADs). TADs provide the regulatory scaffold for megalencephaly (HME), are important causes of severe physical contacts between regulatory elements and their pediatric drug-resistant epilepsies subjected to neurosurgery. target genes. Structural variations, such as duplications, At neuropathological assessment, FCD-II subtype is char- deletions and inversions, can result in disruptions of TAD acterizedbyenlargeddysmorphicneurons(DNs)andballoon structures, gene misexpression and consequently in human cells (BCs) due to mTOR pathway hyperactivation. diseases. Split-Hand/Foot Malformation type 3 is a rare MethodsandResults:Weperformedultra-deeptargeted congenital limb defect affecting the central digits of hands gene sequencing on matched blood-brain resected samples and feet and has been associated with tandem duplicationsAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 5 at the FGF8 locus. In order to investigate the molecular Dijon,France,8AP-HP,DépartementdeGénétiquemédicale, pathomechanism underlying this disease we mapped 25 Cardiogénétique et myogénétique moléculaire et cellulaire, duplications and one inversion at the FGF8 locus and we Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 9AP-HP, generated mice carrying the corresponding rearrangements Département de Génétique médicale, UF de Génétique using the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Capture Hi-C maps span- clinique,hôpitald’EnfantsArmandTrousseau,Paris,France, ning the Fgf8 locus revealed the presence of ectopic inter- 10CHRU de Lille, Service de génétique, Hôpital Jeanne de actions between the Fgf8 endogenous regulatory elements Flandre, Lille, France, 11Clinical Genetics Group, MRC and an unrelated gene within the locus in mutant mice Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of comparedtowild-type.Weshowedthatbothinthetandem Oxford, Oxford, UnitedKingdom, 12AP-HP, Département de duplications and the inversion, the Fgf8 enhancers are Génétique médicale, UF de Génétique chromosomique, relocated into a new TAD causing misexpression of the hôpital d’Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, neighbouring gene in an Fgf8-like pattern in the limb bud. 13Laboratoire de cytogénétique, Service de génétique médi- This ectopic expression in the apical ectodermal ridge of cale, CHRU Tours, Tours, France, 14Centre de Biotechno- developing limbs is associated with the limb phenotype logie Cellulaire, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, observed in mice and in human patients. Therefore, our 15Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique médicale, functionaldatashowthatTAD-shufflingattheFgf8locusis CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 16IGDR, CNRS UMR 6290, the cause of this human limb malformation syndrome and Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 17Centre de furtherhighlightthisnewmutationalmechanismanditsrole génétique, Hôpital d’enfants, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, in human disease. 18Laboratoiredecytogénétiqueconstitutionnelleetprénatale, G.Cova:None.R.Schöpflin:None.R.Falcone:None.B. CHUStrasbourg,Strasbourg,France,19APHP,Département Timmermann: None. L. Wittler: None. O. Zuffardi: None. de Génétique et Centre de Référence Déficiences Intellec- M. Spielmann: None. S. Mundlos: None. tuelles de Causes Rares, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 20Service de génétique médicale, CHRU PL2.6 Tours, Tours, France, 21Service de cytogénétique et biologie The enrichment of breakpoints in late-replicating cellulaire, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, 22Oxford NIHR chromatin provides novel insights into chromoanagen- Biomedical Research Centre, Wellcome Centre for Human esis mechanisms Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 23Service de génétique, CH Métropole Savoie, Chambéry, N. Chatron1,2,3*, G. Giannuzzi3, P. Rollat-Farnier1,4, France, 24Département de génétique, Laboratoire CERBA, F. Diguet1,2, E. Porcu3, T. Yammine1,2, K. UGUEN5, Saint-Ouen l’Aumône, France, 25Institute of Neurology, Z. Bellil1,2, J. Lauer Zillhardt6, A. Sorlin7, F. Ader8, UniversityCollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,26Ser- A. Afenjar9, J. Andrieux10, C. Bardel4, E. Calpena11, vice de génétique clinique et oncogénétique, CHU Amiens- S. Chantot-Bastaraud12, P. Callier7, N. Chelloug13, Picardie, Amiens, France, 27AP-HP, Hôpital Henri Mondor, E. Chopin14, M. Cordier1, C. Dubourg15,16, L. Faivre17, Créteil, France, 28Service de Génétique Clinique, Chromo- F. Girard18, S. Heide19, Y. Herenger20, S. Jaillard21, somique et Moléculaire, CHU Hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne, B.Keren19,S.J.L.Knight22,J.Lespinasse23,L.Lohmann24, France, 29AP-HP, Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital N. Marle7, R. Maroofian25, A. Masurel-Paulet17, Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 30AP-HP, Départe- M. Mathieu-Dramard26, C. Metay27, A. T. Pagnamenta22, mentde Génétique médicale,UF de Génétique chromosomi- M. Portnoï12, F. Prieur28, M. Rio29, J. Siffroi30, que, hôpital d’Enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, Paris, S. Valence31,32, J. C. Taylor22, A. O. M. Wilkie11, France, 31Sorbonne Université, GRC n°19, pathologies P. Edery1,2, A. Reymond3, D. Sanlaville1,2, C. Schluth- Congénitales du Cervelet-LeucoDystrophies, Paris, France, Bolard1,2 32AP-HP, Hôpital Armand Trousseau; GHUEP, Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Paris, France 1Service de Génétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2Equipe GENDEV, CRNL, INSERM U1028, CNRS Theriseofpangenomicmolecularassaysalloweduncovering UMR5292 UCBL1, Lyon, France, 3Center for Integrative complexrearrangements named chromoanagenesisthat were Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, hypothesized to result from catastrophic shattering events. 4CelluleBioinformatiquePlateformeNGS,HospicesCivilsde Constitutionalcaseshavetypicallybeenreportedindividually Lyon, Lyon, France, 5Service de Génétique, CHU Brest, preventingidentificationofcommonfeaturesanduncovering Brest, France, 6Unité de Diagnostic Préimplantatoire, the mechanisms at play. We characterized 20 new chro- Laboratoires de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universi- moanagenesisanddiscoveredyet-undescribedfeatures.While taires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 7Laboratoire de literaturedifferentiateschromothripsisanditsshatteringevent génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, CHU de Dijon, repaired through non-homologous end joining from6 J.delPicchia chromoanasynthesis born to aberrant replicative processes, clinically, I started my research work because I wondered we identified shattered chromosomes repaired through a what made a difference to the family’s ability to cope and combination of mechanisms. In particular, three samples adapt. In this presentation I will discuss early work that present with “rearrangement hubs” comprising a fragmented influencedme,myownresearchjourneyandthoughtsforthe kilobase-long sequence threaded throughout the rearrange- future of research in genetic counselling. My own studies, ment.Toassessthemechanismsatplay,wemergedourdata undertakenfrom1994to2019,havereinforcedmybeliefthat, with those of 20 published constitutional complex chromo- although communicating scientific information is important, somalrearrangementcases.Weevaluatedifthedistributionof addressing the psychological issues that inevitably arise their 1033 combined breakpoints was distinctive using boot- alongsideageneticdiagnosisisessentialtoenablethefamily strap simulations and found that breakpoints tend to keep to adjust and adapt the information to their own lives. My awayfromhaplosensitivegenessuggestingselectivepressure. doctoralstudy,forexample,showedthatpeoplehaddifficulty We then compared their distribution with that of 13,310 and in applying the scientific information to their personal cir- 468 breakpoints of cancer complex chromosomal rearrange- cumstancesunlesstheybelievedthatthepractitionerrelatedto ments and constitutional simple rearrangement samples, them as an individual, and that improving psychological respectively. Both complex rearrangement groups showed peaceofmindwasamajormotivatorforthoseusinggenetic breakpoint enrichment in late replicating regions suggesting services. Despite the clinical advances of the past four dec- similar origins for constitutional and cancer cases. Simple ades, studies still indicate that family members fail to com- rearrangement breakpoints but not complex ones were municate genetic risk to each other, that genetic decision depletedfromlamina-associateddomains(LADs),possiblyas makingcanstillbefraughtwithdistressandambivalenceand a consequence of reduced mobility of DNA ends bound to aproportionofthosewhocouldbenefitfromscreeningand/or lamina. The enrichment of breakpoints in late-replicating treatment fail to seek it. I would argue that addressing these chromatin for both constitutional and cancer chromoanagen- issues still falls within the remit of genetic health profes- esis provides an orthogonal support to the premature chro- sionals, particularly genetic counsellors, but there is a dearth mosome condensation hypothesis that was put forward to of research, particularly using qualitative methods, to inform explain chromoanagenesis. currentpractice.Geneticcounsellorscanbeoverwhelmedby N. Chatron: None. G. Giannuzzi: None. P. Rollat-Farnier: the ever-expanding body of genomic science underpinning None.F.Diguet:None.E.Porcu:None.T.Yammine:None. our work. However, there is a continuing challenge for K.Uguen:None.Z.Bellil:None.J.LauerZillhardt:None.A. counsellorsinthisultra-informationeratoofferpsychological Sorlin:None.F.Ader:None.A.Afenjar:None.J.Andrieux: support to family members to enable information to be uti- None. C. Bardel: None. E. Calpena: None. S. Chantot- lised, support family communication andto reach those who Bastaraud: None. P. Callier: None. N. Chelloug: None. E. are unaware of their options. I emphasise the need for more Chopin: None. M. Cordier: None. C. Dubourg: None. L. applied research, especially addressing questions initiated by Faivre:None.F.Girard:None.S.Heide:None.Y.Herenger: those engaged in clinical practice and using qualitative None. S. Jaillard: None. B. Keren: None. S. J. L. Knight: methods where appropriate. None. J. Lespinasse: None. L. Lohmann: None. N. Marle: H. Skirton: None. None. R. Maroofian: None. A. Masurel-Paulet: None. M. Mathieu-Dramard:None.C.Metay:None.A.T.Pagnamenta: None. M. Portnoï: None. F. Prieur: None. M. Rio: None. J. Concurrent Symposia Siffroi:None.S.Valence:None.J.C.Taylor:None.A.O.M. Wilkie: None. P. Edery: None. A. Reymond: None. D. S01 What to Expect from Prenatal Diagnosis Sanlaville: None. C. Schluth-Bolard: None. S01.1 PL3 ELPAG Award Lecture PrenatalGenomicApproachtoGeneticDiseasesofBone PL3.1 D. Krakow* ELPAG Award Lecture UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States H. Skirton* Skeletal dysplasia are a heterogenous group of mendelian UniversityofPlymouth(retired),Plymouth,UnitedKingdom disorders that often present in the prenatal period. With the expansion of available genomic technologies, many of these The definition of genetic counselling includes the important techniqueshavebeenappliedtoboththepreimplantationand terms, ‘psychological’ and ‘adaptation’. While practising prenatal periods. These methodologies include noninvasiveAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 7 prenatal testing for de novo or dominantly inherited skeletal S02 Liquid Biopsy for Early Detection of Cancer disorders, couple screening for recessively inherited skeletal diseases, PGT for familial inherited disorders. microarray S02.1 analysis for copy number variation, gene panels for skeletal Methylation Patterns of Plasma DNA in Health and dysplasias and related diseases, and exome analysis. The Disease disease genes have been identified for most of the >460 establishedskeletaldysplasias,thusaffordingtheopportunity Y. Dor* toaddressthemolecularbasisofmostoftheskeletaldisorders thatwillpresentintheprenatalperiod.Useofexomeanalysis The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel has identified previously unappreciated prenatal onset dis- orders, expanding the number of defined skeletal disorders. Each cell type has a unique and stable DNA methylation However, in spite of the advances in genomic technologies, pattern, reflecting its gene expression program. We have themainstayofprenataldiagnosisremainsprenatalultrasound established a comprehensive atlas of tissue and cell type- evaluation. Most cases of skeletal dysplasia are detected by specific human methylomes, allowing to define multiple prenatal ultrasound and appreciation of the ultrasound find- loci that are unmethylated or methylated specifically in a ings helps guide diagnosis and genomic analyses. Key ultra- given cell type. We are using these loci as biomarkers to soundfindingsincludinglethalitycanhelpguidemanagement identify the tissue origins of cfDNA, and to infer physio- pending the results of molecular diagnosis. logic and pathologic tissue dynamics. I will discuss exam- D. Krakow: None. ples for the use of tissue specific cfDNA methylation patterns including the detection of cardiomyocyte cfDNA S01.2 after myocardial infarction and in sepsis; the detection of Pandora’s Pregnancy - A new Era for Prenatal Genetic tissue-specific cfDNA in patients with early and late stage Testing cancer; and a dissection of the phenomenon of elevated cfDNA after intensive exercise. Y. Hashiloni-Dolev1*, T. Nov-Klaiman2, A. Raz3 Y. Dor: None. 1Ben-Gurion University of the Negav, Israel, Tel Aviv, S03 Our Ancestry Israel, 2Ben-Gurion University of the Negav, Israel, Munich, Israel, 3Ben-Gurion University of the Negav, S03.2 Israel, Be’er Sheva, Israel What ancient humans can teach us about modern genetic variation The talk is based on conceptual analysis of seminal works that shaped the socio-ethical discourse surrounding the J. Kelso1,2* experiencesofparentsaswellasprofessionalswithprenatal diagnosis in the last thirty years. It delineates a shift from 1Leipzig, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary the "traditional" technologies of karyotyping inPND tothe Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany current phase of advanced genetic technologies including non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), chromosomal micro- Recent technological advances have made it possible to arrayanalysis(CMA)andwhole-exomesequencing(WES) recover genome sequences from a number of archaic and with their higher detection rate and related abundance of early modern humans. These genomes offer a unique uncertain data. The talk will consider the implications of opportunity to identify genetic changes that have come to thisneweraofPNDforpatientsandhealthprofessionalsby fixationorreachedhighfrequencyinmodernhumanssince drawing on previous studies documenting how probability thedivergencefromourcommonancestorwithNeandertals anduncertaintyaffectinformedconsent/choice,healthrisks and Denisovans. Analyses of these archaic genomes have communication,customersatisfactionanddecision-making, also provided direct evidence for interbreeding between and parent-child bonding. I will argue that these changes early modern and archaic humans. As a result all present- move us beyond the idioms and realities of the "tentative day people outside of Africa carry approximately 2% pregnancy" and "moral pioneering", to uncertainty, prob- NeandertalDNA,andsomepopulations,largelyinOceania, ability-basedcounselingandmoral/translationalgambling.I also carry DNA from Denisovans. This introgressed DNA will conclude by discussing what is needed to maintain has been shown to have both positive and negative out- hope in the era of Pandora’s pregnancy. comes for present-day carriers: underlying apparently Y. Hashiloni-Dolev: None. T. Nov-Klaiman: None. A. adaptive phenotypes as well as influencing disease risk. In Raz: None. recent work we have identified Neandertal haplotypes that8 J.delPicchia are likely of archaic origin and determined the likely the government for its convenient accessibility and rea- functional consequences of these haplotypes using public sonable maintenance costs. Each citizen in Estonia has an genome,geneexpression,andphenotypedatasets.Wehave online e-Health record that can be accessed with the per- also used simulations, as well as the distribution of Nean- son’s electronic ID-card which makes the e-Health medical dertal DNA in ancient modern humans, to understand how record system secure and the information easily accessible selection has acted on Neandertal introgressed sequences to authorized individuals. The project has been a huge over the last 45,000 years. challenge for the Estonian Biobank, considering that the firstsetof52,000biobankparticipantswererecruitedovera S04 Public and Patient Engagement 10-yearperiod(2002-2011).Thenewrecruitmentstartedin 2018, afterwards an additional 150+ thousand people have S04.1 joined the biobank. In total, the biobank participants cover The Patient’s Role in New Disease Gene Discovery approximately20%oftheadultpopulationofEstonia.Long before the new recruitment, in 2015, Estonian Biobank C. P. Schaaf* started providing personalized genetic feedback to the bio- bankparticipantsandaninteresttowardsitishuge.bynow University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany Around 3000 people have received their feedback reports by now. As a result, the government of Estonia has laun- The practice of clinical genetics has been revolutionised by ched the Personalized medicine program and invested 5, the implementation of next generation sequencing. Novel million € for developing state-of-the-art digital decision disease genes are recognised on a weekly basis, and the support system to use the gathered genomic information in number of OMIM-listed disease-gene associations con- the Estonian healthcare system. tinues to increase steadily. Methods: In order to recruit an additional 15% of the Whatarethecharacteristicsof“patientno.1”,andhowdo adult population of Estonia, traditional marketing tools you engage with your patient families to work together were applied to gain public attention and support to beyond the initial disease gene discovery? benefit the nationwide project with a minimized budget. Here, we highlight the discovery of Schaaf-Yang Ourapproaches included: explaining thebenefits of using syndrome, a rare neurodevelopment disorder caused by the genetic information in healthcare system by public truncating mutations in MAGEL2, a protein-coding gene media, involving social media influencers, and arranging within the Prader-Willi syndrome domain on chromosome social media challenges to draw the attention and raise 15q11.2. We highlight ongoing physician-patient interac- interest to the project. Enrolment consisted of digitally tions, leading to a deeper understanding of disease signed consents using Estonian ID-card systems, and phenotype, genotype-phenotype interactions, but also bloodsampledonationscollectedthroughawidenetwork molecular mechanisms and avenues towards therapeutic of pharmacies. development. Results:Bytheendof2019,thereare200,000+biobank C. P. Schaaf: None. participants, increasing the biobank cohort from previous 5% to 20% of adult population of Estonia in less than S04.2 two years. Experiences with public engagement: Estonian Bio- Conclusion: A lot can be done if you think out-of-the- bank’s example box! The approaches we used and experiences gained throughout this project can be successfully used by other A. Allik1,2*, A. Metspalu2, L. Leitsalu2, L. Milani2 countries. A. Metspalu: None. L. Leitsalu: None. L. Milani: None. 1Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia S04.3 MyDNA,whosebusinessisitanyway?ACitizenForum Introduction: The Estonian government launched a pro- on the Societal Impact of Genomics gram in 2018 to map the microarray-based genotypes of 100,000 out of 1.3 million inhabitants. The goal of this W. Van Hoof*, C. Mayeur initiative was to introduce the collected genotype data in Estonia’s upgraded healthcare system for delivering perso- Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium nalized medicine information. Estonia’s healthcare system has been revolutionized by innovative e-solutions and has Precision medicine, personalized screening, prevention, become beneficial for patients, doctors, hospitals, and also ever-expanding commercial services and the need forAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 9 massive data sharing in genomics have led to a need to S05 Development and Disease at Single Cell Resolution engage the public in a discussion on the governance of genomic information. Therefore, Sciensano and the King S05.1 Baudouin Foundation organized a Belgium citizen forum Embryo-scale, single-cell spatial transcriptomics on the ethical, legal, and societal implications (ELSI) surrounding the use of genomic information. This delib- S. Srivatsan1, M. Regier1, E. Barkan1, J. Packer1, P. erative forum resulted in policy recommendations for the Grosjean1,S.Saxton1,J.Ladd2,M.Spielmann3,P.Lampe2, Belgian Minister of Public Health, related experts and J. Shendure1,4,5, K. Stevens1, C. Trapnell4,6* stakeholders. The citizen forum consisted of an issue framing workshop, where experts indicated which ques- 1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, tionsthe citizens needed toanswer.Thiswas followedby 2Fred Hutch Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United the citizen forum, where 32 citizens discussed these States, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, questionsoverthreeweekends,whilebeinginformedbya Berlin, Germany, 4Brotman Baty Institute for Precision neutral information package and a wide range of resource Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 5Howard Hughes persons. Finally, the recommendations of the citizens Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 6Seattle, WA, formed the basis for a stakeholder workshop, where United States experts and policy makers discussed the potential imple- mentation of these recommendations into practice. The Spatialpatternsofgeneexpressionspanmanyscales,andare entire process was supported by an expert committee and shaped by both local (e.g. cell-cell interactions) and global audited by two independent researchers. The qualitative (e.g.tissue,organ)context.However,mostinsitumethodsfor analysisofthecitizenforumshowedthatthecitizenpanel profiling geneexpression eitheraverage local contexts or are talkedaboutthegenomeastheirpropertybecauseitisthe restricted to limited fields of view. Here we introduce sci- most intimate part of an individual. Based on this state- Space,ascale-flexiblemethodforspatialtranscriptomicsthat ment, citizens require autonomy in decision-making retains single cell resolution while simultaneously capturing related to the use of their genomic information and con- heterogeneity at larger scales. As a proof-of-concept, we sider that it is society’s responsibility to provide citizens apply sci-Space to the developing mouse embryo, capturing with the rights of individual control, transparency, and the approximate spatial coordinates of profiled cells from traceability in the uses of this information. Citizens must whole embryo serial sections. We identify genes including use these rights responsibly to protect their privacy. The Hox-familytranscriptionfactorsexpressedinananatomically citizen panel strongly believes that “Individuals are more patterned manner across excitatory neurons and other cell than their genome and should not be prisoners of it”. To types.Wealsoshowthatsci-Spacecanresolvethedifferential this end, protection against any form of discrimination, contribution of cell types to signalling molecules exhibiting categorization, and rejection of individuals based on their spatially heterogeneous expression. Finally, we develop and genetic makeup must be established. The citizens assert apply a new statistical approach for quantifying the con- that there are many societal responsibilities to protect tribution of spatial context to variation in gene expression citizens from downsides and promote upsides from the within cell types. use of genomic information: the precautionary principle S.Srivatsan:None.M.Regier:None.E.Barkan:None.J. should guide the way in the development of a framework Packer:None.P.Grosjean:None.S.Saxton:None.J.Ladd: for genomics. Within a well-developed framework that None. M. Spielmann: None. P. Lampe: None. J. Shendure: inspires trust around the use of genomic data, solidarity None. K. Stevens: None. andreciprocityarecorevaluesthatcitizenssupportinthe contextofgenomicdatasharing.Citizensidentifyarange S05.2 of individual responsibilities in decision making in Cellular drivers of injury response and regeneration in genomics and accept that societal nudges might be the zebrafish heart required to balance personal interests and the common good. This citizen forum shows that citizens can make J. P. Junker* meaningful contributions to a complex field like ELSI in genomics. Continued citizen involvement of the public in Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB), thegovernanceofgenomicinformationinsocietyisvital. Berlin, Germany It ensures that societal norms and values guide the tech- nology and not the other way around. Akeygoalofdevelopmentalbiologyistounderstandhowa W. Van Hoof: None. C. Mayeur: None. singlecell transforms into a full-grownorganism consisting10 J.delPicchia of many cells. Although impressive progress has S06 Making Sense out of Nonsense been made in lineage tracing using imaging approaches, analysis of vertebrate lineage trees has mostly been lim- S06.1 ited to relatively small subsets of cells. Here we Nonsense Mediated Decay in Neuronal Development present LINNAEUS, a strategy for massively parallel and Disease lineage tracing on the single cell level. We exploit the fact that Cas9-induced generation of double-strand M. Wilkinson* breaks leads to formation of short insertions or deletions (“genetic scars”) that are variable in their length and Univerity of California, San Diego, CA, United States position. We demonstrate that these genetic scars have very high complexity, making them ideal cellular bar- Nonsense-mediated RNA decay (NMD) is a highly selective codes for lineage analysis. Reading out scar sequences andconservedRNAturnoverpathwaythatpromotesthedecay by single-cell RNA-seq enables us to simultaneously of specific subsets of RNAs. A critical factor in the NMD measure lineage relationships and transcriptome profiles pathway is UPF3B, an adapter protein that binds with other in thousands of single cells. We introduce novel compu- NMD proteins to form a molecular complex that drives rapid tational methods that address the major challenges of RNAdecay.Inhumans,mutationsinUPF3Bcauseintellectual CRISPR/Cas9-based lineage tracing, such as preferential disability (ID) and are strongly associated with autism, atten- creation of specific scar sequences and stochastic tion-deficit hyperactivity disorder, and schizophrenia (SCZ). dropout events. LINNAEUS allows scaling up lineage To understand UPF3B’s role in vivo, we generated a mouse analysis to the level of the whole organism, which model with a null mutation in the Upf3b gene. These Upf3b- makes it an ideal approach for studying processes nullmiceareviablebutexhibitaprofounddefectinpre-pusle like organ regeneration after injury. Here, we use LIN- inhibition (PPI), a measure of sensomotor gating commonly NAEUS to identify the origin and function of transient deficient in individuals with SCZ and other brain disorders. cell types that are generated upon heart injury, and TheseNMD-deficientmicealsohavedeficitsinspecificforms we identify novel cellular drivers of the regeneration of learning and memory. Consistent with both their PPI and process. learning defects, specific neuronal cell subsets in Upf3b-null J. P. Junker: None. mice display deficient dendritic spine maturation in vivo. NeuralstemcellsfromUpf3b-nullmicehaveimpairedability S05.3 toundergodifferentiationandrequireprolongedculturetogive Transcriptome-Scale Super-Resolved Imaging in Tis- rise to functional neurons with electrical activity. During the sues by RNA SeqFISH course of our analysis, we discovered that Upf3b-null mice alsohaveaphenotypeconsistentwithapartialolfactorydefect. L. Cai* ThisprovidedanopportunitytoexaminetheroleofUpf3bin olfactory neurogenesis, a simple and easily tractable neural Caltech, Pasadena, CA, United States developmental system. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA- seq) analysis revealed that Upf3b-null mice have specific Imaging the transcriptome in situ with high accuracy has defects in olfactory neurogenesis, including in olfactory stem been a major challenge in single cell biology, particularly cells. These NMD-deficient mice also had deficits in the hindered by the limits of optical resolution and the density olfactory receptor (OR) repertoire in olfactory sensory neuro- oftranscriptsinsinglecells.WedevelopedseqFISH+,that nal subsets at different stages of development. The nature of canimagethemRNAsfor10,000genesinsinglecellswith these defects strongly suggested that NMD has a key role in high accuracy and sub-diffraction-limit resolution, in the the OR selection process. We suggest that NMD-deficient mouse brain cortex, subventricular zone, and the olfactory Upf3b-nullmicewillbeausefulmodelsystemtodecipherthe bulb, using a standard confocal microscope. The tran- roles of NMD in neural development and function in vivo. scriptome level profiling of seqFISH+ allows unbiased M. Wilkinson: None. identification of cell classes and their spatial organization in tissues. In addition, seqFISH+ reveals subcellular S06.3 mRNA localization patterns in cells and ligand-receptor Unproductive splicing and ultraconserved nonsense pairs across neighboring cells. This technology demon- strates the ability to generate spatial cell atlases and to L. Lareau* perform discovery-driven studies of biological processes in situ. University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United L. Cai: None. StatesAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 11 The most conserved regions of any human genes are found patients’ families. However there are a number of challenges within alternative exons that act as switches to turn off associatedwithcardiovasculardiagnosticsequencingthathave expression of SR splicing factors. When these ‘poison’ limiteditseffectiveness.Theeraofcandidategenestudiesled exons are spliced into SR gene transcripts, they trigger toaplethoraofweakandfalsegene-disease associations,and mRNA degradation by nonsense-mediated decay (Lareau subsequently a large increase in uncertain (and even false etal,2007;Nietal,2007).ThisshiftsthemRNAoutputof positive) findings when incorporated into diagnostic panels. the gene away from the productive, protein-coding form, Recent efforts through community curation initiatives such as allowing post-transcriptional downregulation of SR protein ClinGen and large-scale rare variant association studies have expression. However, despite the intense conservation, the clarified many of these associations, enabling more focused functionalimpactofthis regulationisunknown. We setout and accurate diagnostic testing panels. Variant interpretation toidentifydevelopmentalprocessesshowingchangesinthe remains a critical and often rate-limiting step - although splicingofpoisonexonsinSRgenes.Usingbulkandsingle- widespread adoption of the ACMG/AMP guidelines have cell RNA-seq data, we found that the inclusion of poison broughtstandardisationandstringencytovariantclassification, exons changes dramatically during neurogenesis, and that theyrequirecustomisationforspecificdiseasesandgenesand the splicing patterns of different SR poison exons follow canleadtotheunder-callingofpathogenicvariants.Anumber distincttemporalprofiles.Toidentifytrans-actingregulators of approaches are being developed to address this issue, of poison exon inclusion, we used publicly available CLIP- includingeffortstoenhancedataandknowledgesharing,high seq data from 157 RNA-binding proteins to train motif- throughput functional assays and quantitative and machine based classifiers and predict binding in and near the poison learning variant classification methods. Finally, the more exons whose splicing changes during neurogenesis. We complexandcomprehensivegeneticbasisofinheritedcardiac found that SR splicing factors form a highly interconnected diseases is now being investigated in greater depth, in parti- network by binding both to their own poison exons and to cular though genome-wide association studies utilising multi- the poison exons of other SR splicing factors. During neu- centrestudiesandpopulationbiobanks.Thisresearchoffersthe rogenesis, the expression of these splicing factors is tightly promise in the near future of more comprehensive diagnostic coordinated with the splicing of several groups of exons to sequencingthatmaymoreaccuratelypredicttheriskofdisease which they bind. We identified specific regions within SR onset, severity and outcomes in patientsand family members. poison exons that are bound by one or several splicing R. Walsh: None. regulatorswhichmayactinconcertorinopposition.Weare removing these regions, as well as full poison exons, to S08.3 measuretheirimpactonneuronaldifferentiation.Ourresults Identification and Characterization of Novel Micropro- indicate that poison exons function as an auto- and cross- teins in the Human Heart regulatory mechanism that tightly regulates the levels of splicingfactorsduringneurogenesis,andthatthisregulation S. van Heesch* is mediated by ultraconserved sequences. L. Lareau: None. Max-Delbrück-Centrum for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany S07 Abstracts Withdrawn RNA translation is widespread outside of the canonical S08 Cardiovascular Genetics protein-coding complement of the human transcriptome, vastly expanding its coding potential. In a cohort of 80 S08.1 human hearts, we have recently identified hundreds of Challenges in Diagnostic Sequencing for Inherited previously undiscovered microproteins translated from Cardiac Conditions upstream open reading frames (uORFs) in mRNAs and short ORFs (sORFs) in presumed long noncoding RNAs R. Walsh* (lncRNAs) (van Heesch et al., Cell 2019). Although these includedtranslatedlncRNAswithknownfunctionalrolesin Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands the heart (e.g. UPPERHAND, Myheart, Chaer, TRDN-AS and GATA6-AS1), the biological activity of the micro- Diagnostic genetic sequencing has become an integral part of proteins produced from these genes remained uncertain. clinical management for most inherited cardiac diseases. To address this, we characterized the subcellular Although identifying the Mendelian variants underlying dis- localization, cell type-specific expression, and protein easewillinformtreatmentinonlyaminorityofcases,itcanbe interactomes of hundreds of cardiac microproteins in a used to confirm diagnosis and enable cascade screening in high-throughput manner. Many of the investigated12 J.delPicchia microproteins (57 out of 153 tested) localized to the published medical data on digenic diseases, and an online, mitochondria, suggesting underappreciated functionality in publicly available platform that takes the results of this cardiac energy metabolism. Using a PRISMA screen, for predictor, aggregates this into oligogenic networks, which which tiled 15-aa segments of 271 novel microproteins combinehighlyaffectedgenepairs,andcontextualisesthese werespottedonamembraneandincubatedwithcelllysate, results with molecular knowledge. This platform, called the we catalogued microprotein interaction partners and fine- Oligogenic resource for variant analysis (or ORVAL), mappedpreciseinteractionmotifs,allowingustocategorize allows researchers to perform predictions on genepanels as functional microprotein classes. Among the identified wellasfullexomes,receivingafullreportonthepotentially microproteins, 18 were specifically produced in the human relevant combinations, integrated into gene-pairs and net- heart, most of which were cardiomyocyte-specific in a works, and annotated with known protein relationships as single nucleus expression atlas with >500k sequenced well as functional information for all candidate pathogenic nuclei. Genetic perturbation of one of these human heart combinations that can be found. These two advancements specific microproteins primarily affected expression of provide researchers with a novel way to explore patient genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and calcium exome data while also adding molecular knowledge and handling in hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. Preliminary other pieces of information. The predictor, which is called live-cellimagingofTTN-GFPlabeledmicroprotein−/− cells the variant combination pathogenicity predictor (or Var- revealedalikelyrepressivefunctionofthismicroproteinon CoPP) assigns pathogenicity scores to variant combinations sarcomere contraction and relaxation times. in gene pairs, similarly to well-known monogenic patho- We have identified and characterized hundreds of novel genicity predictors currently used in prioritisation pipelines. microproteinsthatareproducedinthehumanheart,though Yet, as VarCoPP is trained on digenic diseases data, it prevalent in other tissues. Despite the mostly evolutionary identifiesotherculpritsthanthosethatwouldbeidentifiedin young age of these microproteins, we discovered dedicated amonogenicway,openingnewroutesforexplorationwhen subcellular localizations, highly specific interaction part- theclassicalapproachesfail.Inthisway,wehopetoassistin ners, cell-type specificity, and functional involvement in providing more accurate insights into the reasons for phe- processes central to cardiac functioning. notypic heterogeneity in diagnosed patients as well as to S. van Heesch: None. raise the diagnosis level for many rare diseases. T. Lenaerts: None. S09 Beyond Mendelian Inheritance S09.3 S09.1 ResolutionofDisease Phenotypes Resultingfrom Multi- Fromdigeniccombinations tooligogenic networksviaa locus Genomic Variation new predictive approach J. E. Posey* T. Lenaerts* BCM225,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX,United Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium States The wide-spread use of high throughput-sequencing in the Elucidationofthegeneticmechanismsunderlyingdiseaseisa lastdecadeshashelpedimmenselyinunravellingthegenetic criticalsteptowardGenomicMedicine.Asourunderstanding architectureofmanyrarediseasesaswellsasidentifyingthe oftheroleandfrequencyofmultilocusgenomicvariationhas causative variant in Mendelian ones. Notwithstanding the grown, it is increasingly clear that the relationships between many successes, different issues remain unsolved: Certain an individual’s genotype and phenotypic expression are cases exhibit incomplete penetrance, phenotypic variability, complex, and that such cases of multilocus variation are locus heterogeneity, as well as non-Mendelian patterns of challenging to ascertain clinically. We now know that least inheritance. Novel technological advancements are thus 5%ofindividualsforwhomclinicalexomesequencing(cES) required to move beyond this current state of the art. Our is diagnostic are identified to have more than one molecular team pushes the envelope on new pathogenicity prediction diagnosis, and the rate of multiple molecular diagnoses is and ranking tools for the identification of the oligogenic increasing with continued novel disease gene discovery. causes of diseases. We aim to identify more complex Population substructure - identity-by-descent - can drive an inheritance models, where variants in a small number of even higher frequency of multilocus genomic variation: genescauseormodulatethedevelopmentofdisease.Inthis 22.0% (18/82) of cases compared to a control cohort with a presentation I discuss two advancements we recently pub- 4.9% (101/2076) frequency of multilocus variation. We find lished: a new pathogenicity predictor, developed using that the observed rate of multiple molecular diagnoses isAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 13 lower than that predicted, suggesting that such cases may be Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a highly studied cancer under-ascertained. In seeking approaches to improve ascer- inwhichtumorcellshaveasmallnumberofrecurrent,well- tainmentofmultilocusvariation,wefindthattheobservation described somatic mutations in a limited number of func- of apparent phenotypic expansion in association with a pre- tionalclassesofgenes.WholegenomicsequencingofAML viously-described gene may actually represent unrecognized tumor cells confirmed these tumors to be relatively simple multilocus variation. ES analysis of cases with apparent genetically in individual cells, yet patients treated with phenotypic expansion reveals a higher frequency of multiple molecularly-targeted therapy often relapse with highly molecular diagnoses (31.6% [6/19]) compared to a cohort of polyclonal disease, including genotypes rarely if ever seen cases withoutapparentphenotypic expansion (2.3%[2/87,p outside of this context. =0.0004]),providingpotentialmolecularmechanismsforthe We sought to study and characterize this polyclonality observed clinical phenotypes in such cases. Applying a using single cell techniques in order to better understand computational approach to model genotype-phenotype rela- molecular underpinnings of drug resistance and perhaps tionships in the setting of multilocus variation, we demon- identify clinical approaches that would circumvent these. stratethatphenotypicsimilarityanalysescanbeusedtomodel This talk will describe the genetics of AML and describe pairs of Mendelian conditions having distinct or overlapping how single cell analysis for the majority of recurrent (p=1.77×10−7). phenotypic features Preliminary data sug- mutations seen in AML uncovered unexpected genetic gest that a ‘goodness-of-fit’ approach to modeling of patient diversity and provided insight into intratumor heterogeneity phenotypes and identified molecular diagnoses may support withimplicationsfortargetedtherapyofothermalignancies. identification of cases likely to have additional molecular diagnoses.Computationalmodelingofobservedandexpected S11 Embryo and Placenta: Equal Partners clinical phenotypes will play an increasing role in human genomicsasourunderstandingofthecombinatorialeffectsof S11.1 variation at more than one locus increases in complexity. The unsung hero: The essential role of the placenta for J. E. Posey: None. development and lifelong health S10 Single Cell Cancer Genetics M. Hemberger1,2,3* S10.1 1Calgary, AB, Canada, 2University of Calgary, Calgary, Heterogeneity AB, Canada, 3Alberta Children’s Hospital Research Institute, Calgary, AB, Canada B.Thienpont*,M.DeBorre,P.VanMinsel,Q.Yu,E.Galle The unsung hero: The essential role of the placenta for KU Leuven, Laboratory for Functional Epigenetics, development and lifelong health Leuven, Belgium Despite significant progress over the past decades in gaining a better understanding of placental development Lung tumours are heterogeneous, being composed of a and the contribution of the placenta to fetal and postnatal number of stromal cell types as well ascancer cells. In this health, the placenta still remains a much too often talk, I will describe our recent efforts to unravel the het- overlooked organ. Here, we present data from a recent erogeneity of stromal cells within the lung tumour micro- high-throughput phenotyping screen in which we system- environment, and describe the ongoing studies in my lab atically analysed the placental morphology of mouse aimed at understanding how epigenetic enzymes can drive mutants that cause embryonic lethality. Much in contrast transcriptionalheterogeneitywithincancercellpopulations. totheknown~10%ofextra-embryonicdefectsreportedfor B.Thienpont:None.M.DeBorre:None.P.VanMinsel: gene deletions that lead to intra-uterine demise, our None. Q. Yu: None. E. Galle: None. systematic analysis shows that indeed 60-70% of these mutants are associated with a placental phenotype. This S10.3 discrepancy results from the fact that the placenta is Single cell to understand AML progression frequently ignored in the analysis of gene mutations, and demonstrates a great gap in knowledge as to the cohort of A. Perl* genes required for normal placentation. Linking the placental phenotype data with embryonic phenotypes Philadelphia, PA, United States obtained from the very same mouse lines, we observe a strongcorrelationbetweendefectsinplacentaldevelopment andabnormalitiesinheart,brainandvasculardevelopment.14 J.delPicchia These unbiased correlationsunderpintheimportanceofthe S11.3 placenta not just merely for fetal nutrition, but for Organoids to understand pregnancy disorders embryonic development on the whole which has long- lasting consequences for postnatal health. In addition to G. J. Burton* genetic mutations, pregnancy complications that are unrelated to karyotypic abnormalities but often have their University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom roots in a defective placenta are well known to become more prevalent with advanced maternal age. Here, we also Human early pregnancy is a difficult period to research, yet present data on the impact of maternal age on placentation, mounting evidence indicates that many complications of and how changes to the uterine epigenome that accumulate pregnancy,ranging frommiscarriagetogrowthrestriction,are with age contribute to these defects. the result of poor placental development from implantation onwards.Itisnowappreciatedthatdevelopmentoftheplacenta S11.2 issupportedpredominantlybyhistotrophicsecretionsfromthe Genetics of Recurrent Hydatidiform Moles: Novel uterine glands during the first trimester. These secretions are Findings and Patient Counselling wellrecognisedindomesticspecies,wheretheyaregenerically referred to as ‘uterine milk’ due to their high lipid content. R. Slim* Research in the sheep and horse has shown how lactogenic hormones secreted by the placenta signal to the glands and McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, upregulate the secretion of ‘uterine milk’ proteins and growth Montreal, QC, Canada factors. These in turn feedback on the placenta to stimulate proliferationanddifferentiation,inwhathasbeenreferredtoas Hydatidiform mole (HM) is a human conception with a servo-mechanism. abnormal embryonic development and excessive tropho- Wehaveproposedanequivalentmechanismoperatesinthe blastic proliferation. The common form of this condition is human, but gaining evidence in vivo is difficult for ethical sporadic, not recurrent and affects one in every 600 preg- reasons. We have therefore adopted the organoid approach, nanciesinwesterncountries.HMareclassifiedaccordingto generating organoid cultures of both the endometrial glands their morphological features (complete and partial) and and the placental trophoblast. These are genetically stable in genotypes (Diploid androgenetic, monospermic and dis- culture and hormonally responsive, and can be passaged for permic; triploid dispermic, and diploid biparental). Recur- overoneyearorfrozenforbiobanking.Thetranscriptprofileof rent HMaffect for 1to9%ofwomenwith apriorHM and the organoids closely resembles that of the starting material. mayhaveanyofthethreegenotypes.Biallelicmutationsin Exposing our endometrial organoids to various combinations two genes, NLRP7 and KHDC3L, underlie most cases of of pregnancy hormones, such as human chorionic gonado- recurrent diploid biparental moles. Recently, we identified tropinandprolactin,upregulatesthetranscriptionandsecretion three novelgenes, MEI,TOP6BLandREC114,responsible ofknown‘uterinemilk’proteinsandgrowthfactorsthathavea forandrogeneticHMassociatedwithrecurrentmiscarriages mitogenic effect on the placenta. and with female and male infertility. We demonstrated that Theorganoidapproachthereforeopensnewpossibilitiesfor HM tissues from two patients with recessive MEI1 muta- researching the critical events during early placental develop- tions are diploid androgenetic monospermic. Androgenetic ment in a systematic fashion. Our findings also reinforce the HM were first described in 1977, but how they occur have concept that endometrial function and correct decidualisation remained open questions. We next investigated the occur- during the first trimester are critical to pregnancy outcome. rence of androgenesis in Mei1-deficient female mice and G. J. Burton: None. discovered that 8% of their oocytes lose all their chromo- somes by extruding them with the spindles into the first S12 Where Science and Ethics Meet Mei1−/− polar body. We demonstrated that oocytes are capable of fertilization and 5% of them produce androge- S12.1 netic zygotes. We therefore uncovered a novel meiotic The state of the science of heritable human genome abnormality in mammals and a mechanism for the genesis editing and ethical concerns of androgenetic zygotes. Our findings will advance our understanding of the genetic causes of reproductive failure M. Ramsay* in humans and improve patient management and genetic counselling. SydneyBrennerInstituteforMolecularBioscience,Faculty R. Slim: None. of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South AfricaAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 15 Scientific advances in DNA editing technologies are databases are now putting the privacy of the entire popu- approaching levels of accuracy and efficiency that bring us lation in jeopardy, and clinical genomic databases might closer to imagining a responsible clinical translational path- soon as well. Even where legal frameworks protect funda- way toward heritable human genome editing (HHGE). This mental rights and privacy, major failures are seen in prac- profound step would signal the acceptance of wilful manip- tice. Furthermore, legal instruments are lacking to hold ulation of human genomes, such that the changes are passed corporations accountable when they recklessly supply ontofuturegenerations.Ithastriggeredtheformationoftwo technologytoabusiveauthorities.Theacademiccommunity internationalpanelstodebatearesponsiblewayforward.The and scientific publishers have also failed to uphold their WHO has convened an Expert Advisory Committee on professed ethical standards, and hundreds of ethically Human Genome Editing to make recommendations on questionable papers have been published in mainstream appropriate governance standards and mechanisms for over- scientific journals. Urgent action is needed to shore up sight of somatic and germline human genome editing. The social norms, ethical standards, and legal frameworks to UK Royal Society and US National Academies of Medicine regulate biometric surveillance technology, including DNA andSciencesconvenedanInternationalCommissiononthe profiling. Clinical use of Human Germline Genome Editing. The Y. Moreau: None. Commissionhasbeentaskedwithdevelopingaframeworkto informthedevelopmentguidelinesforaresponsiblepathway S13 Lysosomes in Health and Disease fromresearchtopotentialclinicalapplication.Thisshouldbe done in the context of international discussions of societal S13.1 implicationsandincludeconsiderationsofaccess, equityand The lysosome in the control of cell metabolism ethical norms and practices. The specific tasks include: Identifying scientific issues that should be evaluated for var- A. Ballabio1,2,3* ious classes of HHGE; identifying appropriate protocols to guide pre-clinical validation ofpotentialadverse effects such 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), as unintended on- and off-target events, mosaicism and long Pozzuoli, Italy, 2Neurological Research Institute, Baylor term effects; considering how to assess the balance between college of Medicine, Hoston, TX, United States, 3Casma potential benefits and harms to the child and future genera- Therapeutics, Boston, MA, United States tions;providingguidelinesforethicsapprovalandconsent,as well as long-term monitoring of children born with edited The lysosome is the main mediator of cellular degradation genomes; and considering potential oversight structures and recycling processes. Several diseases are due to lyso- includingthescientificcriteriaforestablishingandmonitoring somal malfunction. We have identified a lysosomal gene HHGE. The Commission’s recommendations should be network and a master gene, TFEB, that controls lysosomal applicabletotheglobalcommunityandguidenationalpolicy biogenesis and autophagy. The activity of TFEB is regu- development and processes. * Ramsay is a member of the latedbythemTORC1kinasecomplexthroughalysosomal International Commission on the Clinical use of Human signaling pathway that enables lysosomal function to adapt Germline Genome Editing to environmental cues, such as nutrient availability. Thus, M. Ramsay: None. the lysosome acts as a signaling hub to control cell home- ostasis and the switch between anabolism and catabolism. S12.2 Targeting lysosome-mediated signaling pathways is an Crack down on genomic surveillance attractive therapeutic strategy for a variety of disease conditions. Y. Moreau* A.Ballabio:Other;Significant;CASMATHERAPEUTICS. University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium S14 ESHG-ASHG Building Bridges Session on Polygenic Risk Scores: Risky or Useful in the Clinic? Biometric surveillance is rapidly reshaping life in societies across the world. Genome sequencing is revolutionizing S14.2 medicine.Attheconfluenceofthesetwotrendsliesforensic Improving Polygenic Risk Scores,but also improving DNA profiling, which is touted by law enforcement and our knowledge about them governments as a silver bullet against crime. Serious con- cerns emerge however when this technology becomes a K. Fischer*, K. Läll, M. Mändul cornerstone of human rights abuse, from Xinjiang in China to the US-Mexico border. Moreover, consumer genomic Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia16 J.delPicchia In this presentation, the following aspects of implementa- Nanopore Technology reads. Employing this strategy, we tion of the polygenic risk score (PGRS) will be discussed. produce completely phased de novo genome assemblies First, we consider one of the main problems in the PGRS separately for each haplotype of a single individual of development - in many studies, there is some overlap Puerto Rican origin (HG00733) in the absence of parental between samples used in the different steps: discovery data. The assemblies are accurate (QV > 40), highly GWAS,scoredevelopmentandselectionofthebestPGRS, contiguous (contig N50 > 25 Mbp) with low switch error and finally, validation of the final PGRS. Next, we will rates (0.17%) providing fully phased single-nucleotide highlight that there is no unique solution for choosing the variants (SNVs), indels, and structural variants (SVs). optinal PGRS. Depending on the phenotype, different In the third part, I sketch a way forwardto leverage such methodologies may lead to the best solution (simple PGRS haplotype-resolved genome assemblies to build a human thatusesclumpingoftheSNPsinthediscoverystudyanda pangenome. I present preliminary result on a new tool, p-value threshold, a PGRS with modified weights, PanGenie,abletogenotypevariation,andparticularlySVs, MetaGRS, LDPRED and other Bayesian approaches, inherenttosuchapangenomegivenashortreaddatasetof machine-learningmethods,etc)Athirgrangeofproblemsis a study sample. This process is very scalable, going from connected to the effect size estimation of the PGRS. We input Fastq to final call set in around 20 single core CPU willshowthatincorrecttimescaleaswellasthepresenceof hours, and provides accurate genotypes for many SVs that competing risks may lead to biased and misleading esti- used to be inaccessible by short reads. matesoftheeffectsize.Finally,weaddressthequestionon T. Marschall: None. how to assess the added value of the PGRS to the existing risk-prediction algorithms. We show that some results that S15.2 have been presented with some scepticism may actually Improving the detection and genotyping of structural deserve another look. variation K. Fischer: None. K. Läll: None. M. Mändul: None. B. Kehr1,2* S15 Detection of Structural Variation 1BerlinInstituteofHealth(BIH),Berlin,Germany,2Charité S15.1 - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany DetectionofStructuralVariationandHaplotype-Aware Genome Assembly Structural variants (SVs) can lead to a variety of diseases, contribute significantly to human genetic diversity, and are T. Marschall* important marks of genome evolution. Therefore, incom- plete detection and unreliable genotyping of SVs limit a Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany widerangeofhumangeneticstudies.Asrecentstudieshave demonstratedthatthenumberofSVsperhumangenomeis Recent breakthroughs in long-read sequencing technology at least an order of magnitude greater than the number of andassemblymethodologyenablethedenovoassemblyof SVs we routinely detect in short read data, we need to human genome to a quality approaching the quality of the explore opportunities to improve the detection and geno- reference genome GRCh38. My talk will center around typingofSVs.Onesuchopportunityistheuseofdatafrom creating such assemblies and how they facilitate the dis- noveltechnologies,e.g.longreaddata.Anotheropportunity coveryofstructuralvariation.Mytalkcomesinthreeparts: is joint detection of SVs in many genomes together, which In the first part, I will describe work done by the Human strengthens the detection of variants shared by different Genome Structural Variation Consortium (HGSVC) and genomes. In this presentation, I will introduce computa- summarize how we performed (reference-based) haplotype tional methods for detecting and genotyping SVs in many phasingfollowedbylocalassemblytodefinethesequencesof short-readsequencedgenomesjointlyanddemonstratehow SV alleles (Chaisson et al., Nature Communications, 2019). thejointapproachleadstomorecompleteandmorereliable Inthesecondpart,Iintroduceaworkflowforfullyphased SV call sets. Specifically, I will give an overview of the de novo genome assembly, overcoming the prevailing tools PopDel and PopIns we developed for identifying genome assembly paradigm to produce sequences that deletions and non-reference sequence variants in up to tens "collapse" parental haplotypes into a consensus sequence. of thousands of human genomes. Finally, I will show how Toachievethis,weleveragethechromosome-widephasing eventhecurrentSVcallersforlongreaddataarelimitedin andscaffoldingcapabilitiesofsingle-cellstrandsequencing detecting certain types of SVs. (Strand-seq) and combine them with either high-fidelity B. Kehr: None. (HiFi)longsequencingreads,PacBioCLRreads,orOxfordAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 17 S15.3 predisposition).Todatemutationsin>20discretelocihave AnnotationandCurationofHigh-ConfidenceStructural been described but notably, investigators still report that Variants perhapsasmanyas40-50%offamilieswithanappropriate clinical history have no readily identifiable genetic lesion A. Quinlan* from interrogation of the coding genome. Unsurprisingly, thereisasignificantoverlapbetweengenesmutatedinboth University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States sporadicandinheritedformsofleukaemia.Eachgenehasa distinct clinical, biological and molecular profile; for Atypicalhumangenomecontains>4,000structuralvariants example, familial CEBPA-mutated AML is a recognized (SVs) larger than 300bp, ranging in size from hundreds to leukaemia predisposition entity where the pathological millionsof nucleotides. SVs cause diverse phenotypes, and features and long-term survival of individuals mirrors their size increases the potential to alter gene dosage, alter sporadic CEBPAdm AML. We are lately beginning to chromatin structure, affect expression, remove regulatory decipher the genetic evolution of leukaemia across family elements, and create gene fusions. However, detecting members, with evidence suggesting that secondary muta- structural variants in a human genome via whole-genome tions may cluster within pedigrees, for example GATA2 sequencing is fraught is notoriously inaccurate. I will pre- mutations in families with germline CEBPA mutations and sent recently developed methods for isolating high-con- JAK-STAT pathway mutations in RUNX1 pedigrees fidence structural variants, recent advances in prioritizing potentially pointing to the host genotype impacting on the SVs that may have phenotypic consequences, and chal- acquisition of somatic mutations. In the absence of stan- lenges that remain in interpreting this important, yet com- dardised testing, much of our new knowledge is emerging plex form of genetic variation. fromindividualresearchgroupsandcollaborationsandwill A. Quinlan: None. require validation and collective evaluation across the leu- kaemia research community. It is widely accepted that we S16 Genetic Mechanisms in Haematological Neoplasias need to develop a network of international advisors who may provide accessible guidance for clinicians worldwide, S16.1 particularly when rare and insightful clinical observations Inherited Myeloid Malignancies may aid both clinical management and promote the detec- tion of novel syndromes. Moving forward, it would be J. Fitzgibbon* sensibletohaveanunifiedapproachtoanalysesporadicand familial leukaemia is now required. QueenMaryUniversityofLondon,London,UnitedKingdom J. Fitzgibbon: None. Inherited haematological malignancy syndromes are typi- S16.2 cally characterised by acute myeloid leukaemia/myelodys- Genetics and Mechanisms of Acute Lymphoblastic plasia (AML/MDS) occurring in two or more genetically Leukemia related family members. While these syndromes are con- sidered relatively rare, accounting for <5% of all AML/ A. Ferrando* MDS cases, it is likely that many patients with germline mutations are not readily identified, families may display Columbia University, New York, NY, United States marked variations in disease phenotype, latency and pene- trance across mutation carriers and these features, coupled Relapse acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is associated with an absence of comprehensive diagnostic assays and with chemotherapy resistance and poor prognosis. Persis- paucity of clinical guidelines, give rise to an apparent tent leukemia initiating cells with increased self-renewal under-representation of familial leukaemia. Importantly, capacity, clonal heterogeneity and selection of resistance- lack of awareness regarding familial involvement may lead drivinggeneticalterationshavebeenproposedasdriversof to the unsuspecting selection of asymptomatic family leukemia relapse. Gain of function mutations in the 5′- members as stem cell donors, with several reports describ- Nucleotidase, Cytosolic II (NT5C2) gene are selectively ing donor-derived episodes of AML. Fortunately, we are present in relapsed ALL and confer resistance to che- now making significant progress in recognising and motherapywith 6-mercaptopurine(6-MP).Yet,thespecific understanding the molecular pathogenesis of these syn- mechanisms mediating constitutive activation of NT5C2 dromes, as highlighted by the introduction of a provisional andtheroleofthesemutationsasdriversofclonalevolution diagnostic category in the World Health Organisation during leukemia initiation and disease progression remain (WHO) 2016 (Myeloid neoplasms with germ line unknown. Our structure function and crystallographic18 J.delPicchia analyseshaveuncoverednewintra-molecularmechanismsof Phenotype Ontology (HPO) system to annotate clinical NT5C2regulationspecificallytargetedbyrelapsedleukemia- manifestations has contributed to standardize the terminol- associated mutations. In addition, using an in vivo leukemia ogy and improve the accuracy of the genotype-phenotype model we demonstrate a dual role for NT5C2 R367Q, the correlations in many dysmorphic síndromes, including most frequent relapse-associated NT5C2 allele, as a loss of CdLS. There are a number of tools currently available to fitness mutation impairing cell growth in the absence of performquickandefficientdeepphenotypingprocessesand chemotherapy, and a gain of fitness mutation resulting in algorithmsthatareabletoaccuratelyidentifyfacialpatterns disease progression and relapse in the context of 6-MP ther- (gestalt) that match with specific dysmorphic known sín- apy.Theseresultshaveimportantimplicationsformonitoring dromes. These new tools, rather than substitute the clinical ofleukemiarelapsedrivingclonesandforthedevelopmentof skillsoftheclinician,areintendedtohelpthemtodiagnose targeted therapies for the treatment of relapsed disease. patients who do not fit a recognizable dysmorphic pattern. A. Ferrando: None. We have used one of those deep phenotyping tools ® (Face2Gene ) to check its diagnostic accuracy in 49 CdLS S17 Cornelia de Lange Syndrome and Cohesinopathies patients whose clinical diagnosis was confirmed by mole- cular testing. Thirty-three of them had pathogenic variants S17.1 in NIPBL, and the remaining in three of the other CdLS CorneliadeLangeSpectrum:doesdeepphenotypinghelp? genes (SMC1A, HDAC8, and RAD21). Average accuracy was 83.7%, meaning that CdLS was listed as the first F. Ramos1*, A. Latorre-Pellicer1, L. Trujillano2, choice.In97.9%ofthecasesanalyzed,CdLSwasincluded M. Gil-Salvador1, M. Arnedo1, C. Lucía-Campos1, inthetop-fivesuggestions.Inthesubgroupofpatientswith R. Antoñanzas-Pérez1, B. Puisac1, P. Gómez-Puertas3, theclassicphenotype,88.8%ofthepatientswerediagnosed J. Pié1 as CdLS as the first choice. Overall, KBG was the second mostsuggesteddiagnosis.Nodifferenceswerefoundinthe 1University of Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 2University top-onesensitivitywhenthephenotypeswerecomparedby Hospital "Lozano Blesa", Zaragoza, Spain, 3Molecular age. Finally, we check the accuracy of the process com- Biology Center "Severo Ochoa", Madrid, Spain paring the facial phenotypes of the patients depending on the genes involved. We found, as expected, a top-one sen- Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS, OMIM #122470, sitivity of 97% for patients with variants in NIPBL, 66,6% #300590, #610759 614701, #300882) is a multisystemic forRAD21,60%forHDAC8,and50%forSMC1A.Wecan condition characterized by a recognizable craniofacial concludethat,ingeneral,deepphenotypingtoolsareuseful phenotype, characteristic limb malformations and wide for clinical geneticists and may help them in the diagnostic spectrum of symptoms from different organs and systems. process of patients with non-recognizable dysmorphic pat- Twomainclinicalsubgroupsarecurrentlyrecognizedbased terns or in syndromes with overlapping phenotypes. ontheseverity ofmanifestations:theclassic(severe)CdLS F.Ramos:None.A.Latorre-Pellicer:None.L.Trujillano: and the non-classic CdLS. The first subgroup, the most None.M.Gil-Salvador:None.M.Arnedo:None.C.Lucía- common (≈60% of CdLS cases), includes the patients who Campos: None. R. Antoñanzas-Pérez: None. B. Puisac: have a pathogenic variant in the gene NIPBL. These indi- None. P. Gómez-Puertas: None. J. Pié: None. viduals have a characteristic facial appearance, distal limb reductiondefects(oligodactylyinthehands),hirsutism,and S17.3 moderate to severe growth and psychomotor retardation/ Post-Zygotic Mutation as a Cause of Typical Cornelia intellectual disability. The non-classic CdLS includes the De Lange Syndrome patients with milder craniofacial phenotypes and clinical manifestations and bearing pathogenic variants in the other D. FitzPatrick* four genes associated with the syndrome (SMC1A, SMC3, HDAC8, and RAD21). Clinical diagnosis of many of these MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, individuals is often challenging and sometimes very diffi- Edinburgh, United Kingdom cult due to the overlapping with several syndromes that share clinical manifestations with CdLS but are caused by TypicalCorneliadeLangesyndrome(CdLS,MIM#122470) othergenesthatmaynotberelatedtothecohesincomplex. is a very severe, clinically distinct multisystem disorder Deep phenotyping can be defined as the precise and com- characterised by intellectual disability, prenatal onset growth prehensive analysis of phenotypic anomalies in which the retardation, limb malformations, multiple chronic medical individual components of the phenotype are observed and problems and distinctive facial features. 60-70% of affected described in detail. The generalized use of the Human individuals have de novo heterozygous, loss-of-functionAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 19 mutations in NIPBL which are detectable in blood DNA. Somatic mutations occur spontaneously in normal indivi- Manyoftheremainingtypicalcaseshavemosaicmutationsin duals and accumulate throughout life. These genetic mod- NIPBL usually absent in DNA derived from peripheral leu- ifications contribute to progressive ageing phenotypes and cocytes but detectable in saliva samples at low levels and in are directly involved in cancer development. However, a uncultured skin with variant allele frequencies approaching growing number of studies of Mendelian haematopoietic 50%. Strikingly most of the children with mosaicism have a disorders indicate that somatic genetic events called clinicaldisorderatleastassevereasthosewithconstitutional "somaticgenetic rescue"canoffset thepathogenic effect of mutations. Mosaicism may be the result of post zygotic germline mutations at the cellular level, leading to genetic mutation (PZM) or rescue of a constitutional mutations via mosaicismand,insomecases, resultinginamilderdisease mitotic homologous recombination in blood cell progenitors. phenotype. I will present two examples of somatic genetic NIPBL performs fundamental functions critical for cell sur- rescue that we observed in our lab. vival such as mitotic segregation of chromosomes, DNA P. Revy: None. repair and developmental gene regulation. As such rescue seemed the most plausible mechanism a priori. However S18.3 using data from whole genome sequence and tissue specific Somatic Mutations and Regeneration in Chronic Liver geneticanalysiswecanfindnoevidenceforrescueand,ina Disease number of cases, definitive evidence for PZM. Given the severity of the phenotype in mosaic cases both at a cellular H. Zhu* andorganismallevelitseemslikelythatthemutantcellshave an advantage overwild-type cells in populatingectodermal - UniversityofTexasSouthwestern,Dallas,TX,UnitedStates neuroectodermal,inparticular-lineages.Thishypothesiscan betestedusinginvitrodifferentiationcellcompetitionassays. Normaltissuesaccumulategeneticchangeswithage,butitis D. FitzPatrick: None. unknown if somatic mutations promote clonal expansion of non-malignant cells in the setting of chronic degenerative S18 Clonal Fitness of Somatic Mutations diseases. Exome sequencing of diseased liver samples from 82 patients revealed a complex mutational landscape in cir- S18.1 rhosis. Additional ultra-deep sequencing identified recurrent Somatic Evolution in Human Tissues mutations in PKD1, PPARGC1B, KMT2D, and ARID1A. Thenumberandsizeofmutantclonesincreasedasafunction I. Martincorena* of fibrosis stage and tissue damage. To interrogate the func- tional impact of mutated genes, a pooled in vivo CRISPR Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom screening approach was established. In agreement with sequencing results, examination of 147 genes again revealed Cancers develop by somatic mutation and clonal selection that loss of Pkd1, Kmt2d, and Arid1a promoted clonal within our tissues. Over the past decade, the ability to expansion. Conditional heterozygous deletion of these genes sequencecancergenomeshastransformedourunderstanding in mice was also hepatoprotective in injury assays. Pre- of the genetics and evolution of a wide range of cancers. malignant somatic alterations are often viewed through the However,owingtotechnicallimitations,littleisknownabout lens of cancer, but we show that mutations can promote the earliest steps of cancer and how cells in our tissues regeneration, likely independent of carcinogenesis. accumulate mutations during normal ageing and in their H. Zhu: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, progression towards cancer. In this talk, I will present our patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Ionis. F. work unveiling a hidden and unexpected world of cellular Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; 28-7 Therapeutics. competition and somatic evolution in human healthy tissues, withimplicationsforourunderstandingofcancerandageing. S19 Data-driven Genomic Care and its Implementation I. Martincorena: None. in the Clinic: A Paradigm Shift S18.2 S19.2 Somatic Genetic Rescue in Mendelian Haematopoietic Empirical evidence in preventive genomics: MedSeq, Diseases BabySeq and beyond P. Revy* C. Blout* Imagine Institute, Paris, France BrighamandWomen’sHospital,Boston,MA,UnitedStates20 J.delPicchia As genomic technologies advance and costs decline, the Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified ability to implement preventive genomics into everyday thousands of variants associated with disease, but the medicine becomes possible. The Genomes2People (G2P) underlying mechanisms through which these variants researchprogramisexploringtheimpactofimplementing operate remain elusive. This talk focuses on three topics genomic sequencing into routine medical care. This pre- related to overcoming this challenge: First, I will discuss sentation will summarize G2P studies as well as the some insights into disease architecture that we have gained development of the new Brigham Preventive Genomics from GWAS so far. Second, I will describe a statistical Clinic. The MedSeq Project, which was the first rando- frameworkwehavedevelopedcalledMESC,whichaimsto mized control trial of genome sequencing (GS), enrolled quantify the total fraction of disease heritability that can be not only a disease cohort (cardiomyopathy), but also a explained by all observed expression QTLs. Applying healthy cohort. We enrolled 200 patients and 20 of their MESC to large-scale eQTL and GWAS data we find that health care providers. In the separate but similarly only~11%ofGWASheritabilityappearstobemediatedby designed BabySeq Project, we enrolled 309 newborns measurable eQTLs, most of which resides in eQTLs with recruited from the well-baby nursery and neonatal inten- very weak effects that are difficult to detect. Finally, I will sive careunit. BothoftheseNIH-fundedstudiesexplored describe a computational tool - PLASMA - that leverages the medical, behavioral and economic outcomes of GS allele-specific expression to fine map such weak effect following disclosure. QTLs and colocalize them with disease. In application to Comprehensive sequencing and interpretation revealed real RNA-seq studies from hundreds of individuals, that 20% of MedSeq, and 11% of BabySeq, participants PLASMA increased power over conventional QTL map- had a non-indication-based, unanticipated variant in a ping and colocalization by an order of magnitude. gene associated with a monogenic condition. Upon re- A. Gusev: None. phenotyping, after the variant was identified, 6/20 MedSeq participants and 11/18 BabySeq participants S20.2 were identified to have a personal and/or family history A Bayesian Framework for Joint Fine-Mapping with of the disease. Carrier variants were identified in 94% of Applications to Immune-Mediated Diseases MedSeq and 88% of BabySeq participants. In MedSeq there were no significant cost differences between J. Asimit* sequenced cases and controls by 6 months, and in BabySeq there was a small but significant increase in MRC Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, Cam- downstream health care costs over 3 months among the bridge, United Kingdom sequenced infants when compared to the controls. Both studies revealed no increases in anxiety and depression Hundreds of genetic variants have been identified as asso- relatedtogenomicinformation.Lessonslearnedfromthis ciated with a spectrum of diseases and related traits but research prompted the creation of the Brigham and pinpointing likely causal variants (fine-mapping) has been Women’s Hospital Preventive Genomics clinic. This first complicated by extended linkage disequilibrium (LD) and ofitskindservicehasseenover40clinicalpatientstodate finitesamplesizes.Inthefine-mappingofsingleoutcomes, for preventive genomic consultations and testing. Our inaccuraciesoftenoccurwhentherearetwoormoredistinct researchoutlinesthemanybenefitsofpopulationgenomic causal variants that are both correlated with a single non- screeningandourexperiencesprovideimportantinforma- causal variant. This motivates the development of MFM tionregardingclinicalimplementationaswellasidentify- (Multinomial Fine-Mapping) for multiple diseases with ing areas where further study is needed. shared controls; joint fine-mapping that leverages informa- C. Blout: None. tion between outcomes in a Bayesian framework, where prior model probabilities are formulated to favour combi- S20 Integrating Large-scale Functional Data Into nations of models with a degree of sharing of causal var- Genome-Wide Association Studies iants between outcomes. Our simulation studies demonstrate that MFM has greater accuracy than single S20.1 disease fine-mapping when there are shared causal genetic Combining omics data with GWAS results variantsbetweendiseases,yetnoprecisionlossifthereisno sharing.Inaddition,MFManalysisofsiximmune-mediated A. Gusev1,2* diseasesidentifiesnovelgeneticassociationsthataremissed by marginal analyses. We jointly fine-map association sig- 1Dana-FarberCancerInstitute,Boston,MA,UnitedStates, nals for six diseases and of particular interest is IL2RA, 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States which is known to be associated with several autoimmuneAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 21 diseases, including multiple sclerosis (MS), type 1 diabetes differentiation. Finally, we applied recommender system (T1D), autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) and coeliac machine learning to predict interactions, facilitating disease. MFM has the potential to increase fine-mapping exploration of vastly larger GI manifolds. We expect the resolutioninrelated diseases/traits withoutcollectinglarger conceptual and computational frameworks presented here sample sizes and is computationally efficient. will be broadly applicable to genetic interactions obtained J. Asimit: None. via other rich phenotyping approaches (e.g. proteomics, imaging) and methods of perturbation (e.g. knockdown, knockout, mutagenesis). Educational Sessions J. Weissman: None. E01 New Technologies E01.2 NanoporeSequencingofHumanGenomes:thelongand E01.1 short of it. Manifold destiny: exploring genetic interactions in high dimensions through massively parallel single cell RNA- M. Loose* seq SchoolofLifeSciences,UniversityofNottingham,Notting- J. Weissman* ham, United Kingdom UCSF/HHMI, San Francisco, CA, United States The utility of long read sequencing has dramatically increased in the last few years whilst costs have lowered. A major principle that has emerged from modern genomic We have exploited Nanopore sequencing to sequence and gene expression studies is that the complexity of cell human genomes (and others) on MinION, GridION and types in multicellular organisms is driven not by a large PromethION. To do this we have been involved in devel- increase in gene number but instead by the combinatorial oping methods to sequencing ever longer molecules, cur- expression of a surprisingly small number of components. rently up to 2.3 Mb in length. Alongside we have been This is possible because specific combinations of genes developing methods for targeted sequencing of specific exhibit emergent properties when functioning together, regions of genomes using CAS-9 library preparation enabling the generation of many diverse cell types and methods and, more recently, computational methods behaviors. Understanding such genetic interactions has including adaptive sampling allowing us to direct the important practical and theoretical applications. For exam- sequencertospecificregionsofthegenomeasrequired.We ple, they can reveal synthetic lethal vulnerabilities in willpresentourworkincludingsequencingover700cancer tumors, identify suppressors of inherited and acquired dis- gene targets and the MHC domain to 30x coverage on a orders,guidethedesignofcocktailsofgenestodrivetrans- single MinION flowcell. differentiation between cell types, inform the search for M. Loose: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers missinginheritanceingeneticstudiesofcomplextraits,and bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Oxford enable systematic approaches to define gene function in an Nanopore Technologies. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; objective and principled manner. Defining how genes Modest; UK BioBank. interact is thus a central challenge of the post-genomic era. The combinatorial explosion of possible genetic interac- E01.4 tions (GIs), however, has necessitated the use of scalar Optical mapping for clinical structural variants interaction readouts (e.g. growth) that conflate diverse detection outcomes. I will present our work developing an analytical framework for interpreting manifolds constructed from A. Hoischen1,2,3* high-dimensional interaction phenotypes. We applied this framework to rich phenotypes obtained by Perturb-seq 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University (single-cell RNA-seq pooled CRISPR screens) profiling of MedicalCenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands,2RadboudInstitute strongGIsminedfromagrowth-based,gain-of-functionGI of Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical map. Exploration of this manifold enabled ordering of Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Internal regulatory pathways, classification of GIs in a principled Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases manner (e.g. identifying true suppressors), and mechanistic (RCI), Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, elucidationofsyntheticlethalGIs,includinganunexpected Netherlands synergy between CBL and CNN1 driving erythroid22 J.delPicchia Structural variants (SVs) areanimportantsource ofgenetic example, the section on indication would most probably con- variation in the human genome and they are involved in a tain information on mandatory pharmacogenetic diagnostics multitude of human diseases. SVs are enriched in repeat- prior to onset of therapy, whereas in the section on adverse rich regions of the human genome, and several remain drugreactions,mostlyinformativepharmacogeneticaspectsare undetected by conventional short-read sequencing technol- mentionedaboutvariabilityintheriskofsideeffects.Recently, ogies. Here I will introduce the basics of high-resolution a European referral was opened that should clear the question optical mapping that allow the sensitive genome-wide of a pretherapeutic testing of DPYD variants in therapy with identification of SVs. I shall demonstrate its utility for fluoropyrimidines. The outcome of the referral (expected in molecular cytogenetics for constitutional SVs in cases with 2020) could mean that for the first time in Europe, a pharma- e.g. germline micro-deletion/-duplication syndromes, cogenetic test is mandatory before onset of a common drug inversions and translocations. Recent advances also allow therapy (so far, only genetic testing in rare disease therapy is for the sensitive identification of acquired i.e. somatic SVs mandatory).Pharmacogeneticsisnowintheimplicationphase e.g. in leukemia samples. Finally I will showcase first with the use of pharmacogenetic tests for drug therapy indi- examples of how optical mapping enables unravelling of cation,forindividualizeddosingandfortheavoidanceofside hidden SVs in rare disease cases that remained undetected effects. Depending also on national health systems, genetic byclassicalmethods,includingMLPA,Sangersequencing, testsfortherapydecisionsare/andwillbecomemoreandmore exomeand/orgenomesequencing.Insummary,Iwillshow in use in realworld clinical practice. how the complementary use of mapping rather than J. Stingl: None. sequencing approaches allow for comprehensive detection of all cytogenetic abnormalities and how this can unmask E04 Hypermobility and the Ehlers Danlos Syndromes hidden SVs. I predict that ultra-long read mapping may enable a revolution in ‘next generation cytogenetics’. E04.2 A. Hoischen: None. Vascular Presentation of the Ehlers Danlos Syndromes E02 Abstracts Withdrawn P. Byers* E03 Pharmacogenomics in the Clinic University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States E03.1 Normal 0 false false false EN-US X-NONE X-NONE /* Pharmacogenetics - from bench to drug label Style Definitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style- name:"Table Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso- J. Stingl* tstyle-colband-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style- priority:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, UniversityHospital of 0in 5.4pt; mso-para-margin-top:0in; mso-para-margin- the RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany right:0in; mso-para-margin-bottom:10.0pt; mso-para-mar- gin-left:0in; line-height:115%; mso-pagination:widow- The role of pharmacogenetic diagnostics has changed during orphan; font-size:12.0pt; font-family:"Arial","sans-serif";} thepastdecadeswithamoreexplorativeroleinthebeginning Given that many of the types of Ehlers Danlos syndrome explaining differences in drug metabolism and elimination, (EDS) result from mutations in genes that encode proteins further looking at differences in individual drug response and that are components of blood vessels, it should come as no safety, and nowadays developing to a therapy companion surprise that arterial dissection and rupture can complicate diagnostic for indications of drug therapies. With the knowl- the lives of people with these conditions. The flagship of edge on our pharmacogenome, also new methods for genetic these conditions is vascular EDS (vEDS), which results diagnostics arose, and large genome analyses now became from pathogenic variants in COL3A1 that encodes type III convenient, easy to handle, and relatively cheap. While in procollagen—a major component of arterial walls. These centralizedcountriesliketheUnitedStates,thedevelopmentof eventsareuncommoninchildrenbutprovetotherelatedto guidelines and pharmacogenetic information in drug labels is thecauseofdeathinmostindividuals,exceptforthosewith already advanced, in Europe, the diversity of national health haploinsufficiency. One contribution to premature death systemsaffectsregulationforpharmacogeneticdiagnostics.We (median survival of about 50 years) is that vessel wall is havenowdifferentsortsofpharmacogeneticinformationinthe friable and, so, difficult to suture; in addition, it is difficult drug label which could be informative, actionable, or obliga- toanticipatedissectionandrupture.Aorticandlargearterial tory. The action consequence of this information depends on vessel dissection appears to be an uncommon event in the section in the label that contains the information. For people with classical EDS the most common kinds ofAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 23 mutations (COL5A1 haploinsufficiency) as well as those associated virus (AAV) approach. Using a similar AAV with missense and splicing alterations. The recessively CRISPRa approach, we also show that we can rescue the inherited kyphoscoliotic EDS results from pathogenetic obesity phenotype in Mc4r heterozygous mice. Our results variantsinPLOD1thatencodeslysylhydroxylase1(LH1), highlighthowregulatoryelementscouldbeusedastherapeutic and in FKBP14. These affect the hydroxylation of lysyl targets to treat numerous altered gene dosage diseases. residues in collagens that are critical for the formation of N. Ahituv: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, tissue stabilizing intermolecular cross links. In both, dis- patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Encoded section may occur in late childhood and early adolescence. Therapeutics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, Surveillance protocols are not yet standardized among patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Enhancer groups and there isnotyet consensusrecommendationsfor Therapeutics. any of these conditions. Surgical intervention can be life- saving and should not be ignored, and the effectiveness of E05.2 medical therapies have yet to be clearly demonstrated. The Dissecting Non-Coding Sequences in Gene Regulation pathwayfromnucleotidechangetopathogenesisremainsto beexploredbuttherearehopesthatunexpectedtherapeutic A. Stark* tools may be identified from ongoing studies. P. Byers: None. Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria, Vienna, Austria E05 Interpreting Variation Outside of Protein-Coding Sequence The vast majority of disease-associated SNPs in the human genome is located in the non-protein-coding part, which E05.1 makes it difficult to assess the functional impact of the FunctionalCharacterizationandTherapeuticTargeting sequence variants. Non-coding sequences, which make up of Gene Regulatory Elements the largest part of the human genome, contain gene-reg- ulatoryelements-promotersandenhancers-thatdirectthe N. Ahituv* dynamic expression of genes in complex spatial and tem- poral patterns. The promoter and enhancer sequences con- UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United States tain this gene regulatory information, which in the cells is realized by transcription factor and cofactor proteins. Nucleotide variation in gene regulatory elements is a major Today, I will first introduce how reporter systems can be determinant of phenotypes including morphological diversity used to understand the sequence-encoding of gene-regula- betweenspecies,humanvariationandhumandisease.Despite toryinformationandhowsequencechangesalterregulatory continual progress in the cataloging of these elements, little is function. I will then present our recent work towards knownaboutthecodeandgrammaticalrulesthatgoverntheir understanding how cells utilize this information with function.Decipheringthecodeandtheirgrammaticalruleswill transcription factor and cofactor proteins. Using an inter- enable high-resolution mapping of regulatory elements, accu- disciplinary approach in Drosophila, we study how rate interpretation of nucleotide variation within them and the enhancers and the cofactor proteins they recruit activate design of sequences that can deliver molecules for therapeutic different types of core promoters, enabling distinct sets of purposes.Tothisend,weareusingmassivelyparallelreporter genes and alternative promoters of the same genes to be assays (MPRAs) to simultaneously test the activity of thou- regulated differently. The distinct compatibilities between sands of gene regulatory elements in parallel. By designing cofactors and core promoters forms the basis of specificity MPRAstolearnregulatorygrammarortocarryoutsaturation within and between gene regulatory programs. mutagenesis of every possible nucleotide change in disease A. Stark: None. causing gene regulatory elements, we are increasing our understanding of the phenotypic consequences of gene reg- E06 Brain Size Matters! ulatory mutations. Regulatory elements can also serve as therapeutic targets. To highlight this role, we used CRISPR/ E06.1 Cas9 activation (CRISPRa) of regulatory elements to rescue Microcephaly: genetics and disease mechanisms haploinsufficientdiseases(having~50%dosagereduction due to having only one functional allele) in vivo. By targeting the G. M. S. Mancini* Sim1promoterorits270kbdistanthypothalamicenhancer,we were able to rescue the haploinsufficient obesity phenotype in ErasmusMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, Sim1 heterozygous mice, both using a transgenic and adeno- Netherlands24 J.delPicchia Microcephaly is defined by a head circumference (HC) dysplasia, and neurodevelopmental co-morbidities such as below 2 SD standard deviations for age and sex. A dis- intractable epilepsy, autism and intellectual disability. tinction is generally made between congenital or primary Constitutionalandmosaicmutationsofmultiplecellgrowth microcephaly, i.e. a small HC for gestational age at birth, pathways, including the PI3K-AKT-MTOR and RAS and progressive or post-natal microcephaly, i.e. normal HC pathways, have been identified in this spectrum; with at birth followed by insufficient growth during infancy and promisingtherapeutic avenues on thehorizontoameliorate childhood. When small head circumference reflects an the associated neurological deficits (e.g. MTOR pathway insufficient brain growth, microcephaly is associated with inhibitors). However, significant molecular and clinical neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD), such as intellectual challenges remain. Widely used molecular diagnostic disability, epilepsy, autism. The most common structural methods, such as standard-depth exome sequencing, lack abnormality in primary microcephaly is a simplified gyral the sensitivity to detect low-level mosaic mutations patternofthecortex.Associationwithothermalformations, common in MEG. These methods are also not suitable for e.g. lissencephaly or polymicrogyria, implies neurological screening limited amounts of surgically resected brain sequelae and influences disease course. Nevertheless, tissues due to their high DNA input requirements. prognostic evaluation in a newborn with microcephaly Ultimately, more optimal molecular diagnostic methods remains difficult. Compatibly with a very high mitotic rate and high throughput pre-clinical models are necessary to and scheduled cell death of neural progenitors of the identify and study the effects of MEG-related mutations on developing human cortex, the most relevant genes and braindevelopment.Toaddressthesechallenges,weutilizea processes affected in primary microcephaly relate to reg- combination of ultra-deep targeted sequencing employing ulation of the cell cycle (e.g. mitotic spindle formation and digitaldropletPCR(ddPCR)asanewandsensitivetoolfor orientation, centrosome biology, mitotic chromosome screening common mutations in the PI3K-AKT-MTOR structure, double strand DNA repair and chromosome sta- pathway, and a quad based exome approach, sequencing bility) or of scheduled apoptosis. There is partial etiologic lesional (affected) tissues at a higher depth (200-250X). To overlapwith thepathogenesisofprogressivemicrocephaly, date, we performed genetic testing on a large cohort of whichmostlyaffectcontrolofDNArepair,orregulationof MEG families and have identified both known and novel intermediate metabolism. However, novel paradigms are candidategeneticvariants,includingultra-low-levelmosaic emerging in the pathogenesis of microcephaly, which are mutations in the PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway. Our data related to regulation of the balance between ER-controlled describe a gradient of mosaicism seen within the brain in proteostasisandcellcycle.Thissubtlebalancemightreveal hemimegalencephaly samples; with mutation-positive to be one of thefactors determining the difference between regions ranging in alternate allele frequencies (AAF) from a stable microcephaly phenotype (as observed in many 0.3% to 25.6% across several brain tissues. We subse- types of primary microcephaly) to a progressive, hence quently aimed to model disease pathogenesis in vitro, severe course as observed in many types of progressive selecting patient-derived fibroblast lines with mutations in microcephaly. keyupstream(PIK3CA)anddownstream (MTOR)nodesin G. M. S. Mancini: None. the pathway. We generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) carrying the common PIK3CAH1047R and E06.2 MTORT1977I mutations to characterize these nodes. Our Macrocephaly results suggest that targeted molecular analysis for the common PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway mutations by ddPCR G. Mirzaa1*, F. Pirozzi2, A. Timms2, M. Berkseth2, R. is an effective molecular diagnostic approach for MEG. Shear2, G. Ruggeri2, E. Novotny3, W. Dobyns2, R. Kapur3, GiventhehighsensitivityandlowDNAinputrequirements J. Hauptman2, J. Ojemann2 for this assay, ddPCR may also be an effective molecular tool for other mosaic disorders with a narrow mutational 1Seattle, WA, United States, 2Seattle Children’s Research spectrum.OuriPSC-derivedlinesprovideavaluablemodel Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Seattle Children’s for dissecting the functional consequences of these muta- Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States tions and future drug screens using PI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway inhibitors. Megalencephaly: advances from genomic discoveries to F. Pirozzi: None. A. Timms: None. M. Berkseth: None. precision-based medicine R. Shear: None. G. Ruggeri: None. E. Novotny: None. W. Megalencephaly disorders (MEG) constitute a growing Dobyns: None. R. Kapur: None. J. Hauptman: None. J. spectrum of developmental disorders associated with early Ojemann: None. brain overgrowth, brain malformations including corticalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 25 E07 Genome Editing: Multiple Tools and their E08 Does Genetic Counselling Work? Applications E08.1 E07.1 What Was, What Is, What If - Trends and Predictions Editing the Mammalian Genome: Targets and Tools In Assessing Genetic Counseling H. O’Neill* R. G. Resta* University College London, London, United Kingdom Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, WA, United States Genome editing comprises a powerful set of tools which Genetic counselling as a formalized clinical practice is have enabled discovery in every model organism. CRISPR about75yearsoldandasaprofessionisabout50yearsold. genomeediting haspropelledresearch from benchtoclinic Initially (What Was) the criteria for assessing the effec- andshowspromiseforboththetreatmentandpreventionof tiveness of genetic counselling focused on reproductive geneticdisorders.Ongoingresearchintothecomponentsof outcomes, cost-savings, and avoiding disability. As genetic thistechnologyhighlightwhereimprovementscanbemade technologies have advanced, social values have changed, to sharpen editing efficiencies. This lecture explains what and research sophistication has increased, (What Is) the CRISPR is, how it works, and dissects the CRISPR effectiveness of genetic counselling has been assessed by machinery to illuminate aspects of experimental design patient focused outcomes such as empowerment, adapta- which are essential for any genome editing experiment. tion, and personal disease risk reduction and avoidance. H. O’Neill: None. Nonetheless,recurringthemesofcost-savingsanddisability avoidancecontinuetobeproposedandusedasmeasuresof E07.2 geneticcounsellingsuccess.Ultimately,themeasuresofthe Genome-Wide CRISPR-Cas9 Screening in Immune "success" of genetic counselling reflect social, ethical, cul- Cells tural, geographic, and historical factors, as well as who is measuring genetic counselling outcomes and for what pur- P. Tolar* poses. As genetic technologies and ethical values evolve (What If), different measures of effective genetic counsel- Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom ling will likely emerge. This presentation reviews the different measures of the The advent of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing has effectivenessofgeneticcounsellingandtheirrelationshipto revolutionised genetics. One of the new experimental sociocultural and historical influences and speculates on approachesaffordedbythehighefficiencyofCRISPR/Cas9 emerging, potential, and speculative ways of assessing the gene editing are high-throughput gene targeting experi- effectiveness of genetic counselling. Ultimately, the "effec- ments, such as genome-wide functional screens. Pooled- tiveness" of genetic counselling depends upon how librarygenome-widescreensareaparticularlypowerfuland effectiveness is defined, who is defining effectiveness, and efficientmethodtoidentifynon-redundantgenesregulating why they are defining effectiveness. The effectiveness of a variety of cell intrinsic functions. For the first time this genetic counselling is defined not so much by its allowscomprehensivemolecularcharacterisationofcellular practitioners as it is by the sociocultural, medical, and processesincellsfromhigher organisms inwhichprevious historical context in which genetic counselling takes place. approaches failed, such as in primary immune cells from R. G. Resta: None. mice and humans. I will discuss examples of CRISPR screeningstrategiesthatmylabhasdevelopedforscreening E08.2 ofimmunefunctionsinBcells.Theresultsofthesescreens How to help society interact with genomic technology shed new light on molecular pathways that control antigen- mediated B cell activation, proliferation, cell death and dif- A. Middleton* ferentiation into antibody-secreting cells under healthy and pathological situations. The encouraging results of these Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom approaches hold promise for future advances in studies of gene interactions, pathway mapping andmolecular bases of The‘YourDNA,YourSay’projectisaglobalonlinesurvey pathology inferred directly from diseased human cells. gathering public attitudes towards genomic data sharing. P. Tolar: None. This project exploreshowsociety isrespondingtogenomic technology and articulates the hopes and concerns that26 J.delPicchia individuals have. I will share results from 37,000 members inordertoallowanengraftmentofthecorrectedcells,gene- of the public, from 22 countries (survey gathered data 15 modified autologous HSPCs need a conditioning regimen languages) and offer insight into awareness of genomics, thatcouldberesponsibleforacuteandchronictoxicity,(ii) interest in donating one’s data for research and clinical use HSPCs derived from children under the age of 10 behave andfearsaroundwhatwouldhappenifapersonisidentified differently in culture. Lastly, genome editing and homo- from their data. I will also explore what trust looks like to logous recombination technologies have undergone spec- members of the public. I was also share details of another tacular developments over the last couple of decades. In study,‘MusicofLife’thatexploreshowtoexplaingenetics view of the impressive progress reported for the gene using metaphor in film. Films are being trialled at Adden- addition strategy, offering gene-editing approaches to brookes Hospital in Cambridge and I will share some of patients affected by inherited disorders would move gene these. All of my work focusses on how to build a bridge to therapyonestepforwardbutwouldraiseanumberofother society so that we can help society interact with genomics. scientific questions. Twitter: @genomethics, website: genomethics.org M. Cavazzana: None. A. Middleton: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; RareMark, Congenica. E10.2 Trial readiness, trial endpoints and stakeholder E10 Therapy for Rare Disorders collaboration E10.1 V. Straub* Gene therapy in genetic disorders Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, New- M. Cavazzana1,2,3,4,5* castle, United Kingdom 1Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, Neuromuscular diseases (NMD) are rare diseases caused by 2Biotherapy Department, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, abnormalities in four anatomical structures: 1) the anterior Paris, France, 3Biotherapy Clinical Investigation Center, horn cell, 2) the axon of the 2nd motor neuron, 3) the neu- Groupe Hospitalier Universitaire Ouest, Paris, France, romuscular junction and 4) the skeletal muscle cell itself. 4Paris Descartes–Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Mutations in more than 600 genes causing 1000 different Institute, Paris, France, 5INSERM UMR 1163, Laboratory diseases have so far been identified to cause genetic NMD. of Human Lymphohematopoiesis, Paris, France The spectrum of phenotypes reaches from floppy babies to late onset degenerative diseases. Most NMD are associated Over the last fifteen years, gene therapy has shown its with profound disability and many have a reduced life powerful outcome to successfully treat genetic diseases expectancy. The clinical approach to NMD has changed suchasX-SCID.Moreovertheresultsofseveralothertrials quite dramatically over the past 30 years from a rather have confirmed the clinical potential of gene therapy nihilistic and paternalistic to a research active and forward approachesinothersettingssuchasADAdeficiencyandb- looking approach. Life changing treatments have now been hemoglobinopathies where the bone marrow content of the approved for a number of genetic NMD, including gene differentstemandprecursorcellsandthecells’relationship replacement therapy for spinalmuscular atrophy type1,and with the stroma have very specific characteristics. The many interventional trials and registration studies are ongo- optimizationofgenetherapyrequiresbettercharacterization ing. This change inattitude was helped by improvementsin or identification of bone marrow homeostasis features in diagnostics, a better understanding of pathomechanisms and disease settings. Recent progress has been achieved in the joint international collaborations on trial readiness. Within harvesting and expansion of healthy hematopoietic stem thepast15years,afieldwithaprofoundlackinclinicaltrial and progenitor cells (HSPCs) but also in identifying the culturehaschangedintoaspecialtythatisattheforefrontof appropriate tools. The use of SIN retroviral vectors has advanced therapy activities. This change was amongst other significantlyreducedtheriskofinsertionalmutagenesisand things made possible by TREAT-NMD, a patient centred hasbeenthebestchoicefortheintroductionofatherapeutic collaborative infrastructure programme supported by patient gene into autologous HSPCs than first-generation gamma advocacygroupsandtheEuropeanCommission.Theproject retroviral vectors. The use of autologous gene-corrected startedasanetworkofexcellencewithintheEUFramework HSPCs reduced the risk of alloreactive immune responses Program 6 with the aim to accelerate the elaboration of anddecreasestheriskofinfectiouscomplications.Although clinical trials for rare genetic NMD. Over the past 13 years this progress is of great value, caution is required when the network has established standardised operating proce- translating these findings into a diseased HSPC setting: (i) dures for the assessment of various animalmodels, standardAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 27 ofcareguidelinesforanumberofNMD,patientregistries,a The field of SNP-based heritability analysis began in 2010, care and clinical trial site inventory, a registry for outcome when Yang et al showed it was possible to estimate SNP measures, the TREAT-NMD advisory committee for ther- heritability, the total proportion of phenotypic variation apeutics (TACT), a global communication programme, explained by single nuclotide polymorphisms, from gen- training and education activities, a consortium of biobanks ome-wide association study (GWAS) data. Since then, and close interactions with the regulatory authorities. The manyrelatedmethodshavebeenproposed(e.g,methodsfor successfultranslationalinfrastructurehashelpedtoovercome estimatingheritabilityenrichments,geneticcorrelationsand thefragmentationthatexistedinthefieldandshapedtheway confounding bias), that allow us to further interrogate the all stakeholders are working together. The presentation genetic architecture of complex traits. reflectsontheachievementsofTREAT-NMDandonlessons Iwillbeginbyprovidinganintroductiontothefield,and learned. describing methods that use individual-level data. Then I V. Straub: None. will discuss the second-generation methods, that require only GWAS summary-statistics (and thus allow us to E11 Heritability Estimations analyze ever-increasing amounts of data). I will explain how a crucial feature of all methods is the choice of E11.1 heritability model, which reflects our prior information Heritability estimation and gene-environment about the relative contributions of different SNPs. I will correlation finish by providing examples not only of how these methods have improved our understanding of complex A. Young* traits(e.g.,allowedustodeterminewhichtypesofSNPsare most important, and to infer the impact of selection), but UniversityofSouthernCalifornia,LosAngeles,CA,United how this information can be utilized in other areas of States statistical genetics (e.g., to enable us to produce more accurate polygenic risk scores). Heritability measures the fraction of trait variation in a popu- D. Speed: None. lation due to genetic inheritance. However, when genetic var- iants and environment are correlated, heritability becomes E12 Abstracts Withdrawn harder to measure. Sources of gene-environment correlation include population stratification and indirect genetic effects E13 Mainstreaming Mitochondrial Replacement from relatives. indirect genetic effects are effects of genetic Techniques? variantsinoneindividualonanotherindividual’straitthrough theenvironment.indirectgeneticeffectshavebeenshowntobe E13.1 substantial for educational attainment, and likely affect other Mitochondrial replacement techniques: Exploring the humantraits.Inthistalk,Idiscusshowtousegeneticdataon biological consequences families to separate out the direct causal effects of inherited genetic variants from indirect genetic effects and population M. Herbert*, G. Hudson, Y. Takeda stratification. The particular genetic variant that an individual inheritsistheoutcomeofrandomsegregationintheparentof Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United that individual during meiosis. This randomisation, indepen- Kingdom dent of environment, enables unbiased estimation of direct effects of SNPs and heritability by using genetic data on par- Mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are maternally ents and offspring. We discuss results of applying such meth- inherited and can cause a broad range of debilitating and ods and compare them to results from methods that do not fatal diseases. Reproductive technologies, commonly account for gene environment correlation. known as “mitochondrial replacement” (MR) have been A. Young: None. developed to enable women who carry pathogenic muta- tions to have a genetically related child with a greatly E11.2 reduced risk of transmitting mtDNA disease. Such tech- Flexible Heritability Estimation from Summary nologies involve transplantation of the nuclear DNA from Statistics theeggofanaffectedwomantoanenucleatedeggfroman unaffected donor, effectively rescuing the nuclear genome D. Speed* from its defective mitochondrial environment. The nuclear DNA is transferred in a karyoplast containing a minimal Aarhus Institute of Advanced Studies, Aarhus, Denmark amount of cytoplasm, which can contain mitochondria.28 J.delPicchia Under optimal conditions, the fraction of mtDNA co- S. J. Tabrizi: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; F. transferred with the nuclear genome typically accounts for Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Takeda Pharmaceuticals Ltd. F. 0-2%ofthemtDNAcontentofMRembryos.Despitethis,a Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; Genentech. minority of embryonic stem (ES) cell lines derived from MR embryos revert to the nuclear donor’s mitochondrial genome. While the relevance to development in vivo is Concurrent Sessions unclear,reversioninEScelllinesremainsaconsiderationin the therapeutic application of MR. Our ongoing research, C01 From Carrier Screening to Infertility and Fetal focussed on understanding the drivers of reversion and on Diagnostics developing techniques to prevent it, has revealed new insights into mitochondrial homeostasis during pre- C01.1 implantation development. Consistency of carrier screening guidelines across seven M. Herbert: None. G. Hudson: None. Y. Takeda: None. populations and 408,00 individuals E14 Repeat Expansions: From Detection to Treatment A. Arjunan*, R. Ben-Shachar, R. Torres, K. Johansen Taber, K. E. Kaseniit, D. Muzzey E14.2 Therapeutic advances in Huntington’s disease with MyriadWomen’sHealth,SouthSanFrancisco, CA,United relevance to other repeat expansion disorders States S. J. Tabrizi* Introduction: Current American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) guidelines recommend pan- University College London, London, United Kingdom ethnic carrier screening for two conditions: cystic fibrosis and spinal muscular atrophy. In addition, ACOG recom- Huntington’s disease (HD) is one of the CAG repeat mends screening for approximately a dozen conditions in expansion disorders, it is a devastating autosomal dom- certain ethnicities. Here we analyzed carrier rates of inantly inherited neurodegenerative disease for which there 176 serious conditions to determine whether current is currently no effective disease modifying therapy. The guidelines support consistent care across all ethnicities. genetic predictability of HD provides an opportunity for Methods: Population-specific carrier rates of 176 Men- early therapeutic intervention many years before overt delian conditions were estimated using self-reported symptomonsetandatatimewhenreversalorpreventionof ethnicityinacohortofover408,000individualsundergoing neural dysfunction may still be possible. As HD is mono- expanded carrier screening. Carrier screening guidelines genic, fully penetrant, and characterised by a long pre- were then analyzed to determine consistency across manifest phase, it is emerging as a potential model for ethnicities. studying therapeutic intervention in other neurodegenera- Results: We analyzed 44 population-condition combina- tive conditions such as Alzheimer’s or Parkinson’s disease tions, and found that the least frequent was cystic fibrosis where no preclinical diagnostic tests exist. In addition, HD (CF) in the Southeast Asian population (population- manifests with a broad range of clinical symptoms and condition carrier rate 0.6%, 1 in 161). We then posited signs, many of them common to these other diseases, and the question: how many disorders not recommended for involves widespread pathology throughout most of the screening are as frequent or more frequent than the least brain.UnderstandingofHDpathogenesisisevolving,andI frequentdisordercurrentlyrecommendedbycarrier-screen- will present recent findings on identifying novel genetic ing guidelines? Searching across other permutations modifiersofageofonsetanddiseaseprogression,andtheir revealed 191 additional population-condition carrier rates relevancefor designing new therapeutics.Inthemainbody inexcessof0.6%,suggestingthatcurrentguidelinesarenot of my lecture, I will give an overview of important consistently capturing reproductive risk across populations approachesindevelopmentfortargetingmutantHTTDNA or conditions. and RNA, and in particular I will focus on the recent suc- Conclusions: Many conditions have population-specific cessful phase 1b/2a clinical trial testing the effects of incidence comparable to CF in the Southeast Asian RG6042 (formerly known as IONIS HTT Rx) in patients population—the rarest population-condition pair currently with early Huntington’s Disease and present the results of recommended for carrier screening by ACOG. Expanding the first successful HTT-lowering drug trial. guidelines to include pan-ethnic screening of additional conditions with comparable or higher incidence in selectAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 29 populations would improve equitability of medical care DHCR7 (2×), PMM2 (2×), ACADVL (2×), ACADM (2×), across all populations. HEXA (2×) and ARSA (2×). This study was funded by Myriad Genetics, Inc. Conclusion: Results of CarrierTest provide the couples A.Arjunan:None.R.Ben-Shachar:A.Employment(full with information about the risk for their offspring. The or part-time); Significant; Myriad Genetics, Inc. E. Own- severity depends on the gene and exact mutations. The ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other findings thus must be assessed and communicated by a intellectual property); Significant; Myriad Genetics, Inc. clinical geneticist so that couples can make informed R. Torres: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; decisions. The available preventive measures include Myriad Genetics, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock preimplantation genetic testing, prenatal diagnosis as well options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; as postnatal diagnosis for early treatment. Myriad Genetics, Inc. K. Johansen Taber: A. Employment J. Diblík: None. M. Bittóová: None. F. Lhota: None. F. (full orpart-time); Significant;MyriadWomen’sHealth.E. Zembol:None.L.Dohnalová:None.Z.Vilímová: None.I. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Soldátová: None. M. Hrabíková: None. I. Pavlechová: intellectual property); Significant; Myriad Genetics, Inc. K. None. M. Koudová: None. D. Stejskal: None. E. Kaseniit: A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Significant; Myriad Women’s Health. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; C01.3 Significant; Myriad Women’s Health. D. Muzzey: A. Exome sequencing reveals variants in known and novel Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Myriad candidate genes for severe sperm motility disorders Women’s Health. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; M. S. Oud1*, B. J. Houston2, L. Volozonoka3,4, F. K. Myriad Genetics, Inc. Mastrorosa4, B. Alobaidi4, P. F. de Vries1, G. Astuti1, L. Ramos5, R. Burke2, R. I. McLachlan6, M. K. O’Bryan2, C01.2 J. A. Veltman1,4, H. E. Chemes7, H. Sheth4,8 Expanded carrier screening of recessive disorders (CarrierTest) in clinical practice 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Monash School of Biological Sciences, J.Diblík*,M.Bittóová,F.Lhota,F.Zembol,L.Dohnalová, Clayton,Australia,3RigaStradinsUniversity,Riga,Latvia, Z.Vilímová,I.Soldátová,M.Hrabíková,I.Pavlechová,M. 4Biosciences Institute Newcastle University, Newcastle, Koudová, D. Stejskal United Kingdom, 5Department of Gynaecology and Obste- trics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 66Hudson GENNET s.r.o., Praha, Czech Republic Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Australia, 7Center for Research in Endocrinology, Buenos Aires Children’s Introduction: Screening for carrier status of recessive dis- Hospital, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 8Foundation for orders is a standard part of preconception care. Expanded Research in Genetics and Endocrinology, Ahmedabad, screening is based on simultaneous detection of variants in India multiple genes that covers mutations prevalent in different human populations. Severe sperm motility disorders are a form of male inferti- Methods: CarrierTest is a custom designed test based on lity characterized by immotile sperm, often in combination amplicon sequencing of target regions in 77 genes for with a spectrum of structural abnormalities of the sperm detectionof835pathogenicmutationscausingmorethan61 flagellum. Depending on the sub-categorization, genetic inherited disorders. factors explain up to 50% of these patients. We performed Results: We have examined 10752 individuals from exome sequencing on 21 patients with severe sperm moti- coupleswithinfertilityorrecurrentpregnancylossbetween lity disorders to identify the underlying genetic defects. A April 2017 and October 2019. In total we have detected diagnosis was reached in 9/21 patients (42.9%) due to 3899 pathogenic variants, most often in following genes: variantsinpreviouslydescribedgenesCFAP43(3patients), GJB2 (in 4.9 % of individuals), CFTR (3.6 %), SERPINA1 CFAP44 (2 patients), QRICH2 (2 patients), DNAH1 (1 (2.6 %), DHCR7 (2.6 %), SMN1 (2.5 %), PAH (2.3 %), patient)andDNAH6(1patient).Furthermore,weidentified NBN (1.8 %), CYP21A2 (3.3 %), ATP7B (1.2 %), PMM2 seven patients with variants in novel spermatogenesis-rela- (1.1 %), ACADVL (1.1 %) and ACADM (1 %). We have ted candidate genes: CFAP58, DNAH12, DRC1, MDC1, found a high risk of autosomal recessive disorder in 67 PACRG, SSPL2C and TPTE2. One other patient carried couples (1.25 %), most often both partners were carriers of variants in four candidate genes. Electron microscopy mutations in GJB2 (18×), CFTR (13×), SMN1 (6×), imaging was available to further characterize the sperm CYP21A2 (6×), SERPINA1 (3×), PAH (3×), MEFV (3×), flagellum phenotype in 4/9 diagnosed patients and 5/830 J.delPicchia patients with variants in candidate genes. This revealed stabilising the interaction between homologous chromo- short,irregulartailswiththickeningofthefibroussheath(9/ somes. Based on our data we propose that pathogenic var- 9patients),abnormalouterdensefibers(5/9)andabsenceof iantsinMSH4andMSH5causeautosomalrecessiveMeiA. dynein arms (2/9 patients), central microtubule pairs (6/9 If validated, screening of MSH4 and MSH5 in azoospermic patients) or mitochondrial sheath (9/9). RNA interference patients before testicular biopsy may prevent unnecessary study in Drosophila melanogaster confirmed that loss of surgical procedures, if there is no chance of finding mature DNAH6,DNAH12andQRICH2expressionresultedinmale spermatozoa in the testis. This work was carried out within infertility, thus suggesting an evolutionary conserved role the frame of the DFG Clinical Research Unit ‘Male Germ for these genes. Our results confirm an important role for Cells: from Genes to Function‘(CRU 326). fiveknowngenesanddemonstratethatexomesequencingis M. J. Wyrwoll: None. C. Friedrich: None. E. Kaminsky: an effective method to diagnose patients with severe moti- None. C. Krallmann: None. S. Kliesch: None. F. lity disorders. Sequencing of additional patient cohorts is Tüttelmann: None. needed tofurther strengthen therole ofthe novel candidate genes in motility disorders. C01.5 M. S. Oud: None. B. J. Houston: None. L. Volozonoka: Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis by genome-wide haplo- None.F.K.Mastrorosa: None.B. Alobaidi:None.P.F.de typing of cell-free plasma DNA Vries: None. G. Astuti: None. L. Ramos: None. R. Burke: None.R.I.McLachlan:None.M.K.O’Bryan:None.J.A. H. Che1*, D. Villela1,2, E. Dimitriadou1, C. Melotte1, N. Veltman: None. H. E. Chemes: None. H. Sheth: None. Brison1,M.Neofytou1,K.VanDenBogaert1,O.Tsuiko1,K. Devriendt1,E.Legius1,M.ZamaniEsteki1,3,4,T.Voet1,J.R. C01.4 Vermeesch1 Identificationofnovelcausesformaleinfertility:loss-of- function variants in MSH4 and MSH5 1Center of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Insti- M. J. Wyrwoll1,2*, C. Friedrich1, E. Kaminsky3, tute of Biosciences, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, C. Krallmann2, S. Kliesch2, F. Tüttelmann1 Brazil, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Münster, 4Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, GROW School Münster, Germany, 2Centre of Reproductive Medicine and for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht Andrology, Department of Clinical and Surgical Androl- University, Maastricht, Netherlands ogy, University Hospital, Münster, Germany, 3Praxis für Humangenetik Kaminsky, Hamburg, Germany Introduction: While non-invasive prenatal testing for aneuploidies (NIPT-A) is widely implemented, there is an Infertilityaffectsaround7%ofallmenandisinpartdueto increasing need for universal approaches for noninvasive azoospermia. Testicular sperm extraction (TESE) from prenatal testing for monogenic diseases (NIPT-M). Here, biopsies in azoospermic patients offers the possibility to we present a cost-effective, generic cell-free fetal DNA recover sperm that can be used for assisted reproduction. (cffDNA) haplotyping approach to scan the fetal genome However, 2-10% of azoospermic patients have meiotic for the presence of inherited monogenic diseases. arrest(MeiA).IfMeiAiscomplete,TESEwillnotsucceed. Methods: Families participating in the preimplantation We performed whole exome sequencing (WES) in 68 genetic testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M) program patients with MeiA and negative TESE procedures. Alter- were recruited for this study. 250000 SNPs captured from nativecausesforinfertilitywereexcludedinadvance.WES maternal plasma DNA along with genomic DNAs from data was screened with focus on rare, biallelic variants family members were massively parallel sequenced. [maximum allele frequency (MAF) < 1% in all databases], Parental genotypes were phased via an available genotype which are likely pathogenic (stop-, frameshift-, and splice from a close relative, and the fetal genome-wide haplotype site-mutations). We detected two novel genes, MSH4 and andcopynumberweredeterminedusingcffDNAhaplotyp- MSH5,aspossiblecausesforMeiAinmen.Bothgenesare ing analysis based on estimation and segmentation of fetal expressed predominantly in germ cells in humans and are allele presence in the maternal plasma. associated with premature ovarian insufficiency in women. Results: In all families tested, mutational profiles from One of our MeiA patients carries biallelic loss of function cffDNA haplotyping are consistent with embryo biopsy variants in MSH4, while three azoospermic patients have profiles.Genome-widefetalhaplotypesareonaverage97% homozygous variants in MSH5. MSH4 and MSH5 form a concordant with the newborn haplotypes and embryo heterodimer, which binds DNA strands during prophase 1, haplotypes.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 31 Conclusion: We demonstrate that genome-wide targeted have shown the value of trio exome sequencing for the capture and sequencing of polymorphic SNPs from prenatalgeneticdiagnosisoffetuseswithvaryingstructural maternal plasma cell free DNA (cfDNA) allows haplotyp- anomalies. A fast, stable, and reliable process including ing and copy number profiling of the fetal genome during sample processing, data analysis, and comprehensive pregnancy. The method enables the accurate reconstruction reporting is required to provide patients with the maximal of the fetal haplotypes and can be easily implemented in benefit. In summary, prenatal exome sequencing offers a clinical practice. feasiblediagnosticapproachforfetuseswithanomalies,but Grants: This work was funded by KULeuven funding a multidisciplinary team to cover all ethical, psychological, (C1/018), the Horizon 2020 WIDENLIFE: 692065 to J. R. social and medical aspects is required. V. and T.V and by the Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk H.Gabriel:None.C.Wilhelm:None.F.Battke:None.E. Onderzoek (FWO-Vlaanderen: G080217N) to J. V. D. V. Goldmann: None. C. Bus: None. S. Biskup: None. was supported by FAPESP (2017/23448-8). H.Che:None.D.Villela:None.E.Dimitriadou:None.C. C02 Intellectual Disability Melotte: None. N. Brison: None. M. Neofytou: None. K. Van Den Bogaert: None. O. Tsuiko: None. K. Devriendt: C02.1 None. E. Legius: None. M. Zamani Esteki: None. T. Voet: SCAF4 loss of function in humans and Drosophila None. J. R. Vermeesch: B. Research Grant (principal implicates mRNA transcriptional termination in neuro- investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants developmental disorders as well as grants already received); Modest; Agilent. A.Fliedner1*,P.Kirchner1,K.E.Agre2,I.deGraaf-vande C01.6 Laar3,M.DutraClarke4,L.Davis-Keppen5,A.B.Ekici1,A. Trio exome/whole exome sequencing in prenatal diag- Gregor1,N.Lippa6,K.McWalter7,G.Mirzaa8,G.Noh9,L. nosis: Experiences from >400 cases shows a high Ohden5, D. A. Scott10, S. Lalani10, R. Straussberg11,12, R. diagnostic yield and a great benefit for pregnancy Cohen13,12, A. Wiesener1, C. Zweier1 management and genetic counselling. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Univer- H. Gabriel1*, C. Wilhelm2, F. Battke1, E. Goldmann2, sität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Clinical C. Bus2, S. Biskup1 Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 3Department ofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusMC,University 1CeGaT, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Divi- Tuebingen, Germany sion of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of California-Irvine, School of Whole exome sequencing (WES) and trio exome sequen- Medicine, Irvine, CA, United States, 5University of South cing is becoming the first-tier diagnostic test for many Dakota, Sanford School of Medicine, Sioux Falls, SD, unclear genetic conditions. However, in prenatal testing, United States, 6Institute for Genomic Medicine, Columbia several challenges have to be addressed: turn-around-time, University Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, patient acceptability, additional findings, interpretation of 7Clinical Genomics, GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United unclear variants, and ethical dilemmas. A cohort of >400 States, 8Department of Pediatrics, University of Washing- unselected fetuses with varying structural anomalies seen ton, Seattle, WA, United States, 9Department of Genetics, during routine ultrasonography were analysed after amnio- Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Fontana, centesis or chorionic villus sampling. In 326 samples, trio CA, United States, 10Department of Molecular and Human exome sequencing was performed. Only likely pathogenic Genetics,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX,United and pathogenic (according to the currentACMG guideline; States, 11INeurogenetics Clinic, Neurology Unit, Schneider Richards et al., 2015), in genes to be potential involved in Children Medical Center, Petah Tikvah, Israel, 12Sackler the observed fetal phenotype were considered. 30% of the SchoolofMedicineTelAvivUniversity,RamatAviv,Israel, cases were clearly solved by trio exome sequencing, 13Neurology Institute and Epilepsy Center, Schneider meaning that class 4 or 5 variants consistent with the fetal Children Medical Center, Petah Tikvah, Israel phenotype were found. An additional 12% cases with var- iantsverylikelycausativeforthephenotypeweredetected. Regulation of gene expression is highly complex and Inmostofthesecasesonlylimitedclinicalinformationwas involves a large number of different processes including available or only soft markers (e.g. increased nuchal trans- mRNA termination at polyA sites. This is mediated by lucency) were present. The mean turn-around-time (TAT) RNA polymerase IIand requires binding of SR-related and was18dayswithashortestTATof5days.Inthisstudy,we CTD-associated factor 4 (SCAF4). SCAF4 represses the32 J.delPicchia usage of early polyA sites and thus prevents usage of T. Kleefstra2,3, A. Reymond4, L. E. L. M. Vissers2,3, S. E. alternative last exons (ALEs) and formation of truncated, Fisher1,3 non-functionalproteins.SCAF4isexpressedinalladultand fetaltissues,withhighexpressioninbrain,andhasnotbeen 1Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, associated with disease, yet. By exome sequencing and Netherlands, 2Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Don- international matchmaking we assembled six truncating, ders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijme- two splice-site and one missense variant in SCAF4, all but gen, Netherlands, 4University of Lausanne, Lausanne, one de novo. All individuals presented with a variable Switzerland, 5Washington University School of Medicine, neurodevelopmental disorder with developmental delay, St. Louis, MO, United States, 6Children’s Hospital of mild to severe intellectual disability and various other Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 7Children’s Hospi- aspects such as epilepsy (6/9), behavioral anomalies (6/9) tal of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, ON, and skeletal (3/9) or renal (3/9) anomalies. Knockdown of Canada,8GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD,UnitedStates,9Uni- the SCAF4 orthologue CG4266 in the model organism versité de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, Drosophila melanogaster resulted in impaired locomotor 10CentreHospitalierUniversitairedeDijon,Dijon,France, function in the climbing assay and impaired learning and 11Vannes hospital, Vannes, France, 12Rennes University, short-term memory tested by the courtship conditioning Institute of Genetics and Development of Rennes (IGDR), paradigm. Furthermore, we observed an increased number Rennes, France, 13University of Missouri-Kansas City of active zones in larval neuromuscular junctions, repre- School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO, United States, senting large glutamatergic synapses. These observations 14Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United indicate a role of CG4266 in nervous system development States, 15Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United and function and support a role of its human orthologue States, 16Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, SCAF4 in neurodevelopmental disorders. We establish 17VilniusUniversity,Vilnius,Lithuania,18VilniusUniversity likely gene-disruptive variants in SCAF4 as causative for a HospitalSantarosKlinikos,Vilnius,Lithuania,19University variable neurodevelopmental disorder and thus implicate of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 20University Hospitals of disturbed mRNA termination in impairment of neurodeve- Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 21University Hospital Essen, lopment and cognition. University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 22Guy’s A.Fliedner:None.P.Kirchner:None.K.E.Agre:None. Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 23Northwell Health, I. de Graaf-van de Laar: None. M. Dutra Clarke: None. L. Great Neck, NY, United States, 24Donald and Barbara Davis-Keppen:None.A.B.Ekici: None.A.Gregor:None. Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hemp- N.Lippa:None.K.McWalter:A.Employment(fullorpart- stead, NY, United States, 25Feinstein Institutes for Medical time); Significant; GeneDx. G. Mirzaa: None. G. Noh: Research, Manhasset, NY, United States, 26The University None.L.Ohden:None.D.A.Scott:None.S.Lalani:None. of Kansas School of Medicine Salina Campus, Salina, KS, R.Straussberg:None.R.Cohen:None.A.Wiesener:None. United States, 27Pediatrics & Genetics Alpharetta, Alphar- C. Zweier: None. etta, GA, United States, 28Zuidwester, Middelharnis, Netherlands, 29Randall Children’s Hospital at Legacy C02.2 Emanuel, Portland, OR, United States, 30Children’s Mutation-specific pathophysiological mechanisms in a Hospital of the King’s Daughters, Norfolk, VA, United new SATB1-associated neurodevelopmental disorder States, 31Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, United States, 32Maastricht University Medical Center+, J. den Hoed1*, E. de Boer2,3, N. Voisin4, N. Guex4, L. Maastricht, Netherlands, 33St Michael’s Hospital Bristol, Snijders Blok1,2,3, J. Chrast4, The DDD study, L. UniversityHospitalsBristolNHSFoundationTrust,Bristol, Manwaring5, M. Willing5, A. Waheeb6,7, M. Osmond7, K. United Kingdom, 34Oxford University Hospitals NHS McWalter8, A. Vitobello9,10, F. Demurger11, A. Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 35Oxford Lavillaureix12, S. Odent12, B. Mazel10, L. Faivre10, I. Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 36Radboud Thiffault13,14,C.Schwager13,14,S.M.Amudhavalli13,14,J.A. Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Rosenfeld15, K. Radtke16, E. Preiksaitiene17,18, E. Netherlands Ranza19,20, C. Depienne21, A. Kuechler21, S. Mohammed22, Y.HamzaviAbedi23,24,V.R.Bonagura25,24,B.Zuccarelli26, Introduction: Special AT-rich sequence-binding protein-1 B. Horist27, V. Krishnamurthy27, A. A. Kattentidt- (SATB1) is a transcription factor that has not been impli- Mouravieva28,L.Granger29,A.Petersen29,K.L.Jones30,31, cated in neurodevelopmental disorders, but was recently M. Sinnema32, A. P. A. Stegmann2,32, R. Newbury-Ecob33, identified as a dominant candidate gene in two large-scale U.Kini34,D.F.Newbury35,C.Gilissen2,36,H.Brunner2,3,32, meta-analyses, together comprising >65,000 patients withAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 33 neurodevelopmental disorders, including intellectual dis- C02.3 ability (ID) and/or autism spectrum disorders. A homo- De novo frameshift variants in the neuronal splicing zygous knockout of the orthologous Satb1 leads to mice factor NOVA2 result in a common C-terminal part and lethality, demonstrating its importance in early cause a severe form of neurodevelopmental disorder development. Methods and results: Here, we report on 26 individuals F. Mattioli1*, G. Hayot1, N. Drouot1, B. Isidor2, J. with SATB1 variants. Seventeen patients have missense Courraud1, M. Hinckelmann1, F. Tran Mau-Them3,4, C. variants predicted to be deleterious, and nine have Sellier1, A. Goldman5, A. Telegrafi6, A. Boughton7, C. truncating variants, three of which predicted to escape Gamble7, S. Moutton3,4, A. Quartier1, N. Jean3,4, P. Van nonsense-mediated decay. 21 of 26 variants (80%) were Ness5, S. Grotto8, S. Nambot3,4, G. Douglas6, Y. Si6, J. confirmed tobedenovoinorigin. Patientsshowedabroad Chelly1,9, Z. Shad10, E. Kaplan10, R. Dineen10, C. Golzio1, phenotypic spectrum, including ID and/or neurodevelop- N. Charlet1, J. Mandel1, A. Piton1,9 mental delay, epilepsy, dental abnormalities and aspecific brain MRI findings. Additionally, patients with missense 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2CHU de Nantes, Nantes, variants are more severely affected than those with France, 3CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Burgundy truncating variants. We characterized the effects of eight University, Dijon, France, 5Baylor College of Medicine, different missense mutations, including two recurrent Houston, TX, United States, 6GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, variants, in cell-based assays. Compatible with a gain-of- United States, 7Cook Children’s Genetics, Fort Worth, TX, function effect of missense variants, mutated SATB1 United States, 8AP-HP Robert-Debré, Paris, France, proteins showed altered nuclear localization and increased 9Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, transcriptionalrepressionontwocharacterizedtargets(IgH- France, 10University of Illinois College of Medicine, MAR site and the IL2 promoter). Consistent with this Chicago, IL, United States hypothesis, fluorescent recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) experiments demonstrated a decrease in mobility Monogenic forms of intellectual disability (ID) are char- ofmutantSATB1,suggestingstabilizationofDNAbinding acterized by an extreme heterogeneity, with more than 700 underlying the increased transcriptional activity. Transcrip- genes now implicated. The most frequent cause of mono- tome analysis is currently ongoing to further substantiate genic ID -thefragile X-syndrome- isduetotheabsence of these findings. the RNA-binding protein (RBP) FMRP. Many other ID Conclusions: In summary, through multi-center colla- genes have been implicated in the RNA metabolism. borations, we show that SATB1 is associated with an NOVA2 is a RBP known to regulate neuron specific autosomaldominantneurodevelopmentaldisorder,resulting alternative splicing (AS). We identified 6 individuals with from distinct mutation-specific pathophysiological de novo frameshift variants in NOVA2 affected with a mechanisms. neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by ID, motor J. den Hoed: None. E. de Boer: None. N. Voisin: None. and speech delay, autistic features, spasticity or ataxic gait N.Guex:None.L.SnijdersBlok:None.J.Chrast:None.L. andabnormalbrainMRI.AllvariantsclusterinasmallGC- Manwaring: None. M. Willing: None. A. Waheeb: None. repeat rich region, located in the last exon, indicating that M. Osmond: None. K. McWalter: None. A. Vitobello: the mutated transcript might escape to nonsense mediated None.F.Demurger:None.A.Lavillaureix:None.S.Odent: decay. All 6 frameshift variants lead to the addition of a None.B.Mazel:None.L.Faivre:None.I.Thiffault:None. novelcommonC-terminalpartinsteadofthelastKHRNA- C. Schwager: None. S. M. Amudhavalli: None. J. A. binding domain, suggesting a dominant negative mechan- Rosenfeld:None. K.Radtke:None.E. Preiksaitiene:None. ism. We detected 41 genes differentially spliced after E.Ranza:None.C.Depienne:None.A.Kuechler:None.S. downregulation of NOVA2 in human neuronal cells. The Mohammed: None. Y. Hamzavi Abedi: None. V. R. NOVA2 variant protein shows decreased ability to bind Bonagura: None. B. Zuccarelli: None. B. Horist: None. V. target RNA sequences and to regulate target AS events. It Krishnamurthy: None.A. A.Kattentidt-Mouravieva:None. also fails to complement the effect on neurite outgrowth L. Granger: None. A. Petersen: None. K. L. Jones: None. induced by NOVA2 downregulation in vitro and to rescue M.Sinnema:None.A.P.A.Stegmann:None.R.Newbury- alterationsofretinotectalaxonalpathfindinginducedbyloss Ecob: None. U. Kini: None. D. F. Newbury: None. C. of NOVA2 ortholog in zebrafish. Our results showed that Gilissen: None. H. Brunner: None. T. Kleefstra: None. A. truncating mutations in NOVA2 cause a syndromic form of Reymond: None. L. E. L. M. Vissers: None. S. E. ID,suggestingahypomorphicmechanismratherthanafull Fisher: None. heterozygous loss of function, although a specific con- tribution of the novel C-terminal extension cannot be excluded.34 J.delPicchia F. Mattioli: None. G. Hayot: None. N. Drouot: None. B. School,Boston,MA,UnitedStates,16BirminghamWomen’s Isidor: None. J. Courraud: None. M. Hinckelmann: None. and Children’s Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Birming- F. Tran Mau-Them: None. C. Sellier: None. A. Goldman: ham, United Kingdom, 17Warren Alpert Medical School of None. A. Telegrafi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Brown University, Providence, RI, United States, 18Uni- Significant;Genedx.A.Boughton:None.C.Gamble:None. versity of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, S. Moutton: None. A. Quartier: None. N. Jean: None. P. United States, 19Tartu University Hospital and Institute of Van Ness: None. S. Grotto: None. S. Nambot: None. G. ClinicalMedicine,Tartu,Estonia,20YaleUniversitySchool Douglas: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 21Leiden GeneDx. Y. Si: A. Employment (full or part-time); University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 22Depart- Significant; GeneDx. J. Chelly: None. Z. Shad: None. E. ment of Paediatrics, Juliana Children’s Hospital HAGA, Kaplan: None. R. Dineen: None. C. Golzio: None. N. the Hague, Netherlands Charlet: None. J. Mandel: None. A. Piton: None. SRCAP functions in a chromatin remodeling complex, C02.4 involved in epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Pro- Location, location, location: protein truncating variants tein-truncating variants (PTVs) in the last two exons of in different loci of SRCAP cause three distinct neurode- SRCAP cause Floating-Harbor syndrome (FLHS), which is velopmental disorders, associated with distinctive DNA characterized by typical facial features, short stature with methylation signatures delayed bone age and expressive speech delay. We report on novel genotype-phenotype correlations, associated with D.Rots1*, E. Chater-Diehl2, A. J. M.Dingemans1,M. Siu2, SRCAP PTVs outside the FLHS locus. C. Cytrynbaum2, N. Hoang2, S. Walker2, S. Scherer2, R. We identified 21 probands with PTVs upstream, and 5 Pfundt1,T.Rinne1,T.Gardeitchik1,B.B.A.deVries1,C.T. with PTVs downstream of the reported FLHS locus. Most R.M.Stumpel3,S.J.C.Stevens4,J.vanHarssel5,D.G.M. patients presented with speech delay and intellectual Bosch5,K.L.I.vanGassen5,E.vanBinsbergen5,C.M.de disability. In contrast to FLHS, they have normal height Geus6,M.Hempel7,D.Lessel7,J.Denecke8,A.Slavotinek9, and bone age. Moreover, facial-recognition algorithms on J. Strober9, L. B. Ousager10, M. Larsen10, L. Schultz- 2D-photos showed that patients with upstream and down- Rogers11, E. Morava11, E. W. Klee11, I. R. Berry12, J. stream PTVs do not cluster with the FLHS-facial gestalt. Campbell13, K. Lindstrom14, A. M. Neumeyer15, J. A. The upstream PTVs result in subtle facial dysmorphism, Radley16, C.Phornphutkul17, W.G.Wilson18,B. Schmidt18, autism spectrum disorder, severe behavioral problems and S. Meyn2, K. Ounap19, K. Reinson19, S. Pajusalu19,20, C. joint issues, such as hypermobility and premature degen- Ruivenkamp21, A. van Haeringen21, R. Cuperus22, GeneDx eration. In contrast, patients with downstream PTVs have inc.,L.E.L.M.Vissers1,H.G.Brunner1,4,T.Kleefstra1,D. neurodevelopmental delay and Marfanoid habitus. A. Koolen1, R. Weksberg2 Atthemolecularlevel,FLHSischaracterizedbyaunique DNA methylation (DNAm) signature consisting of ~570 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2The Hospital for differentially methylated CpGs. The DNAm profiles of the Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Department of upstream and downstream PTVs yielded different signa- Clinical Genetics and GROW-School for Oncology and tures from FLHS. Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical In summary, we delineate the phenotype of patients with Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Maastricht University SRCAPPTVsoutsidetheFLHSlocus.Noneofthepatients Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 5University show clinical features typical for FLHS. Analysis at the Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6University molecular level suggests that each clinical entity is of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, associated with its own molecular mechanism. We propose Groningen, Netherlands, 7Institute of Human Genetics, that the upstream PTVs result in haploinsufficiency, UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg, whereas the downstream PTVs and FLHS-causing variants Germany, 8Department of Pediatrics, University Medical result in distinct dominant-negative or gain-of-function CenterHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg,Germany,9Depart- effect. ment of Pediatrics, UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United D. Rots: None. E. Chater-Diehl: None. A. J. M. Dinge- States, 10Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, mans:None.M.Siu:None.C.Cytrynbaum:None.N.Hoang: 11Mayo Clinic, Rochester, NY, United States, 12St. James’s None. S. Walker: None. S. Scherer: None. R. Pfundt: None. University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 13Chapel T. Rinne: None. T. Gardeitchik: None. B. B. A. de Vries: Allerton Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 14Phoenix None.C.T.R.M.Stumpel:None.S.J.C.Stevens:None.J. Children’s Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 15Massa- van Harssel: None. D. G. M. Bosch: None. K. L. I. van chusetts General Hospital for Children, Harvard Medical Gassen: None. E. van Binsbergen: None. C. M. de Geus:Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 35 None.M.Hempel:None.D.Lessel:None.J.Denecke:None. and 4C-seq. MEF2C was variably differentially expressed A.Slavotinek:None.J.Strober:None.L.B.Ousager:None. upon deletion of proximal and distal MEF2C loop regions, M. Larsen: None. L. Schultz-Rogers: None. E. Morava: with effects depending on cell type and variant class. None. E. W. Klee: None. I. R. Berry: None. J. Campbell: Underlying chromatin interaction patterns revealed evi- None. K. Lindstrom: None. A. M. Neumeyer: None. J. A. dence of loop maintenance in these models, possibly via Radley:None.C.Phornphutkul:None.W.G.Wilson:None. CTCF buffering, highlighting compensatory mechanisms B. Schmidt: None. S. Meyn: None. K. Ounap: None. K. against3Dchromatindisruption.Incontrast,deletionofthe Reinson:None.S.Pajusalu:None.C.Ruivenkamp:None.A. proximal TAD boundary facilitated increased contacts with vanHaeringen:None.R.Cuperus:None.L.E.L.M.Vissers: predicted enhancers in the adjacent TAD. None. H. G. Brunner: None. T. Kleefstra: None. D. A. Our results suggest novel regulatory mechanisms driving Koolen: None. R. Weksberg: None. phenotypicoutcomesforthe5q14.3region,withsignificant implications for interpretation of pathogenic structural C02.5 variation. Mechanisticdissectionofchromatintopologydisruption K. Mohajeri: None. E. D’haene: None. R. Yadav: None. in the 5q14.3 MEF2C locus as an indirect driver of H.Gu:None.B.Menten:None.A.PresserAiden:None.C. neurodevelopmental disorders Lowther:None.S.Erdin:None.E.LiebermanAiden:None. J. Gusella: None. S. Vergult: None. M. Talkowski: None. K. Mohajeri1,2, E. D’haene3*, R. Yadav1,2, H. Gu4,5, B. Menten3, A. Presser Aiden4,5, C. Lowther1,2, S. Erdin1,2, E. C02.6 Lieberman Aiden4, J. Gusella1,2, S. Vergult3, M. Crispr-Cas9-engineered Pigv341E mouse model mirrors Talkowski1,2 the human phenotype, reveals a hippocampal synaptic defect and suggests a major role of impaired Abl1/ 1Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Ephrin signaling pathway in GPI anchor deficiency Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, M. Rodríguez de los Santos1,2,3*, M. Rivalan4, F. S. United States, 3Center for Medical Genetics, Dept. of David3,5, A. Knaus3, A. Stumpf6, L. Moreno Velasquez6, A. Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium, Voigt6,D.Mattei7,M.Long4,L.Wittler8,B.Timmermann9, 4The Center for Genome Architecture, Baylor College of D. Horn1, S. Mundlos1,2,10, U. Kornak1,10, D. Schmitz6, Y. Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Department Winter4, P. M. Krawitz3 of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States 1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, Structural variants have the potential to create long-range 2Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, FG Devel- positionaleffects,uncouplegenesfromregulatoryelements, opment and Disease, Berlin, Germany, 3Institute for and facilitate aberrant 3D chromatin folding. In an inde- Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University of Bonn, pendent study, we revealed a significant enrichment of Bonn, Germany, 4Animal Outcome Core Facility of the intergenic balanced chromosomal abnormality (BCA) NeuroCure Center, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin breakpoints from congenital anomaly cases at chromosome and Institute of Cognitive Neurobiology, Humboldt Uni- 5q14. 3. All 11 5q14.3 BCA carriers had breakpoints dis- versity Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 5Institute of Human ruptingthetopologicallyassociateddomain(TAD)housing Genetics, University of Bonn, Faculty of Medicine & MEF2C, a known driver of neurodevelopmental disorders. University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 6Neuroscience In a second study, we showed, using 4C-seq, that MEF2C Research Center, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, forms proximal and distal interaction loops within this Berlin, Germany, 7Institute of Veterinary Pharmacology TAD, contacting multiple neuronal enhancers. and Toxicology, University of Zurich, UZH-Zürich, Zürich, To understand the functional impact of these BCAs, we Switzerland, 8Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, performed a mechanistic dissection of the 3D regulatory Department Developmental Genetics, Berlin, Germany, network at the 5q14.3 locus and its constituent functional 9Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Sequencing elements using Cas9-based genome editing. We generated Core Facility, Berlin, Germany, 10Berlin-Brandenburg >200celllines,representingdeletionsofMEF2Calongside Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charité – Universitäts- five MEF2C TAD boundary and interaction loop targets in medizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany iPS-derived neural stem cells (NSCs) and cortical induced neurons (iNs). We profiled changes in expression and 3D Pathogenic germline mutations in PIGV result in a glyco- chromatin interactions within these models using RNA-seq sylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis deficiency (GPIBD).36 J.delPicchia Patients with biallelic mutations in genes of this molecular omnigenic model suggests that many of the genes in these pathwayshowcognitiveimpairments,apsychomotordelay locimightnotdirectlybeinvolvedincorediseasepathways. and often suffer from epilepsies. Thus far, the pathophy- The omnigenic model postulates that most genes in the siologyunderlyingthediseaseremainsunclearandsuitable GWAS loci are peripheral genes that exert smaller down- rodent models were lacking. Hence, we generated a mouse stream effects on genes that directly affect the phenotype model using CRISPR-Cas9 to introduce the most prevalent (coregenes).Thesecoregenesareexpectedtooverlapwith hypomorphic mutation observed in European patients, that genes that result in rare Mendelian diseases when mutated. is also conserved in mice Pigv:c.1022 C>A (p.Ala341Glu). In order to map the relationships between peripheral and At the behavioral level, Pigv341E mice mutants showed coregenes,were-analysed31,499publiclyavailableRNA- deficitsinmotorcoordinationandcognitiveimpairmentsin seqsamplesfromvarioustissuesandcell-typestocalculate long-term spatial memory. Furthermore, Pigv341E mice a gene-gene co-regulation network. We then integrated the displayed alterations in social behavior and sleep patterns co-regulation network with GWAS summary statistics to reflecting the human phenotype. Immunohistochemistry identify genes that are co-regulated with a large number of showed a decreased synaptophysin immunoreactivity in GWAS genes. We hypothesise that these genes are more hippocampal CA1 and electrophysiology recordings likely to be core disease genes. demonstrated a reduced hippocampal synaptic transmission Asaproofofconcept,weappliedthisgeneprioritization in Pigv341E mice that may explain impaired memory for- strategy to a height GWAS and show that prioritized core mation. In addition, we performed single cell RNA genesarestronglyenrichedforMendeliandiseasegenesfor sequencingofhippocampalcellsofadultPigv341Emicethat both disproportionate short and tall stature (AUC 0.69 and exhibit changes of gene expression, most prominently in a 0.86 respectively) as expected under the omnigenic model. microglia subtype, subicular neurons and CA3 pyramidal The enrichment of Mendelian disease genes among the neurons. A significant reduction of Abl1 transcripts in predicted core genes suggest that complex disease and rare severalcellclusterssuggestsalinktothesignalingpathway diseasegeneticsareontwoendsofthesamespectrum.We of GPI-anchored ephrins, which are known to play a major therefore expect that our method can ultimately be used to role in synapse formation and plasticity. In summary, we better understand common diseases and we hope to predict present here the first mouse model with a patient-specific new rare disease genes. hypomorphic mutation that mirrors the human phenotype O. B. Bakker: None. A. Claringbould: None. H. Westra: and will allow us to explore the pathophysiology in None.S.MulcahySymmons:None.M.Swertz:None.I.H. GPIBDs in future studies. Jonkers: None. L. Franke: None. P. Deelen: None. M.RodríguezdelosSantos:None.M.Rivalan:None.F. S. David: None. A. Knaus: None. A. Stumpf: None. L. C03.2 Moreno Velasquez: None. A. Voigt: None. D. Mattei: Improved de novo mutation detection through deep None. M. Long: None. L. Wittler: None. B. Timmermann: learning None.D.Horn:None.S.Mundlos:None.U.Kornak:None. D. Schmitz: None. Y. Winter: None. P. M. Krawitz: None. K. Šablauskas*, W. Steyaert, D. Rots, R. Pfundt, H. G. Yntema,H.G.Brunner,A.Hoischen,L.E.L.M.Vissers,C. C03 Novel Bioinformatic and Machine-Learning Gilissen Methods Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University C03.1 Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands Reconciling GWAS and Mendelian genetics through core-gene identification De novo mutations (DNMs) are an important cause of genetic disorders. The accurate identification of DNMs is O. B. Bakker1*, A. Claringbould1, H. Westra1, S. Mulcahy therefore fundamental to rare disease research and diag- Symmons1, M. Swertz1, I. H. Jonkers1, L. Franke1, P. nostics.Unfortunately,identifyingreliableDNMsremainsa Deelen1,2 major challenge due to sequence errors, uneven coverage and mapping artifacts. 1UniversityMedicalCenterGroningen,Groningen,Nether- Here, we developed a deep convolutional neural network lands, 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, (CNN)DNMcaller:deNovoCNN.WetraineddeNovoCNN Netherlands by encoding the sequence alignment reads for a trio as 164x160resolutionimages.Wetrainedourmodel(80/20% Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified training/validation split) on 4,868 high-qualityDNMs from thousands of disease susceptibility loci, however the whole exome sequencing (WES) data of 2,018 trios withAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 37 intellectual disability (ID). We then compared the DNM Results: The patients with similar phenotype were calls in 20 separate trios to those of three other de novo locatedincloseproximityintheCFPS.Rankingsyndromes callers: GATK, DeNovoGear (DNG), and Radboudumc in- by distance in CFPS, we achieved 80% top-10 accuracy in house tool (IH). The identified variants were manually identifying super rare Mendelian diseases that are not yet inspected though IGV. represented in DeepGestalt. Moveover, as a tool for deNovoCNNoutperformedothercallingapproacheswith matching patients of unknown cause, more than 100 pairs an accuracy of 99.38% (GATK 75.69%, DNG 30.97%, IH of unrelated patients were identified that show a similarity 97.54%). Additional Sanger validation for a subset of comparable to patients with the aforementioned super rare mutations is ongoing. When applying deNovoCNN to 278 disorders,suggestingnovelphenotypesofsharedmolecular unresolved trios, we identified 5 previously missed DNMs etiology. in monoallelic ID genes (CDK13, PAFAH1B1, TCF20, Conclusions: GestaltMatch opens the door to extend the SMC1A and PRKAR1A), that provide a likely diagnosis coverage of syndromes recognized by NGP tools and to based on ACMG criteria. All of these mutations were enable further exploration of the unknown phenotype- confirmed to be de novo events by Sanger sequencing. genotype associations. Overall, deep convolutional neural networks are a T. Hsieh: None. A. Bar-Haim: A. Employment (full or powerful tool for DNM discovery, and have the potential part-time); Significant; FDNA. G. Nadav: A. Employment to call clinically relevant DNMs missed by existing (full or part-time); Significant; FDNA. T. J. Pantel: None. approaches. N.Fleischer:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; K.Šablauskas: None.W. Steyaert: None. D.Rots: None. FDNA. P. Krawitz: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; R. Pfundt: None. H. G. Yntema: None. H. G. Brunner: Modest; FDNA. None. A. Hoischen: None. L. E. L. M. Vissers: None. C. Gilissen: None. C03.4 Untranslated region (UTR) variant analysis across C03.3 71,702 genomes to build a framework for variant GestaltMatch: breaking the limits of rare Mendelian interpretation disorder diagnosis by matching patients with next- generation phenotyping S. Pajusalu1,2,3*, N. J. Lake1,4, M. Lek1 T. Hsieh1*, A. Bar-Haim2, G. Nadav2, T. J. Pantel3, N. 1Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Fleischer2, P. Krawitz1 Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, 2Department of ClinicalGenetics,InstituteofClinicalMedicine,University 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Germany, 2FDNA, Boston, MA, United States, 3Charité United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany Estonia, 4Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia Introduction: Recent advances in next-generation pheno- typing (NGP) for syndromology such as DeepGestalt have TheimportanceofUTRsintheregulationofgeneexpression learned phenotype representations of multiple disorders by has been widely appreciated. However, UTR variants asso- training on thousands of patient photos. However, many ciatedwithMendeliandisordershavebeenunderstudied.This Mendelian syndromes are still not represented by existing is due to our inability to interpret the functional impact of NGP tools as only handful of patients were diagnosed. We UTR variants and a lack of clear interpretation guidelines. therefore propose “GestaltMatch” which utilizes the simi- To investigate human UTR variants, we gathered larityamongpatientstoidentifysyndromicpatientsbytheir 1,049,754 single nucleotide substitutions in canonical 5′ facial gestalt in order to extend the coverage of NGP tools. UTRs and 5,289,132 in canonical 3′UTRs from gnomAD Methods: We compiled a dataset consisting of 23,000 v3 database. Notably,this is more than a 2-fold increase of patients with 1,500 different rare disorders. For each UTR variants from the previous gnomAD release. We individual a frontal photo and the molecularly confirmed assessed the effects of variants affecting upstream open diagnosis were available. We utilized deep convolutional readingframes(uORFs),Kozaksequences,polyadenylation neuralnetworkstotrainamodelonpatient’sfrontalphotos, signals, andmiRNA-bindingsites. These data were usedto and facial embeddings werefurtherextracted toconstruct a build a publicly available variant annotation tool which is ClinicalFacePhenotypeSpace(CFPS).JointBayesianwas the basis of our UTR variant interpretation framework. used to quantify the similarity among patients and correct Using a genome-wide heptamer model of constraint the confounding effects of age and ethnicity in CFPS. enabled us to identify that UTRs show less variation than38 J.delPicchia expected;thisisevenmorepronouncedacross 5′UTRs and significantly enriched for missense DNMs, all in the “ion functional elements like uORFs. By assessing UTR transport protein” (PF00520) domain family (position 96, p=3.6×10−2;102,p=7.1×10−5;and231,p=8.0×10−6), constraintandtheabsenceofvariantswithstrongregulatory effects, we were able to prioritize novel candidate disease and no hotspots enriched for protein truncating or synon- genes.Forexample,MDGA1,aregulatorysynapticprotein, ymous DNMs. The 57 missense variants driving enrichment is under strong constraint for 5′UTR and none of its 55 are located in 25 genes. So far, 20 of these genes (with 52 putative uORF-creating variants exist in gnomAD indicat- DNMs) have been previously associated with DD (p=6.3× 10−15), ing strong negative selection. suggesting that our approach is able to identify true We demonstrate the utility of the framework by disease genes. In the remaining 5 genes, genetic intolerance classifying variants reported in the literature and databases, and molecular gene function suggest KCNH5, KCNG1, and as well as present results from large neuromuscular disease TPCN1 as putative novel candidate genes for DD. Thus, we cohorts where we have applied this framework to improve show a novel approach based on hotspot identification in the interpretation of UTR variants. homologous protein domains that may be used to identify Grant: PUTJD827 candidate disease genes. S. Pajusalu: None. N. J. Lake: None. M. Lek: None. L. van de Wiel: None. H. Venselaar: None. L. E. L. M. Vissers: None. G. Vriend: None. J. A. Veltman: None. C. C03.5 Gilissen: None. Hotspot detection in homologous protein domains using de novo mutations from 31,058 patients identify C03.6 candidate developmental disorder genes Cell type specific genetic regulation of gene expression across human tissues L. van de Wiel1,2*, H. Venselaar2, L. E. L. M. Vissers3, G. Vriend2, J. A. Veltman3,4, C. Gilissen1 S. Kim-Hellmuth1,2*, F. Aguet3, M. Oliva4, S. Kasela2, M. Muñoz-Aguirre5,V.Wucher5,GTExConsortium,R.Guigó5, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for B. E. Stranger6, K. G. Ardlie3, T. Lappalainen2,7 Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Centre for Molecular 1Dr. von Hauner Children’s Hospital, Department of and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute for Pediatrics, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Germany, 2New York Genome Center, New York, NY, Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Human United States, 3The Broad Institute of Massachusetts Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cam- Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, bridge, MA, United States, 4Section of Genetic Medicine, Netherlands, 4Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Centre for Life, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Chicago,IL,UnitedStates,5CentreforGenomicRegulation Tyne, United Kingdom (CRG), The Barcelona Institute for Science and Technol- ogy, Barcelona, Spain, 6Center for Genetic Medicine, Identification of disease-causing variants is an ongoing Department of Pharmacology, Northwestern University, effort, and requires integration of various biologically Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States, relevantprioritizationstrategies.Wehavepreviouslyshown 7DepartmentofSystemsBiology,ColumbiaUniversity,New that genetic variation can be aggregated through homo- York, NY, United States logous protein domains and used to interpret variants of unknown significance. Here, we show that we can use this Introduction: The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) concept to robustly identify critical hotspots of de novo project has identified expression and splicing quantitative mutations (DNMs) that suggest novel disease gene candi- traitloci(eQTLsandsQTLs)incisforthemajorityofgenes dates. We used a dataset of 45,221 DNMs from 31,058 acrossarangeofhumantissues.However,theinterpretation patients with developmental disorders (DD). Of these, of these e/sQTLs has been limited by the heterogeneity of 15,392 DNMs locate to protein domain regions, belonging cell type abundances in bulk tissue. to 2,311 protein domain families across 6,910 genes. We Materials and Methods: Here, we applied cell type curated this list for unique genomic positions and mapped deconvolution to characterize the cell type specificity of these onto aggregated domain families. We subsequently eQTLs and sQTLs for 43 cell type-tissue combinations, used a binomial test to identify significantly enriched using seven cell types across 35 tissues from up to 838 positions as domain-based hotspots. From 12,389 aggre- individuals. gated domain positions, we found three hotspotsAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 39 Results:Acrosscelltypesandtissues,wedetected3,347 visceral fat were clonally expanded and subjected to both genes with a cell type interacting eQTL (ieQTL) and 987 whole genome sequencing and gene expression analyses. genes with a cell type interacting sQTL (isQTL) at 5% Multi-organ biopsies from each donor allowed well- FDR. Furthermore, ieQTL-genes (ieGenes) had a larger controlled comparison of somatic mutation landscapes in number of independent eQTLs in standard eQTL mapping different tissues. andwereenrichedamongtissue-specificeGenes,indicating Results: Somatic mutation and gene expression data that cell type-specific regulatory activity drives cell type- identified a population of kidney tubule progenitors that specificeQTLeffectsthatcontributetoallelicheterogeneity showed a mutation profile similar to progenitor cells from andtissue-specificityofeQTLs.CelltypeieQTLswerealso other tissues (fat, skeletal muscle and blood) and low enriched in sex-biased eQTLs suggesting that these higher amount of mutations, indicating protection from mutagen order G x E interactions are driven by cell composition exposure. Conversely, de-differentiated cells derived from changes.Finally,colocalizationanalysisofcelltypeieQTLs damaged proximal tubules showed a mutation profile and isQTLs with 87 complex traits not only pinpointed the similar to the most common cancer tumor subtypes (clear cellular specificity of known eQTLs but identified novel cell renal cell- and papillary-carcinoma). High mutation colocalized loci that were masked in bulk tissue. burden and a unique mutation landscape, characterized by Conclusions: Our results emphasize the importance of mutation enrichment in active chromatin, regulatory and identifyinggeneticeffectsongeneexpressionatthecellular transcribed regions, caused 6-fold faster accumulation of level and demonstrate that cell type-specific effects can be potential, cancer-driver mutations. uncovered in bulk tissues by integrating increasingly Conclusions: Our somatic mutation data support the available single-cell and cell type-specific existence of a stem cell-like population protected from transcriptomic data. mutations in the kidney tubules. Conversely, the proximal S. Kim-Hellmuth: None. F. Aguet: None. M. Oliva: tubule of healthy, human kidneys is exposed to unique None. S. Kasela: None. M. Muñoz-Aguirre: None. V. mutagenic processes that increase tumor predisposition. Wucher: None. R. Guigó: None. B. E. Stranger: None. K. Fundings from Swedish Research Council, Center for G. Ardlie: None. T. Lappalainen: None. Innovative Medicine, Engkvist, Hagelen, Österman and Jeanssons Foundations, Svenska Läkaresällskapet and C04 Cancer Genetics I: Basic Research in Cancer Riksbankens Jubileumsfond I. Franco: None. H. T. Helgadottir: None. A. Moggio: C04.1 None.M.Larsson:None.P.Vrtacnik:None.A.Johansson: Unique somatic mutation lanscape enhances tumor None. N. Norgren: None. P. Lundin: None. D. Mas-Ponte: predisposition in the kidney proximal tubule None. J. Nordström: None. T. Lundgren: None. P. Stenvinkel: None. L. Wennberg: None. F. Supek: None. I. Franco1*, H. T. Helgadottir1, A. Moggio1, M. Larsson2, M. Eriksson: None. P. Vrtacnik1, A. Johansson3, N. Norgren4, P. Lundin5, D. Mas-Ponte6,J.Nordström7,T.Lundgren7,P.Stenvinkel7,L. C04.2 Wennberg7, F. Supek6, M. Eriksson1 TFEBconstitutiveactivationunderliespolycystickidney and renal carcinoma in Birt-Hogg-Dube’ syndrome 1Karolinska Institutet, HUDDINGE, Sweden, 2Science for Life Laboratories, LINKÖPING, Sweden, 3Science for Life C. Di Malta*, G. Napolitano, A. Esposito, M. Matarese, V. Laboratories, UPPSALA, Sweden, 4Science for Life Benedetti,A.Zampelli,D.Siciliano,A.Venuta,M.Cesana, Laboratories, UMEÅ, Sweden, 5Science for Life Labora- C. Vilardo, E. Nusco, J. Monfregola, A. Ballabio tories, STOCKHOLM, Sweden, 6Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), BARCELONA, Spain, 7Kar- Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), olinska University Hospital, HUDDINGE, Sweden Pozzuoli (NA), Italy Introduction: Somatic mutations accumulating in the Loss of function mutations in the Folliculin (FLCN) gene genome of human cells can be used to track mutagen are responsible for the autosomal dominant inherited Birt- exposure and to identify cancer-prone cell types. Hogg-Dube’ (BHD) syndrome, a genetic disorder char- Materials and methods: To detect somatic mutations in acterizedbybenignskintumors,lungandkidneycystsand single genomes from healthy, human cells, biopsies were kidney cancers. Renal tumors represent the most severe obtained from six healthy donors undergoing kidney manifestation of the disease and develop following a explant for donation. Donors´ age spanned from 30 to 69. somatic second-hit mutation leading to the inactivation of Single cells from kidney, skin, blood, subcutaneous and the remaining FLCN allele. To date, the pathogenetic40 J.delPicchia mechanisms downstream FLCN depletion are still Introduction: The contribution of coding mutations to unknown. FLCN acts a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) oncogenesis has been largely clarified whereas little is for the Rag family GTPase, in particular RagC/D, con- known about somatic mutations in noncoding DNA and verting them totheiractiveforms,which signalaminoacid theirroleindrivingtumorsremainscontroversial.Here,we sufficiency to the mechanistic Target Of Rapamycin Com- used an alternative approach to interpret the functional plex 1 (mTORC1), a key regulator of cell metabolism, significance of noncoding somatic mutations in promoting highly implicated in cancer. Previous studies indicated that tumorigenesis. kidney-specific Flcn deletion in mice recapitulates kidney Methods: Noncoding somatic mutations of 151 neuro- phenotype observed in BHD patients. Here we show that blastomas (NB) and of 81 Wilms tumours (WT) were, in loss of FLCN induces a constitutive activation of the parallel, integrated with ENCODE data to locate somatic Transcription Factor EB (TFEB), the master regulator of mutations in regulatory elements specifically active in lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, which drives upre- tumor cells (of NB and WT), non-specifically active in gulation of several target genes relevant for disease phe- tumor cells (of NB and WT), and non-active. Within these notype, in particular Rag C/D, thus leading to types of elements, we identified transcription factors (TFs) hyperactivation of mTORC1 signaling. Remarkably, whose binding sites (BS) were enriched or depleted in depletionofTfebinFlcn-KOmice,whichwasachievedby mutations. For these TFs, a gene expression signature was generatingFlcn/TfebdoubleKOmice,fullyrescuedkidney built to assess their implication in NB and WT. phenotype and associated lethality, thus pointing to TFEB Results: For both tumor types, the pathogenicity of as the major driver of BHD syndrome. Interestingly, mutations was significantly higher in TFBS of regulatory increased TFEB nuclear localization is also observed in elements specifically active in tumor cells, as compared to renal tumors from BHD patients, hence suggesting that the others. Here, we found over-represented TFs mainly targeting this transcription factor could be a valuable ther- involvedincellcyclephasetransitions(n=18andn=35for apeutic strategy for the treatment of this genetic disorder. NB and WT, respectively), and under-represented TFs C. Di Malta: None. G. Napolitano: None. A. Esposito: primarilyregulatingcelldifferentiation(n=15andn=21for None. M. Matarese: None. V. Benedetti: None. A. NB and WT, respectively). A gene expression signature Zampelli: None. D. Siciliano: None. A. Venuta: None. M. basedonover-representedTFscorrelatedwithpoorsurvival Cesana: None. C. Vilardo: None. E. Nusco: None. J. and unfavourable prognostic markers. Monfregola: None. A. Ballabio: F. Consultant/Advisory Conclusions: We propose a novel approach to study the Board; Modest; CASMA Therapeutics, Inc, Cambridge, involvement of regulatory variants in NB and WT that MA 02139. could be extended to other cancers and provide further evidence that alterations of gene expression may have C04.3 relevant effects in tumour development. Oncogenic transcription factors are over-represented in V. A. Lasorsa: None. F. Cimmino: None. M. Avitabile: mutatedactiveDNAbindingsitesinneuroblastomaand None. S. Cantalupo: None. A. Montella: None. B. De Wilms tumor Angelis: None. M. Morini: None. C. de Torres: None. A. Castellano:None.F.Locatelli:None.A.Iolascon:None.M. V. A. Lasorsa1,2*, F. Cimmino1,2, M. Avitabile1,2, S. Capasso: None. Cantalupo1,2,A.Montella1,2,B.DeAngelis3,M.Morini4,C. deTorres5,A.Castellano3,F.Locatelli3,6,A.Iolascon1,2,M. C04.4 Capasso1,2,7 CharacterizationofcircRNAprofilesinchildhoodacute lymphoblastic leukemia 1CEINGE-BiotecnologieAvanzate,Napoli,Italy,2Depart- ment of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, A. Gutierrez-Camino1,2*, M. Caron2, C. Richer2, E. Lopez- Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy, Lopez1, I. Martin-Guerrero1, B. Frutos1, P. St-Onge2, A. 3Department of Pediatric Haematology and Oncology, Bataille2, D. Sinnett2,3 IRCCS Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy, 4LaboratoryofMolecularBiology,IRCCSIstitutoGiannina 1University of the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain, 2Division Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 5Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, of Hematology-Oncology, Sainte-Justine University Health DevelopmentalTumorBiologyLaboratoryandDepartment Center,Montreal,QC,Canada,3DepartmentofPediatrics, of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, 6Department of Paedia- Montreal University, Montreal, QC, Canada trics, Sapienza University of Rome, Roma, Italy, 7IRCCS SDN, Napoli, Italy Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (cALL) represents one of the most frequent causes of death by disease inAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 41 children. Accurate patient diagnosis is fundamental to obtain sequencing studies have demonstrated that PDAC tumors higher cure rates. In recent years, a new type of non-coding comprise diverse cell populations, but the functional inter- RNAs, circRNA, has emerged as a promising biomarker for play and evolutionary hierarchy of PDAC cells remains cancerdiagnosis,howeverlittleisknownabouttheirrolesin elusive. cALL development and treatment response. We propose to We derived PDAC organoids from primary tumors of 18 investigate and characterize a circRNAs in cALL, which patients, together with two matched samples from liver might allow a more precise diagnosis and prognosis assess- metastases. By scRNA-seq, we determined that PDAC ment,thusopeningthedoortobetteroutcomes.Towardsthis organoids consist of ductal cells with patient-specific goalwehaveperformedatranscriptomeanalysis(RNA-Seq) expression of several gene groups. Organoids derived from of156cALLpatients(124B-ALLand26T-ALL)fromtwo higher-grade tumors tend to show more ‘basal-like’ gene independent cohorts. CircExplorer was used to quantify, expression, consistent with previous data. However, annotate and characterize circRNAs. A total of 187,504 cir- ‘classical’ and ‘basal-like’ cells may coexist within the cRNAs were identified in the discovery cohort. The size of same tumor, and the level of subtype heterogeneity within thecircRNAswasonaverage820bp,withameanof5exons tumors is independently linked to poor prognosis. percircRNA.TheoverallexpressionofcircRNAvariantswas Despite intertumor heterogeneity, we identified several between 1 and 452 per gene with a mean of 14,6. Unsu- tumor cell states shared across patients, including a cycling pervised clustering analysis showed that circRNAs could progenitor cell state and a differentiated secretory state, properly stratify cALL subtypes. Differential circRNA which are connected by a differentiation hierarchy. By expressionbetweenALL and controls showed a totalof 726 integrating scRNA-seq data from PDAC organoids and deregulated in the whole cohort (390 upregulated and 336 primarytumors,weshowthatthesecellstatesandhierarchy downregulated). The 50% of circRNAs were unique for are mirrored within the ductal cell compartment in specific subtypes. These results were validated in an inde- primary PDAC. pendent cohort. In conclusion, we have defined circRNA Our results uncover a hierarchy of functional PDAC cell characteristics in cALL and identified subtype-specific cir- states in organoids and primary tumors, supporting the use cRNAs. In addition to protein-coding genes and other non- of PDAC organoids as a clinically relevant model for coding RNAs, we have shown that circRNA expression in vitro studies of tumor heterogeneity. profiles can accurately classify cALL subtypes. T.G.Krieger:None.J.Jabs:None.S.LeBlanc:None.A. A. Gutierrez-Camino: None. M. Caron:None. C. Richer: Giri: None. O. Strobel: None. R. Eils: None. C. None.E.Lopez-Lopez:None.I.Martin-Guerrero:None.B. Conrad: None. Frutos: None. P. St-Onge: None. A. Bataille: None. D. Sinnett: None. C04.6 Integrative analyses of 100 genomes of Basal Cell C04.5 Carcinoma in the context of transcription and methyla- Patient-derivedPDACorganoidsrecapitulatetumorcell tion profiles state heterogeneity and functional hierarchy in vitro S. I. Nikolaev1*, A. Yurchenko1, A. Sartori2, I. Padioleau1, T.G.Krieger1*,J.Jabs2,S.LeBlanc3,A.Giri1,O.Strobel3, F. Rajabi1, L. Parmentier3, D. Salomon4, E. Dermitzakis2, R. Eils1, C. Conrad1 H. Ongen5 1Digital Health Center, Berlin Institute of Health (BIH)/ 1Gustave Roussy, VILLEJUIF, France, 2Univeristy of Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin,Germany, 2Divisionof Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Hospital of Sierre, Sierre, Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Switzerland, 4Seujet Dermatological Clinics, Geneva, Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 3European Pan- Switzerland, 5University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland creas Center, Department of Surgery, Heidelberg Uni- versity Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC) of skin is the commonest human malignancy with the lifetime risk of 30% and Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is projected to increasing incidence. BCC is characterized by constitutive be the second leading cause of cancer mortality by 2030, activation of the Sonic hedgehog pathway and by hyper- and responses to current therapy differ markedly between mutator phenotype due to UV. In this study we present patients. Transcriptomic analyses have established two WholeGenomeSequences(WGS)of96andWholeExome subtypes of PDAC: ‘classical’ tumors characterised by a Sequences of 259 BCC. These data are complemented by higher level of differentiation, and ‘basal-like’ tumors RNA-Seq and Methylation profiling of BCC and adjacent showing aggressive clinical behaviour. Recent single-cell skin. Over 20 million point mutations allowed42 J.delPicchia unprecedentedly detailed analysis of UV-induced muta- catalytically inactive. Homozygous deletion results in neo- genesis in skin cancer and revealed differences between natal lethality. Homozygous embryos and pups with the BCC and melanoma. Variation in spectrums and cluster- deletion have an incompletely penetrant congenital heart ization of mutations across genomic regions with different defectphenotype.Theyhaveventricularseptaldefectswith sets of genomic covariates including tumor-derived tran- or without an overriding aorta (as in tetralogy of Fallot). In scriptomes and methylomes was used for decomposition homozygouspupsandembryostheventricularmyocardium into separate biological processes. Driver discovery, per- is abnormal resembling non-compaction. At day 16.5 of formed with multiple methods, validated known genes development the compact myocardium of the left ventricle including PTCH1, SMO, MYCN, PTPN14 and others as is significantly thinner (p<0.05) in homozygous embryos well as rendered a handful of novel drivers in other cancer compared to wild-type. Adult heterozygous mice have a pathways.RNA-Seqanalysisuncoveredthemostimportant significantly prolonged PR interval (p=0.01) compared to pathways involved in BCC pathogenesis and histological wild-type (measured by unconscious ECG). All other heterogeneity. Numerous structural variants and gene electrocardiography and echocardiography parameters fusions were retrieved using both WGS and RNA-Seq. measuredwerenotsignificantlydifferentcomparedtowild- Theseeventsaswellasalistof23focaldeletionssuggested type.Ourdataforthefirsttime showsthatKMT2Cplaysa novel putative tumor suppressor genes in BCC. Functional role in cardiac development and congenital heart disease. non-coding genomic variation was assessed with somatic We have also identified a novel role for KMT2C in myo- cis-eQTLanalyseswhichrevealedconsequencesofsomatic cardium formation and cardiac function. Grant reference: mutations in promoters at the allelic expression of nearby BHF FS/16/58/32734 genes including putative cancer drivers. This work repre- S. C. Borland: None. G. Tenin: None. R. Monaghan: sents a first large scale genomic study of BCC dissecting None.S.Williams:None.M.Zi:None.C.Wilson:None.S. mutational mechanisms and functional consequences of Prehar: None. E. Cartwright: None. S. Abraham: None. B. coding and non-coding somatic mutations. Keavney: None. S. I. Nikolaev: None. A. Yurchenko: None. A. Sartori: None. I. Padioleau: None. F. Rajabi: None. L. Parmentier: C05.2 None. D. Salomon: None. E. Dermitzakis: None. H. Mutations in KDR, encoding for vascular endothelial Ongen: None. growth factor receptor 2, contribute to Tetralogy of Fallot C05 Elucidating the Function of Cardiac Genes D. Skoric-Milosavljevic1*, N. Lahrouchi1, F. Bosada1, G. C05.1 Dombrowsky2, F. Tjong1, I. El Bouchikhi3, M. Hababa1, S. Investigating the role of KMT2C in heart development Williams4,R.Walsh1,L.Beekman1,A.Ilgun1,R.Lesurf5,E. Audain2,J.Breckpot6,B. J.Mulder1,S.Clur1,S.Mital5,B. S.C.Borland*,G.Tenin,R.Monaghan,S.Williams,M.Zi, Keavney4, M. Hitz2, V. Christoffels1, E. M. Lodder1, A. V. C. Wilson, S. Prehar, E. Cartwright, S. Abraham, B. Postma1, C. R. Bezzina1 Keavney 1Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Neth- Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Man- erlands, 2University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, chester, Manchester, United Kingdom Kiel, Germany, 3University of Sidi Mohammed Ben Abdellah, Fez, Morocco, 4The University of Manchester, Histone modifiers have been implicated as candidate genes Manchester, United Kingdom, 5The Hospital for Sick in congenital heart disease indicating they are important in Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Center for Human heart development. Previously, our lab performed exome Genetics, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium sequencing of 829 tetralogy of Fallot patients which iden- tified 18 mutations in KMT2C that are absent in gnomAD Introduction:Congenitalheartdefects(CHD)arethemost and have a combined annotation dependent depletion common birth defects. Although there is a clear genetic (CADD) score of more than 20. KMT2C is a H3K4 component, a substantial proportion of CHD cases remain methyltransferaseactivepredominantlyatenhancers.Using genetically unexplained. Family based studies are suitable in situ hybridisation we have shown Kmt2c expression to identify rare, highly penetrant variants in novel during key stages of mouse heart development. Human candidate genes. embryonic hearts also show KMT2C expression during Material and Methods: We conducted whole-exome equivalent stages. We have studied a mouse model where sequencing in a family with two children affected with the SET domain of KMT2C is deleted making the protein tetralogy offallot(TOF). We generated and studied knock-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 43 in mice carrying variants homologues to two missense Netherlands,2Department ofClinicalGenetics,Amsterdam variants in the gene KDR, which likely underlie the TOF UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Pharma- phenotypeinthefamily.Furthermore,wescreenedacohort cological Sciences and Graduate Program in Molecular of TOF probands of European descent for likely disease- andCellularPharmacology,StonyBrookUniversity,Stony causing variants in KDR and performed a burden test for Brook, New York, NY, United States, 4Department of Cell rare genetic variants in this gene in an ancestry-matched and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School case-control dataset. of Medicine, Nashville, TN, United States, 5Research Unit Results: Both affected children are compound hetero- for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Adoles- zygous for two missense variants in KDR (p.Gly345Trp/p. cent Medicine, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University Gly537Arg), encoding vascular endothelial growth factor and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, receptor 2. While mice that were compound heterozygous 6DepartmentofBiochemistryandCellBiology,StonyBrook forthesevariantsdisplayednoCHD,micehomozygousfor University, Stony Brook, New York, NY, United States, thep.Gly537Argvariantdisplayedembryoniclethalitywith 7Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Hadassah, Hebrew defective vasculogenesis and pericardial edema, mimicking University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 8Department the phenotype of Kdr knock-out mice. Compared to the ofMedicalBiology,AmsterdamUMC,Amsterdam,Nether- gnomAD database there seems to be an enrichment of lands, 9Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University protein-truncating variants (PTVs) among a set of 1,226 Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 10Department of (P=5x10−7). TOF probands of European descent Further- Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, more, we identified a significant burden of rare Nashville, TN, United States, 11University of Minnesota, (MAF<0.1%) missense variants and PTVs in KDR in Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Women’s Health, European TOF patients versus controls (P=9x10−4). Minneapolis,MN,UnitedStates,12UniversityofMinnesota, Conclusions: Based on a family study and case-control DepartmentofPediatrics,DivisionofPediatricCardiology, analysis, we highlight the importance of KDR in the Minneapolis,MN,UnitedStates,13UniversityofMinnesota, pathogenesis of CHD in humans. DepartmentofPediatrics,Minneapolis,MN,United States, D. Skoric-Milosavljevic: None. N. Lahrouchi: None. F. 14Department of Pediatrics, Ochsner Clinic, Tulane Uni- Bosada: None. G. Dombrowsky: None. F. Tjong: None. I. versity,UniversityofQueensland,NewOrleans,LA,United ElBouchikhi:None.M.Hababa:None.S.Williams:None. States, 15Makarios Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, R. Walsh: None. L. Beekman: None. A. Ilgun: None. R. 16Ultrasound and Fetal Medicine Diagnostic Centre, Lesurf: None. E. Audain: None. J. Breckpot: None. B. J. Nicosia, Cyprus, 17Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, Mulder: None. S. Clur: None.S. Mital: None. B. Keavney: Nicosia, Cyprus, 18Genetic and Rare Disease Research None.M.Hitz:None.V.Christoffels:None.E.M.Lodder: Division,BambinoGesùChildren’sHospitalIRCCS,Rome, None. A. V. Postma: None. C. R. Bezzina: None. Italy, 19Genetic and Rare Disease Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital IRCC, Rome, Italy, C05.3 20Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Bi-allelic loss-of-function mutations in PLD1 cause Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 21University of congenitalright-sidedcardiacvalvedefectsandneonatal Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Depart- cardiomyopathy ment of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 22Monique and Jacques Roboh Department of Genetic Research, Hadas- N. Lahrouchi1*, A. Postma2, C. M. Salazar3, D. De sah, Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, Laughter4, F. Tjong1, L. Piherová5, F. Z. Bowling6, D. 23Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Emma Children’s Zimmerman1, E. M. Lodder1, A. Ta-Shma7, Z. Perles7, L. Hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Beekman1, A. Ilgun8, Q. Gunst8, M. Hababa1, D. Škorić‐ Amsterdam, Netherlands Milosavljević1,P.deKnijff9,R.deLeeuw9,J.Y.Robinson10, S. C. Burn11, H. Mustafa11, M. Ambrose12, T. Moss13, J. Introduction: Mutations in PLD1, which encodes phos- Jacober14,D.M.Niyazov14,A.Rousounides15,A.Aristidou- pholipase D1, were recently associated with severe con- Kallika16, G. Tanteles17, M. Magliozzi18, F. C. Radio19, G. genital cardiac valve defects in two families. However, the W. E. van Santen20, J. C. Herkert21, O. Elpeleg22, M. van consequences of the mutations on PLD1 protein function den Hoff8, B. Mulder1, M. V. Airola6, S. Kmoch5, J. V. and the mechanism by which PLD1 dysfunction leads to Barnett10, S. Clur23, M. A. Frohman3, C. R. Bezzina1 congenital valve abnormalities remained unknown. Methods: We established an international cohort of 1AmsterdamUMC,UniversityofAmsterdam,HeartCenter; patients with autosomal-recessive mutations in PLD1. We Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, assessed the location of the disease-causing missense Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam, mutationsonthe3-dimensionalstructureofPLD1andtested44 J.delPicchia theireffectonPLD1enzymaticactivityinacellularassay.To Goff1, J. Michel1, G. Jondeau1,5, L. Y. Sakai15, C. investigate the involvement of PLD1 in endocardial- Boileau1,4,5, M. Abifadel1,2 mesenchymaltransition(EndoMT)weusedaninvitroassay to asses EndoMT in atrioventricular cushion explants. 1Laboratory for Vascular Translational Science, INSERM Results: We identified 26 patients with bi-allelic PLD1 U1148,UniversitédeParis,CentreHospitalo-Universitaire mutations. While most patients presented with right-sided Xavier Bichat, Paris, France, 2Laboratory of Biochemistry congenital cardiac valve defects (24/26), two patients and Molecular Therapeutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Saint- displayed isolated severe fetal/neonatal cardiomyopathy. Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, 3Center for Medical Using haplotype analyses, we established that p.I668F is a Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4Département founder mutation among the Ashkenazi-Jews (AJS, minor- de Génétique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Xavier allele frequency in gnomAD-ASJ=2%). We found that Bichat,Paris,France,5HôpitalBichat,CentredeRéférence disease-causingPLD1missensemutationsclusterinregions Maladies Rares, Syndrome de Marfan et pathologies oftheproteincriticalforcatalyticactivity.Correspondingly, apparentées,AssistancePublique-HôpitauxdeParis,Paris, a drastic reduction in enzymatic activity was observed for France, 6Department of Internal Medicine, McGovern the mutant proteins. We demonstrate that PLD1 inhibition MedicalSchool,UniversityofTexasHealthScienceCenter, decreases EndoMT, an established pivotal early step in Houston,TX,UnitedStates,7InstituteforProteinResearch, valvulogenesis. Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan, 8Centre for Conclusion:Wehereprovidethegeneticandphenotypic Evolution and Cancer, Division of Molecular Pathology, characterization of the largest cohort of PLD1 patients. Division of Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Genotyping of the p.I668F founder mutation using popula- Research, London, United Kingdom, 9IRCCS Istituto tion-based carrier screening may be justified to assess risk Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, of cardiac defects among ASJ-descendants. Finally, our Italy, 10Inserm UMRS_974, Centre de recherche en results demonstrate that functional testing is useful for myologie, G. H. Pitié-Salpétrière, 47 boulevard de clinical interpretation of variants in PLD1. l’Hôpital, Paris, France, 11Service de Neuropédiatrie, N. Lahrouchi: None. A. Postma: None. C. M. Salazar: HôpitalNecker-Enfants-Malades,149ruedeSèvres,Paris, None.D.DeLaughter:None.F.Tjong:None.L.Piherová: France, 12Department of Clinical Genetic, Hôpitaux None. F. Z. Bowling: None. D. Zimmerman: None. E. M. Universitaires de Strasbourg, 67091, Strasbourg, France, Lodder: None. A. Ta-Shma: None. Z. Perles: None. L. 13Department of Hypertension, Vascular Diseases and Beekman: None. A. Ilgun: None. Q. Gunst: None. M. Pharmacology, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, Hababa:None.D.Škorić-Milosavljević:None.P.deKnijff: France, 14Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Hôtel- None. R. de Leeuw: None. J. Y. Robinson: None. S. C. Dieu, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Nantes, 44093, Burn: None. H. Mustafa: None. M. Ambrose: None. T. Nantes, France, 15Shriners Hospital for Children, Mole- Moss: None. J. Jacober: None. D. M. Niyazov: None. A. cular & Medical Genetics and Biochemistry & Molecular Rousounides: None. A. Aristidou-Kallika: None. G. Biology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Tanteles: None. M. Magliozzi: None. F. C. Radio: None. OR, United States G. W. E. van Santen: None. J. C. Herkert: None. O. Elpeleg: None. M. van den Hoff: None. B. Mulder: None. Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAAD) is a life- M.V.Airola:None.S.Kmoch: None.J.V.Barnett:None. threateningdiseasewithoftenunrecognizedinheritedforms S.Clur:None.M.A.Frohman:None.C.R.Bezzina:None. (hTAAD). Although pathogenic variants have been found in several genes, the majority of hTAAD cases are of C05.4 unknown etiology. We identified in probands and families PathogenicvariantsinTHSD4,encodingtheADAMTS- with TAAD, five functional variants in THSD4 of which Like 6 protein, predispose to inherited thoracic aortic two heterozygous variants leading to a premature termina- aneurysm tion codon. THSD4 encodes ADAMTSL6 (member of the ADAMTS/L superfamily), a microfibril-associated protein S.Elbitar1,2*,M.Renard3,P.Arnaud1,4,5,N.Hanna1,4,5,M. that promotes fibrillin-1 matrix assembly. The THSD4 Jacob1, D. Guo6, K. Tsutsui7, M. Gross1, K. Kessler8, L. variants studied lead to haplo-insufficiency or impaired Tosolini1, V. Dattilo9, S. Dupont1, J. Jonquet1, M. assembly of fibrillin-1 microfibrils. Thsd4+/- mice showed Langeois5, L. Benarroch1,10, M. Aubart1,11, Y. Ghaleb1,2, Y. progressive dilatation of the thoracic aorta. Histologic Abou Khalil1,2, M. Varret1, P. El Khoury1,2, B. Ho-Tin- examination of aortic samples from a patient carrying a Noé1,Y.Alembik12,S.Gaertner13,B.Isidor14,L.Gouya5,O. THSD4 variant and from Thsd4+/- mice, revealed typical Milleron5,K.Sekiguchi7,D.Milewicz6,J.DeBacker3,C.Le medial degeneration and diffuse disruption of extracellular matrix.ThesefindingshighlighttheroleofADAMTSL6inAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 45 aortic physiology and TAAD pathogenesis. They will investigated in vivo and in vitro. A heterozygous missense improve genetic screening for hTAAD and could help mutation (p.P33R) was identified in the SND cohort and develop new targeted therapies. fourheterozygousvariants(p.G77D,p.L129=,p.L130F,p. S. Elbitar: None. M. Renard: None. P. Arnaud: None. N. A293=)intheAFcohort.Overexpressionofthepathogenic Hanna: None. M. Jacob: None. D. Guo: None. K. Tsutsui: predicted mutations in zebrafish revealed pericardial edema None. M. Gross: None. K. Kessler: None. L. Tosolini: None. for p.G77D, whereas the p.P33R and p.A293= variants V. Dattilo: None. S. Dupont: None. J. Jonquet: None. M. showednoeffect.Inaddition,adominant-negativeeffectwith Langeois: None. L. Benarroch: None. M. Aubart: None. Y. reducedheartrateswasdetectedforp.G77D.Invitroreporter Ghaleb:None.Y.AbouKhalil:None.M.Varret:None.P.El assaysdemonstratedforbothmissensevariantsp.P33Randp. Khoury: None. B. Ho-Tin-Noé: None. Y. Alembik: None. S. G77D significantly impaired transactivation activity. Also, a Gaertner:None.B.Isidor:None.L.Gouya:None.O.Milleron: reduced Bmp4 target gene expression was revealed in zebra- None.K.Sekiguchi:None.D.Milewicz:None.J.DeBacker: fish hearts upon overexpression of the p.P33R mutant. This None.C.LeGoff:None.J.Michel:None.G.Jondeau:None. study associates rare variants in the SHOX2 gene implicated L. Y. Sakai: None. C. Boileau: None. M. Abifadel: None. in the susceptibility to arrhythmias and allows frequency estimationsinanAFcohort(3/990).Wealsodemonstratefor C05.5 the first time a genetic link between SND and AF involving Functional characterization of rare SHOX2 variants SHOX2. This work was supported by grants from the DFG identified in sinus node dysfunction and atrial (RA 380/14-4) and DZHK (81X2500107). fibrillation S.Hoffmann:None.C.Paone:None.S.A.Sumer:None. S. Diebold: None. B. Weiss: None. R. Roeth: None. S. S.Hoffmann1,2*,C.Paone3,S.A.Sumer1,2,S.Diebold3,B. Clauss: None. I. Klier: None. S. Kääb: None. A. Schulz: Weiss1, R. Roeth1, S. Clauss4,5, I. Klier4,5, S. Kääb4,5, A. None. P. S. Wild: None. A. Ghrib: None. T. Zeller: None. Schulz6, P. S. Wild6, A. Ghrib7,8, T. Zeller7,8, R. B. R.B.Schnabel:None.S.Just:None.G.A.Rappold:None. Schnabel7,8, S. Just3, G. A. Rappold1,2 C06 Sensory Disorders 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, C06.2 Germany, 2DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Whole Exome Sequencing, Molecular Assays, Immu- Research), Partner site Heidelberg/Mannheim, Heidelberg, nohistology and Animal Models associate USP48 to Germany, 3Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hereditary Hearing Loss of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 4Department of Medicine I, Klinikum Grosshadern, University of Munich (LMU), S. Bassani1*, A. Morgan2, M. Cocca3, N. Voisin4, J. Munich,Germany,5DZHK(GermanCentreforCardiovas- Chrast4,S.Pradervand4,N.Guex4,B.Delprat5,M.Rossel5, cular Research), Partner site Munich, Munich, Germany, H.Locher6,E.VanBeelen6,M.Tangui5,P.Gasparini2,3,G. 6Preventive Cardiology and Preventive Medicine, Center Girotto2,3, A. Reymond4 for Cardiology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 7Depart- 1University of Lausanne, Laussane, Switzerland, 2Depart- ment of General and Interventional Cardiology, University ment ofMedicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University Heart Center Hamburg (UHZ), University Hospital Ham- of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3IRCCS Materno Infantile Burlo burg/Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 8DZHK (German Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 4Centre for Integrative Genomics, Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner site Ham- University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5MMDN, burg/Kiel/Luebeck, Hamburg, Germany University of Montpellier, EPHE-INSERM U1198, Mon- tpellier, France, 6Department of ORL-HNS, Leiden Uni- Sinus node dysfunction (SND) and atrial fibrillation (AF) versity Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands often coexist; however, the molecular mechanisms linking both conditions remain elusive. Mutations in the homeo- Non-Syndromic Hearing Loss (NSHL) is a sensorineural box-containing SHOX2 gene have been recently associated disorder with high genetic heterogeneity and 115 genes with early-onset and familial AF. Shox2 is a key regulator already associated. We identified through exome sequencing of sinus node development, and its deficiency leads to and data aggregation an Italian family with six affected bradycardia, as demonstrated in animal models. We inves- individuals and two unrelated NSHL Dutch patients with tigatedSHOX2asasusceptibilitygeneforSNDandAFby predicted-to-be deleterious missense variants in USP48. We screening 98 SND patients and 450 individuals with AF. uncoveredaninthpatientpresentingunilateralcochlearnerve The functional relevance of the novel mutations was aplasiaandadenovosplicevariantinthesamegene.USP4846 J.delPicchia encodes a ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase under evo- deletion (CD) in the mouse to investigate the regulatory lutionary constraints according to GnomAD (pLI=1; Zmis- architecture of the region and its role in iris development sense=4.37).Pathogenicityofthepatients’missensevariants and glaucoma. Heterozygous mice carrying the CD devel- is supported by the three-dimensional representation of the oped normally, except for moderate reduction in pupil encoded peptide. For example, the Italian missense variant diameter (p<0.01). RNAseq revealed ectopic expression of affects a flexible loop that controls binding to ubiquitin thus Sox21,downstreamoftheCD.OthergeneswithintheTAD leading to an incapacity to hydrolyze tetra-ubiquitin in our were unaffected. Smaller deletions encompassing CTCF- in vitro assays. Consistent with a contribution of USP48 to insulators within the CD did not alter Sox21 regulation, auditoryfunction,immunohistologyshowedthattheencoded suggesting adoption of a nearby enhancer by Sox21 pro- protein is expressed in human hair cells/stereocilia of the motor in CD mice. ChIPseq-H3K27Ac identified two utricle, the dark cell area, the Reissner’s membrane, the stria enhancers of Dct involved in melanin synthesis, at the 5′ vascularis and the developing organ of Corti. Engineered boundary of the TAD. Consistent with a role of Dct zebrafishes knocked-out for the USP48 paralog presented enhancer(s), immunohistology detected Sox21 in the pig- with delayed primary motoneurons development, decreased mented epithelium (PE). It was undetectable in the anterior swimming velocity and circling swimming behavior indica- layer where the DM develops, but ChIPseq identified a tive of vestibular dysfunction and hearing impairment. Cor- trophicfactoramongSox21targets,themRNAandproduct roboratingly, acoustic startle response assays revealed a ofwhichwereelevatedintheirisandaqueoushumor(AH) reduced auditory response of zebrafish lacking usp48 with a ofCDmiceasdeterminedbyRNAseq(p<0.01)andELISA significant decrease at 600Hz and 800Hz frequencies, high- (p<0.01), respectively. Knowing that AH elevation of this lighting the role of this gene in auditory function. In con- factor is associated with primary open-angle glaucoma clusion, we describe a novel NSHL gene through a (POAG), we suggest that both DM malformation and multipronged approach combining Exome Sequencing, Ani- glaucoma in MCOR are secondary to Sox21-mediated mal Modelization, Immunohistology and Molecular Assays. activation of a POAG paracrine signaling in the PE. S.Bassani:None.A.Morgan:None.M.Cocca:None.N. C. Angee: None. B. Nedelec: None. P. David: None. S. Voisin: None. J. Chrast: None. S. Pradervand: None. N. Gerber:None.S.Crippa:None.B.Passet:None.J.Vilotte: Guex: None. B. Delprat: None. M. Rossel: None. H. None. N. Chassaing: None. J. Kaplan: None. C. Costic: Locher: None. E. Van Beelen: None. M. Tangui: None. P. None. P. Calvas: None. J. Rozet: None. L. Fares- Gasparini: None. G. Girotto: None. A. Reymond: None. Taie: None. C06.3 C06.4 Ablation of the congenital microcoria (MCOR) critical Mouse and human studies support a role for CAPN15 region on 13q32.1 activates common-type glaucoma variants in cataract and microphthalmia signalingpathwayschallengingadevelopmentaletiology of MCOR-associated glaucoma. C.Zha1,C.A.Farah1,R.J.Holt2*,F.Ceroni2,L.AlAbdi3,4, A. O. Khan4,5,6, R. Helaby4, F. S. Alkuray4,7, A. Kraus8, N. C.Angee1*,B.Nedelec1,P.David2,S.Gerber1,S.Crippa3, K. Ragge2,9, W. S. Sossin1 B. Passet4, J. Vilotte4, N. Chassaing5, J. Kaplan1, C. Costic3, P. Calvas5, J. Rozet1, L. Fares-Taie1 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3King Saud 1Imagine Institute - Laboratory of Genetics in Ophtalmol- University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4King Faisal Specialist ogy (LGO), Paris, France, 2Imagine Institute - Transgen- Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Eye esis Platform, Paris, France, 3Jules Gonin Eye Hospital, Institute, Cleveland Clinic Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Lausanne, Switzerland, 4INRA - Animal Models for the Arab Emirates, 6Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Differentiation of Tissue (MoDiT), Jouy-en-Josas, France, Medicine at Case Western University, Cleveland, OH, 5Purpan Hospital, Toulouse, France United States, 7Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 8Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds, United Kingdom, 9West The iris is essential to controlling the intraocular pressure, Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birming- the elevation of which leads to glaucoma. Accordingly, ham Health Partners, Birmingham Women’s and Chil- glaucoma is frequent in individuals with irido-dysgenesis, dren’s NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United including congenital microcoria (MCOR), a rare dominant Kingdom disease of dilator muscle (DM) development (>30%). MCORisduetodeletionswithina1MbTADon13q32.1. Introduction: Anophthalmia, microphthalmia and colo- We generated deletions at/or around the 35-Kb critical boma (AMC) are genetically heterogeneous developmentalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 47 eye anomalies, with variants in over 100 genes implicated. James’ University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 4UCL However, only 25-60% of affected individuals are geneti- Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, cally diagnosed, depending on the phenotype. Calpains are 5Birbeck University of London, London, United Kingdom, a group of intracellular cysteine proteases important in 6PORT Polish Center for Technology Development, Wroc- development. Calpain 15 (CAPN15) is located at chromo- law, Poland, 7Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, some 16p13.3, a region previously implicated in an indi- Poland, 8The Centre for Applied Genomics, Toronto, ON, vidual with cataracts and microphthalmia. We describe a Canada, 9University of Southampton, Toronto, ON, Capn15mouseknockoutwithcataractandmicrophthalmia, Canada, 10Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United King- and three human families with developmental eye anoma- dom, 11The University of Manchester, Manchester, United lies and CAPN15 recessive variants. Kingdom, 12Saint Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Materials and Methods: A mouse Capn15 knockout Kingdom was generated using embryonic stem cells from the International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium. Variants in Introduction: The cytoplasmic dynein-2, heavy chain 1 human AMC cases were identified through whole exome gene (DYNC2H1) encodes a motor protein important for sequencing of 55 individuals from a UK patient cohort, retrograde ciliary intraflagellar transport. DYNC2H1 var- examination of the Deciphering Developmental Disorders iants have been associated with severe syndromic condi- Study cohort, and from a clinical diagnostic laboratory. tions such as Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy Results:DuringmousedevelopmentCapn15waswidely (JATD), with rare retinal involvement. expressed throughout the central nervous system, including Materialand Methods:Genomeand exome sequencing in the brain and eyes. Capn15 knockout mice presented were performed for 5 unrelated cases of IRD with no with a significant growth deficit and a range of structural identifiedvariant.Invitroassaysweredevelopedtovalidate eye disorders, including cataract (31%), microphthalmia the variants identified; fibroblast ciliation assay, iPSC- (26%) and anophthalmia (18%). Three human cases with derived retinal organoids, and an in vitro dynein phenotypes including growth delay (2/3), cataracts (1/3), motility assay. coloboma (2/3) and microphthalmia (2/3) were identified Results: Four novel DYNC2H1 variants (V1, with homozygous or compound heterozygous likely g.103327020_103327021dup; V2, g.103055779 A>T; V3, pathogenic variants in CAPN15. g.103112272 C>G; V4, g.103070104 A>C) and one Conclusions: We present evidence that variants in previously reported (V5, g.103339363 T>G) were identi- CAPN15 are associated with AMC. Testing for variants in fied. V1 introduced a premature termination codon (PTC), this gene can be used to enhance AMC patient diagnosis, whereasV2disruptedtheexon41splicedonorsitecausing and meets criteria for clinical diagnostic testing, including incomplete skipping of exon 41. V1 and V2 impaired those of Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen) and dynein-2 motility in vitro and perturbed IFT88 distribution Genomics England. within cilia. V3 is predicted to cause a PTC in a retina- C. Zha: None. C. A. Farah: None. R. J. Holt: None. F. predominant transcript. Analysis of retinal organoids Ceroni: None. L. AlAbdi: None. A. O. Khan: None. R. showed that expression of this transcript increased with Helaby:None.F.S.Alkuray:None.A.Kraus:None.N.K. organoid differentiation. Ragge: None. W. S. Sossin: None. Conclusions: The DYNC2H1 variants discussed were either hypomorphic or affect a retina-predominant tran- C06.5 script.Thisisthefirstreportofdyneinvariants,specifically DYNC2H1hypomorphicorretina-predominantvariants DYNC2H1 variants, causing non-syndromic IRD. cause non-syndromic retinal degeneration Funding: Foundation Fighting Blindness Canada and USA, University of Toronto McLaughlin Centre WGS A. V. Vig1,2*, J. A. Poulter3, D. Ottaviani4, E. Tavares1, K. Initiative, Henry Brent Chair in Innovative Pediatric Toropova5, A. M. Tracewska6,7, A. Mollica1, J. Kang1, O. OphthalmologyResearch,BrendaEyeResearchFund,Fight Kehelwathugoda1, T. Paton1,8, J.T. Maynes1, G.Wheway9, For Sight UK, NIH Research, Moorfields Eye Charity, G. Arno4,10, K. N. Khan3, M. McKibbin3, C. Toomes3, M. Wellcome Trust, Cancer Research UK, Medical Research Ali3, M. Di Scipio1, S. Li1, J. Ellingford11, G. Black11,12, A. Council,RetinaUK,IRDCLeedsandManchester,National Webster4,10, M. Rydzanicz7, P. Stawiński7, R. Płoski7, A. Science Center Poland, Royal Society, BBSRC. Vincent1,2,M.E.Cheetham4,C.F.Inglehearn3,A.Roberts5, A.V.Vig:None.J.A.Poulter:None.D.Ottaviani:None. E. Heon1,2 E. Tavares: None. K. Toropova: None. A. M. Tracewska: None. A. Mollica: None. J. Kang: None. O. Kehelwathu- 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, goda: None. T. Paton: None. J. T. Maynes: None. G. 2The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3St Wheway:None.G.Arno:None.K.N.Khan:F.Consultant/48 J.delPicchia Advisory Board; Modest; Advisory board fees from Médecine, Université de Strasbourg et Clinique Dermato- MeiraGTx,AdvisoryboardfeesfromRoche.M.McKibbin: logique, Hôpitaux Universitaires, Strasbourg, France., B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or Strasbourg, France, 10Centre National de Recherche en consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de Biologie received); Modest; Educational travel grant from Novartis, François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91057, Educational travel grant from Bayer, Educational travel Evry, France., Evry, France, 11Institut de Biologie Molé- grant from Allegran. C. Other Research Support (supplies, culaire et Cellulaire (IBMC), Plateforme Protéomique equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Strasbourg—Esplanade, CNRS FRC1589, 67084 Stras- Modest; Personal research funding from Alcon, Personal bourg, France, Strasbourg, France, 12Karlsruhe Institute research funding from Roche. F. Consultant/Advisory of Technology (KIT), Institute of Toxicology and Genetics Board; Modest; Lecture or advisory board feed from (ITG), Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany., Strasbourg, Novartis, Lecture or advisory board feed from Bayer. C. France Toomes: None. M. Ali: None. M. Di Scipio: None. S. Li: None. J. Ellingford: None. G. Black: None. A. Webster: Patientswithaveryrareassociationofearly-onsetcataracts None. M. Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawiński: None. R. Płoski: and severe deafness as part of a neurological, sensorial and None. A. Vincent: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; cutaneous novel syndrome were explored by Whole Gen- Adverum Technologies. M. E. Cheetham: None. C. F. ome Sequencing in a very large family. A unique deep Inglehearn: None. A. Roberts: None. E. Heon: F. Con- intronic homozygous variant was identified in the PSMC3 sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Deep Genomics, Sanofi. gene (encoding the proteasome ATPase subunit Rpt5) leadingtothetranscriptionofacrypticexon.Theubiquitin- C06.6 proteasome system represents the most important non- Proteasome subunit PSMC3 variants cause neurosen- lysosomal cellular protein degradation machinery. By way sory syndrome combining deafness and cataract due to ofthe26Sproteasomeasthedegradativeenzymecomplex, proteotoxic stress it is tightly connected with the ubiquitin-dependent timely degradation of regulatory proteins involved in signalling A. Kröll-Hermi1, F. Ebstein2, C. Stoetzel1, V. Geoffroy1, E. cascades and the elimination of mis-folded proteins. The Schaefer1, S. Scheidecker1, S. Bär3, M. Takamiya4, K. proteasome content and activity in patient’s fibroblasts was Kawakami5, B. Zieba2, F. Studer6, V. Pelletier6, C. Speeg- however unaffected. Nevertheless, patient’s cells exhibited Schatz7, V. Laugel8, D. Lipsker9, F. Sandron10, S. impaired protein homeostasis characterized by accumula- McGinn10, A. Boland10, J. Deleuze10, L. Kuhn11, J. tion ofubiquitinated proteins suggestingsevere proteotoxic Chicher11, P. Hammann11, S. Friant3, C. Etard12, E. stress. Indeed, the TCF11/Nrf1 transcriptional pathway Krüger2, J. Muller1*, U. Strähle4, H. Dollfus1 allowingproteasomerecoveryafterproteasomeinhibitionis permanently activated in the patient’s fibroblasts. Upon 1U1112, Strasbourg, France, 2Institut für Medizinische chemical proteasome inhibition this pathway was impaired Biochemie und Molekularbiologie (IMBM), Greifswald, in patient’s cells, which were unable to compensate for Germany, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Géno- proteotoxicstressalthoughahigherproteasomecontentand mique, Microbiologie (GMGM), UMR7156, Centre activity was observed. PSMC3 knock-out in zebrafish National de Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Université de remarkablyreproducedthehumanphenotypewithinnerear Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, Strasbourg, France, development anomalies as well as cataracts suggesting that 4Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute of Rpt5 plays a major role in inner ear, lens and central ner- ToxicologyandGenetics (ITG), Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, voussystemdevelopment.Thisreportisthefirstdescription Germany., Karlsruhe, Germany, 5Laboratory of Molecular of a recessive pathogenic variant in a proteasomal ATPase. and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Genetics, 19S subunits are highly expressed in the central nervous and Department of Genetics. SOKENDAI (The Graduate system and appear to be of utmost importance for neuronal University for Advanced Studies), Mishima, Japan, Mis- /sensorial protein homeostasis and development. hima,Japan,6CentredeRéférencepourlesaffectionsrares A. Kröll-Hermi: None. F. Ebstein: None. C. Stoetzel: en génétique ophtalmologique, CARGO, Filière SENS- None. V. Geoffroy: None. E. Schaefer: None. S. Schei- GENE,HôpitauxUniversitairesdeStrasbourg,Strasbourg, decker: None. S. Bär: None. M. Takamiya: None. K. France, Strasbourg, France, 7Department of Ophthalmol- Kawakami: None. B. Zieba: None. F. Studer: None. V. ogy, Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, Pelletier: None. C. Speeg-Schatz: None. V. Laugel: None. France, Strasbourg, France, 8Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpi- D.Lipsker:None.F.Sandron:None.S.McGinn:None.A. taux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 1 avenue Molière, Boland: None. J. Deleuze: None. L. Kuhn: None. J. Strasbourg, France, Strasbourg, France, 9Faculté de Chicher: None. P. Hammann: None. S. Friant: None. C.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 49 Etard: None.E. Krüger: None.J. Muller: None. U.Strähle: Genomics England. R. Wier: A. Employment (full or part- None. H. Dollfus: None. time); Significant; Genomics England. T. Fowler: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Genomics C07ImpactofGenomicMedicineonPublicandPatients England. M. Bishop: None. A. Pichini: None. C07.1 C07.2 Implementing a hybrid clinical/research model in A tailored approach towards informing relatives at risk genomic medicine: post 100,000 Genomes Project of inherited cardiac diseases: preliminary results of a randomized controlled trial C.Patch1,2,3*,E.Thomas1,F.MaleadyCrowe1,R.Wier1,T. Fowler1, M. Bishop4, A. Pichini4 L. M. Van den Heuvel1*, Y. M. Hoedemaekers2, A. F. Baas3,M.J.H.Baars1,E.M.A.Smets1,J.P.vanTintelen3, 1Genomics England, London, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome I. Christiaans4 Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 4Genomics 1Amsterdam UMC, location AMC, Amsterdam, Nether- Education Programme, Health Education England, Bir- lands, 2Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, mingham, United Kingdom Netherlands, 3University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4University Medical Centre Groningen, Gro- Building on theUK 100,000 Genomes Project and existing ningen, Netherlands NHS genomic infrastructure, the creation of the NHS GenomicsMedicineservicebyNHSEnglandtogetherwith Introduction: If undetected, inherited cardiac diseases can Genomics England has established the principle of patient lead to sudden cardiac death, while preventive and treat- choice to both have a diagnostic test and agree to use of ment options are available. Predictive DNA testing is their data for the research. Through the national test direc- advised for at-risk relatives. Currently, probands are asked tory whole genome sequencing (WGS) has been commis- to inform relatives with a family letter. However, only half sionedforclinicaldiagnosticusefor21rarediseaseclinical of relatives attends genetic counselling. indications and 4 cancer indications (https://www.england. Methods: Current practice was compared to a tailored nhs.uk/publication/national-genomic-test-directories/). All approach, in which probands were asked to decide to persons agreeing to the WGS testing will be offered the (initially) inform relatives themselves or by the counsellor, opportunity to agree to the use of their data and available and family letters were sent directly 1 month after samples within the National Genomic Research Library. disclosure of the probands’ test result with consent of the This will be part of the clinical pathway. The development proband. Outcomes were uptake of counselling in the first ofthemodelandthedevelopmentofthenecessarycomplex year (using pedigrees), and impact on psychological/family implementation processes was underpinned by collabora- functioning,andevaluationoftheapproach(measuredwith tion and informal co-design. This included ensuring the surveys at 3 (T1) and 9 (T2) months after disclosure). choicemodelwascompliantwithcurrentunderstandingsof Results: 96 probands were included; 549 relatives were governance across the clinical and research interface, eligible for counselling. Preliminary findings showed no development of the Genomics England research environ- significant difference in uptake of genetic counselling ment, development of materials to support patients and the between the control (34.5%) and the intervention (36.7%) clinical workforce and formalising processes for clinical group. At T1, 92% of probands in the intervention group implementation. Implementation was informed by a series reported that all relatives were informed, compared to 73% of multi-agency task and finish groups and by consultation in the control group. In both the intervention and control with health care professionals, educationalists, participants group, probands were satisfied with the approach (resp. of the 100,000 genomes project and other stakeholders. 95%vs.88%)andreportednoimpactonfamilyfunctioning Here we present the finalised products for the first stage of (resp. 94.6% vs. 92.3%). the Genomics Medicine Service. The long-term aim being Conclusions: Preliminary findings of this trial show no tocreate an ethicallyrobust andtrustedresearch ecosystem differences in uptake, impact on family functioning and as a routine part of clinical care. satisfaction between the tailored and current approach, C. Patch: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; despite more relatives being informed using the tailored Genomics England. E. Thomas: A. Employment (full or approach. Data collection ofuptake and T2 surveys will be part-time); Significant; Genomics England. F. Maleady finished in November 2020. Crowe: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant;50 J.delPicchia L. M. Van den Heuvel: None. Y. M. Hoedemaekers: C07.4 None. A. F. Baas: None. M. J. H. Baars: None. E. M. A. Critical components of informed consent for genetic Smets:None.J.P.vanTintelen:None.I.Christiaans:None. testing: Results of a Delphi Consensus process C07.3 K. E. Ormond1*, M. Borensztein1, A. H. Buchanan2, W. Measuring the burden of direct-to-consumer genetic Faucett2,M.L.G.Hallquist2,H.L.Peay3,M.E.Smith4,E. testing on clinical genetics services Tricou1, W. R. Uhlmann5, K. E. Wain2, C. R. Coughlin II6 J. M. Tiller1*, M. Millward2, M. Bogwitz3, H. Kincaid4, S. 1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 2Gei- Taylor3, A. Trainer3,2, P. Lacaze1 singer Health Care, Danville, PA, United States, 3RTI, Research Triangle Park, NC, United States, 4Northwestern 1Public Health Genomics, Monash University, Melbourne, University, Chciago, IL, United States, 5University of Australia, 2University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 6University of 3Genomic Medicine & Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Colorado, Denver, CO, United States Melbourne, Australia, 4Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia Background: Genetic testing has historically been tied to pre-test genetic counseling to facilitate informed consent. Introduction: Direct-to-consumer genetic testing While core concepts exist for general informed consent, (DTCGT) is increasing in popularity, as is the practice of there is not specific guidance defining them around the consumers interrogating their resultant genotype data with clinical use of genetic testing. third-party software tools to generate unvalidated imputed Method: We conducted a scoping literature review that disease risk estimates. This is suspected to be creating a identified 77 concepts, and used a modified Delphi burden on clinical genetic health services, as consumers methodology to survey experts. Participants used 5 point seek assistance with interpretation. However, few studies likert scales to determine how “critical” each concept was have collected recent evidence regarding the extent of this for a “typical patient” to make an informed decision, and burden. rankedthetopchoiceswithineachsubcategoryofconcepts Methods and results: We administered an online survey over 2 rounds. to Australian clinical genetic services, asking questions Findings: There were 25 respondents (9 medical related to DTCGT-related referrals over the past 10 years. geneticists, 8 genetic counselors, 9 bioethicists), 60% of Eleven publicly-funded clinical genetic services completed whomregularlyconsentforgenetictesting.Themosthighly the survey, reporting over 100 DTCGT-related referrals. endorsed concepts for inclusion were: (1) condition(s) Most referrals (83%) were made by general practitioners to tested; (2) management implications; (3) primary and (4) aid interpretation of DTCGT results. Over 30% of referrals secondaryresultstobereturned,andoptionsforchoice;(5) were related to imputed disease risk estimates generated To whom results will be reported; (6) voluntariness of from third-party web-based software tools. Services testing; (7)testlimitations (8)potentialtolearnunexpected reported low validation rates for DTCGT results (<10%). informationabout family relationships; (9) potential impact Procedures for managing DTCGT referrals and granting onpersonalhealth,(10)ontreatment/screening,and(11)on appointments were variable between services, with most the family (health, emotions, relationships); (12) risks for services (8/11) lacking specific procedures. discrimination and/or stigma. A larger survey, meant to Conclusions: Our study provides evidence that the validatewhethermedicalgeneticistsandgeneticcounselors increasing popularity of DTCGT is causing a material more broadly agree with the Delphi results, will be burden on publicly-funded Australian clinical genetics conducted in spring 2020 and included in the presentation. services. We also report a sizeable portion of that burden Discussion: Defining the minimal critical concepts to resultingfromtheuseofthird-partygeneticrisk-imputation allow clients to reach informed decisions about genetic software tools. The impact of DTCGT is likely to increase testing is important as genetic testing increases exponen- in coming years, if the use of DTCGT continues to grow. tially and the consent process is increasingly done by non- Our findings are relevant for other countries with publicly- genetics healthcare providers. fundedorsingle-payerclinicalgeneticsservices,whichwill K. E. Ormond: None. M. Borensztein: None. A. H. have to contend with the growing popularity of DTCGT in Buchanan: None. W. Faucett: None. M. L. G. Hallquist: the near future. None. H. L. Peay: None. M. E. Smith: None. E. Tricou: J. M. Tiller: None. M. Millward: None. M. Bogwitz: None. W. R. Uhlmann: None. K. E. Wain: None. C. R. None. H. Kincaid: None. S. Taylor: None. A. Trainer: Coughlin II: None. None. P. Lacaze: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 51 C07.5 1RTI,International,Bethesda,MD,UnitedStates,2NHGRI, Publicattitudestowardshumangermlinegeneediting:a National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States baseline survey in the Netherlands Patient coping has been intermittently studied as a practice D. Houtman1*, M. Polak2, B. Vijlbrief1, P. Verheggen3, R. outcome of genetics services. Yet, assessments have been Hofstra1, S. Riedijk1 inconsistent and coping strategies have been reported without evidence of their effectiveness. Discrepant theore- 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Eras- tical and methodological approaches may have distracted mus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Moti- attention from compelling evidence that genetic counseling vaction International B. V., Rotterdam, Netherlands can enhance effective patient coping and, with time, adap- tationtogeneticinformation.Wereportkeyfindingsfroma Introduction:Amultidisciplinaryconsortiumisorganizing systematic literature review of 68 abstracts that met our a public dialogue about human germline gene editing inclusioncriteriaforstudiesofcopingwithgeneticriskora (GLGE) in the Netherlands. Challenges of public dialogue condition. The studies represent 12,006 patients. Study include ensuring inclusivity, designing appropriate content designs included: cross-sectional (31), longitudinal (10), for engagement, and evaluating the impact of the dialogue randomized (5), and observational (1). Among qualitative onopinionformation.Thecurrentstudyprovidesabaseline studies were semi-structured interviews (16) and focus measurement, which will later be used to evaluate the groups (3). The majority were studies conducted in cancer impact of the dialogue. For now, we aim to use this mea- genetics, yet most specialty settings were represented. A surement to identify subgroups of society based on their synthesis of outcomes generated five hypotheses: H1: The attitudes towards human GLGE and their willingness to effectivenessofcopingstrategiesdependsontheircongruence engage in science and technology. withthestresssourceanditsactionability.H2:Inthefaceof Materials and Methods: A representative sample of genetic risk, avoidant coping is most likely to result in psy- 1185 adults filled out an online survey, measuring their chological distress, unless used to avoid learning unwanted acceptance of different applications of human GLGE and genetic information. H3: Family history, risk perception and their willingness to discuss new technologies and how to personalitytraitsmediateeffectiveuseofcopingstrategiesto deal with them. manage illness-related stress. H4: Identifying unhelpful cop- Results:Bymeansofexploratoryanalyseswefoundthat ing strategies and offering useful ones reduces risk-related in our sample 68.9% agreed with application to prevent a distress and promotes adaptation. H5: Enhancing patient severe muscle disease, 37.0% agreed with application to coping self-efficacy improves coping effectiveness. Overall, prevent an infection disease, and 7.8% agreed with the evidence that generated these hypotheses suggests that application to increase intelligence. Willingness to discuss genetics providers have important clinical opportunities to newtechnologiesandhowtodealwiththemwasassociated enhance coping effectiveness as a valuable outcome in help- with income (χ²(3)=15.577, p<0.01), educational level ing patients adapt to genetic risk or a condition. (χ²(2)=25.830, p<0.01), and personal values (χ²(7)= B. B. Biesecker: None. M. T. Cho: None. 68.930, p<0.01). Comparatively, people who did not want to discuss new technologies and how to deal with them C08 Impact of Diagnostics Improvements inHealthcare (36.5%)showedlowereducational-level,lowerincome,and more traditional and consumption-oriented values. C08.1 Conclusions: Our data provide insights into attitudes of Project Baby Bear: The first state-funded quality the Dutch population towards different applications of improvement project of rapid Whole Genome Sequen- human GLGE and into the identification of subgroups of cing in neonatal and pediatric intensive care units in society for whom participation is not self-evident. the USA D. Houtman: None. M. Polak: None. B. Vijlbrief: None. P. Verheggen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; K. A. Ellsworth1*, S. Caylor1, W. Benson1, C. Ashburner2, Motivaction International B. V. R. Hofstra: None. S. J. Carmichael2, E. Cham3, S. Chowdhury1, J. Cleary4, A. Riedijk: None. D’Harlingue3, L. Farnaes1, J. Hunt4, C. Hobbs1, K. Houtchens3,P.Joe3,J.Knight4,A.Kochhar2,M.Joseph2,J. C07.6 Limon2,M.Martin5,S.Nahas1,K.A.Rauen5,A.Schwarz4, Does Genetic Counseling lead to effective coping with S.P.Shankar5,R.Spicer2,M.Rojas2,O.Vargas-Shiraishi4, genetic risk information? K. Wigby1, N. Zadeh4, S. Kingsmore1, D. Dimmock1 B. B. Biesecker1*, M. T. Cho252 J.delPicchia 1Rady Children’s Institute for Genomic Medicine, San A. Lindstrand1,2*, H. Stranneheim1,3,4, K. Lagerstedt- Diego, CA, United States, 2Valley Children’s Healthcare, Robinson1,2, M. Kvarnung1,2, N. Lesko1,3, D. Nilsson1,2, B. Madera,CA,UnitedStates,3UniversityofCalifornia–San Anderlid1,2, H. Arnell5, C. Backman Johansson3, M. Francisco, Benioff Children’s Hospital Oakland, Oakland, Barbaro3, E. Björck1,2, H. Bruhn3, J. Eisfeldt1,2,4, M. CA,United States,4Children’sHospital ofOrangeCounty, Engvall3, C. Freyer3, G. Grigelioniene1,2, P. Gustavsson1,2, Orange,CA,UnitedStates, 5UniversityofCaliforniaDavis A. Hammarsjö1,2, M. Hellström-Pigg1,2, A. Jemt6, M. Children’s Hospital, Sacramento, CA, United States Laaksonen7, S. Lind Enoksson8, M. Magnusson1,7, H. Malmgren1,2,K.Naess3,M.Nordenskjöld1,2,M.Oscarson3, Previous studies showed that rapid Whole Genome M. Pettersson1,2, C. Rasi4, A. Rosenbaum7, E. Sahlin1,2, T. Sequencing (rWGS) results in improved outcomes and Stödberg3,5, B. Tesi1,2, E. Tham1,2, H. Thonberg1,2, U. von reducedcostsforacutelyillinfantsintheintensivecareunit Döbeln3, S. Vonlanthen8, A. Wikström8, J. Wincent1,2, O. (ICU)whencomparedtostandardofcare.Currently,rWGS Winqvist8,A.Wredenberg3,S.Ygberg3,5,R.H.Zetterström3, is not a reimbursed test under California Medicaid (Medi- P. Marits8, M. Johansson-Soller1, M. Johansson Soller1,2, Cal), private insurers or federal Medicare programs. Cali- A. Nordgren1,2, V. Wirta4,6,7, A. Wedell1,3 fornia’s State Department of Health Care Services appro- priated $2,000,000 for rWGS Quality Improvement Pilot 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karo- Program,knownasProjectBabyBear(PBB)withagoalto linska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of identify the clinical and economic benefits of rWGS for Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stock- critically ill pediatric patients enrolled in Medi-Cal. rWGS holm, Sweden, 3Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, was performed on 116 babies admitted to five medical Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, centersinCalifornia.Datawascollectedontheoutcomesof 4Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, patients and costs to evaluate the clinical and economic TumourandCellBiology,KarolinskaInstitutet,Stockholm, benefits of rWGS. The clinical utility of diagnoses and Sweden, 5Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, changes in outcome were determined by patients’ medical Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Genomic Med- teams. To date, 43% of those sequenced received a mole- icine Center Karolinska, Karolinska University Hospital, culardiagnosis,withturnaroundtimeforprovisionalresults Stockholm,Sweden,7ScienceforLifeLaboratory,Schoolof in <72 hrs. In >35% of cases, rWGS altered the clinical engineering sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and management. Collectively, patients avoided >225 hospital Health, KTH Royal Institutet of Technology, Stockholm, days,numerousinvasiveproceduresanddiagnostictests.In Sweden,8DepartmentofClinicalImmunologyandTransfu- the preliminary analysis of PBB cases, it was estimated a sion Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, charge expenditure saving of up to $2.4M across all epi- Sweden., Stockholm, Sweden sodesofcare.Inconclusion,thepreliminarydatafromPBB demonstrated the clinical utility and cost effectiveness of Wereportthefindingsfrom4553samples(3211cases)that utilization of rWGS in the pediatric ICU setting. PBB have been analyzed by genome sequencing at the Genomic provided evidence that rWGS should become a Medi-Cal Medicine Center Karolinska-Rare Diseases (GMCK-RD). covered benefit, and presented the framework for future GMCK-RD represents a long-term collaborative initiative studies in other states to show the utility of rWGS. between Karolinska University Hospital and SciLifeLab to K. A. Ellsworth: None. S. Caylor: None. W. Benson: establish advanced, genomics-based diagnostics in the None.C.Ashburner:None.J.Carmichael:None.E.Cham: Stockholm healthcare setting. Our bioinformatic analysis None. S. Chowdhury: None. J. Cleary: None. A. D’Harlin- pipeline includes SNVs, Indels, CNVs (including SMN), gue: None. L. Farnaes: None. J. Hunt: None. C. Hobbs: balanced structural variants and short tandem repeat None.K.Houtchens:None.P. Joe: None.J.Knight:None. expansions. Visualization of results for clinical interpreta- A. Kochhar: None. M. Joseph: None. J. Limon: None. M. tion is carried out in Scout - a custom-developed decision Martin: None. S. Nahas: None. K. A. Rauen: None. A. supportsystem.Bothsingleton(84%)andtrio/family(16%) Schwarz: None. S. P. Shankar: None. R. Spicer: None. M. analysis is performed. The variant interpretation is done by Rojas: None. O. Vargas-Shiraishi: None. K. Wigby: None. 15 expert teams at the hospital involving staff from three N.Zadeh:None.S.Kingsmore:None.D.Dimmock:None. clinics and for patients with complex phenotypes data is shared between the teams. Overall 33% of the patients C08.2 receive a molecular diagnosis (1208 positive findings) Integration of genome sequencing into health care - rangingfrom30%to60%forspecificdiseasegroups.There experiences from 3211 rare disease patients show high isextremeheterogeneityregardingcausativegenes(n=701) diagnostic rates across multiple clinical entities with some of the most common being SCN1A (n=13; epi- lepsy), TNFRSF13B (n=5; inborn errors of immunity) andAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 53 ARID1B (n=8; intellectual disability). Some of the causa- Materials and Methods: We have developed a novel tive variants were recurrent; including both previously statistical method based on summarising sequenced reads known founder mutations, known recurrent de novo muta- from whole genome clinical samples and cataloguing them tions and novel recurrent variants. Overall, GMCK-RD has in “Incremental Databases” that maintain individual con- had dramatic results as a large number of patients have fidentiality. Allele statistics were catalogued for each received specific molecular diagnoses. Furthermore, nega- genomicpositionthatconsistentlyshowedsystematicbiases tive cases are systematically included in research studies with the corresponding MPS pipeline. that have led to the discovery of 21 novel disease-causing Results:Wefoundsystematicbiasespresentat~1-3%of genes. To facilitate discovery of new disease genes, the human autosomal genome across five patient cohorts. GMCK-RDhasjoinedinternationaldatasharinginitiatives, We identified how susceptible different genomic regions including ClinVar, UDNI, Beacon and MatchMaker were to systematic biases, including large homopolymer Exchange. flanks (odds ratio=23.29-33.69) and the NIST high A. Lindstrand: None. H. Stranneheim: None. K. Lager- confidence genomic regions (odds ratio=0.154-0.191). We stedt-Robinson: None. M. Kvarnung: None. N. Lesko: confirmed our predictions on a gold-standard reference None. D. Nilsson: None. B. Anderlid: None. H. Arnell: genomeandshowedthatthesesystematicbiasescanleadto None.C.BackmanJohansson:None.M.Barbaro:None.E. suspect variant calls within clinical panels. Björck: None. H. Bruhn: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. M. Conclusion:Ourresultsrecommendincreasedcautionto Engvall:None.C.Freyer:None.G.Grigelioniene:None.P. address systematic sequencing biases. This study imple- Gustavsson: None. A. Hammarsjö: None. M. Hellström- mentsanovelstatisticalapproachtoenhancequalitycontrol Pigg: None. A. Jemt: None. M. Laaksonen: None. S. Lind of clinically sequenced samples by flagging variants at Enoksson: None. M. Magnusson: None. H. Malmgren: suspect loci for further analysis or exclusion. None. K. Naess: None. M. Nordenskjöld: None. M. This work has recently been accepted for publication in Oscarson: None. M. Pettersson: None. C. Rasi: None. A. Genome Research. Rosenbaum:None. E.Sahlin: None.T. Stödberg:None. B. T. M. Freeman: None. D. Wang: None. J. Harris: A. Tesi: None. E. Tham: None. H. Thonberg: None. U. von Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Personalis Inc. Döbeln:None.S.Vonlanthen:None.A.Wikström:None.J. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Wincent:None.O.Winqvist:None.A.Wredenberg:None. intellectual property); Significant; Personalis Inc. S.Ygberg:None.R.H.Zetterström:None.P.Marits:None. M.Johansson-Soller:None.M.JohanssonSoller:None.A. C08.4 Nordgren: None. V. Wirta: None. A. Wedell: None. Systematic analysis of short tandem repeats in 38,256 exomes provides additional diagnostic yield C08.3 Genomic loci susceptible to systematic sequencing bias B. P. G. H. van der Sanden1,2*, M. de Groot1, J. in clinical whole genomes Corominas1, M. Pennings1, R. P. P. Meijer1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1,2, E. Kamsteeg1, C. Gilissen1,3 T. M. Freeman1*, Genomics England Research Consortium, D. Wang1, J. Harris2 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 1The University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Radboud Institute for 2Personalis Inc., Menlo Park, CA, United States Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands Introduction: Accurate massively parallel sequencing Short tandem repeats (STRs) are defined as tandemly (MPS) of genetic variants is key to many areas of science repeated nucleotide motifs of 2-12 base pairs in length and and medicine, including diagnosing genetic diseases. Cer- occur across the genome. Extreme expansion of specific tain genomic positions can be prone to higher rates of STRscanleadtoapproximately30differenthumangenetic systematic sequencing and alignment bias that limit accu- disorders.Despitetheextensiveapplicationofwholeexome racy, resulting in false positive variant calls. Current stan- sequencing (WES) in routine diagnostic genetic testing, dard practices to differentiate between loci that can and STRs arenot routinely identified from these data. Here,we cannotbesequencedwithhighconfidenceutiliseconsensus present our results of a systematic analysis for STR between different sequencing methods as a proxy for expansion disorders in our cohort of 38,256 clinical sequencing confidence. These practices have significant exomes. limitations and alternative methods are required to We evaluated four different tools, exSTRa, STRetch, overcome these. ExpansionHunter, and GangSTR, on a validation cohort of54 J.delPicchia 11 patients with known pathogenic repeat expansion allele lack of well-defined comparative cohorts has been a lim- (s). ExpansionHunter demonstrated highest sensitivity itation of health economic studies comparing first-line (91%) and specificity (100%), after which we applied it to genomic sequencing (GS) against traditional approaches. 2,900exomesfrommovementandmuscledisorderpatients. Aim: To evaluate utility and cost effectiveness of early We identified 49 patients with a likely aberrant STR GS in pediatric patients with complex monogenic condi- length. Validation by GeneScan® and/or triplet repeat- tions compared to a matched historical cohort. primed PCR technologies confirmed the presence of Method:Data,includingdiagnosisrateandinvestigation aberrant expansion allele(s) for 18 (0.6%). Importantly, 10 costs,werecollectedinaprospectivecohortof92pediatric STR expansions had not previously been identified using patients who underwent singleton GS over an 18-month conventional genetic testing, and may result in novel period(2016-2017).Inclusionrequiredpatientstohavetwo diagnoses. Three expansions were detected in ATXN7, of the following: a condition with high morbidity or known to cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 7, for which mortality, a multi-system disease involving three or more increase in repeat size between generations may cause organ systems, or severe limitation of daily function. For extremeanticipation.Wesubsequentlytestedtheremainder comparison, data were collected in a historical patient of our diagnostic WES cohort, including over 30 clinically cohort fulfilling the inclusion criteria who underwent and genetically heterogeneous disorders, and currently traditionalinvestigationsinthetwoyears(2012-2013)prior 1,187 aberrant expansion alleles are being validated. to the availability of clinical genomic sequencing. Our results show that systematic STR evaluation may Results:Genomicsequencingyieldedadiagnosisin42% increasediagnosticWESyieldby0.6%,andshouldbecome while traditional investigations yielded a diagnosis in 23% a routine part of WES data analysis in genetic testing (p=0.003). 75% of diagnosed patients experienced a laboratories. change in management, compared to 33% of diagnosed B.P.G.H.vanderSanden:None.M.deGroot:None.J. patientswhounderwenttraditionalinvestigations.IntheGS Corominas: None. M. Pennings: None. R. P. P. Meijer: cohort, four times fewer invasive investigations were None. L. E. L. M. Vissers: None. E. Kamsteeg: None. C. observed. Compared to traditional investigations, singleton Gilissen: None. genomic sequencing at a cost of $3100 AUD resulted in a mean saving per person of $2780 AUD (95%CI $1585 - C08.5 $3974). A cost-effectiveness and utility analysis of genomic Conclusion: Early genomic sequencing is highly cost- sequencing in a prospective versus historical cohort of effective while doubling the diagnostic yield of traditional complex pediatric patients approachesandimprovingthecareofpatientswithcomplex genetic conditions. A. Yeung1,2*, N. B. Tan1, T. Y. Tan1,2,3, Z. Stark1,2,3, N. A. Yeung: None. N. B. Tan: None. T. Y. Tan: None. Z. Brown1,3,M.J.Hunter4,5,M.Delatycki1,3,C.Stutterd1,3,R. Stark: None. N. Brown: None. M. J. Hunter: None. M. Savarirayan1,3,G.McGillivray1,R. Stapleton1,S.Kumble1, Delatycki: None. C. Stutterd: None. R. Savarirayan: None. L.Downie1,M.Regan4,5,S.Lunke1,B.Chong1,D.Phelan1, G. McGillivray: None. R. Stapleton: None. S. Kumble: G. Brett1, A. Jarmolowicz1, Y. Prawer4, G. Valente6, Y. None.L.Downie:None.M.Regan:None.S.Lunke:None. Samarinsky1,M.Martin7,2,3,C.McEwan2,I.Goranitis7,8,C. B. Chong: None. D. Phelan: None. G. Brett: None. A. Gaff7,2,3, S. M. White1,2,3 Jarmolowicz:None.Y.Prawer:None.G.Valente:None.Y. Samarinsky:None.M.Martin:None.C.McEwan:None.I. 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children’s Goranitis: None. C. Gaff: None. S. M. White: None. Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2Melbourne Geno- mics Health Alliance, Parkville, Australia, 3Department of C08.6 Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, The impact of the 100,000 Genomes Project on rare 4Monash Genetics, Monash Health, Melbourne, Australia, disease in national healthcare 5Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, Mel- bourne, Australia, 6Genetics in the North East, Austin D. Smedley1,2*, S. Abbs3, G. Arno4, E. Baple5, M. Barnes1, Health, Melbourne, Australia, 7Murdoch Children’s P.Beales6,M.Bitner-Glindzicz6,G.Black7,P.Brennan8,G. Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 8Centre for Health Chan2, P. Chinnery3,9, V. Cipriani1, S. Ellard5, J. Policy, Melbourne School of Population and Global Ellingford7, P. Elliott6, H. Firth3, F. Flintner10, K. Ibanez Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia Garikano1,2, H. Houlden6, M. Irving10, J. Jacobsen1, E. McDonagh2, D. McMullan11, L. Moutsianas1,2, W. The diagnosis of children with genetic conditions places a Newman7, W. H. Ouwehand3,9,12, T. Ratnaike3, A. Rueda significant economic burden on health care services. The Martin2,C.Penkett3,12,F.Raymond3,9,J.Sayer8,R.Scott2,6,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 55 K. Smith2, H. Stark9,12, K. Stirrups9,12, J. Taylor13, E. and enabling prioritization of clinical indications for Thomas2, A. Tucci2,1,6, J. Vandrovcova6, L. Vestito6, A. adoption. Webster4, W. Wei9, M. Wielscher2, H. Williams6, A. D. Smedley: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Wilkie13, C. Wright5, A. Rendon2,9, M. Caulfield2,1,. NIHR Congenica Ltd. S. Abbs: None. G. Arno: None. E. Baple: BioResource3, . Genomics England Research Consortium2 None. M. Barnes: None. P. Beales: None. M. Bitner- Glindzicz: None. G. Black: None. P. Brennan: None. G. 1Queen Mary University of London, London, United Chan: None. P. Chinnery: None. V. Cipriani: None. S. Kingdom, 2Genomics England, London, United Kingdom, Ellard:None.J.Ellingford:None.P.Elliott:None.H.Firth: 3Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, United None. F. Flintner: None. K. Ibanez Garikano: None. H. Kingdom, 4Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United King- Houlden: None. M. Irving: None. J. Jacobsen: None. E. dom, 5University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 6Uni- McDonagh: None. D. McMullan: None. L. Moutsianas: versity College London, London, United Kingdom, None. W. Newman: None. W. H. Ouwehand: None. T. 7University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, Ratnaike:None.A.RuedaMartin:None.C.Penkett:None. 8The Newcastle upon Tyne NHS Foundation Trust, New- F. Raymond: None. J. Sayer: None. R. Scott: None. K. castle, United Kingdom, 9University of Cambridge, Cam- Smith: None. H. Stark: None. K. Stirrups: None. J. Taylor: bridge, United Kingdom, 10Guys and St Thomas’ NHS None. E. Thomas: None. A. Tucci: None. J. Vandrovcova: FoundationTrust,London,UnitedKingdom,11Birmingham None.L.Vestito:None.A.Webster:None.W.Wei:None. Women’s and Children’s NHS Trust, Birmingham, United M. Wielscher: None. H. Williams: None. A. Wilkie: Kingdom,12NHSBloodandTransplant,Cambridge,United None. C. Wright: None. A. Rendon: None. M. Caulfield: Kingdom, 13University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom None. NIHR BioResource: None. Genomics England Research Consortium: None. Introduction: The UK 100,000 Genomes Project was cre- atedtodefinetheroleofwholegenomesequencing(WGS) C09 Metabolic and Mitochondrial Disorders in rare disease, cancer and infection. For rare disease a diagnostic pipeline and research environment was built to C09.1 address the needs of patients who remained undiagnosed The AustralianGenomicHealth AllianceMitochondrial following standard testing in the National Health Service Flagship - A national approach to genomic diagnostics (NHS) in England. Methods: Detailed clinical features on enrolled partici- D. Thorburn1,2,3*, N. Baker3, S. Balasubramaniam4, D. pants were captured, WGS performed and automated Bratkovic5, D. Coman6, A. Compton1, M. Delatycki3, C. variant interpretation run based on gene panels (PanelApp) Ellaway4,M.Fahey7,J.Fletcher8,A. Frazier1,R.Ghaoui8, as well as phenotype-based prioritisation (Exomiser). H.Goel9,D.Hock10,M.Kava11,N.Lake12,P.Lamont13,J. PrioritisedvariantswerereturnedtotheNHSforlaboratory Lee14, J. Panetta7, L. Phillips8, R. Rius1, M. Ryan15, N. review and clinical reporting. Smith5,D.Stroud10,M.Tchan16,M.Walsh7,M.Wallis17,A. Results:Wereportonthefirst4660participantsacrossa Welch1, C. Wools7, J. Christodoulou1,2,3 broad spectrum ofrare disease. Diagnosticyields varied by family structure (highest in trios and larger pedigrees) and 1MurdochChildren’sResInst,Melbourne,Australia,2Uni- disease. Likely Mendelian disorders had higher yields versity of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Victorian (37%)withintellectualdisability,hearingandeyedisorders Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, 4Sydney achieving 40-50%. Those with more complex causes (e.g. Children’s Hospitals Network, Sydney, Australia, familial cancer) had lower yields (11%), particularly where 5Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, knownlocihadbeenexcludedbystandardtests.Theoverall 6Queensland Children’s Hospital and Wesley Hospital, diagnosticyieldwas26%,involving470uniquediagnoses. Brisbane, Australia, 7Royal Melbourne Hospital, Mel- Clinical phenotypes (Human Phenotype Ontology terms) bourne, Australia, 8Royal Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide, were critical to performance of the automated pipeline in Australia, 9Hunter Genetics, John Hunter Hospital, New- detecting 90% of SNV/indel diagnoses. WGS enabled castle, Australia, 10Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotech- diagnoses that would be missed by other technologies: 4% nology Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 11Perth Children’s involved non-coding variation, 9% with structural variants, Hospital, Perth, Australia, 12Yale School of Medicine, New and 8% in coding regions with no/low coverage by whole Haven, CT, United States, 13Royal Perth Hospital, Perth, exome sequencing. Finally, cohort-wide analysis detected Australia, 14Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Aus- numerous novel disease-gene associations. tralia, 15Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash Conclusions: Our findings will inform healthcare University, Melbourne, Australia, 16Westmead Hospital, uptake and utilisation of WGS world-wide, identifying56 J.delPicchia Sydney, Australia, 17Tasmanian Clinical Genetics Service, G. Oemer1*, K. Lackner1, J. Koch1, E. R. Werner1, C. Hobart, Australia Doerrier2, G. Krumschnabel2, G. Leman1, S. Dubrac1, R. Houtkooper3, J. Zschocke1, M. A. Keller1 Introduction: The Australian Genomics Health Alliance is anationallyfundedhealthservicesresearchprojectfocused 1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, on bringing genomic technologies to the clinic. The Mito- 2Oroboros Instruments, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Amsterdam chondrial Disease (MD) Flagship brings together expert Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands clinicians from around Australia, specialist diagnostic laboratories and researchers expert in functional character- Barth Syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder that is char- ization of MD to examine the clinical utility of genomic acterized by mitochondrial dysfunction leading to severe sequencing for efficient diagnosis of MD. cardiomyopathy, growth delay, muscle weakness and neu- Methods: We recruited 134 paediatric and adult tropenia. The affected TAZ gene encodes the CoA-indepen- individualswithaprobableordefiniteMDdiagnosis,based dent transacylase tafazzin that remodels the acyl chains of on modified Nijmegen criteria. Their blood DNA was cardiolipins. This phospholipid, which is synthesized and randomized to either whole genome sequencing or whole localized in mitochondrial membranes, is functionally exome plus mitochondrial DNA sequencing. involved in cristae formation, protein anchoring, super- Results: Our definitive diagnostic yield is currently complexassembly,ROSscavengingandapoptoticsignaling. ~36% for both whole genome and whole exome/ Cardiolipin has a unique structure with four fatty acyls ren- mitochondrial DNA approaches, with most diagnosed dering cardiolipins the most diverse phospholipid class. We cases having a primary defect in the nuclear genome. Not generatedaBarthSyndromediseasemodelbyCRISPR/Cas9- surprisingly, 14% of individuals with confirmed molecu- mediatedHEKTAZ-knockoutcelllinesandhavethoroughly lar diagnoses had mutations in non-MD genes, reflecting characterized the induced alterations on cardiolipin home- phenotypic overlap. Unsolved patients have been triaged ostasisandmitochondrialfunctions.Furthermoreweapplieda to one or more targeted functional tests, quantitative recently developed LC-MS/MS lipidomics method to quali- proteomics, RNAseq or long-read genome sequencing. tatively,quantitativelyandstructurallycharacterizechangesin This enabled re-categorising of numerous class 3 variants the cardiolipin composition. In combination with systematic andidentificationofnoveldiseasegenesandmechanisms, alteration of the lipid environment by BSA-mediated fatty including a de novo duplication within the ATAD3 locus acid supplementation, we obtained new insights in the com- resultinginapresumablytoxicfusionprotein(seeFrazier plex mitochondrial - and partially rescuable - phenotypes of et al. abstract). Barth Syndrome.As such,we observed fatty acid dependent Conclusions: Our collaborative effort has demonstrated mitochondrialfissionandoxidativestressinTAZ-knockouts. that using a consistent national approach for clinically Most strikingly, high-resolution respirometry revealed a shift triaging cases for genomicsequencingisboth effective and in the OXPHOS flux control from NADH-depended to suc- efficient,usuallyobviatestheneedforinvasivebiopsiesand cinate-linked pathways without affecting the mitochondrial in some cases enables targeted therapies. Supported by central carbon metabolic network or ß-oxidation. This indi- grants from an NHMRC Targeted Call for Research cates a compensatory adaptation caused by the altered mito- (GNT1113531) and the Mito Foundation. chondrial lipid homeostasis in TAZ-deficient cells. D. Thorburn: None. N. Baker: None. S. Balasubrama- G.Oemer:None.K.Lackner:None.J.Koch:None.E.R. niam: None. D. Bratkovic: None. D. Coman: None. A. Werner:None.C.Doerrier:None.G.Krumschnabel:None. Compton: None. M. Delatycki: None. C. Ellaway: None. G. Leman: None. S. Dubrac: None. R. Houtkooper: None. M. Fahey: None. J. Fletcher: None. A. Frazier: None. R. J. Zschocke: None. M. A. Keller: None. Ghaoui: None. H. Goel: None. D. Hock: None. M. Kava: None. N. Lake: None. P. Lamont: None. J. Lee: None. J. C09.3 Panetta: None. L. Phillips: None. R. Rius: None. M. Ryan: Recurrent de novo ATAD3 duplications cause fatal None. N. Smith: None. D. Stroud: None. M. Tchan: None. perinatal mitochondrial cardiomyopathy, persistent M. Walsh: None. M. Wallis: None. A. Welch: None. C. hyperlactacidemia, encephalopathy and heart-specific Wools: None. J. Christodoulou: None. mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation complex I deficiency. C09.2 High resolution respirometric analysis of a Barth A. E. Frazier1,2, A. G. Compton1,2*, Y. Kishita3, D. H. Syndrome disease model Hock4, A. E. Welch1, S. S. C. Amarasekera1,2, R. Rius1,2, L. E.Formosa5,A.Imai-Okazaki3,6,D.Francis7,M.Wang1,N. J.Lake1,2,8,S.Tregoning1,7,J.S.Jabbari9,A.Lucattini9,K.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 57 R. Nitta3, A. Ohtake10, K. Murayama11, D. J. Amor1,2, G. andSchoolofPaediatricsandChildHealth,TheUniversity McGillivray7,F.Y.Wong12,M.S.vanderKnaap13,14,R.J. ofWesternAustralia,Perth,Australia,21GeneticMetabolic Vermeulen15,E.J.Wiltshire16,J.M.Fletcher17,B.Lewis18, Disorders Service, Sydney Children’s Hospital Network, G. Baynam19,20, C. Ellaway21,22, S. Balasubramaniam21, K. The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, Bhattacharya21,22, M. L. Freckmann23, R. J. Taft24, S. 22Disciplines of Genomic Medicine and Child and Adoles- Sadedin1,7, M. J. Cowley25,26, A. E. Minoche26, S. E. cent Health, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Calvo27, V. K. Mootha27, M. T. Ryan5, Y. Okazaki3, D. A. Sydney, Australia, 23Clinical Genetics, The Canberra Stroud4, C. Simons1,28, J. Christodoulou1,2,7, D. R. Hospital, Canberra, Australia, 24Illumina, Inc., San Diego, Thorburn1,2,7 CA, United States, 25Children’s Cancer Institute, and St Vincent’s Clinical School, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, Austra- 1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Aus- lia, 26Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan tralia, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Mel- Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 27Broad bourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Diagnostics and Institute; Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Depart- Therapeutics of Intractable Diseases, Intractable Disease ment of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospi- Research Center, Juntendo University, Graduate School of tal; and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 4Department of Biochemistry and States, 28Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University Molecular Biology and Bio21 Molecular Science and of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Mel- bourne, Australia, 5Department of Biochemistry and Mitochondrial disorders are clinically heterogeneous and Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Insti- comprise over 350 different genetic conditions. However, tute,MonashUniversity,Melbourne,Australia,6Divisionof the molecular diagnosis is unknown in ~50% of cases, Genomic Medicine Research, Medical Genomics Center, partly due to some genomic regions being refractory to National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, standard genomic analysis. One such region is the ATAD3 Japan, 7Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch locus consisting of 3 highly homologous tandemly arrayed Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, genes (ATAD3C, ATAD3B and ATAD3A) encoding mito- Melbourne, Australia, 8Department of Genetics, Yale chondrial proteins implicated in processes including cho- School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States, lesterol metabolism, and mitochondrial replication, 9Australian Genome Research Facility Ltd, Victorian dynamics and morphology. Recessive deletions and domi- Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, nant duplications in this locus have recently been reported 10Department of Pediatrics & Clinical Genomics, Saitama to cause rare, lethal perinatal mitochondrial disorders MedicalUniversityHospital,Saitama,Japan,11Department characterised by pontocerebellar hypoplasia or cardiomyo- of Metabolism, Chiba Children’s Hospital, Chiba, Japan, pathy,respectively.Wereport17subjectsfrom16unrelated 12Ritchie Centre, Hudson Institute of Medical Research; familieswithcardiomyopathy,persistenthyperlactacidemia, Department of Paediatrics, Monash University; and encephalopathyandfrequentlycornealcloudingorcataracts Monash Newborn, Monash Children’s Hospital, Mel- duetodenovoATAD3duplications.Thesixdifferent68Kb bourne, Australia, 13Child Neurology, Emma Children’s duplications were consistently identifiable from whole Hospital, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Vrije genome and exome sequencing, but usually missed on Universiteit and Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, microarray.Theduplicationsallresultedintheformationof Netherlands, 14Functional Genomics, Center for Neuroge- an identical chimeric ATAD3A/ATAD3C fusion protein, nomics and Cognitive Research, Vrije Universiteit and which appears to act in a dominant manner causing altered Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands, ATAD3 complexes and a striking reduction in mitochon- 15Department of Neurology, MaastrichtUniversity Medical drialoxidativephosphorylationcomplexIanditsactivityin Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 16Department of Paedia- heart tissue. In our experience, the ATAD3 locus is one of tricsandChildHealth,UniversityofOtagoWellingtonand thefivemostcommoncausesofnuclear-encodedpaediatric Capital and Coast District Health Board, Wellington, New mitochondrial disease but the repetitive nature of the locus Zealand, 17Department of Genetics and Molecular Pathol- means ATAD3 diagnoses may be frequently missed by ogy, SA Pathology, Adelaide, Australia, 18Department of current genomic strategies. Supported by grants from the Clinical Biochemistry, PathWest Laboratory Medicine Australian NHMRC 1164479 and 1113531, US DoD Western Australia, Perth, Australia, 19Western Australian CDMRP PR170396; the Japanese AMED 19ek0109273, RegisterofDevelopmentalAnomaliesandGeneticServices 18ek0109177, 19kk0205014 and 18kk0205002; Japanese of Western Australia and King Edward Memorial Hospital JSPS 19H03624 and the Australian Mito Foundation. forWomenPerth,Perth,Australia,20TelethonKidsInstitute58 J.delPicchia A. E. Frazier: None. A. G. Compton: None. Y. Kishita: which ultimately lead to uric acid production. Further None. D. H. Hock: None. A. E. Welch: None. S. S. C. metabolome analyses performed on LDHD knockout mice Amarasekera: None. R. Rius: None. L. E. Formosa: None. generated using CRISPR-Cas9 recapitulated the human A.Imai-Okazaki:None.D.Francis:None.M.Wang:None. phenotype. We showed that LDHD expression is enriched N. J.Lake: None. S. Tregoning:None. J. S. Jabbari: None. intissues with high metabolic rate and abundant mitochon- A.Lucattini:None.K.R.Nitta:None.A.Ohtake:None.K. dria, and that D-lactate dehydrogenase resides in the Murayama: None. D. J. Amor: None. G. McGillivray: mitochondria of cells overexpressing the human LDHD None.F.Y.Wong:None.M.S.vanderKnaap:None.R.J. gene. In line with the human phenotype, injection of D- Vermeulen: None. E. J. Wiltshire: None. J. M. Fletcher: lactate to naïve mice resulted in hyperuricemia. None. B. Lewis: None. G. Baynam: None. C. Ellaway: Conclusion: Hyperuricemia and gout can result from None. S. Balasubramaniam: None. K. Bhattacharya: None. accumulation of D-lactate and possibly additional metabo- M.L.Freckmann:None.R.J.Taft:A.Employment(fullor lites whose renal excretion is coupled to uric acid part-time); Significant; Illumina, Inc. S. Sadedin: None. M. reabsorption. J.Cowley:None.A.E.Minoche:None.S.E.Calvo:None. M. Drabkin: None. Y. Yogev: None. L. Zeller: None. R. V.K.Mootha:None.M.T.Ryan:None.Y.Okazaki:None. Zarivach: None. R. Zalk: None. D. Halperin: None. O. D. A. Stroud: None. C. Simons: None. J. Christodoulou: Wormser: None. E. Gurevich: None. D. Landau: None. R. None. D. R. Thorburn: None. Kadir: None. Y. Perez: None. O. S. Birk: None. C09.4 C09.5 Hyperuricemiaandgoutcausedbymissensemutationin Metabolite set enrichment improves biomarker identifi- D-lactate dehydrogenase, revealing novel enzymatic cation and detection in untargeted metabolic profiling activity (UMP) data for patients with inborn errors of metabolism M.Drabkin1*,Y.Yogev1,L.Zeller2,R.Zarivach1,R.Zalk1, D. Halperin1, O. Wormser1, E. Gurevich3, D. Landau4, R. B. Hoegen1*, U. F. H. Engelke2, K. L. M. Coene2, J. E. Kadir1, Y. Perez1, O. S. Birk1 Hampstead1, P. Kulkarni2, R. A. Wevers2, H. G. Brunner3, C. Gilissen1 1Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Soroka Med- ical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 3"Clalit" Health Services, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Beer-Sheva, Israel, 4Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center,Nijmegen,Netherlands,2DepartmentofLaboratory Introduction:Goutiscausedbydepositionofmonosodium Medicine, Translational Metabolic Laboratory (TML), urate crystals in joints when plasma uric acid levels are Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Nether- elevated beyond saturation threshold, mostly due to renal lands,3DepartmentofHumanGenetics,DondersCenterfor under-excretion of uric acid. While molecular pathways of Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijme- this under-excretion have been elucidated, its etiology gen, Netherlands remains mostly unknown. We studied a consanguineous Bedouin kindred affected with gout and hyperuricemia. Inborn errors of metabolism (IEMs) are a large, pre- Materials and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing, dominantly recessive class of genetic disorders associated linkage analysis, protein structure modeling, mass-spectro- with the congenital disruption of one or more metabolic metry, metabolomics, confocal microscopy, in-vivo meta- pathways. Untargetedmetabolomic profiling (UMP)allows bolic studies, co-immunoprecipitation, proteomics, the simultaneous measurement of hundreds of metabolites, knockout mouse model. including diagnostic biomarker metabolites for IEM dis- Results: We demonstrate that gout can be caused by a orders, in a single test and can aid in the interpretation of mutation in LDHD within the putative catalytic site of the variants of uncertain significance (VUS) in genes with a encoded D-lactate dehydrogenase, resulting in augmented known or suspected metabolic phenotype. However, the blood and urine levels of D-lactate, a stereoisomer of L- large amount of data generated in a single UMP run limits lactate, normally present in human blood in miniscule its diagnostic utility. Here, we present a metabolite set amounts. Consequent excessiverenal secretionofD-lactate enrichment method (MSEA) that leverages biological in exchange for uric acid reabsorption culminated in pathway information to prioritise clinically relevant meta- hyperuricemia and gout. Metabolome analysis of patient’s bolites and their associated pathways in UMP data. We blood and urine using mass-spectrometry revealed elevated further cluster enriched pathways into pathway sets to levels of intermediate metabolites of purine degradation, eliminate redundancy. We ran MSEA across 43 diagnosedAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 59 patient plasma samples with pathway information available United States, 12Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachu- in databases (KEGG=317, SMPDB=901) spanning 21 setts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 13Divi- distinct IEMs, and show that MSEA prioritises known sion of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy, diagnosticbiomarkers better thananaivefilteringapproach University of Florida School of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, in 18 samples across 10 IEMs without a genetic prior United States, 14Atlanta VA Health Care System, Atlanta, (p=0.00015). This has particular relevance for patients GA, United States, 15Department of Epidemiology, Emory with unresolved IEMs, or novel IEMs not included on University Rollins School of Public Health, Atlanta, GA, standard gene panels. Additionally, our method identifies United States, 16Edith Nourse Rogers Memorial VA putative novel biomarkers for at least one IEM. MSEA Hospital, Bedford, MA, United States, 17Department of improves the analysis of UMP data for patient diagnostics, Health Law, Policy and Management, Boston University and provides a first approach to opening the metabolome. School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, These approaches will be crucial for the interpretation of 18Phoenix VA Health Care System, Pheonix, AZ, United variants of unknown significance from WES data, and for States, 19College of Medicine, University of Arizona, the integration of WES and WGS results with untargeted Tuscon, AZ, United States, 20Division of Endocrinology, metabolomics data. Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United B. Hoegen: None. U. F. H. Engelke: None. K. L. M. States,21DivisionofGeneralInternalMedicine,Massachu- Coene:None.J.E. Hampstead:None.P.Kulkarni:None.R. setts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, A. Wevers: None. H. G. Brunner: None. C. Gilissen: None. 22Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 23Broad Institute of MIT and C09.6 Harvard, Boston, MA, United States, 24Atlanta VA Medical A genome-wide association study for a proxy non- Center, Atlanta, GA, United States, 25Division of Cardiol- alcoholic fatty liver phenotype identifies novel loci and ogy, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, trait-relevant candidate genes United States, 26University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States, 27Department of Psychiatry, University of M. Vujkovic1,2, S. Ramdas3, K. Gawronski4, K. Lorenz1,3,5, Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 28Veterans M. Serper1,2,6, D. E. Kaplan1,2, R. Carr1,2, K. M. Lee7, S. Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT, Saiju Pyarajan8,9, T. Edwards10,11, D. Klarin8,12,13, Y. V. UnitedStates,29YaleSchoolofMedicineandYaleSchoolof Sun14,15, D. R. Miller16,17, P. D. Reaven18,19, L. S. Public Health, New Haven, CT, United States, 30Massa- Phillips14,20,C.J.O’Donnell8,9,J.B.Meigs21,22,23,P.W.F. chusetts Veterans Epidemiology Research and Information Wilson24,25, R. Vickers-Smith1,26, H. R. Kranzler1,27, A. C. Center,VeteransAffairsBostonHealthcareSystem,Boston, Justice28,29,M.Gaziano9,30,S.Muralidhar31,S.L.DuVall32, MA, United States, 31Office of Research and Development, T. L. Assimes33,34, J. S. Lee33,34, P. S. Tsao33,34, D. J. Veterans Health Administration, Washington, DC, United Rader2,3,35, C. D. Brown3, S. M. Damrauer1,36, J. A. States, 32VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure, VA Lynch32,37, D. Saleheen38,39, B. F. Voight1,3,5*, K. M. Salt Lake City Health Care System, Salt Lake City, UT, Chang1,2, on behalf of the VA Million Veteran Program United States, 33VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 34Department of Medicine, 1Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VA Medical Center, StanfordUniversity,Stanford,CA,UnitedStates,35Depart- Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2Department of Medicine, ment of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadel- University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United phia, PA, United States, 36Department of Surgery, States, 3Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylva- University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United nia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Cellular and States, 37University of Massachusetts College of Nursing Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Penn- and Health Sciences, Boston, MA, United States, 38Depart- sylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Department of ment of Medicine and Cardiology, Columbia University Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United 39Center for Non-Communicable Diseases, Karachi, States, 6Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics, Pakistan Philadelphia,PA,United States,7VASaltLakeCityHealth CareSystem,SaltLakeCity,UT,UnitedStates,8VABoston Introduction:Non-alcoholicfattyliverdisease(NAFLD)is Healthcare System, Boston, MA, United States, 9Depart- a prevalent, heritable trait that can progress to cirrhosis, mentofMedicine,BrighamWomen’sHospital,Boston,MA, liverfailure,andcancer.Elucidationofitsetiologyhasbeen United States, 10Nashville VA Medical Center, Philadel- stymied by the lack of human genomics data at scale. We phia, PA, United States, 11Vanderbilt Genetics Institute, previouslyreportedaproxyphenotypeforNAFLD:elevated Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, serum alanine aminotransferase levels across multiple time60 J.delPicchia pointswithoutalternatecausesofliverdisease,recoveringall Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United previously associated variants. Using this definition, we per- States, 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, formedgenome-wideassociationinacohortofUnitedStates MA, United States, 4Finnish Institute for Health and Veteran participants in the Million Veteran Program. Welfare, Helsinki, Finland Methods: Trans-ethnic meta-analysis included 95,940 cases and 145,858 controls of European, African, Asian, Rare genetic variants influencing diseases often have large and Latinx ancestries. Gene prioritization was based on effect sizes with potential direct treatment implications; linkage with coding variants or co-localization (COLOC studyingtheireffectscomprehensivelyrequireshoweverlarge P4 > 0.8) with quantitative trait loci (QTL) from GTEx. cohortsizes.Thepopulation-widecohortofFinnGenoffersan Enrichment analyses were performed via GREGOR and unprecedented opportunity to investigate phenotype associa- DEPICT; heritability analyses via LD-score regression. tions of rare variants because the founding bottleneck of Results: 75 loci exceeded genome-wide significance, Finland concentrates them to higher population frequencies. with 3 additional loci identified in an African-American This‘Finnishdiseaseheritage’appliesparticularlytorecessive specific scan. Candidate genes at 34 loci were prioritized variants. Here, we studied recessive, dominant and additive based on coding or QTL variation tightly linked with lead effects of 82,516 coding variants on 2,264 disease endpoints variants,with9variantspredicteddamagingorhadreduced using nation wide electronic health record data of 176,899 expression associated with lower incidence of our proxy Finns. Globally, variant effects in different GWAS models trait.Totalliabilityscaleh2wasestimatedat16%(95%CI: were in agreement with inheritance modes of the respective 12-19%). Functional genomic annotations and gene-sets genes in OMIM (recessive, dominant or “both”). However, demonstratedenrichmentofliverbiologyatassociatedsites. there were many exceptions e.g. 33 genes listed only as Causal inference analyses indicated that body mass index recessive in OMIM had coding variants with dominant asso- ciations(p<10−7).OneexamplewasXPA(recessivedisease: (BMI)andwaist-hipratioadjustedforBMIwereassociated with our proxy trait (P < 10−10). Xeroderma pigmentosa), where a heterozygous truncating Conclusion: We identified novel loci with 34 candidate variantwasassociatedwithskincancer(p=8×10−11,beta= genes plausibly associated with non-alcoholic fatty liver 1.24). Another example was a variant in SCN5A associated disease. with sick sinus syndrome in recessive state. Interestingly, in M. Vujkovic: None. S. Ramdas: None. K. Gawronski: heterozygous form it had a protective effect for cardiac None. K. Lorenz: None. M. Serper: None. D. E. Kaplan: arrhythmia phenotypes (p=2×10−8, beta=−0.48, repli- None. R. Carr: None. K. M. Lee: None. S. Saiju Pyarajan: cated in UKBiobank with p=0.04, beta=−0.39).Our data None.T.Edwards:None.D.Klarin:None.Y.V.Sun:None. also included 6794 coding variants listed in ClinVar. We D.R.Miller:None.P.D.Reaven:None.L.S.Phillips:None. found significantly more phenotype associations than for C.J. O’Donnell:None.J. B.Meigs:None.P.W. F. Wilson: random intergenic variants in 498 (likely) pathogenic/con- None. R. Vickers-Smith: None. H. R. Kranzler: None. A. C. flicting, but also 4019 “benign” variants in dominant and Justice:None.M.Gaziano:None.S.Muralidhar:None.S.L. recessive genes. We report new findings from associations of DuVall: None. T. L. Assimes: None. J. S. Lee: None. P. S. coding variants with population wide electronic health record Tsao: None. D. J. Rader: None. C. D. Brown: None. S. M. data in FinnGen. Damrauer: None. J. A. Lynch: None. D. Saleheen: None. B. H. O. Heyne: None. J. Karjalainen: None. S. M. F. Voight: None. K. M. Chang: None. Lemmelä: None. A. S. Havulinna: None. M. Kurki: None. A.Palotie:None.M. J.Daly: E. OwnershipInterest (stock, C10 Rare and Common Variants in Personalized stockoptions,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest; Medicine Maze Therapeutics. C10.1 C10.2 RecessivevsdominantGWASof82,516codingvariants Germline genetic testing following tumor sequencing in on electronic health records in a population-wide ana- cancerpatientshasaremarkablyhighyieldofclinically lysis of 176,899 Finns important findings that inform patient care H. O. Heyne1,2,3*, J. Karjalainen1,2,3, S. M. Lemmelä1,4, S. Lincoln*, K. Das, N. Ngo, S. Michalski, S. Yang, D. FinnGen, A. S. Havulinna1,4, M. Kurki1,2,3, A. Palotie1,2,3, Pineda, E. Esplin, S. Aradaya, R. Nussbaum M. J. Daly1,2,3 Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finnland: FIMM, Hel- sinki, Finland, 2Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 61 Introduction: Recent ESMO guidelines recommend (continued) germline genetic testing following tumor sequencing, but only for certain genes in specific patients (PMID GermlineandSomaticFindingsin1849Patients(Geneswithno germlinefindingsarenotlisted) 31050713).Weexaminedtheutilityofgermlinefindingsin Genes Total #Germline MetESMO Potential patients receiving both test types. Findings (%Findings) criteria? Utility Methods:1849 consecutive patients were analyzed, who: (a) received germline testing, and (b) previously had NBN 11 5(46%) No MG,CT receivedtumorsequencing.Indicationsforgermlinetesting CDH1 67 4(6%) No MG were diverse and included: tumor findings of potential RAD51C 4 4(100%) Yes MG,CT germline origin, treatment/surgical planning, personal/ Others 312 28(9%) varies varies family history, and patient concern. 238 patients had colorectal cancer, 227 breast, 208 prostate, 189 lung, 173 pancreas, and the remainder had other cancers. 12% had *ESMOcriteriaforthisgenespecifypatientageand/ortumortypes multiple primary diagnoses. **MG: Management Guidelines, PT: Precision Therapy (FDA), CT: ClinicalTrials Results: 31% of patients harbored a high or moderate penetrance pathogenic germline variant (PGV) in a known cancer predisposition gene. Mutations in certain genes S. Lincoln: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- were more likely to be germline compared to others cant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, (Table) and PGVs were prevalent among most cancer patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Illumina, types studied. Most PGVs were potentially actionable, but Thermo Fisher. K. Das: A. Employment (full or part-time); 25% of PGVs failed to meet ESMO criteria for germline Significant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock testing. 8.6% of PGVs were not reported by tumor options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; sequencing as either somatic or germline findings, often Amarin Dx. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; because of test limitations. 9.3% of patients had PGVs Amarin Dx. N. Ngo: A. Employment (full or part-time); identified only after presenting with a second, possibly Significant; Invitae. S. Michalski: A. Employment (full or preventable, cancer. part-time); Significant; Invitae. S. Yang: A. Employment Conclusions: Germline testing following tumor sequen- (full or part-time); Significant; Invitae. D. Pineda: A. cing often produces clinically important findings. Our Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Invitae. E. results suggest that such testing may however be under- Esplin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; utilized and that guidelines for reflex testing appear Invitae. S. Aradaya: A. Employment (full or part-time); effective although conservative. Significant; Invitae. R. Nussbaum: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Invitae. GermlineandSomaticFindingsin1849Patients(Geneswithno germlinefindingsarenotlisted) C10.3 The first genotype-phenotype study on European Genes Total #Germline MetESMO Potential carriers of CDH1 germline mutations Findings (%Findings) criteria? Utility BRCA1/2 765 295(39%) Yes MG,PT,CT J. García-Peláez1*, R. Monteiro1, L. Sousa1, H. Pinheiro1, ATM 136 58(43%) No MG,CT S. Castedo1,2,3, L. Garrido2, M. Teixeira4,5, G. Michils6, V. MLH1,MSH2, 182 55(30%) Yes MG,PT,CT Bours7,8,5, R. de Putter9,5, L. Golmard & M. Blanluet10, C. MSH6,PMS2 Colas10,5, P. Benusiglio11, S. Aretz & I. Spier12,13,5, R. CHEK2 68 49(72%) No MG,CT Hüneburg13,14, L. Gieldon15,16, E. Schröck15,16,5, E. PALB2 60 44(73%) Yes MG,CT Holinski-Feder & V. Steinke17,18,5, D. Calistri & G. BRIP1 24 10(42%) Yes MG,CT Tedaldi19, G. Ranzani20, M. Genuardi21,22, C. Silveira & I. TP53 357 14(4%) 10/14No* MG,CT Silva23, M. Krajc & A. Blatnik24,5, S. Novakovic24, A. RET 23 8(35%) Yes MG,CT Patiño-García25, J. Soto26, C. Lázaro27,5, G. Capellá27,5, J. BAP1 33 7(21%) 3/7No* MG,CT Brunet-Vidal28,5, J. Balmaña29,5, E. Domínguez-Garrido30, CDKN2A 105 6(6%) No MG M. Ligtenberg31,5, E. Fewings32, R. Fitzgerald33, E. NF1 41 6(15%) Yes MG Woodward34,35,5,G.Evans36,5,H.Hanson37,K.Lagerstedt- SDHA 13 5(39%) Yes MG Robinson38, S. Bajalica-Lagercrantz38,5, C. Egas39, C. FH 6 5(83%) 3/5No* MG Martínez-Bouzas et al.40,41, K. Dahan & D. Feret42, N. Hoogerbrugge31,5, M. Tischkowitz32,5, C. Oliveira4362 J.delPicchia 1IPATIMUP/i3S, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro Hospitalar University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Universitário São João (CHSJ), Porto, Portugal, 3Faculty 34NW Genomic Laboratory hub, Manchester Centre for of Medicine of the University of Porto (FMUP), Porto, Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS Portugal,4IPO,InstitutoPortuguêsdeOncologiadoPorto, FoundationTrust,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,35Division Porto, Portugal, 5European Reference Network on Genetic of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Tumour Risk Syndromes (ERN GENTURIS), Nijmegen, Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Netherlands, 6Centre for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Leuven, Belgium, 7Laboratory of Human Genetics, GIGA- Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 36Manche- Institute, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 8Center of ster Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester Centre for Genetics, University Hospital (CHU), Liège, Belgium, Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom, 37St 9Clinical Genetics department, University Hospital of GeorgesNHSFoundationTrust,London,UnitedKingdom, Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 10Genetic Department, Institut 38Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Kar- Curie, Paris, France, 11Département de Génétique, GH olinska Institutet and Department of Clinical Genetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 12Institute of Human Karolinska Univ Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 39Advanced Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 13National Services Unit, Biocant - Biotechnology Innovation Center, Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University of Cantanhede, Portugal, 40Biocruces Health Research Insti- Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 14Department of Internal Medicine tute, Barakaldo, Spain, 41Molecular Genetics Laboratory, I, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 15Institut für Genetics Service, Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo, Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Spain, 42Institut de Génétique et de Pathologie, IPG, Carus,Dresden,TechnischeUniversitätDresden,Dresden, Gosselies, Belgium, 43i3S & Ipatimup & FMUP & ERN- Germany, 16Core Unit for Molecular Tumordiagnostics GENTURIS & CDH1-ClinGen working Group, Porto, (CMTD), National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT) site Portugal Dresden, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)Heidel- berg, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Dresden, Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer-HDGC syndrome, pre- Germany, 17MedizinischeKlinikund PoliklinikIV,Campus disposingfordiffusegastriccancer-DGCandlobularbreast Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Ziems- cancer-LBC, is caused by germline CDH1 Pathogenic-P senstr, Münich, Germany, 18MGZ - Medizinisch Genet- and Likely Pathogenic-LP variants. Surveillance/prophy- isches Zentrum, Münich, Germany, 19Biosciences lactic surgery is life-saving in asymptomatic carriers, but Laboratory, Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e clinicalmanagementremainschallengingincarrierslacking la Cura dei Tumori (IRST) IRCCS, Meldola, Italy, clinicalcriteria.Throughgenotype-phenotypeanalysisinP/ 20Department of Biology and Biotechnology “Lazzaro LP variant carrier-families, we studied CDH1-associated Spallanzani”, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 21Fonda- spectrum and age-of-disease onset to optimize clinical zione Policlinico Universitario “A. Gemelli” IRCCS, UOC management. We collected/curated variant classification, di Genetica Medica, Rome, Italy, 22Istituto di Medicina family phenotypes and clinical-criteria of 506 coding and Genomica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, splice-site CDH1-variant’ carriers, registering 1361 pheno- Italy, 23Genomed Diagnósticos de Medicina Molecular, S. types of 1302 family members from 10 European ERN- A., Lisbon, Portugal, 24Institute of Oncology Ljubljana, GENTURIS countries. From 506 families, 160 (31.6%) DepartmentofMolecularDiagnostics,Ljubljana,Slovenia, fulfilled HDGC clinical-criteria and 87.5% of these carried 25Clinical Genetics Unit and CIMA LAB Diagnostics. P/LP actionable variants (96.4% truncating). From 346 University Clinic of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 26Molecu- (68.3%) families lacking criteria, 13.3% carried such var- lar Genetics Laboratory, Elche University Hospital, Elche, iants (100% truncating). Among P/LP-variant bearing Spain, 27Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBELL, CIBER- families fulfilling criteria, 48% of family phenotypes was ONC, Barcelona, Spain, 28Catalan Institute of Oncology, DGC and 6% was LBC, both before 50 and without IDIBELL,IDIBGI, Barcelona-Girona,Portugal,29Hospital enrichment of other cancer types. In families lacking cri- Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 30Molecular Diagnostics teria,LBCincreasesto24%,andDGCdropsto8%,stillin Laboratory, Fundación Rioja Salud, Logroño, Spain, the 40-50 age-range. CDH1 missense variant carrier- 31Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University families were almost completely excluded after clinical Medical Center and Radboud Institute for Molecular Life classification. Still, the ones remaining as P/LP revealed an Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 32Academic Laboratory enrichment in non-specified breast cancer and other cancer ofMedicalGenetics.NationalInstituteforHealthResearch types, rarely presenting DGC and LBC. This is the first P/ Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UK LP CDH1 variant-driven genotype-phenotype analysis. It University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, demonstrates that clinically-actionable CDH1 variants are 33MRC Cancer Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, mainly truncating, most carriers fulfill HDGC clinical-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 63 criteria, reinforcing use in clinical practice; supports 50 as genetictesting,leadingtohighratesofvariantsofuncertain the upper age-limit for CDH1 testing; supports widening significance and false negative test results. criteria to accommodate family history of LBC, and; high- Materials and Methods: We compared rare variant light alikelyirrelevant role ofmissense variants inHDGC. frequencies from 1847 LQTS (KCNQ1,KCNH2,SCN5A) J. García-Peláez: None. R. Monteiro: None. L. Sousa: and3335BrS(SCN5A)casesfromtheInternationalLQTS/ None. H. Pinheiro: None. S. Castedo: None. L. Garrido: BrS Genetics Consortia to population-specific gnomAD None. M. Teixeira: None. G. Michils: None. V. Bours: data. We propose disease-specific criteria for ACMG/AMP None. R. de Putter: None. L. Golmard & M. Blanluet: evidenceclasses-rarity(PM2/BS1rules)andenrichmentof None. C. Colas: None. P. Benusiglio: None. S. Aretz & I. individual (PS4) and domain-specific (PM1) variants in Spier: None. R. Hüneburg: None. L. Gieldon: None. E. cases over controls. Schröck: None. E. Holinski-Feder & V. Steinke: None. D. Results:RareSCN5Avariantprevalencedifferedbetween Calistri & G. Tedaldi: None. G. Ranzani: None. M. BrS cases with spontaneous (28.7%) versus induced (p=1.3×10−13) Genuardi: None. C. Silveira & I. Silva: None. M. Krajc & (15.8%) type 1 Brugada ECG and A. Blatnik: None. S. Novakovic: None. A. Patiño-García: between European (20.8%) and Japanese (8.9%) patients None.J.Soto:None.C.Lázaro:None.G.Capellá:None.J. (p=8.8×10−18). Transmembrane regions and specific N- Brunet-Vidal: None. J. Balmaña: None. E. Domínguez- terminus (KCNH2) and C-terminus (KCNQ1/KCNH2) Garrido:None.M.Ligtenberg:None.E.Fewings:None.R. domains were characterised by high enrichment of case Fitzgerald:None.E.Woodward:None.G.Evans:None.H. variants and >95% probability of pathogenicity. Applying Hanson: None. K. Lagerstedt-Robinson: None. S. Bajalica- the customised rules, 17.5% of European BrS cases and Lagercrantz: None. C. Egas: None. C. Martínez-Bouzas 73.7% of European LQTS cases had variants classified as etal.:None.K.Dahan&D.Feret:None.N.Hoogerbrugge: (likely)pathogenic,comparedtoestimateddiagnosticyields None. M. Tischkowitz: None. C. Oliveira: None. (case excess over gnomAD) of 19.3%/82.6%. Conclusions: Large case/control datasets enable quanti- C10.4 tative implementation of ACMG/AMP guidelines and Enhancing rare variant interpretation in inherited increasedsensitivityforinheritedarrhythmiagenetictesting. arrhythmiasthroughquantitativeanalysisof5182cases R. Walsh: None. N. Lahrouchi: None. C. Glinge: None. from long QT syndrome and Brugada syndrome C. Krijger: None. D. Skoric-Milosavljevic: None. N. consortia cohorts and gnomAD population controls Whiffin: None. F. Mazzarotto: None. J. S. Ware: None. R. Tadros: None. C. R. Bezzina: None. R. Walsh1*, N. Lahrouchi1, C. Glinge1,2, C. Krijger1, D. Skoric-Milosavljevic1, N. Whiffin3, F. Mazzarotto4, J. S. C10.5 Ware3, R. Tadros5, International Brugada Syndrome Genomewideassociationstudybasedoncardiacmagnetic Genetics Consortium, International LQTS Genetics resonanceimagingin23,634individualsidentifiesfivenew Consortium, C. R. Bezzina1 loci associated with left atrial enlargement 1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Copenhagen G.Ahlberg1,2*,L.Andreasen1,2,J.Ghouse1,2,S.Haunsoe1,3, University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Imperial J. H. Svendsen3,4, M. S. Olesen1,2 College,London,UnitedKingdom,4UniversityofFlorence, Florence, Italy, 5Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, QC, 1Laboratory for Molecular Cardiology, Department of Canada Cardiology, Centre for Cardiac, Vascular, Pulmonary andInfectiousDiseases,Rigshospitalet,UniversityHospital Introduction: Guidelines for variant interpretation in of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Mendeliandisease set stringent criteria toreport variantsas Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenha- (likely)pathogenic,prioritisingcontroloffalsepositiverate gen, Denmark, 3Department of Clinical Medicine, Uni- over test sensitivity and diagnostic yield, and require cus- versity of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, tomisation for the specific genetic characteristics of gene- 4Department of Cardiology, Centre for Cardiac, Vascular, diseasedyads.InheritedarrhythmiaslikelongQTsyndrome Pulmonary and Infectious Diseases, Rigshospitalet, Uni- (LQTS) and Brugada syndrome (BrS) are genetically het- versity Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark erogeneous, with missense variants constituting the pre- ponderance of disease-causing variants. Evidence from Background: Left atrial enlargement is associated with family segregation or functional assays to confirm patho- mortality due to cardiovascular disease. The pathology genicity are often unavailable or impractical in clinical behind and the association with cardiovascular outcomes64 J.delPicchia are, however, poorly characterised. Compromised atrial plasma lipid levels as risk factors for coronary artery function predisposes for stroke. disease (CAD). Methods: We obtained data from the UK Biobank Materials and Methods: We systematically tested for cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) protocol con- modifiereffectsbetween30lipid-regulatorygenesderived taining CMRscans from~31,000individualsatthetime of fromGWASlociassociatedwithplasmaLDL,HDL,TG, study.Genome-wideassociationstudieswerecarriedouton TC or CAD using robust linear model fitting with three state-of-the-art imaging variables exposed to machine complementary data types: protein-truncating variants learning algorithms to investigate the genetic basis of left (PTVs) from whole-exome sequencing of 161,508 UK atrial volume and function. Biobank participants; GWAS lead SNPs from 378,033 Results: We tested 10.6 million variants for association UK Biobank participants; and results from a combinator- with left atrial (LA) minimum/maximum volumes and LA ial RNAi screen measuring cellular LDL-uptake. emptying fraction in 23,624 European individuals without Results: We show that additive effects between lipid prevalent myocardial infarction or heart failure. We genes are pervasive, consistent with the use of summed identified five genetic loci located in close proximity to effect sizes in polygenic risk scores. Yet, all three thegenesEIF2D,C9orf3,ANKRD1,FGFR2,andMYO18B. approaches also indicated existence of non-additive GIs, We observed a notable genetic correlation between both with one GI identified from PTV-based, 26 from SNP- maximum and minimum LA volumes and stroke and based, and 20 from cell-based analyses, respectively. cardioembolic stroke. Integrating genetic and functional data validated three Conclusions: We report on five genetic loci and suggest GIs as modulating both plasma lipid levels and cellular several plausible candidate genes important for atrial uptake. structural pathology. Genetic correlation analyses indicate Conclusions: Our combined genetic and functional that the genetic determinants of LA volumes could be analyses propose distinct gene pairs that modulate plasma markers of stroke risk. These findings enhance our under- and cellular lipid levels via additive and non-additive standingoftheimportanceoftheLAandarepotentialnovel effects. Our results can help prioritize drug target pairs for therapeutic targets for cardiovascular disease, including the development of lipid-lowering combination therapies. stroke. M.Zimon:None.Y.Huang:A.Employment(fullorpart- G.Ahlberg:None.L.Andreasen:None.J.Ghouse:None. time);Significant;BiogenInc.E.OwnershipInterest(stock, S. Haunsoe: None. J. H. Svendsen: None. M. S. stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Olesen: None. Significant; Biogen Inc. A. Trasta: None. J. Liu: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Biogen Inc. C10.6 E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Genetic interactions modulate lipid plasma levels and intellectual property); Significant; Biogen Inc. C. Chen: A. cellular uptake Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Biogen Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other M. Zimon1*, Y. Huang2, A. Trasta1, J. Liu2, C. Chen2, A. intellectualproperty);Significant;BiogenInc.A.Halavatyi: Halavatyi1, P. Blattmann1, B. Klaus1, C. Whelan2, D. None.P. Blattmann: None. B. Klaus: None. C. Whelan:A. Sexton2, S. John2, E. Tsai2, W. Huber1, R. Pepperkok1, H. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Biogen Inc. E. Runz2 Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Biogen Inc. D. Sexton: 1EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Biogen Inc., Cambridge, A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Biogen Inc. MA, United States E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Biogen Inc. S. John: A. Introduction: Genetic Interactions (GIs), where variants in Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Biogen Inc. E. two genes collectively cause non-additive phenotypes dif- Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other ferent from the sum of the variants’ individual effects, are intellectual property); Significant; Biogen Inc. E. Tsai: A. considered a foundational element in the genetic archi- Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Biogen Inc. E. tecture of complex traits. In humans, however, GIs have Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other remained largely elusive. Here, we combined exome- intellectual property); Significant; Biogen Inc. W. Huber: sequencing and genotyping in the UK Biobank with sys- None. R. Pepperkok: None. H. Runz: A. Employment (full tematic cell-based RNA-interference (RNAi) to assess orpart-time);Significant;BiogenInc.E.OwnershipInterest whether GIs between lipid genes contribute to changes in (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Biogen Inc.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 65 C11 Multiple Malformation Syndromes I severe developmental delay, all of whom were initially givenaclinicaldiagnosisofCatel-Manzkesyndrome.Inall C11.1 patients, we detected biallelic variants in KYNU, mainly Biallelic variants in KYNU cause a multisystemic syn- missense variants. Plasma and urine metabolomic analysis drome with hand hyperphalangism of two patients indicated a block along the tryptophan catabolic pathway and urine organic acid analysis showed N. Ehmke1*, K. Cusmano-Ozog2, R. Koenig3, M. excretion of xanthurenic acid. Biallelic loss-of-function Holtgrewe4,5,B.Nur6,E.Mihci6,H.Babcock7,C.Gonzaga- mutations in KYNU were recently described as a cause of Jauregui8,J.D.Overton9,J.Xiao10,B.Fischer-Zirnsak1,C. NAD deficiency with vertebral, cardiac, renal and limb Huber11,U.Kornak1,S.H.Elsea12,V.Cormier-Daire13,C. defects; however, no hand hyperphalangism and excretion R. Ferreira14,15 of xanthurenic acid were described in those patients, and Catel-Manzke syndrome was notdiscussed as a differential 1InstituteofMedicalGeneticsandHumanGenetics,Berlin, diagnosis. In conclusion, we present unrelated patients Germany, 2Biochemical Genetics and Metabolism Labora- identified with biallelic variants in KYNU leading to tory,Children’sNationalMedicalCenter,Washington,DC, kynureninase deficiency and xanthurenic aciduria as a very United States, 3Department of Human Genetics, University likely cause of their hyperphalangism, heart defect, short of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany, 4Core Unit Bioinfor- stature, and developmental delay. We found urine organic matics–CUBI,BerlinInstituteofHealth,Berlin,Germany, acid analysis as a simple method that will facilitate differ- 5Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, ential diagnosis in patients with hyperphalangism and sus- 6Department of Pediatric Genetics, Akdeniz University pected Catel-Manzke syndrome. Funding resources: Rahel- Medical School, Antalya, Turkey, 7Rare Disease Institute, Hirsch program (Charité); Intramural Research Program, Children’s National Health System, Washington, DC, National Human Genome Research Institute, National United States, 8Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron Institutes of Health. Pharmaceuticals Inc. Tarrytown, Tarrytown, NY, United N. Ehmke: None. K. Cusmano-Ozog: None. R. Koenig: States, 9Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron Pharma- None.M.Holtgrewe:None.B.Nur:None.E.Mihci:None. ceuticals Inc. TarrytownInstitute of Medical Genetics and H. Babcock: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. Employment Human Genetics, Tarrytown, NY, United States, 10Depart- (full or part-time); Significant; Regeneron Genetics Center mentofMolecularandHumanGenetics,BaylorCollegeof from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. J. D. Overton: None. Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 11Department of J. Xiao: None. B. Fischer-Zirnsak: None. C. Huber: None. Genetics,INSERMUMR1163,UniversitéParisDescartes- U. Kornak: None. S. H. Elsea: None. V. Cormier-Daire: Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, AP-HP, Hôpital None. C. R. Ferreira: None. Necker Enfants MaladesInstitute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Paris, France, 12Department of Molecu- C11.2 lar and Human Genetics, Baylor College of MedicineIn- Integrated genome and transcriptome analyses solves stitute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Houston, about one third of the patients with rare developmental TX, United States, 13Department of Genetics, INSERM disordersandnegativefirst-linemolecularinvestigations UMR 1163, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker Enfants A. Vitobello1,2*, F. Tran Mau-Them1,2, A. L. Bruel1,2, Y. Malades,Paris,France,14InstituteofMedicalGeneticsand Duffourd1, E. Tisserant1, P. Callier1,2, S. Moutton1,3, S. Human GeRare Disease Institute, Children’s National Nambot1,3, D. Lehalle1,3, N. Jean-Marçais3, J. Delanne1,3, Health Systemnetics, Washington, DC, United States, C.Racine1,J.Thevenon3,C.Poe1,T.Jouan1,M.Chevarin1, 15National Human Genome Research Institute, National M. Willems4, C. Coubes4, D. Geneviève4,5, N. Houcinat1,3, Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States A. Masurel-Paulet3, A. Mosca-Boidron1,2, A. Sorlin1,2,3, B. Isidor6, S. Heide7, A. Afenjar8, D. Rodriguez9, C. Mignot7, Catel-Manzke syndrome is characterized by the combina- D. Heron7, M. Vincent6, P. Charles7, S. Odent10, C. tion of Pierre Robin sequence and radial deviation, short- Dubourg11,A.Faudet7,B.Keren7,B.Cogné12,A.Boland13, eningaswellasclinodactylyoftheindexfingers,duetoan R. Olaso13, C. Philippe1,2, J. F. Deleuze13, L. Faivre1,3, C. accessoryossificationcenter.MutationsinTGDShavebeen Thauvin-Robinet1,2,3 identified as one cause of Catel-Manzke syndrome, but cannot be found as causative in every patient with the 1Inserm UMR 1231 GAD team, Genetics of Developmental clinicaldiagnosis.Weperformedachromosomemicroarray disorders,UniversitédeBourgogne-FrancheComté,Dijon, and/or exome sequencing in three patients with hand France, 2Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique hyperphalangism, heart defect, short stature, and mild to des maladies rares, Pôle de Biologie, CHU Dijon66 J.delPicchia Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3Centre de Référence maladies genotype-phenotypecorrelationcouldestablish3additional rares « Anomalies du Développement et syndrome mal- diagnosesnotidentifiedduringtheESanalysis.Inaddition, formatifs » de l’Est, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon we detected 2 complex structural variants of unknown Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Département de Génétique significance, not resolvable by short-read GS, as well as Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personnalisée, new candidate genes identified through RNA-seq differ- Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies du ential expression analysis. Overall, GS and RNAseq ana- Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs ADSOOR, lyses allowed the identification of the molecular CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Université Mon- mechanismsunderlying1/3ofpreviouslyunsolvedpatients, tpellier, Unité Inserm U1183, Montpellier, France, 6CHU and additional candidate variants requiring further investi- deNantes,ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,Nantes,France, gation (3rd-generation sequencing, 3C techniques) to 7AP-HP, Département de Génétique, Hôpital de la Pitié- demonstrate their causality. Salpêtrière, 75013, Paris, France et Centre de Référence A. Vitobello: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. L. "déficiences intellectuelles de causes rares", 75013, Paris, Bruel: None. Y. Duffourd: None. E. Tisserant: None. P. France, 8APHP, Département de génétique et embryologie Callier: None. S. Moutton: None. S. Nambot: None. D. médicale, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, F-75012, Paris, Lehalle: None. N. Jean-Marçais: None. J. Delanne: None. France,9CentredeRéférencedeNeurogénétiqueetService C. Racine: None. J. Thevenon: None. C. Poe: None. T. de Neurologie Pédiatrique, AP-HP, Hôpital Armand Jouan: None. M. Chevarin: None. M. Willems: None. C. Trousseau, GHUEP ; Sorbonne Université, GRC n°19, Coubes:None.D.Geneviève:None.N.Houcinat:None.A. pathologies Congénitales du Cervelet-LeucoDystrophies, Masurel-Paulet:None.A.Mosca-Boidron:None.A.Sorlin: Paris, France, 10CHU de RENNES, Génétique; Univ None. B. Isidor: None. S. Heide: None. A. Afenjar: None. Rennes, CNRS, IGDR (Institut de Génétique et Développe- D.Rodriguez:None.C.Mignot:None.D.Heron:None.M. ment de Rennes) UMR 6290, Rennes, France, 11Service de Vincent: None. P. Charles: None. S. Odent: None. C. Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique, BMT-HC « Jean Dubourg: None. A. Faudet: None. B. Keren: None. B. Dausset », CHU Pontchaillou, 2 rue Henri Le Guilloux, Cogné: None. A. Boland: None. R. Olaso: None. C. 35033, Rennes, France, 12L’institut du thorax, INSERM, Philippe: None. J. F. Deleuze: None. L. Faivre: None. C. CNRS, UNIV Nantes, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France., Thauvin-Robinet: None. Nantes, France, 13Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut de Biologie C11.3 François Jacob, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay and LabEx Characterization and treatment of overactive K ATP GENMED, F-91057, Evry, France channels associated with Cantú syndrome in zebrafish Exome sequencing (ES) represents the first-tier diagnostic H. I. Roessler1*, S. S. Singareddy2, C. McClenaghan2, S. test in patients presenting with syndromic developmental Savelberg1, F. Tessadori3, J. Bakkers3, R. Tyron2, C. G. delay with suspected monogenic etiology. Yet, about 50% Nichols2, G. van Haaften1 of these patients remain unsolved, arguing the interest to extendthegeneticinvestigationsbeyondtheprotein-coding 1Department of Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, genome and to integrate multi-omics approaches. We University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, launched a multi-centric pilot study gathering 53 unsolved 2Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, and Center patients, after trio ES and array-CGH results, presenting for the Investigation of Membrane Excitability Diseases with heterogeneous mild to severe syndromic intellectual (CIMED), Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United disabilities. We performed genome sequencing (GS) com- States, 3Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical bined with transcriptome analysis, highlightingamolecular Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands causein32%ofthecohort(18/53patients).GSidentified7 causative structural variants, including 1 deletion, 2 Cantú Syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by balanced inversions, 1 balanced translocation and 3 com- gain-of-function (GoF) mutations in genes encoding the plexvariants.Themolecularreadoutsofsuchvariantswere pore-forming (Kir6.1, KCNJ8) and regulatory (SUR2, all validated and furtherly investigated by RNAseq. One ABCC9) subunits of cardiovascular ATP-sensitive potas- deepintronicSNVcausingtheactivationofacrypticexon, sium(K )channels.CSpatientsconsistentlypresentwith ATP changing the open reading frame of the transcript, was hypertrichosis and facial anomalies alongside a varying detected by RNAseq. Two frameshift-causing indels were range of cardiovascular abnormalities. CS is debilitating identified in protein-coding regions not captured by ES. with no targeted therapy available. To further elucidate the Three variants were identified in genes not yet known as complexpathophysiologyofCSandtoperformtherapeutic disease-causing at the time of the ES analysis. Finally, drug screening, we introduced patient-specific pointAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 67 mutations in the germline of zebrafish orthologues of Germany, 5Division of Medical Genetics, Department of ABCC9 and KCNJ8. Applying RT-PCR and patch-clamp- Specialized Medicine, McGill University Health Centre, ing of isolated ventricular cardiomyocytes (VCMs) and Montreal, QC, Canada, 6GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) we confirm for the United States, 7Division of Genetics, Department of first time that expression, composition and functional Pediatrics, King Abdullah specialized Children’s Hospital, properties of cardiovascular K channels are conserved Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 8Department of Genetics and ATP betweenzebrafishandmammals.CS-relatedGoFinmutant Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount fish was validated and is reflected by a shift in ATP sen- Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 9Department for sitivity in VCMs and a greater basal K conductance in Neuropediatrics, University Children’s Hospital, Ruhr VSMCs. It is postulated that by directly targeting over- University Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 10Institute of active K channels repurposing channel blockers, it may Human Genetics, University Medical Center Leipzig, ATP be possible to reverse consequences of GoF. Thus, we Leipzig, Germany, 11Universitätsklinikum Leipzig - AöR, tested theinvivoefficacyofglibenclamideandrepaglinide, University of Leipzig, Hospital for Children and Adoles- clinically applied to block GoF K channels involved in cents, Leipzig, Germany, 12CeGaT GmbH and Praxis für ATP neonatal diabetes, and the Kir6.1 inhibitor PNU-37883. Humangenetik Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 13Dr. von Glibenclamide resulted in significant correction of CS car- HaunerChildren’sHospital,UniversityofMunich,Munich, diac phenotypes in abcc9 knock-in (KI) larvae, whereas Germany, 14Medicover Humangenetik Hannover, Hanover, repaglinide revealed similar effects in kcnj8 KI mutants. Germany, 15Medical Genetic Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ These results indicate that zebrafish represent a suitable Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, modeltostudypathophysiologyandtherapyoptionsforCS 16Child and AdolescentNeuropsychiatric Unit, Fondazione and further disorders involving aberrant cardiovascular IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, K channels. Italy, 17Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, ASST Papa ATP E-Rare 2014 ‘CantuTreat’ (I-2101-B26) to GvH. Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy, 18Center for Human H. I. Roessler: None. S. S. Singareddy: None. C. Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 19Centre for McClenaghan: None. S. Savelberg: None. F. Tessadori: Developmental Disabilities, Department of Development None. J. Bakkers: None. R. Tyron: None. C. G. Nichols: and Regeneration, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 20Center None. G. van Haaften: None. for Metabolic Diseases, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 21Unidad de Patología Compleja, Servicio de Pediatría, C11.4 Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 22Instituto Biallelic MADD variants cause a phenotypic spectrum deGenéticaMédicayMolecular,HospitalUniversitarioLa ranging from developmental delay to a multisystem Paz, IdiPAZ, CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 23Center of disorder Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 24Department of Pediatric Neurology, University P. E. Schneeberger1*, F. Kortüm1, G. C. Korenke2, M. Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 25Department of Alawi3, R. Santer4, M. Woidy4, D. Buhas5, S. Fox5, D. Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Bel- McKnight6, M. Alfadhel7, B. D. Webb8, E. G. Coci9, R. gium, 26Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Abou Jamra10, A. Finck10, M. Siekmeyer11, S. Biskup12, C. Queen Square Institute of Neurology and The National Heller12, E. M. Maier13, P. Javaher-Haghighi14, M. F. Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, United Bedeschi15, P. F. Ajmone16, M. Iascone17, H. Peeters18, K. Kingdom, 27Next Generation Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad, Ballon19, J. Jaeken20, A. Rodríguez Alonso21, M. Iran, Islamic Republic of, 28Department of Medical Palomares-Bralo22, F. Santos-Simarro22, M. E. C. Genetics, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mash- Meuwissen23, D. Beysen24, R. Kooy25, H. Houlden26, D. had, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 29Institute of Human Murphy26, M. Doosti27, E. G. Karimiani27, M. Mojarrad28, Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany R. Maroofian26, B. D. Gelb8, I. Kurth29, M. Hempel1, K. Kutsche1 We report a new pleiotropic disorder with a unique con- stellation of neurological, endocrine, exocrine, and hema- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center tologicalfindingsthatiscausedbybiallelicMADDvariants. Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 2Klinik für MADD, the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) NeuropädiatrieundangeboreneStoffwechselerkrankungen, activating death domain protein, regulates various cellular Klinikum Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany, 3Bioinfor- functions, such as vesicle trafficking, activity of the Rab3 matics Core Unit, University Medical Center Hamburg- and Rab27 small GTPases, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF- Eppendorf,Hamburg,Germany,4DepartmentofPediatrics, α)-induced signaling and prevention of cell death. Through UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg, internationalcollaboration,wecollected20patientswith1868 J.delPicchia different pathogenic MADD variants identified by next- TXNL4A/DIB1. Patients with BMKS have a 34 base pair generation sequencing. We clinically evaluated the patients deletion in the promoter region of one allele of TXNL4A and categorized the phenotypes in two groups. Eleven combined with a loss-of-function mutation in the other patients in Group 1 had severe developmental delay, allele,resultinginreducedTXNL4Aexpression.However,it endocrineandexocrinedysfunction,impairment ofsensory is unclear how reduced expression of this spliceosome and autonomic nervous system, and hematological anoma- protein results in craniofacial defects during development. lies. Nine patients in Group 2 presented with predominant HerewereprogrammeBMKSpatientandparentbloodcells neurological phenotype comprising developmental delay, intoinducedpluripotentstemcells(iPSCs)anddifferentiate hypotonia, speech impairment, and seizures. Relative the iPSCs into induced neural crest cells (iNCCs). We find quantification of MADD mRNA and protein in patients’ that patient-derived iPSCs proliferate more slowly than fibroblasts showed drastic reduction or loss of MADD. parent- and unrelated control-derived iPSCs. Patient iPSCs Treatment of patient-derived fibroblasts with TNF-α resul- show defective differentiation into iNCCs compared to ted in reduced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, enhanced acti- parentandunrelatedcontroliPSCs,inparticularundergoing vation of the pro-apoptotic caspase-3 and -7 and increased an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. RNA-seq analysis apoptosiscomparedtocontrolcells.Internalizationstudyof of the iNCCs reveals considerable differential gene epidermal growth factor (EGF) in patient cells revealed a expressionandmis-splicingingenesrelevanttocraniofacial defect in endocytosis of EGF. We conclude that MADD development. The mis-spliced genes share common physi- deficiency underlies multiple cellular defects that can be cal properties such as length and splice site strengths, sug- attributed to alterations of TNF-α-dependent signaling gesting that splicing of certain subsets of genes is pathways and defects in vesicular trafficking. Our data particularlysensitivetochangesinTXNL4Aexpression.We highlights the multifaceted role of MADD as signaling are comparing mis-expressed and mis-spliced genes in molecule in different organs and reveals its physiological iPSCs and iNCCs from patients with parent and unrelated roleinregulatingthefunctionofthesensoryandautonomic control lines to delineate why neural crest cells are parti- nervous system and endocrine and exocrine glands. cularlyaffected byreducedTXNL4Aexpression.Using this P. E. Schneeberger: None. F. Kortüm: None. G. C. disease-relevant model, we will study properties such as Korenke: None. M. Alawi: None. R. Santer: None. M. migration and the cell cycle in patient-specific iNCCs to Woidy: None. D. Buhas: None. S. Fox: None. D. unravelhowBMKS-specificmutationsinTXNL4Aresultin McKnight: None. M. Alfadhel: None. B. D. Webb: None. craniofacial defects. E. G. Coci: None. R. Abou Jamra: None. A. Finck: None. Grant references: MRC (1916606; 1926882), BBSRC M.Siekmeyer:None.S.Biskup:None.C.Heller:None.E. (BB/N000358/1), NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research M. Maier: None. P. Javaher-Haghighi: None. M. F. Centre (IS-BRC-1215-20007). Bedeschi: None. P. F. Ajmone: None. M. Iascone: None. K. A. Wood: None. C. Rowlands: None. H. Thomas: H. Peeters: None. K. Ballon: None. J. Jaeken: None. A. None. S. Woods: None. J. O’Flaherty: None. S. Kimber: Rodríguez Alonso: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. F. None. W. Newman: None. R. O’Keefe: None. Santos-Simarro: None. M. E. C. Meuwissen: None. D. Beysen: None. R. Kooy: None. H. Houlden: None. D. C11.6 Murphy: None. M. Doosti: None. E. G. Karimiani: None. A novel Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba (BRRS)/CLOVES M.Mojarrad:None.R.Maroofian:None.B.D.Gelb:None. syndrome model in Xenopus tropicalis, by CRISPR/ I. Kurth: None. M. Hempel: None. K. Kutsche: None. Cas9 C11.5 D. Dimitrakopoulou*, S. Demuynck, K. Vleminckx Modelling the developmental spliceosomal craniofacial disorder Burn-McKeown Syndrome using induced Ghent Univeristy, Ghent, Belgium pluripotent stem cells Introduction:Xenopushasbeenwidelyusedindisciplines K. A. Wood*, C. Rowlands, H. Thomas, S. Woods, J. of developmental biology and functional genomics and the O’Flaherty, S. Kimber, W. Newman, R. O’Keefe CRISPR/Cas9 breakthrough has significantly expanded its use for human disease modeling. Activating mutations in University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom the PIK3CA gene and PTEN loss of function mutations generate PIK3CA-related overgrowth syndromes (PROS/ The developmental craniofacial disorder Burn-McKeown CLOVES) and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba (BRRS) syn- Syndrome (BMKS) is caused by compound heterozygous drome, respectively. Although the genetic mutations that mutations in the pre-messenger RNA splicing factor drive these syndromes are different, disease phenotypesAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 69 overlap. Here we describe a BRRS/CLOVES model by University, Tampere, Finland, 8Department of Psychiatry, CRISPR/Cas9 targeting of the pten gene in X. tropicalis. ResearchUnitofClinicalNeuroscience,UniversityofOulu, Materials and methods: X.tropicalis 4-cell stage Oulu, Finland, 9Department of Public Health Solutions, embryos were injected with pten+myc+notch1* and pten Mental Health Unit, National Institute for Health and +notch1* sgRNA complexed with Cas9. After 5 weeks, Welfare, Helsinki, Finland froglets’ limbs and main body demonstrated overgrowths and at critical point, animals were sacrificed. Overgrowths Introduction:SUPER-Finlandisanationwidestudywhich and internal organs were histologically processed. The hasrecruited10,075patientswithpsychoticdisorderacross mutation pattern of overgrowths was evaluated by targeted the country. Because of comprehensive national registers, deep sequencing. longitudinal data on education, employment, hospitaliza- Results: The pten mutant animals, that presented over- tions, drug prescriptions and cause of death can be drawn growths were dissected. These animals demonstrated from registers and linked to information collected at study muscle hyperthrophy and abdominal haemorrhage. Histo- visit using national social security number. Our aim is to logical analysis characterized the overgrowths as lipoma- shed light to genetic basis of different psychotic disorders. toustumors.Furthermore,immunohistochemicalanalysisof Materials and Methods: Illumina Global Screening lipomasdemonstratedhighlyactivatedPI3K/AKTpathway. Array was used to genotype 10,075 subjects from SUPER- Internal organs displayed disorganized architecture and Finland study. Genotypes were imputed using population- highly activated PI3K/AKT pathway. Samples from over- specific Sequencing Initiative Suomi panel as reference. growths were sequenced, revealing that bi-allelic inactiva- PolygenicriskscoreswerecalculatedwithLDpredsoftware tion of the pten gene is sufficient for CLOVES using publicly available genome-wide association study development. Pten mutants will be used for validating our summary statistics. Data on hospitalizations, duration of model by testing BYL719, a PIK3CA inhibitor with involuntary hospitalization and psychosocial functioning at efficacy in treating human CLOVES patients. hospitalization and discharge was drawn from registers. Conclusion: We generated the first amphibian model in Results: When comparing PRSs for schizophrenia and BRRS/CLOVES syndrome. We believe that a Xenopus major depression jointly, subjects with schizoaffective tropicalis BRRS/CLOVES model could become a valid disorderhavedifferentpolygenicbackgroundthanthosewith experimental platform for further compound testing or schizophreniaandbipolardisorder.Schizoaffectivedisorderis identification of new drug targets. also different from psychotic depression. Subjects with high D. Dimitrakopoulou: None. S. Demuynck: None. K. polygenic risk for schizophrenia have lower psychosocial Vleminckx: None. functioning at hospital discharge, possibly reflecting residual disease. They also have more involuntary hospital days. C12 Neuropsychiatry Conclusions: Schizoaffective disorder seems to have different polygenic background from other forms of C12.1 psychotic illnesses. This supports the idea of maintaining Polygenic background of psychotic disorders and it as separate disorder in psychiatric disease classification. genetic determinants of disease severity High polygenic risk for psychotic illness predisposes to more severe disease forms. A. V. Ahola-Olli1*, Z. Misiewicz2, N. Mars2, M. Funding:The StanleyCenter for Psychiatric Research at Lähteenvuo3, B. Neale1, T. Männynsalo4, E. Isometsä5, A. the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Orion Research Wegelius5, J. Hietala6, W. Haaki6, O. Kampman7, J. Foundation, Finnish Cultural Foundation. Veijola8, J. Tiihonen3, T. Kieseppä9, J. Suvisaari9, S. A. V. Ahola-Olli: None. Z. Misiewicz: None. N. Mars: Hyman1, M. Daly2, A. Palotie2 None. M. Lähteenvuo: None. B. Neale: None. T. Männyn- salo: None. E. Isometsä: None. A. Wegelius: None. J. 1Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, Hietala: None. W. Haaki: None. O. Kampman: None. J. United States, 2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland Veijola: None. J. Tiihonen: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Forensic Modest;Lundbeck.Other;Modest;EliLilly,Janssen-Cilag. Psychiatry, University of Eastern Finland, Niuvanniemi T.Kieseppä:None.J.Suvisaari:None.S.Hyman:None.M. Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, 4Department of Psychiatry, Daly: None. A. Palotie: None. Helsinki City Health Centre, Helsinki, Finland, 5Depart- ment of Psychiatry, University of Helsinki and Helsinki C12.2 University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Autism-linked Cullin3 germline haploinsufficiency Psychiatry, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, impactscytoskeletaldynamicsandcorticalneurogenesis 7Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Tampere through RhoA signaling70 J.delPicchia M. Amar1, A. Pramod1, V. Munive Herrera1, N. Yu2, L. R. J. Chen: None. J. Gutierrez: None. J. Sebat: None. D. Qiu3, P. Moran-Losada1, P. Zhang1, C. A. Trujillo1, J. Ramanathan:None.J.P.Lerch:None.J.R.YatesIII:None. Ellegood3, J. Urresti1, K. Chau1, J. Diedrich2, J. Chen1, J. A. R. Muotri: None. L. M. Iakoucheva: None. Gutierrez1, J. Sebat1, D. Ramanathan1, J. P. Lerch3, J. R. Yates III2, A. R. Muotri1, L. M. Iakoucheva1* C12.3 Tissue-specific transcriptional and functional signatures 1University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United in reciprocal genomic disorders : Insights from inte- States, 2The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, grated mouse and human neuronal models United States, 3Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada R. Yadav1,2,3*, D. JC Tai1,2,3, J. Wang4,5, T. Aneichyk1,2, S. Erdin1,3, B. B Currall1,2,3, K. O’Keefe1,2, A. Stortchevoi1,2, Introduction: E3-ubiquitin ligase Cullin3 (Cul3) is a high U. Rudolph6, R. H. Perlis4,5, J. F Gusella1,2,3,7, M. E confidence risk gene for Neurodevelopmental Disorders Talkowski1,2,3 (NDD) including Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and Developmental Delay (DD). To better understand the 1Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of Neurol- impact of ASD-associated Cul3 mutations on brain devel- ogy, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United opment, we generated Cul3-haploinsufficient mouse model States, 2Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology. School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Program in Medical MaterialsandMethods:Weinvestigatedbrainanatomy, and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and behavior, molecular, cellular, and circuit-level mechanisms Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Center for dysregulatedbyCul3mutations.BrainMRI,transcriptomic Quantitative Health, Center for Genomic Medicine, and and quantitative proteomic profiling of cerebral cortex, DepartmentofPsychiatry,MassachusettsGeneralHospital, hippocampus, and cerebellum of Cul3-haploinsufficient Boston, MA, United States, 5Department of Psychiatry, mice were carried out at three developmental periods Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, (embryonic, early postnatal and adult) to understand 67Department of Comparative Biosciences, College of spatiotemporal impact of Cul3 mutations. Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois at Urbana- Results: Brain MRI of Cul3 mutant animals found Champaign, Urbana, IL, United States, 7Department of profound abnormalities in half of brain regions, including Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boton, MA, United decreased volume of cortical regions and increased volume States of subcortical regions. Cul3 mutant mice exhibited social and cognitive deficits, and hyperactive behavior. Spatio- Reciprocal genomic disorders (RGDs) involve large copy temporaltranscriptomicandproteomicprofilingofthebrain number variation (CNV) mediated by flanking segmental implicated neurogenesis and cytoskeletal defects as key duplications. Though individually rare, the collective con- drivers of Cul3 functional impact. Cortical neurons from tributionofRGDstodevelopmentaldisordersissubstantial. mutant mice had reduced dendritic length and loss of Here, we compared the tissue-specific functional and tran- filamentous actin puncta, along with reduced spontaneous scriptional signatures associated with two RGDs: 16p11.2 network activity. Inhibition of small GTPase RhoA, a (740 kb, 29 genes) and 15q13.3 (1.5 Mb, 7 genes). For molecular substrate of Cul3 ligase, rescued dendrite length 16p11.2 we generated 304 RNAseq libraries across three phenotype. tissuescerebellum,prefrontalcortex,andstriatumfrom101 Conclusions: Novel CRISPR/Cas9 Cul3-haploinsuffi- total mice, and isogenic CRISPR-engineered human neural cient mouse model implicated dysregulation of RhoA stem cells (NSCs, n=27 lines) and NGN2-induced neurons pathway and downstream cytoskeletal and neurogenesis (iNs, n=19 lines), while 119 libraries were analyzed for defects during early brain development in autism. This 15q13.3 across NSCs (24 lines), iNs (23 lines), and brain study identified RhoA signaling as a potential mechanism, tissue from 48 mice. Transcriptome profiling of both the through which Cul3 mutation impacts early brain RGDs revealed that the strongest and most consistent development. effects occurred within the CNV segment while most sec- Funding: NIH grants MH108528, MH109885, ondary regulatory effects were tissue-specific. Co-expres- MH105524, MH104766, and Simons Foundation for sionanalysesisolated modules thatwereenrichedfor RGD Autism Research #345469. genes, DEGs, and highly constrained and genes associated M. Amar: None. A. Pramod: None. V. Munive Herrera: with NDD and autism. Genes regulating actin filament and None. N. Yu: None. L. R. Qiu: None. P. Moran-Losada: cytoskeleton organization, neuron projection, calcium sig- None. P. Zhang: None. C. A. Trujillo: None. J. Ellegood: naling pathway, and ion channel activity were significantly None. J. Urresti: None. K. Chau: None. J. Diedrich: None. altered in 15q13.3 iNs. Using a weighted z-score meta-Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 71 analysis, we discovered convergence on shared molecular and we are currently performing rescue experiments with pathways across the RGDs, most prominently including small molecules in the chd8 mutants. alterations to genes involved in myelin sheath formation, Grants:ANR-10-IDEX-0002-02,ANR-10-LABX-0030- dendriticfunction,andmitochondrialfunction.Intriguingly, INRT neuronphenotypingassaysrevealedsignificantantagonistic G. L. Hayot: None. C. Weber: None. C. Golzio: None. effect of these RGDs on neurite length and number of branchpoints in iNs. These results suggest the pathogenic C12.5 mechanismsassociatedwithrecurrentRGDsmayconverge Ahumansingle-cellatlasoftheSubstantianigrareveals on common molecular signatures. novel cell-specific pathways associated with the genetic R. Yadav: None. D. JC Tai: None. J. Wang: None. T. risk of Parkinson’s disease and neuropsychiatric Aneichyk: None. S. Erdin: None. B. B Currall: None. K. disorders. O’Keefe:None.A.Stortchevoi:None.U.Rudolph:None.R. H. Perlis: None. J.F Gusella: None. M. E Talkowski: None. D. Agarwal1, C. Sandor2, V. Volpato2, T. Caffrey1, J. Monzon-Sandoval2,R.Bowden1,J.Alegre-Abarrategui1,R. C12.4 Wade-Martins1, C. Webber2,1* Autism Comorbidities: Role of CHD8 during the Development of the Enteric Nervous System 1Oxford University, Oxford,United Kingdom, 2UKDemen- tia Research Institute, Cardiff, United Kingdom G. L. Hayot*, C. Weber, C. Golzio We sequenced ~ 17,000 nuclei from both the Cortex and IGBMC, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France Substantia Nigra (SN) of five human brains and generated thefirsthumansingle-nucleitranscriptomicatlasoftheSN, Introduction: CHD8 is mutated in 0.21% of total autism a region playing important roles in reward and movement. spectrum disorders (ASD) cases. Recently, clinical reas- By mapping genetic variants associated with different sessmenthighlightedthehighprevalenceofgastrointestinal human traits to SN cell-type-specific gene expression pat- (GI) defects in ASD. Transient suppression of chd8 in terns, we demonstrate for the first time that Parkinson’s zebrafish led to a reduced number of enteric neurons and a disease (PD) genetic risk, for which the symptoms are decreased gut mobility which likely drive the GI problems caused by loss of SN dopaminergic neurons (DaNs), is (Bernier et al. Cell, 2014). indeed associated with DaN-specific gene expression Materials and Methods: To understand how the loss of affecting pathways such as mitochondrial organisation and chd8 causes the loss of mature enteric neurons, we functioning, protein ubiquitination and vesicle transport. generated and characterized a stable mutant zebrafish line: However, we also identify a distinct cell type association Tg(chd8sa19827;phox2bb:GFP) in which the neuronal pro- between PD risk and oligodendrocyte-specific gene genitors (i.e. enteric neural crest cells, eNCCs) are labeled expression. Unlike Alzheimer’s disease (AD), we find no with GFP. association between PD risk and microglia or astrocytes, Results: First, we observed a migration delay and suggesting that neuroinflammation plays a less causal role reduced proliferation of eNCCs during early development inPDthanAD.BeyondPD,wefindotherneuropsychiatric and a decreased number of mature neurons and more disorders,particularlyschizophrenia(SCZ),tobeassociated specificallyserotonergicneuronsat5dayspost-fertilization. toSNDaNsandGABAergicneurons.Nevertheless,wefind Second, transcriptomic analyses of eNCCs revealed the that each neuropsychiatric disorder is associated with a upregulation of the serotonin receptor htr6 and the distinct set of genes within those neuronal types. On the dysregulation of several actors of the Wnt/Planar Cell contrary,wefindanoverlappingcomponentofriskbetween Polarity and RhoA pathways, extracellular matrix compo- neuropsychiatric disorders in the association to glial cells, nents, and several genes from the human morbid genome. particularly oligo-precursor cells (OPCs). This atlas pro- Third, behavioral analyses showed i) hyperactivity of the videsthefirstobjectiveassociationsbetweengeneticriskof mutant chd8 larvae and ii) normal sociability and no multiple disorders and the midbrain cell types these risks aggressive behavior in the adult mutants. likely manifest through, thereby directing our aetiological Conclusion: We showed that the decreased number of understanding. enteric neurons in absence of chd8 is due to a combination D. Agarwal: None. C. Sandor: None. V. Volpato: None. of proliferation, migration and differentiation defects of the T. Caffrey: None. J. Monzon-Sandoval: None. R. Bowden: eNCCs. Moreover, our transcriptomic data identified None. J. Alegre-Abarrategui: None. R. Wade-Martins: druggable targets in chd8-associated signaling pathways None. C. Webber: None.72 J.delPicchia C12.6 S. Moller: None. M. Trivisano: None. N. Specchio: None. ClinicalandmolecularcomplexityofX-linkedclustering R. Kumar: None. D. Pham: None. R. Roberts: None. epilepsy, a disorder of cellular mosaics C13 3D Genome Architecture J.Gecz1*,K.Kolc1,L.Sadleir2,C.Depienne3,C.Marini4,I. E. Scheffer5, R. S. Moller6, M. Trivisano7, N. Specchio7, R. C13.1 Kumar1, D. Pham1, R. Roberts1 Landscape of cohesin-mediated chromatin loops in the human genome 1The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 2Univer- sity of Otago, Wellington, New Zealand, 3University F. Grubert1*, R. Srivas1, D. Spacek1, M. Kasowski1, M. Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, 4University of Florence, Ruiz-Velasco2, N. Sinnott-Armstrong1, P. Greenside1, A. Florence, Italy, 5University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Narasimha1, Q. Liu1, B. Geller1, A. Sanghi1, M. Kulik3, S. Australia, 6The Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Den- Sa1, M. Rabinovitch1, A. Kundaje1, S. Dalton3, J. Zaugg2, mark, 7Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy M. Snyder1 PCDH19 is a well-established neurodevelopmental dis- 1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 2EMBL, ability (NDD) gene implicated in an early onset seizure Heidelberg, Germany, 3University of Georgia, Athens, GA, disorder, X-linked clustering epilepsy or XCE. XCE is United States one of the most frequent epilepsies. It is a disorder of cellular mosaics, i.e. heterozygous females (due to X- Physicalinteractionsbetweendistalregulatoryelementsinthe inactivation mosaicism) or postzygotic somatic mosaic genomeplayakeyroleinregulatinggeneexpression,yetthe males. Hemizygous males without functional PCDH19 extenttowhichtheseinteractionsvarybetweencelltypesand are not affected. In the present study we investigated contribute to cell type-specific gene expression and how they the complexity of the XCE NDD phenotype as well as arerelatedtooverallgenefunctionremainsunclear.Toaddress the cellular and molecular determinants of its variable these questions as part of ENCODE Phase III, we mapped (~80%) penetrance. Firstly, using standardized survey cohesin-mediated chromatin loops, using a high-resolution tools we have assessed executive function (Behavior ChIA-PET assay, and gene expression in 24 diverse human Rating Inventory) and psychiatric comorbidities (Social cell types, including core ENCODE cell lines. We find that Responsiveness Scale, Social Communication Ques- 28% of all chromatin loops vary across cell types, and these tionnaire, Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire, and changes are effective at grouping cell types based on their Dimensional Obsessive Compulsive Scale) on 112 indi- tissueoforigin,indicatingcommonalitiesinthree-dimensional viduals with deleterious PCDH19 variant, males and (3D)genomearchitectureamongstrelatedcelltypes.Thisalso females. Genetic, seizure, and developmental information appliedtodifferentcelltypesthatwerederivedfromthesame were also collected. Developmental delay prior to seizure individual,demonstratingthattheobservedvariationismainly onsetoccurredin18%,executivedysfunctionandASDin due to epigenetic changes. Cell type-specific loops show dif- 60% of individuals. 21% of individuals met criteria for ferent patterns of chromatin states, with stem cell loops being obsessive-compulsive disorder, distinct from ASD. There depleted of active promoter states and transcription, and enri- were no phenotypic differences between heterozygous chedinbivalentstates.Wefurtherfindthattheconnectivityof femalesandsomaticmosaicmalesattestingtothecellular genes corresponds to different functional classes, with house- mosaicism as the disease driver. Secondly, we assessed keeping genes being connected by few loops, and dosage- 322 PCDH19 missense variants, 45 of which we tested sensitive genes being highly connected to enhancer elements. experimentally using in vitro assays to engineer a high Finally, we demonstrate that genetic variants identified accuracy PCDH19 variant predictor toolbox. Thirdly, in GWAS are enriched in variable loops in disease-relevant using patient-derived skin fibroblast cell lines we identi- cell types. Overall, our results provide important insights fied genetic (mRNA, protein) and epigenetic (methyla- on how variation in 3D chromatin organization corresponds tion) biomarkers of the penetrance of XCE even among to cell type-specific functions and identity. discordant monozygotic twins. Our research set founda- F. Grubert: None. R. Srivas: None. D. Spacek: None. M. tions of a Phase III international clinical trial of ganax- Kasowski: None. M. Ruiz-Velasco: None. N. Sinnott- olone in XCE. Armstrong:None.P.Greenside:None.A.Narasimha:None. J. Gecz: None. K. Kolc: None. L. Sadleir: None. C. Q.Liu: None. B. Geller: None.A.Sanghi: None. M.Kulik: Depienne: None. C. Marini: None. I. E. Scheffer: None. R. None. S. Sa: None. M. Rabinovitch: None. A. Kundaje: None. S. Dalton: None. J. Zaugg: None. M. Snyder: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 73 C13.2 1Department of Human Genetics, McGilll University, Analysis of chromatin looping at joint endometrial- Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Lady Davis Institute for Medical ovariancancerrisklocitoidentifycandidatetargetgenes Research, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3The Research Institute of the McGill University D. Glubb*, I. Jeong, A. Spurdle, T. O’Mara Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia Introduction: High-grade gliomas are a leading cause of cancer-related death in children and young adults, and no We have previously identified 11 joint risk endometrial- targeted treatments are currently available. A recurrent ovarian cancer loci through analysis of genome-wide lysine-to-methioninesubstitutionatposition27ofhistone3 associationstudy(GWAS)datafromthetwolargeststudies variants has been shownto inducealterationsofrepressive ofthesediseases.Tofindcandidatetargetgenesatjointrisk andactivechromatinlandscapes,respectivelyagloballoss loci, we performed HiChIP chromatin looping analysis of of H3K27 trimethylation, and a pervasive gain of H3K27 three endometrial and three ovarian cancer cell lines. To acetylation. Repeated genomic elements are particularly enrich for enhancer-promoter interactions, a mechanism targeted by this de-repression, leading to an exquisite through which GWAS-identified variation may target sensitivity of H3K27M cells to agents triggering viral genes,wecapturedloopsassociatedwithH3K27Achistone mimicry. (characteristic of promoters and enhancers). We identified Materials and methods: In K27M-mutated gliomas, we 60,208-182,001 replicated loops per cell line, 28-44% of combine single-nuclei (sn)RNA-sequencing and snATAC- which contacted a promoter. Intersection of promoter- sequencingtoinvestigatetheintra-tumoralheterogeneityof associated loops with statistically credible risk variants genomic repeats expression. highlighted 59 genes, at eight joint risk loci, as candidate Results: In several samples bearing K27M mutations in targets in both endometrial and ovarian cancer cell lines. all three variants of histone 3, we consistently identified Thesegenesincludedthosewithwell-establishedoncogenic gradients of repeats expression. These gradients correlated roles(e.g.TERT,MYCandCCND1).Amongthecandidate with gene signatures specific of K27M gliomas, a result target genes, there was a two-fold enrichment (p=0.01) for corroboratedbysnATAC-sequencing.Cellsdisplayinghigh genes differentially expressed in endometrial or ovarian repeats expression also showed a higher enrichment for tumours. Network analysis prioritised a set of proteins that targetsoftherepressivemethylationcomplexPRC2,aswell interact with those encoded by candidate target genes. This as a transcriptomic profile resembling less differentiated (p=2×10−15) set was 16-fold enriched for endometrial or oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. ovarian cancer drivers and included proteins encoded by Conclusions: We have implemented an approach to mismatchrepairgenesMLH1,MSH2andMSH6,forwhich detectexpressionofgenomicrepeatsatthesinglecelllevel variants are penetrant for endometrial cancer and ovarian and demonstrate gradients of expression in high-grade cancer. Lastly, candidate target genes and prioritised inter- gliomas. Our results corroborate the existence of tumor actingproteinswereover-representedinpathwaysrelatedto compartments in K27M-tumors that consist of progenitor- endometrial and ovarian cancer development. In summary, like, aggressive malignant cells, displaying higher expres- wehaveidentifiedbiologicallyrelevantcandidategenesand sionofthesilentgenome.Theyadvocateforthepotentialof pathways, providing insight into endometrial and ovarian viral mimicry trigger as therapeutic option for these cancer aetiology. untreatable tumors. Funded by NHMRC project grant #1158083 (DG M. Coutelier: None. V. Lisi: None. S. Hébert: None. D. and TOM) Faury: None. B. Krug: None. N. De Jay: None. N. Jabado: D. Glubb: None. I. Jeong: None. A. Spurdle: None. T. None. C. L. Kleinman: None. O’Mara: None. C13.4 C13.3 CDH1 regulatory noncoding elements: a hidden master When the silent genome gets loud: transcription of for tissue-specific E-cadherin expression repeatedgenomicelementsatthesingle-cellresolutionin K27M-mutated high-grade gliomas C.SãoJosé1,2,3*,A.R.Monteiro1,A.André1,A.Qamra4,R. Acuna-Hidalgo3, P. Tan4, S. Mundlos3,5,6, C. Oliveira1,2 M. Coutelier1,2*, V. Lisi2,3, S. Hébert1,2, D. Faury4,3, B. Krug4,3, N. De Jay1,2, N. Jabado4,3, C. L. Kleinman1,2 1Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde da Universidade do Porto (i3S)/Institute of Molecular74 J.delPicchia Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto C13.5 (Ipatimup), Porto, Portugal, 2Faculty of Medicine of the Local gene co-expression: molecular characterisation, University ofPorto, Porto, Portugal,3MaxPlanck Institute tissue specificity and its genetic control for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (NUS), Singapore, Singapore, 5Insti- D. Ribeiro1,2*, A. Ramisch3,2, E. Dermitzakis3,2, O. tute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité Universi- Delaneau1,2 tätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 6Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité Universitäts- 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss medizin, Berlin, Germany Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 3University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland Introduction: Germline CDH1/E-cadherin loss of function (LoF) causes inherited gastric and breast cancer; and Many Eukaryotic genes tend to be expressed together. somatic LoF occurs during progression of most epithelial Recent studies highlight the existence of structural and cancers. Classical genetic/epigenetic/post-transcriptional regulatory domains orchestrating the organised expression inactivationmechanisms failtoexplain CDH1LoFinmost of nearby genes (Delaneau et al. 2019 Science 364(6439)). inherited/somatic contexts. We hypothesized that CDH1 Yet, the molecular mechanisms, genetic control and tissue LoF occurs due to defects in the CDH1 regulatory network specificity of local gene co-expression are far from being and explored potential expression modifier sequences con- understood.Here,wedevelopedanovelmethodtoidentify trolling CDH1 expression. groupsofnearbygenes(within1Mb)thatareco-expressed, Materials and Methods: Six gastric-cancer cell lines using genome-wide RNA-seq datasets from large popula- weresubmittedtoCaptureHi-C(cHi-C)and4C-seqwitha tions(e.g.>200individuals).First,weidentified9548high- CDH1 promoter viewpoint. Interactors’ expression patterns confidence co-expressed gene pairs (FDR 1%) from 358 in normal tissues were explored in GTex. Interactors’ human lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) samples from the regulatory function was assessed in mouse embryo LacZ- Geuvadis dataset. These constitute 52.5% of the protein- reporter assays, followed by tissue-specific β-galactosidase coding and lincRNA genes expressed in LCLs, demon- expression analysis in transgenic embryonic stomach, strating that local gene co-expression is highly prevalent. esophagus, duodenum, liver (endoderm), heart (ectoderm) Next, by integrating various molecular assays (e.g. ChIP- and skin (mesoderm). seq, Hi-C), we determined the relative contribution of Results: We found simultaneous interactions between several molecular features towards local gene co-expres- CDH1 promotor and (1) a new lncRNA at chromosome#2 sion.Forinstance,wefoundthatCTCFbindingplaysarole short-arm, and (2) a CDH1-intronic cis-regulatory element in determining which gene pairs can be co-expressed, (CDH1-iCRE). These were specific for CDH1 non-expres- whereaschromatincontactsbetweengenesshowntobekey sing cells, and undetected in CDH1-expressing cells, only when these are distant (>200kb) from each other. highlightingapotentialnegative regulatorynetwork. GTEx Notably, developing novel QTL mapping approaches, we data revealed that lncRNA and CDH1 have mutually found that the co-expression of more than 50% of the gene exclusive expression patterns, with CDH1 being expressed pairs is controlled by nearby genetic variants (co-QTLs), across epithelial tissues, and the lncRNA restricted to brain many of whom falling within shared regulatory elements, and testis. CDH1 expression was 100-fold higher than suchasenhancers.Finally,weappliedournovelapproaches lncRNA expression. The interacting CDH1-iCRE showed across53humanGTExtissuestostudyin-depththetissue- tissue-specificity in endodermal-derived tissues where E- specificity and genetic control of local gene co-expression, cadherin exerts a primordial function (stomach, esophagus ultimately improving the functional interpretation of QTL and duodenum). and GWAS findings. Conclusion: We found a potential negative regulatory D. Ribeiro: None. A. Ramisch: None. E. Dermitzakis: networkingastriccancercelllinesthroughCDH1promoter None. O. Delaneau: None. cis and trans interactions, and evidence for tissue-specific regulation. These findings suggest a novel mechanism C13.6 triggering CDH1/E-cadherin LoF. Structural variants in HDAC9 that disrupt TWIST1 C. São José: None. A. R. Monteiro: None. A. André: transcriptional regulation but not HDAC9 protein None. A. Qamra: None. R. Acuna-Hidalgo: None. P. Tan: function are associated with craniofacial and limb None. S. Mundlos: None. C. Oliveira: None. malformations R. Y. Birnbaum1,2*, N. Hirsch3Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 75 1Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Natural Sciences, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, The Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Israel., Beer- Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, Sheva, Israel, 2Center of Evolutionary Genomics and 2Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Medicine, The Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, Sheva, Israel, 3Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University NaturalSciences,TheBen-Gurion UniversityoftheNegev, Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Institute of Beer-Sheva, Israel Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Structuralvariants(indels,translocationsandinversions)are Germany, 5Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, associated with human variations. SVs affecting protein Freiburg University Hospital, University of Freiburg, coding sequencesand\orregulatoryelementsareassociated Freiburg, Germany with human disorders. However, SVs disrupting protein coding sequences that also function as transcriptional reg- Introduction: 50% of chronic kidney disease up to age 30 ulation are yet to be demonstrated. Here, we show that can be attributed to congenital anomalies of the patients with SVs involving HDAC9 protein coding kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). CAKUT is genetically sequence are associated with craniosynostosis due to dis- complex: Although more than 40 genes have been ruption of TWIST1 regulatory elements that reside in linked to monogenic CAKUT and familial clustering is HDAC9 sequence and not due to disruption of HDAC9 frequent, monogenic causes can only be identified in about protein. By generating CRISPR\Cas9 mouse models, we 12% of cases. Exome sequencing (ES) has become a deletedHdac9proteincodingsequencethatalsofunctionas valuable tool for the analysis of genetically heterogeneous (eTw5-7Δ/Δ Twist1 transcription enhancers ) that altered diseases both in diagnostics and research. We report a Twist1 expression and led to significant craniofacial phe- multiplex consanguineous Arab family with several indi- notype and polydactyly, resemble Saethre-Chotzen syn- viduals segregating syndromic kidney hypoplasia in drome. Furthermore, deletion of Hdac9 sequence which ES identified a homozygous frameshift variant in (CTCFΔ/Δ encompasses CTCF site ) disrupted Twist1 FOXD2 and show functional characterization of Foxd2 enhancer-promoter interactions which led to craniofacial knockout (KO). phenotype and polydactyly. Using RNA-seq and 4C-seq, Material & Methods: Analysis of the index patient by we demonstrate that in both Hdac9 deletion models Twist1 ES,Sangersequencingofrelatives.CRISPR/Cas9-mediated (Foxd2−/− expression, but not Hdac9, was reduced and the effect on KO of Foxd2 ) in murine metanephric mesench- the downstream targets of Twist1 elucidated unexpected yme cells (mk4). RNA sequencing of KO cells. pathways. Finally, we generated a large inversion of the Results: ES identified a homozygous frameshift variant (Hdac9INV/+ entire Hdac9 sequence ) that does not disrupt in FOXD2 NM_004474.3:c.789dup, p.(Gly264Argfs*228) Hdac9 coding sequence but rather reposition Twist1 reg- in the index patient (bilateral hypoplastic kidneys, facial ulatory elements. We showed reduction of Twist1 expres- dysmorphism, developmental delay). Sanger sequencing sion, but not of Hdac9, that led to craniofacial phenotype confirmedsegregationofthevariantinthefamily.Pathway analysisofRNAdatafromFoxd2−/− and polydactyly. Thus, we elucidated the TWIST1 tran- cellsvs.WTrevealed scriptional machinery that reside in HDAC9 sequence, significant enrichment of differential expression of renal suggesting that SVs encompass protein coding sequences developmental genes. Pax2 and Wnt4 were notable couldleadtoaphenotypethatisnotattributedtotheprotein significantly downregulated genes. function but rather a disruption of the transcription regula- Discussion: FOXD2 is a transcription factor with strong Foxd2−/− tion of nearby gene, such as TWIST1. expression in the developing kidney. mice can R. Y. Birnbaum: None. N. Hirsch: None. show a CAKUT phenotype. Our data implicate FOXD2 in autosomal recessive syndromic CAKUT. RNA sequencing C14 Internal Organs results suggest that KO of Foxd2 leads to impaired transition from metanephric mesenchyme to epithelium in C14.1 the developing kidney via the Pax2-Wnt4 axis. Implication of FOXD2 in autosomal recessive K. M. Riedhammer: None. M. Nguyen: None. B. syndromic CAKUT Alhaddad: None. S. J. Arnold: None. G. J. Kim: None. U. Heemann: None. M. Schmidts: None. J. Hoefele: None. K. M. Riedhammer1,2*, M. Nguyen3, B. Alhaddad1, S. J. Arnold4, G. J. Kim4, U. Heemann2, M. Schmidts5, J. Hoefele176 J.delPicchia C14.2 confined to the mesenchyme of ureter, kidney capsule, Heterozygous DACT1 mutations in patients with renal cortical and medullary stroma. CRISPR/Cas9-derived anomalies and features of Townes-Brocks syndrome Dact1-deficientmurineinnermedullarycollectingductcells showed impaired tubule formation. Altogether, we demon- A. Christians1, E. Kesdiren1, I. Hennies2, A. D. Hofmann3, strate a statistically significant overrepresentation of rare M. Trowe4, F. Brand1, H. Martens1*, I. A. Kindem5, Z. heterozygoushypomorphicDACT1variantsinpatientswith Gucev6, M. Zirngibl7, R. Geffers8, T. Seeman9, A. Kispert4, renalanomaliesversuscontrols.(DFGgrantno.KO5614/2- H. Billing7, A. Bjerre5, V. Tasic6, D. Haffner2, J. 1) Dingemann3, R. G. Weber1 A. Christians: None. E. Kesdiren: None. I. Hennies: None. A. D. Hofmann: None. M. Trowe: None. F. Brand: 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical None. H. Martens: None. I. A. Kindem: None. Z. Gucev: School, Hannover, Germany, 2Department of Pediatric None. M. Zirngibl: None. R. Geffers: None. T. Seeman: Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover Medical None.A.Kispert:None.H.Billing:None.A.Bjerre:None. School, Hannover, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric V.Tasic:None.D.Haffner:None.J.Dingemann:None.R. Surgery, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, G. Weber: None. 4Institute of Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,Germany,5DivisionofPediatricandAdolescent C14.3 Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 6Med- Loss of UNC45A causes microvillus inclusion disease- icalFacultySkopje,UniversityChildren’sHospital,Skopje, like by impairing myosin-dependent epithelial Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 7Depart- morphogenesis ment of Pediatric Nephrology, University Children’s Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 8Genome Analy- R. Duclaux-Loras1, F. Charbit-Henrion1, C. Lebreton1, O. tics Research Group, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Nicolle2, M. Rabant3, C. Guerrera4, A. Fabre5, L. Faivre6, Research, Braunschweig, Germany, 9Department of Pedia- G. Michaux2, H. Uligh7, F. Ruemmele3, N. Cerf- trics, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University Bensussan1, M. Parlato1* Prague, Prague, Czech Republic 1InstitutImagine,Paris,France,2CNRS,UMR6290,Institut Less than 20% of patients with congenital anomalies of the deGénétiqueetDéveloppementdeRennes,Rennes,France, kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) carry variants in the 3Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker- approximately 50 known CAKUT genes, indicating that Enfants Malades, Department of Pediatric Gastroenterol- this disorder is genetically highly heterogeneous. To iden- ogy, Paris, France, 4Proteomics platform 3P5-Necker, tify novel genes associated with CAKUT, we applied Université Paris Descartes-Structure Fédérative de whole-exome sequencing toa patientwithrenal anomalies, RechercheNecker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633,Paris, i.e.left-sidedagenesisandright-sidedduplex,whoalsohad France,5Servicedepédiatriemultidisciplinaire,Hôpitalde extrarenal abnormalities, e.g. anorectal and sacral mal- la Timone Enfants, APHM, Marseille, France, 6Centre de formation, thus detecting a rare heterozygous missense Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, variantinthedishevelledbindingantagonistofbetacatenin 7Department of Pediatrics, University of Oxford; Transla- 1(DACT1)gene.Ascombinedrenal,anorectal,andskeletal tionalGastroenterologyUnit,UniversityofOxford,Oxford, defects, features overlapping Townes-Brocks syndrome, United Kingdom were previously described in a family carrying a DACT1 nonsensevariantandinDact1-deficientmice,theidentified Introduction: Congenital diarrhea disorders (CDDs) are DACT1 variant was presumed causative in our patient. rareinheriteddiseasescharacterizedbychronicenteropathy Therefore, we aimedto determine thefrequency ofDACT1 starting early in life. Recently, mutations in UNC45A, variants in patients with renal anomalies. Taken together, coding for a myosins- co-chaperone, have been associated we identified seven maternally inherited, heterozygous, with a complex syndrome combining cholestasis, diarrhea, likely pathogenic DACT1 missense variants in 8 of 209 deafness and bone fragility. We aimed to investigate the families (3.8%) with renal agenesis/dysplasia/hypoplasia pathomechanism underlying the intestinal defect in and other features of Townes-Brocks syndrome. Immuno- UNC45A deficient patients. precipitation revealed reduced dishevelled segment polarity Materials and Methods: We investigated 4 unrelated protein 2 (DVL2) binding capacity of mutant DACT1. By patients with history of intestinal failure due to congenital RNA in situ hybridization on murine embryo sections, diarrhea. We used next generation sequencing to uncover Dact1expressionwasdetectedindifferentorgansincluding the underlying gene defect and immunohistochemistry/ anal canal and kidney, whereby renal expression was electron microscopy to analyse intestinal tissue. UNC45AAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 77 −/− CaCo2 cells were generated by CRISPR/Cas9 editing 6Bioscience Asthma, Research and Early Development, and cultured in matrigel to form cysts. UNC45A inter- Respiratory, Inflammation and Autoimmune (RIA), Bio- actome was investigated by mass spectrometry. Organoids Pharmaceuticals R&D,AstraZeneca,Gothenburg,Sweden, were generated from controls and from patients using 7Bioscience Asthma, Research and Early Development, blood-derived pluripotent stem cells. Respiratory, Inflammation and Autoimmune (RIA), Bio- Results: Exome analysis identified biallelic mutations in Pharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United UNC45A in all patients. Abnormal PAS and CD10 Kingdom, 8Precision Medicine, Oncology R&D, AstraZe- accumulation throughout the subapical cytoplasm was neca, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge, United Kingdom found on patient duodenal biopsies. Microvesicles and microvilli inclusions were associated with microvillous Asthma is a highly heterogenous disease with considerable atrophy. UNC45A−/− CaCo2 cells developed into multilu- unmet need. Understanding the genetic architecture may mens-cysts,indicatingadefectinepithelialmorphogenesis. enableaprecisionmedicineapproach.Westudiedexomedata MassspectrometryconfirmedMYO5BasUNC45A-HSP90 from 24,584 asthma cases from the UKBiobank (UKB) and client and expanded the number of non-muscle myosins-II, SAGA, an AstraZeneca study. Controls were 120,557 UKB dependent on UNC45A for proper folding and maturation. participants with FEV/FVC ratio >70%, without respiratory Patient‘s organoids displayed features of microvillus illness. In addition to all-comer asthma (n=24,584), we stu- inclusion disease. died familial (n=1,065) and early-onset (age<18yrs, n= Conclusions: We identified 6 novel mutations in 5,962) asthma subsets. Gene- and variant-level analyses iden- UNC45A causative of a complex syndrome including tifiedstatisticallysignificantsignalsfrommoderate-to-common congenital diarrhea. EM on patient derived organoids protein-truncating variants (PTVs), including in FLG, which recapitulates the defects of morphology and polarization has previously been associated with asthma. Asthma risk was observed in patient’s biopsies. Overall, our results under- significantly increased not only by common FLG PTVs, but score the important role of UNC45A in shaping epithelial also the collection of rare-to-private FLG PTVs. This signal morphogenesis in the gut. wasdrivenbyearlyonsetasthma,withnomeasurableimpact R. Duclaux-Loras: None. F. Charbit-Henrion: None. C. on diagnoses >18 years old (p=0.91, OR=1.00). Risk was Lebreton: None. O. Nicolle: None. M. Rabant: None. C. strongest among atopic asthma (diagnoses<18 y.o., p= Guerrera: None. A. Fabre: None. L. Faivre: None. G. 1.13×10−37, OR=2.32), but remained significant after cor- phenotypes(p=1.26×10−13, Michaux: None. H. Uligh: None. F. Ruemmele: None. N. recting forallergiesand related Cerf-Bensussan: None. M. Parlato: None. OR=1.4).Finally,wefoundFLG-associatedasthmadoesnot correlate with eosinophil levels. In addition, a single splice C14.4 variant in IL33, rs146597587-C, previously proposed as a A comprehensive exome study of the genetic architec- protective, loss-of-function PTV (Smith D (2017) PLoS tureofasthmarevealsaputativenovelpatientsubgroup Genet), was replicated as protective (p=8.0×10−10, OR= defined by filaggrin truncating variants 0.58). We further observed significantly lower carrier rates of this splice-variant among early-onset asthmatics (0.36%) S. R. Cameron-Christie1*, H. Olsson2, A. Mackay2, Q. compared to later onset (0.61%) (Mann-Whitney p=0.001). Wang3, M. Hühn2, D. Muthas2, G. Lassi1, J. Lindgren4, G. Whilewedidnotfindevidenceofnovelasthmagenesamong Povysil5, D. B. Goldstein5, G. Belfield4, I. Dillmann4, Y. current samples, we did identify a putative novel patient sub- Ohne6, S. Cohen7, S. Young8, A. Platt2, S. Petrovski1 group from the recognised FLG asthma loci, namely FLG PTV carriers, whose prevalence in UKB is 12%. 1Centre for Genomics Research, Precision Medicine and S. R. Cameron-Christie: A. Employment (full or part- Genomics, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, time); Significant; AstraZeneca. H. Olsson: A. Employment United Kingdom, 2Translational Science and Experimental (full or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. A. Mackay: A. Medicine, Research and Early Development, Respiratory, Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;AstraZeneca.Q. Inflammation and Autoimmune (RIA), R&D BioPharma- Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; ceuticals, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK, Gothenburg, AstraZeneca. M. Hühn: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sweden, 3Centre for Genomics Research, Precision Med- Significant;AstraZeneca.D.Muthas:A.Employment(fullor icine and Genomics, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. G. Lassi: A. Employ- Waltham, MA, United States, 4Translational Genomics, ment (full or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. J. Discovery Sciences, R&D BioPharmaceuticals, AstraZe- Lindgren: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; neca,Gothenburg,Sweden,Gothenburg,Sweden,5Institute AstraZeneca. G. Povysil: None. D. B. Goldstein: F. forGenomicMedicine,ColumbiaUniversityIrvingMedical Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; AstraZeneca. G. Bel- Center,NewYork,NewYork,NewYork,NY,UnitedStates, field: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant;78 J.delPicchia AstraZeneca.I.Dillmann:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); expression data showed significant enrichment of genes at Significant; AstraZeneca. Y. Ohne: A. Employment (full or RG-associations in ileum and pancreas, indicating a role of part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. S. Cohen: A. Employ- the digestive tract in RG level regulation. ment(fullorpart-time);Significant;AstraZeneca.S.Young: Funding: H2020-SC1-HBC-28-2019-LONGITOOLS, A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;AstraZeneca. WCRF-2017/1641. A. Platt: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; M. A. Kaakinen: None. L. Jiang: None. A. Ulrich: None. AstraZeneca. S. Petrovski: A. Employment (full or part- L.Zudina:None.Z.Balkhiyarova:None.P.Todorov:None. time); Significant; AstraZeneca. T. H. Pers: None. V. Lagou: None. I. Prokopenko: None. C14.5 C14.6 Random plasma glucose GWAS in 479,678 individuals: A complementary study approach unravels novel genetic relationships with impaired lung function and players in the pathoetiology of Hirschsprung‘s disease intestinal health T.Mederer1,S.Schmitteckert1*,J.Volz1,C.Martinez1,2,R. M.A.Kaakinen1,2*,L.Jiang2,3,A.Ulrich2,L.Zudina1,2,Z. Röth1,3, T. Thumberger4, V. Eckstein5, J. Scheuerer6, C. Balkhiyarova1,2, P. Todorov4, T. H. Pers4, V. Lagou5, I. Thöni6, F. Lasitschka6, L. Carstensen7, P. Günther7, S. Prokopenko1,2, MAGIC Investigators Holland-Cunz8,R.Hofstra9,E.Brosens9,D.Schriemer10,I. Ceccherini11, M. Rusmini11, J. Tilghman12, B. Luzón- 1University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom, 2Imper- Toro13,14, A. Torroglosa13,14, S. Borrego13,14, C. Szeman ial College London, London, United Kingdom, 3The Tang15,M.Garcia-Barcelo15,P.Tam15,N.Paramasivam16, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 4University M. Bewerunge-Hudler17, C. de la Torre18, N. Gretz18, G. of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5VIB Center for Rappold1,19, P. Romero7, B. Niesler1,3,19 Brain & Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg Fasting glucose and 2-hour post-prandial glucose are used UniversityHospital,Heidelberg,Germany,2LleidaInstitute as the gold standard tests for diagnosing type 2 diabetes for Biomedical Research Dr. Pifarré Foundation, Lleida, (T2D). High non-fasting i.e. random plasma glucose (RG) Spain, 3nCounter Core Facility, Department of Human levelsmayalsoindicateabnormalglucosehomeostasis.We Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg University Hospital, Hei- soughttocharacterisethegeneticarchitectureofRGandits delberg,Germany,4CenterforOrganismalStudies,Heidel- genetic relationships with other traits by performing a berg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 5FACS Core genome-wide association study of 8.1M SNPs with Facility, CampusHeidelberg,Heidelberg,Germany,6Insti- MAF>1% for RG in non-diabetic individuals from 17 tute of Pathology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidel- European studies, including UK Biobank, adjusted for i) berg, Germany, 7Pediatric Surgery Division, Heidelberg age, sex, population structure (N=479,678) and ii) addi- University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Pediatric tionally for time since last meal (N=438,678). We eval- Surgery, University Children’s Hospital, Basel, Switzer- uated the results from each model and their combination. land,9DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusUniversity The LD score regression was used to evaluate the genetic Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10Department of correlation between RG and other traits. We identified Neuroscience, University Medical Center, Groningen, 156signalsat117lociassociatedwithRGatgenome-wide Netherlands, 11UOSD Genetica e Genomica delle Malattie significance (P<5×10−8), including 38 novel signals for Rare, IRCCS, Instituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, glycaemic traits and T2D. These include five common 12Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, New York coding variants within GCKR, TET2, RREB1, NMT1 and University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United WIPI1, and three low-frequency nonsynonymous variants States, 13Department of Maternofetal Medicine, Genetics within EDEM3, NEUROD1 and GLP1R genes. The LD andReproduction,InstituteofBiomedicineofSeville(IBIS), score regression revealed significant genetic correlations University Hospital Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/University of between RG and glycaemic/obesity traits and T2D, as well Seville, Seville, Spain, 14Centre for Biomedical Network as a novel inverse genetic correlation with forced vital Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Seville, Spain, capacity (r =−0.088, SE=0.022, P=6.04×10−5). The 15DepartmentofSurgery,LiKaShingFacultyofMedicine, g latter finding brings molecular clues to the observational The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China, 16Divi- studies showing an impairment in lung function in indivi- sion of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer duals with T2D. DEPICT analysis of large-scale human Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 17Genomics andAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 79 ProteomicCoreFacility,GermanCancerResearchCenter, C15 Best Posters 1 Heidelberg, Germany, 18Center of Medical Research, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany, 19Inter- C15.01 disciplinary Center for Neurosciences, University of START: The STudy of Assisted Reproductive Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany Technologies Introduction: Hirschsprung’s disease (HSCR, OMIM R.Lyle1*,C.Page2,Y.Lee2,K.L.Haftorn2,A.Jugessur2,J. 142623) involves congenital intestinal obstruction caused Bohlin2, H. K. Gjessing2, P. Magnus2, S. Håberg2 bydysfunctionofneuralcrestcellsandtheirprogenyduring enteric nervous system (ENS) development. HSCR is a 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Norwegian multifactorial disorder and risk genes have only been Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway identifiedinaminorityofcases.Duetoitscomplexgenetic architecture, defining novel disease-relevant gene variants In the last few decades there have been marked changes in remains challenging. patterns of fertility and family structure in rich countries. Material and Methods: To identify candidate genes, These include increasing age at childbirth, a lower number wholeexomesequencing(WES)oftwoHSCRpatientsand of children born to each woman or man, greater use of theirnon-affectedparentswasperformed.Toexamine their assisted reproductive technology (ART), higher frequency disease-causingrelevance,acomplementarystudyapproach of family disruptions and increasingly complex family has been established. This included transcriptome analysis structures. The Centre for Fertility and Health (CeFH; of murine embryonic ENS-relevant tissues, in silico www.cefh.no) consists of a multidisciplinary research team network analyses,expressionanalysesaswellasfunctional of epidemiologists, geneticists, demographers, sociologists assaysassessingmigration,differentiation,proliferationand and economists with research themes including fertility cell survival capability of genome-edited cell clones. problems and intergenerational transmission of health. The Results: WES data were nailed down to four novel START project aims to understand the causes and health HSCR candidate genes: ATP7A, SREBF1, ABCD1 and consequencesofsubfertilityandhowgeneticinfluencesand PIAS2. Further rare variants in these genes were identified epigenetic differences are associated with subfertility and in additional HSCR patients, indicating disease relevance. Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART). ART may In addition, transcriptomics revealed that these genes are introduce epigenetic changes in the embryo since the pro- expressed in embryonic and fetal gastrointestinal tissues. cedures are during a period of extensive epigenetic repat- Functional analyses using candidate gene-specific, neuro- terning.Itisunknownwhichgenesmaybeaffectedandthe nal-like CRISPR/Cas9-edited knockout cell clones demon- potentialhealthconsequencesforthechildren.STARTuses strated impaired differentiation, proliferation and/or cell data from the Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort survival capacity. Study (MoBa; https://www.fhi.no/en/studies/moba/), which Conclusions: Our approach identified and validated follows more than 110 000 children and their parents. We candidate HSCR genes and provided further insight into have collected genetic and epigenetic data from 1000 trios underlying pathomechanisms of HSCR. withchildrenbornafterART,and1000triosfromnaturally Major Funding: This study was supported by the conceived children analyzed with the Illumina EPIC array Heidelberg Stiftung Chirurgie, the Heinz and Heide Dürr andtheIlluminaHumanCoreExomechip.Investigationsare Stiftung and the Dres. Majic/Majic Schlez Stiftung. focussedontheeffectofARTtreatmentonimprintedgenes T.Mederer:None.S.Schmitteckert:None.J.Volz:None. and fertility genes, and how epigenetic age acceleration C. Martinez: None. R. Röth: None. T. Thumberger: None. interactswithfertilityandARTtreatment.Ourresultsshow V. Eckstein: None. J. Scheuerer: None. C. Thöni: None. F. DNA methylation changes due to both parental subfertility Lasitschka: None. L. Carstensen: None. P. Günther: None. and ART procedures. S. Holland-Cunz: None. R. Hofstra: None. E. Brosens: R. Lyle: None. C. Page: None. Y. Lee: None. K. L. None. D. Schriemer: None. I. Ceccherini: None. M. Haftorn: None. A. Jugessur: None. J. Bohlin: None. H. K. Rusmini: None. J. Tilghman: None. B. Luzón-Toro: None. Gjessing: None. P. Magnus: None. S. Håberg: None. A. Torroglosa: None. S. Borrego: None. C. Szeman Tang: None. M. Garcia-Barcelo: None. P. Tam: None. N. C15.02 Paramasivam: None. M. Bewerunge-Hudler: None. C. de Evaluating diagnostic challenges with ABCA4-related la Torre: None. N. Gretz: None. G. Rappold: None. P. retinal disease - experience with a 7500 IRD patient Romero: None. B. Niesler: None. cohort sent for genetic diagnostics80 J.delPicchia J. Känsäkoski*, K. Kämpjärvi, S. Tuupanen, K. Wells, L. Significant;BlueprintGenetics.E.Mårtensson:A.Employ- Sarantaus, P. von Nandelstadh, K. Merkkiniemi, H. ment (full or part-time); Significant; Blueprint Genetics. R. Västinsalo, E. Mårtensson, R. Perez Carro, E. Sankila, J. PerezCarro:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; W. Koskenvuo, S. Myllykangas, T. Alastalo Blueprint Genetics. E. Sankila: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Blueprint Genetics. J. W. Kosken- Blueprint Genetics, Espoo, Finland vuo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Blueprint Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Introduction: ABCA4 variants cause autosomal recessive options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Stargardt disease (STGD1), the most prevalent hereditary Blueprint Genetics. S. Myllykangas: A. Employment (full macular disease. Major challenges in STGD1 molecular orpart-time);Significant;BlueprintGenetics.E.Ownership diagnostics include (i) non-coding variants typically not Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual targetedbyavailablegenetictests(ii)copynumbervariants property); Significant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. (CNV) missed by standard testing, and (iii) interpretation Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Blueprint challenges with common hypomorphic variants. We eval- Genetics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, uated the significance of challenging ABCA4 variants and patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Blueprint their contribution to STGD1 diagnostic yield in a cohort of Genetics. inherited retinal disease (IRD) patients. MaterialsandMethods:Weincluded7500IRDpatients C15.03 tested at a CLIA laboratory between 2017 and 2019. Insights into the retinal function of ciliopathy proteins Sequencing analysis, including established non-coding gained through zebrafish models ABCA4 variants and high resolution CNV detection, was done by using in-house developed and validated NGS M. Masek, R. Bachmann-Gagescu* platform. Results: Two disease-causing ABCA4 variants were UniversityofZurich-MedicalGenetics,Zürich,Switzerland identifiedin663patients,ofwhich20(20/663;3%)hadan established non-coding variant and 11 (11/663; 1.5%) a Ciliopathiesaredisorderscausedbydysfunctionofprimary CNV. In 192 patients with clinically diagnosed ABCA4- cilia, ubiquitous organelles involved in signal transduction. related disease, only one disease-causing variant was Inretinalphotoreceptors(PRs),lightsensationoccursinthe identified. Among those, the hypomorphic allele ABCA4 outer segments (OSs), which represent highly specialized c.5603A>T, p.(Asn1868Ile) was identified in 109 patients ciliary compartments. Consequently, retinal disease is a (109/192: 57%), with a significantly increased allele commonmanifestationinciliopathypatients.Our effortsto frequency (126/384=0.328) compared to controls in elucidatethemolecularfunctionsofciliopathyproteinsrely gnomAD (AF 11928/282712=0.042) (OR: 11.087, 95% on zebrafish mutants in genes associated with Joubert syn- CI: 8.953-13.73, p<0.001). The median age at genetic drome, an iconic ciliopathy associated with retinal disease testing among the 109 patients was 56 years, which was in25%ofpatients.Wefocusongenesthatencodeproteins significantly higher compared to 37 years among the 663 participating in distinct ciliary complexes: Cc2d2a at the patients with two disease-causing variants. transition zone, representing the gate to the cilium, or Tal- Conclusions: Non-coding variants and CNVs contribute pid3/KIAA0586 at the basal body (BB), anchoring the significantly to diagnostic yield in ABCA4-related disease. cilium in the cell. While both mutants display decreased Our large dataset supports the important role of the visual function, we identify distinct ultra-structural pheno- hypomorphic allele ABCA4 c.5603A>T, p.(Asn1868Ile) types indicating specific roles for each protein in primary in diagnostics of late-onset STGD1. cilium function. We find that Cc2d2a organizes the vesicle J. Känsäkoski: A. Employment (full or part-time); fusion machinery at the periciliary margin and provides a Significant; Blueprint Genetics. K. Kämpjärvi: A. Employ- docking point for incoming vesicles through a chain of ment (full or part-time); Significant; Blueprint Genetics. S. interactions linking CC2D2A to NINL-MICAL3-RAB8. In Tuupanen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; contrast, Talpid3 is involved in BB docking and ciliogen- BlueprintGenetics. K. Wells: A.Employment (full or part- esis upstream of Rab8a activation. Retina-specific tran- time); Significant; Blueprint Genetics. L. Sarantaus: A. scriptomics identifies both shared and distinct effects on Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Blueprint gene transcription: while transcription of phototransduction Genetics. P. von Nandelstadh: A. Employment (full or genes is decreased in both mutants, likely as a secondary part-time);Significant;BlueprintGenetics.K.Merkkiniemi: effect,weobservedownregulationoftheBBSome,amulti- A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Blueprint proteincomplexassociatedwiththeciliopathyBardet-Biedl Genetics.H.Västinsalo:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); syndrome, only in talpid3 mutants, while Nek8 isAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 81 upregulated only in cc2d2a mutants. In conclusion, our in vivo and in vitro functional data show involvement of findings demonstrate how mutations in genes causing the RCBTB1 in the cellular response to oxidative stress. This same human disorder result in similar phenotypes through provides insight into the mechanism underlying RCBTB1- distinct mechanisms. associated IRD and uncovers potential therapeutic M. Masek: None. R. Bachmann-Gagescu: None. opportunities. Funding: FWO/1802220N; FWO/1S52818N; BOF15/ C15.04 GOA/011; BOF20/GOA/023. Functional characterization of a Xenopus tropicalis M. Carron: None. T. Naert: None. G. Ascari: None. S. knockout and a human cellular model of RCBTB1- Demuynck:None.T.VanNieuwenhuyzen:None.T.Rosseel: associatedinheritedretinaldiseaseshowsinvolvementof None. D. Priem: None. A. Kremer: None. H. Van Land- RCBTB1 in the cellular response to oxidative stress eghem: None. S. Hoogstoel: None. F. Coppieters: None. C. Guérin: None. K. Vleminckx: None. E. De Baere: None. M.Carron1,2*,T.Naert1,G.Ascari2,S.Demuynck1,T.Van Nieuwenhuyzen1, T. Rosseel2, D. Priem3,4, A. Kremer4, H. C15.05 Van Landeghem1, S. Hoogstoel2, F. Coppieters2, C. Loss of function of RIMS2, a synaptic membrane Guérin5, K. Vleminckx1, E. De Baere2 exocytosis gene, causes a new phenotype characterized by congenital cone-rod synaptic disease associated with 1Ghent University, Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent, neurodevelopmental and pancreatic involvement Belgium, 2Ghent University, Center for Medical Genetics and Dept of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent, Belgium, S. Mechaussier1*, B. Almoallem2, C. Zeitz3, K. Van Schil2, 3Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4VIB-UGent Center L. Jeddawi4, J. Van Dorpe5, C. Condroyer3, O. Pelle6, M. for Inflammation Research, Ghent, Belgium, 5VIB Bioima- Polak7, N. Boddaert8, N. Bahi-Buisson9, M. Cavallin10, J. ging Core, Ghent, Belgium Bacquet11, A. Mouallem-Bézière11, O. Zambrowski11,12, J. Sahel3,13,14, I. Audo3,14,15, J. Kaplan1,11, J. Rozet1, E. De Introduction: The function of RCBTB1, recently impli- Baere2, I. Perrault1 cated in syndromic and non-syndromic inherited retinal disease (IRD), remains unknown so far. Patients with 1Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), biallelicmissensevariantsinRCBTB1displaydiverseIRD INSERM UMR1163, Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine phenotypessuchasretinitispigmentosa.Here,wetestedthe and Paris University, Paris, France, 2Center for Medical hypothesis that RCBTB1 is involved in NRF2-regulated Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, protection against reactive oxygen species in the eye, more Ghent, Belgium, 3Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, specifically in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). InstitutdelaVision,Paris,France,4PediatricOphthalmol- Materials and Methods: A Xenopus tropicalis rcbtb1-/- ogy Division, Dhahran Eye Specialist Hospital, Dharan, knockout (KO) was generated using CRISPR/Cas9 editing. Saudi Arabia, 5Department of Pathology, Ghent University Histology and three-dimensional electron microscopy was and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 6Cell performed on retinas of rcbtb1-/- frogs. RNA-seq analysis Sorting Facility, INSERM UMR1163, Institute of Genetic wasperformedonRCBTB1-mutatedpatients’lymphocytes, Diseases, Imagine and Paris University, Paris, France, treatedwithH2O2,aswellasonembryosfromthercbtb1-/- 7Endocrinology, Gynecology and Pediatric Diabetology KOstreatedwithCdCl2.AnRCBTB1knockdowncellline Department, University Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades, wasgeneratedinARPE-19cellsandfunctionalassays(flow Paris,France,8DepartmentofPediatricRadiology,Hôpital cytometry, MTT-assay, cell death kinetics) assessed the Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris University, Paris, France, consequences of RCBTB1 loss-of-function. 9Pediatric Neurology Department, University Hospital Results: Rcbtb1-/- animals showed changes in the RPE, Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10Laboratory of similar to observations in human cases, including loss of Embryologyandgeneticsofhumanmalformation,INSERM apical-basal cell polarity, cuboidal cell morphology, UMR1163,InstituteofGeneticDiseases,ImagineandParis spreading of the pigment granules and vacuolisation. University, Paris, France, 11Service d’Ophtalmologie, NRF2 downstream targets and several metallothioneins Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Créteil (CHIC), were found to be differentially expressed, both in the KO Créteil, France, 12Ophthalmology Department, University and cellular models. Functional assays in ARPE-19 cells Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, revealed that RCBTB1 depletion affects cellular responses 13Department of Ophthalmology, The University of Pitts- to external insults of oxidative stress. burgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, Conclusion: We showed that the Xenopus tropicalis 14CentreHospitalierNationald’OphtalmologiedesQuinze- rcbtb1-/-KOrecapitulatesthehumanIRDphenotype.Both Vingts, INSERM-DHOS CIC 1423, Paris, France,82 J.delPicchia 15InstituteofOphthalmology,UniversityCollegeofLondon, 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and London, United Kingdom Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Global Health Research, Introduction: Anomalies in pre- and post-synaptic trans- Usher Institute for Population Health Sciences and mission of visual information from photoreceptors to Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United bipolar cells are responsible for stationary congenital night Kingdom,3SplitMedicalSchool,Split,Croatia,4Instituteof blindness (CSNB). Pre-synaptic disorders, characterized by Physiology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland congenitalnystagmusandphotophobia,nightblindness,are known as cone-rod synaptic disorder (CRSD) can be mis- Magnesium is the second most abundant bivalent cation in taken for Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA). Full-field thebodyandisessentialformanycellularprocesses.Renal electroretinogram is crucial for the differential diagnosis, magnesiumhandlingplaysanimportantroleinmaintaining butitcanbedifficulttoperforminyoungchildren.Here,we magnesium homeostasis, however the exact biological report (i) the identification of biallelic mutations in the mechanisms remain unclear. A recent genome-wide asso- RIMS2 gene encoding a pre-synaptic protein not yet asso- ciation study (GWAS) identified an association between ciated with human diseasesin 3/4 families initiallyreferred urinarymagnesiumconcentration(uMg)andvariantsinthe for LCA and (ii) the diagnostic adjustment to CRSD with ARL15 gene on chromosome 5. ARL15 encodes a GTP- variable associated alteration including autistic behavior binding protein that regulates the magnesium transporter and insulinopathy. channelTRPM6,andotherproteinsinvolvedinmagnesium Methods: Exome sequencing combined with targeted homeostasis in physiologically relevant cell lines. We RIMS2 testing were performed in 46 prescreened patients conductedmeta-analyses for urinary magnesiumin11, 617 with CRSD and 94 with LCA. Biallelic RIMS2-mutated individuals from Scottish and Croatian populations to cases underwent ophthalmologic, neurologic and metabolic determine possible genes involved in these traits. Mass assessment. RIMS2 immunostaining was performed on spectrometry analysis was conducted to determine inter- human retina, brain and pancreas. Nonsense variants were actors of Arl15 and in-vitro knockout models of Arl15 was functionally investigated in mammalian cells. Results. established using CRISPR-Cas9. The top SNP associated Biallelic RIMS2 sequence variants were found in four with uMg in our meta-analyses lies within a transcription unrelated families. RIMS2, a protein regulating synaptic factor binding site in an enhancer region of ARL15. Indi- membrane exocytosis localizes in the human retinal outer viduals homozygous for the alternate allele of rs35931 has plexiform layer, Purkinje cells and pancreatic islets. Apart lower urinary magnesium levels compared to individuals from CRSD, neurodevelopmental disease was observed in with the homozygous reference allele. Arl15 interacts with all cases, and abnormal glucose homeostasis in the eldest magnesium transporters within the distal convoluted tubule patient.?Nonsense variants lead to truncated RIMS2 and segment of the kidneys. Furthermore, we find that homo- decreased insulin secretion in mammalian cells. zygous deletion of Arl15 is lethal at the organismal level. Conclusion: This is the first report of syndromic CRSD Wehypothesisethatthevariantfoundaffectstheexpression with neurodevelopmental or pancreatic involvement due to of ARL15, which, in turn modulates magnesium transport RIMS2 loss-of-function. The disease presentation is con- by regulating magnesium transporters. We are performing sistent with the localization and function of RIMS2. furtherfunctionalstudiestoelucidatetheroleARL15plays S. Mechaussier: None. B. Almoallem: None. C. Zeitz: in magnesium homeostasis both in vitro and in vivo. None. K. Van Schil: None. L. Jeddawi: None. J. Van C. B. Joseph: None. C. M. Stanton: None. C. Drake: Dorpe: None. C. Condroyer: None. O. Pelle: None. M. None. T. S. Boutin: None. J. F. Wilson: None. O. Polasek: Polak: None. N. Boddaert: None. N. Bahi-Buisson: None. None. O. Devuyst: None. T. Hurd: None. C. M. Cavallin: None. J. Bacquet: None. A. Mouallem- Hayward: None. Bézière: None. O. Zambrowski: None. J. Sahel: None. I. Audo:None.J.Kaplan:None.J.Rozet:None.E.DeBaere: C15.08 None. I. Perrault: None. RNA-seq approach to detect splicing alterations in primary ciliary dyskinesia and non-CF bronchiectasis C15.06 Genetic and molecular analysis of urinary magnesium J. Legebeke1*, G. Wheway1, H. Wai1, W. Walker1,2, J. S. concentration in Scottish and Croatian populations Lucas1,2, D. Baralle1,2 C.B.Joseph1*,C.M.Stanton1,C.Drake1,T.S.Boutin1,J. 1University of Southampton, Southampton, United King- F. Wilson2, O. Polasek3, O. Devuyst4, T. Hurd1, C. dom, 2University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, Hayward1 United KingdomAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 83 MutationsthatcausePCDhavebeenreportedin>40genes. to liver failure and transplant. There are several genes Most cases are recessive, caused by biallelic changes in described for different genetic diseases that lead to choles- these genes. These account for around 70% of cases, sug- tasis. USP53 has been recently suggested as a candidate gesting that additional genes, and non-coding or synon- gene for paediatric intrahepatic cholestasis based on one ymous changes in known genes, remain to be identified. family with two affected siblings. Interestingly, USP53 Non-CF bronchiectasis is a heterogeneous group of dis- interacts with tight junction protein 2 (TJP2) for which orders and adults may need to be investigated for PCD. pathogenicvariantsareknowntocauseprogressivefamilial Here we present an optimised pipeline for RNA analysis intrahepatic cholestasis. To date, the USP53 gene has not from nasal brushings taken from the inferior turbinate of beenlinkedtoanOMIMphenotype.Bycombiningexome/ patientswithsuspectedPCDor non-CF bronchiectasis. We genome sequencing and mining our in-house variant data- present analysis pipelines to investigate differences in gene basewe identifiedfivepatients fromunrelatedfamilies.All expression, alternative splicing and the identification of affected individuals display a similar phenotype, mainly deleterioussplicing events.Wedevelopedgene-neutraland including early onset intrahepatic cholestasis. Moreover, gene-specific analysis protocols, from both nasal brushings onefamilyshowedhearinglossasanadditionalphenotype. storedinRNA-laterandcellsfromnasalbrushingscultured Allpatientswerehomozygotesfordifferentloss-of-function at the air-liquid interface (ALI). We present this RNA-seq variants in the USP53 gene. USP53 (ubiquitin specific approach as a particularly useful diagnostic tool to inves- peptidase 53) is a tight junction-associated protein that is tigatepatientsinwhomasinglepathogenicvarianthasbeen known to involve in the survival of auditory hair cells and identified in a known PCD gene and where we suspect an hearing. Our results confirm USP53 as a novel gene for alteration in splicing of the same gene due to a second autosomal recessive intrahepatic cholestasis. Additionally, intronic or synonymous / non-synonymous exonic variant. we demonstrate that combined exome/genome sequencing This represents a step towards using RNA analysis for and variant database mining is an effective approach to increasing diagnostic yield in rare recessive respiratory discoverandconfirmnovelgenesrelatedtohumandiseases. disease.JL,DBandHTaresupportedbyaNIHRResearch Thisacceleratetheprocessofgenediscoveryandultimately Professorship to DB (RP- 2016-07-011). JL is further sup- shortens the diagnostic odyssey in rare genetic disorders. ported by Southampton NIHR BRC. GW is funded by a S. Alawbathani: A. Employment (full or part-time); WellcomeTrustSeedAwardinScience(GrantNo.204378/ Significant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. M. Rocha: Z/16/Z) and a University of Southampton Faculty of Med- A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Centogene icine Research Management Committee research grant. AG, Rostock, Germany. H. Arshad Cheema: None. R. G. Wheway: None. H. Wai: None. W. Walker: None. J. Boustany:None.S.Nampoothiri:None.A.Alswaid:None. S. Lucas: None. D. Baralle: None. N. El Koofy: None. V. Karageorgou: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Ger- C15.09 many. I. Hövel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Combined exome/genome sequencing with in-house Significant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. S. Khan: variant data repository mining confirm USP53 as a A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Centogene causal gene for intrahepatic cholestasis AG, Rostock, Germany. C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. S. Alawbathani1*, M. Rocha1, H. Arshad Cheema2, R. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Boustany3, S. Nampoothiri4, A. Alswaid5, N. El Koofy6, V. Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany. P. Bauer: A. Employ- Karageorgou1, I. Hövel1, S. Khan1, C. Beetz1, A. Rolfs1, P. ment (full or part-time); Significant; Centogene AG, Bauer1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1 Rostock, Germany. A. M. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Centogene AG, Rostock, 1Centogene AG, Rostock, Germany, 2Children’s Hospital Germany. and Institute of Child Health, Lahore, Pakistan, 3AUBMC American University of Beirut Medical Center, Beirut, C15.10 Lebanon, 4Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kerala, Elucidating the molecular mechanism underlying later- India, 5King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riadh, Saudi Arabia, ality defects 6Abu El Reesh Children’s Hospital, Cairo, Egypt D. Antony1,2,3*, A. Maver4, M. A. Deardorff5,6, L. Slagter2, Cholestatic liver disease is a significant cause of morbidity K.Wu2,Z.Bakey1,2,E.Gulec7,A.Gezdirici7,H.Brunner2,3, and mortality in the paediatric population, starting in the M. Schmidts1,2,3 early postnatal life. Severity is variable, from benign idio- pathic neonatal hepatitis to intrahepatic cholestasis leading84 J.delPicchia 1CenterforPediatricsandAdolescentMedicine,University C15.11 HospitalFreiburg,Freiburg,Germany,2Genome Research Biallelic missense variant in SVBP causes impaired Division, Department of Human Genetics, Radboud UMC, detyrosination of tubulin leading to complex hereditary Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Radboud Institute of Molecular spastic paraplegia without microcephaly Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Centre for Mende- lianGenomics,ClinicalInstituteofMedicalGenetics,UMC E. Verdura1,2*, N. Launay1,2, G. Fernandez Garcia de Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 5Department of Pediatrics Eulate3,4,5, J. Ondaro4,5, A. Schlüter1,2, M. Ruiz1,2, S. and Pathology, The Perelman School of Medicine, Fourcade1,2, A. López de Munain3,4,5, A. Pujol1,2 University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA, United States, 6Laboratory Medicine, The Perelman School of 1NeurometabolicDiseaseLab,InstituteofNeuropathology, Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA, IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, United States, 7University of Health Sciences, Kanuni 2Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases Sultan Suleyman training and research Hospital, Depart- (CIBERER U759), Ministry of Science, Innovation and ment of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey University, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Donostia, San Sebastián, Spain, Introduction: Laterality defects are rare developmental 4Department of Neurosciences, Instituto Biodonostia, San disorders, occurring isolated or as part of complex syn- Sebastián, Spain, 5Department of Neurosciences, School of dromes. Underlying cause is frequently dysfunction of Medicine and Nursery, University of the Basque Country, motile cilia causing Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) and UPV-EHU, San Sebastián, Spain rarely, non-motile cilia defects or non-ciliary causes. In additiontorandomizationoftheleftrightbodyaxis,PCDis Introduction: Reversible C-Terminal detyrosination of characterized by frequent respiratory infections and alpha-tubuliniscrucialformicrotubuleorganization,andis infertility. strongly linked to neuronal differentiation. VASH1 and Methods: We used Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) to VASH2, in complex with SVBP, have recently been iden- delineate the underlying molecular cause in 37 mainly tified as responsible for intracellular tubulin detyrosination consanguineous families with laterality defects. activity. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in SVBP have Results: We identified causative variants in 32% with much recently been described in patients showing intellec- majority of mutations detected in genes previously tual disability, microcephaly, ataxia and hypotonia. associated with PCD, including 2 small homozygous Methods: All patients underwent accurate clinical CNVs. Variants in non PCD genes, PKD1l1 and GJA1 evaluation and provided informed consent. Whole-exome were also detected. We further identified homozygous sequencing (WES) was performed using patients’ DNA null mutations in two genes not previously associated samples, and segregation in relatives was confirmed by with human disease, MNS1 and DNAH9, both in cases Sangersequencing.Primaryfibroblastsweregeneratedfrom with situs inversus but little or no respiratory symptoms. patients’ skin biopsies, and cultured cells were incubated Gene matcher database revealed two additional families with paclitaxel to analyze detyrosinated tubulin levels by withbiallelicDNAH9mutationandimmunofluorescence immunofluorescence and western blot. cDNA of VASH1 analysis revealed complete absence of DNAH9 from and wild-type/mutated forms of SVBP were cloned into a respiratory cilia of one affected while DNAH9 localises pCMV-Tag4A vector, and then cotransfected into HeLa to the distal half of cilia in controls. Further, we found cells for Western Blot analysis. direct interaction of DNAH9 with the ODA docking Results: We report two families with multiple patients complex protein CCDC114 using Y2H screening harboring an homozygous missense variant in SVBP (p. also interaction with DNAH5 and DNAI2 using co- Leu49Pro). Affected individuals show spastic paraplegia, Immunoprecipitation. peripheral neuropathy, verbal apraxia and intellectual Conclusion: Wecould only solve athird ofthelaterality disability, in absence of microcephaly, broadening the cases genetically using WES, pointing towards non coding previously reported phenotype. In vitro experiments in variations,geneticmosaicismorepigeneticeffectswhilewe patients’ fibroblasts demonstrate a significant loss of were able to identify two novel human disease causing VASH1/2 detyrosination activity and decreased SVBP genes, MNS1 and DNAH9, both causing laterality defects levels. Cotransfection studies show that SVBP p.Leu49Pro with no or little respiratory disease. ERC: TreatCilia variant reduces both VASH1 and SVBP soluble quantities D. Antony: None. A. Maver: None. M. A. Deardorff: or their stability. None. L. Slagter: None. K. Wu: None. Z. Bakey: None. E. Conclusions: Our results expand the phenotypic spec- Gulec: None. A. Gezdirici: None. H. Brunner: None. M. trum of SVBP mutations to complex spastic paraplegia Schmidts: None. without microcephaly, and confirm for the first time that aAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 85 detyrosination defect is observed in patients’ cell lines, Results:WedescribeaSpanishpatientwithHDLhaving enabling functional testing of SVBP variants and extended 2 novel compound heterozygous missense mutations in pathogenetic studies. RNF216. The study of brain material from one of the two E.Verdura:None.N.Launay:None.G.FernandezGarcia reported Belgian families demonstrated ubiquitin- and p62- de Eulate: None. J. Ondaro: None. A. Schlüter: None. M. positive intranuclear inclusions, negative for Tau, ?-synu- Ruiz: None. S. Fourcade: None. A. López de Munain: clein and TDP-43. Proteomics generated a list of candidate None. A. Pujol: None. genes whose histopathological examination is currently ongoing. Hela cells transfected with wildtype and mutant C15.13 RNF216constructsrevealedRNF216andubiquitinpositive Understanding the mechanism of RNF216-mediated intranuclear speckle-like bodies. neurodegeneration: genetic, proteomic, neuropathologi- Conclusion:Theidentityofintranuclearbodiesshouldbe cal and cellular approach further analyzed hoping to reveal molecular intricacies linked to this neurodegenerative disease. Odysseus Type-I S. Roy1,2*, P. Ervilha Pereira1,2, N. Schuermans1,2, A. (G0H8318N)FWOgrant,Startinggrant(01N10319)Ghent Sieben3,4, F. Thery5,6, E. Mondragon Rezola7, E. University Debackere1,2, P. LeBlanc1,2, M. Galas8, P. Santens3,4, F. S. Roy: None. P. Ervilha Pereira: None. N. Schuermans: Impens5,6, E. Bogaert1,2, B. Dermaut1,2 None. A. Sieben: None. F. Thery: None. E. Mondragon Rezola: None. E. Debackere: None. P. LeBlanc: None. M. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Galas: None. P. Santens: None. F. Impens: None. E. Gent, Belgium, 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Bogaert: None. B. Dermaut: None. FacultyofMedicineandHealthSciences,GhentUniversity, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, Ghent Uni- C15.14 versity Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 4Department of Head and The genotype-phenotype correlation of intragenic Skin, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent RBFOX1 deletions. University, Ghent, Belgium, 5Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Ghent M. A. Paczkowska*, M. Geremek, B. Nowakowska University,Gent,Belgium,6CenterforMedicalBiotechnol- ogy, VIB Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 7Department of Neurol- Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland ogy, University Hospital Donostia, Basque Country University, Donostia, Spain, 8Inserm, UMRS1172, JPARC, The RBFOX1 gene encodes a protein that regulates pre- Alzheimer & Tauopathies, Lille, France mRNA splicing in developmental genes expressed in muscle, heart and neuronal cells. Intragenic deletions of Introduction:Neurodegenerativediseasesfrequentlyresult RBFOX1 gene have been identified as susceptibility loci frommutationsinubiquitin-signalinggenes.Ourgroupwas and reported in patients with aggressive behavior, conduct amongthefirsttoreportbi-allelicmutationsinRNF216,an disorder,epilepsyandautismspectrumdisorder.Despiteof E3ubiquitinligase,asthegeneticcauseofGordonHolmes the documented correlation with neurodevelopmental dis- syndrome (GHS), an adult-onset rare neurodegenerative orders, the deletions of RBFOX1 gene are often inherited disorder characterized by ataxia, dementia and hypogona- fromthehealthyparents,thereforetheclinicalinterpretation dotropichypogonadismorHuntington-likedisorder(HDL). of CNVs within this gene is still unclear. We applied oli- To date, >10 mutations in RNF216 have been reported not gonucleotide microarrays (OGT) in a cohort of 9430 only from the catalytic active site but also from N-terminal patients with neurodevelopment disorders and their healthy part of the protein. relatives. The analyses of genomes were performed using Objective: We intend to unravel the mechanisms by genome-wide array to accurate detection of copy number whichRNF216mutationsleadtoGHSandHDL.Weaim variationattheexonlevelinRBFOX1gene.Chromosomal to identify novel RNF216 mutations for genotype- analysis revealed intragenic RBFOX1 deletions in 36 phenotype correlation studies, identify protein composi- patients. The differential distribution across the gene tion of the pathological intranuclear inclusions, and between patients with neurodevelopmental disorders and understand the cellular and biochemical function of the the control group allowed to distinguished evidently RNF216 protein. pathogenic areas within the gene. Deletions of exones 1-2 Methods: Frozen and fixed brain material from patient and 13-14 have high penetrance, and are mainly associated wereusedforgeneralizedproteomicsandneuropathological with conduct disorder and autism spectrum disorder. While studies and patient fibroblast and Hela cells were used for the middle part of the gene and all intronic CNVS were cellular studies. observed with higher frequency in the control group,86 J.delPicchia suggestingtheirbenignimpactonthephenotype.Thework Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is a reproductive wassupportedbyMINDDS-CACOSTActionCA16210- technology which allows prospective parents to select their Maximising Impact of research in NeuroDevelopmental futureoffspringbasedongeneticcharacteristics.Duringthe DisorderS lastdecade,itsregulationhasfollowedmostlyalinearpath, M. A. Paczkowska: None. M. Geremek: None. B. with incremental changes driven by scientific advances or Nowakowska: None. by court driven alterations. But also, shift has been prompted by greater societal uptake. No longer considered C15.15 an experimental practice, stakeholders have challenged the Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress contri- status quo, recognizing that both technological and policy bute to the phenotype of FOXP1 deficiency developments do not take place in a moral vacuum. They have done so under the flag of reproductive freedom, J. Wang*, H. Fröhlich, G. A. Rappold equitable access and welfare considerations, amongst other ethicalconcerns.Despitethepassageoftime,theubiquitous Institut für Humangenetik, Heidelberg, Germany presence of eugenics seems to constantly cast a shadow over technologies that open the door for selecting the Patients with FOXP1 haploinsufficiency present intellectual geneticcharacteristicsofahumanoffspring.Forthisreason, disability, autism spectrum disorder, severe speech and lan- we can predict that despite greater societal acceptance, guageimpairments as well asmotor dysfunction. To unravel widening its permissibility criteria will remain contested the pathological mechanism underlying FOXP1 syndrome, and a matter of continue social and policy debate. In this we analysed Foxp1+/- mice, which closely reflect FOXP1 presentation, we examine variations in policy approaches. haploinsufficiency. We can show that Foxp1+/- animals We draw on a representative sample of 19 countries (Aus- exhibit behavioural deficits such as reduced neonatal ultra- tralia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, France, sonic vocalization, hyperactivity, anxiety and alterations in Germany, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, spatial navigation and memory. Furthermore, they manifest Singapore,SouthKorea,Switzerland,UnitedKingdom,and decreased exercise capacity and endurance. We also found the United States) to provide a global landscape of the thatFoxp1+/-animalsdisplayareducedstriatalexpressionof spectrum of policy and legislative approaches. We also proteins involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and dynamics explore central socio-ethical and policy issues and con- (Pgc-1?, Tfam, Opa1 and Drp1), suggesting that mitochon- tentious applications as for instance, permissibility criteria drialdysfunctionmaycontributetothesymptoms.Toaddress (e.g. medical necessity), non-medical sex selection and thisissueinmoredetail,weinvestigatedmitochondriainWT reproductive tourism. Finally, we further outline genetic andFoxp1+/-animals.WedemonstratethatFoxp1+/-striatal counseling requirements across policy approaches. neurons display a disrupted mitochondrial membrane poten- R. Isasi: None. M. E. Ginoza: None. tial. In addition, we detected an increased abundance of reactive oxygen species, increased cytochrome C release as C16.2 well as lipid peroxidation in the Foxp1+/- striatum. In sum- Regulation of international direct-to-participant (DTP) mary, our results indicate mitochondrial dysfunction in mur- genomic research: results and recommendations from a ine Foxp1 deficiency, suggesting that mitochondrial 31-country study dysfunction and increased oxidative stress may also con- tribute to the deficits in FOXP1 Syndrome. M. Zawati1*, M. Rothstein2, B. Knoppers1 H. Fröhlich: None. G. A. Rappold: None. 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2University of C16 The Interplay of Law, Policy and Genomics Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States C16.1 International direct-to-participant (DTP) research promises Regulating Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis: A com- to greatly increase the number and diversity of participants parison of international policy trends and perspectives for research on genetic disorders. This phenomenon, in which participants recruited online supply biosamples or R. Isasi*, M. E. Ginoza provideaccesstoelectronichealthrecords,maybethwarted by prohibitions on research without ethics review in each MillerSchoolofMedicine,UniversityofMiami,Miami,FL, participating country. Though global recruitment is a pro- United States mising research strategy, there is an urgent need to under- standtheinternationalregulatorylandscapetofosteramore global DTP genomics research ecosystem. In thisAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 87 presentation, we set out to determine how DTP genomics 317,259 genomes and exomes to date. Most of the researchisregulatedin31countries.Weengagedwithlocal sequencing institutions reported that they are able to store experts in 31 countries, each of whom were asked to pre- raw genomic data in compliance with various national pare a report of 2,000 words in response to a 10-item regulations, although there was a lack of standardisation of questionnaire on the regulation of DTP research. These storageformats.Interviewees from12ofthe33institutions reportsrepresentthefirstsystematicefforttoassessthelegal included in our study reported that they had received environment for international DTP genomic research. We requests for personal access to raw genomic data from will describe the results of this work, including the state of sequencedindividuals.Intheabsenceofpoliciesonhowto regulation of international genomic research practices. We process such requests, these were decided on an ad hoc found, for example,that17/31expertsreporteditwouldbe basis; in the end, at least 28 requests were granted, while unlawful for an international researcher to conduct DTP there were no reports of requests being rejected. Given the researchwithoutlocalethicsapproval.Wewillconcludeby rights, interests, and liabilities at stake, it is essential that outliningourteam’srecommendationsoninternationalDTP sequencing institutions adopt clear policies and processes genomic research, elaborating on themes of ethics equiva- for raw genomic data retention and personal access. lence and the importance of incorporating cultural con- S. Narayanasamy: A. Employment (full or part-time); siderations in policy development. While there are Significant;MegenoS.A.V.Markina:A.Employment(full significant legal barriers to expanding DTP genomics or part-time); Significant; Megeno S. A. A. Thorogood: F. research internationally, sound policy will maximize its Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Megeno S. A. A. potential. Blazkova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Funding information: National Institute of Health (NIH), MegenoS.A.M.Shabani:None.B.M.Knoppers:None.B. National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), Prainsack:None.R.Koesters:A.Employment(fullorpart- Grant No. 5R01HG009914-02. time); Significant; Megeno S.A. M.Zawati:None.M.Rothstein:None.B.Knoppers:None. C16.4 C16.3 The genome as individual property or common good. Genomic sequencing capacity, data retention and Conceptualization of the genome within a citizen forum personal access to raw data in Europe C. Mayeur*, W. Van Hoof S. Narayanasamy1*, V. Markina1, A. Thorogood2, A. Blazkova1,M.Shabani3,B.M.Knoppers2,B.Prainsack4,R. Sciensano, Anderlecht, Belgium Koesters1 In recent years, policymakers and experts showed particular 1Megeno S.A., Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg, 2Centre of interest in public engagement in genomics. However, most Genomics and Policy, McGill University, Montreal, QC, projects focus on expressed values, without exploring the Canada, 3Metamedic, Faculty of Law and Criminology, conceptsbehindthem.Tounderstandwhichusesofgenomic GhentUniversity,Ghent,Belgium,4DepartmentofPolitical information citizens support, one should first examine their Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria conceptualizationofthehumangenomeandthenexplorethe valuestheyassigntoit.Weorganizedacitizenforumonthe Whole genome/exome sequencing (WGS/WES) has ethical, legal and societal issues surrounding the use of become widely adopted in research and, more recently, in genomicinformationinhealthcare.Duringthreeweekends,a clinical settings. Many hope that the information obtained panel of 32 citizens, informed by experts of different back- from interpretation of this data will have medical benefits grounds,debatedandreflectedwiththefinalaimofproducing for patients and - in some cases - also their biological political recommendations for the ministry of public health. relatives. Because of the manifold possibilities to reuse Aninductivethematicanalysisoftheirdiscussionsshowsthat genomic data, enabling sequenced individuals to access citizens view the genome as the most intimate part of indi- their own raw (uninterpreted) genomic data is a highly viduals, that warrants protection to avoid breach of privacy. debatedissue.Thispaperreportssomeofthefirstempirical Additionally, citizens claim that humans are more than their findings on personal genome access policies and practices. geneticmakeup:theyaresocially,culturally,emotionally,and We interviewed 39 respondents, working at 33 institutions psychologically complex, and should be treated and con- in21countriesacrossEurope.Thesesequencinginstitutions sideredaccordingly. This is whycitizens vehemently oppose generatemassiveamountsofWGS/WESdataandrepresent genetic categorization and discrimination. Finally, a funda- varying organisational structures and operational models. mental tension remains between two conceptions of the Taken together, in total, these institutions have sequenced genome - the individual’s property versus common good -88 J.delPicchia with consequences on sensitive issues such as commerciali- “compassionate use” practice. Finally, our strategy using a zation,accesstoandsharingofdata,individualresponsibility stable dual-reporter cell line can be exploited for identifying and autonomy. Citizens’ conceptions of the genome inform effective drugs for other genetic and multifactorial disorders such different norms and values that it is important for pol- in which the modulation of a protein represents a promising icymakersandexpertstoappreciatethemtobeabletoinform therapeutic option. citizens and engage with them on genomics. Innovative E. Giorgio: None. E. Pesce: None. E. Pozzi: None. E. Partnership for Action Against Cancer funded this study. Sondo: None. M. Lorenzati: None. M. Ferrero: None. G. C. Mayeur: None. W. Van Hoof: None. Borrelli: None. E. Della Sala: None. A. Buffo: None. N. Pedemonte: None. A. Brusco: None. C17 New Therapeutic Approaches C17.2 C17.1 Low-dose infigratinib, an oral selective fibroblast An innovative dual-reporter cell line to identify protein growthfactorreceptor(FGFR)tyrosinekinaseinhibitor level modulators in drug-repositioning for rare genetic (TKI), demonstrates activity in preclinical models of diseases: a proof-of-principle in Autosomal Dominant achondroplasia (ACH) LeukoDystrophy (ADLD) B. Demuynck1*, J. Flipo1, G. Li2, C. Dambkowski2, L. E. Giorgio1*, E. Pesce2, E. Pozzi1, E. Sondo2, M. Legeai-Mallet1 Lorenzati3, M. Ferrero1, G. Borrelli1, E. Della Sala1, A. Buffo3, N. Pedemonte2, A. Brusco1,4 1Université de Paris, Institut Imagine, Laboratory of MolecularandPhysiopathologicalBasesofOsteochondro- 1University of Torino-Dep Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, dysplasia, INSERM, Paris, France, 2QED Therapeutics 2IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini-UOC Genetica Medica, Inc., San Francisco, CA, United States Genova, Italy, 3University of Torino-Dep. Neuroscience Rita Levi Montalcini and Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Background: FGFR3 gain-of-function mutations play a Ottolenghi,Torino,Italy,4CittàdellaSaluteedellaScienza crucial role in ACH, thanatophoric dysplasia (TD), and University Hospital-Medical Genetics Unit, Torino, Italy hypochondroplasia. Therapies blocking the MAP kinase (MAPK)pathway,suchasC-typenatriureticpeptide(CNP) Rare genetic diseasesaffecta small numberof patients each, analogues, are in development; however, FGFR3 can also and thus are of limited interest to the biopharmaceutical promote chondrocyte proliferation via alternate pathways industry. Since the vast majority still have no treatment (e.g. STAT1). We tested the hypothesis that the FGFR1-3 options,acost-effectivestrategyistherepurposingofexisting selectiveoralTKIinfigratinib(BGJ398)ismoreefficacious drugs as therapies for new disorders. The success of drug- than a CNP analog due to inhibition of both MAPK and repositioning approaches is strongly related to the optimiza- STAT1 in preclinical models of ACH carrying FGFR3 tion of an appropriate reporter cell line suitable for high gain-of-function mutations. throughputscreening(HTS).Here,wereportthedevelopment Methods:HumanTDchondrocyteswereincubatedwith/ andoptimizationofastablecelllineconstitutivelyexpressing withoutinfigratiniborvosoritide,andtotal/phospho-ERK1/ (Fgfr3Y367C/+ an innovative dual-reporter IRES-containing bicistronic vec- 2 levels were measured. A mouse model ) tor allowing the rapid and efficient identification of mod- mimicking ACH received subcutaneous injections of ulators acting at protein level. Drugs restoring physiological infigratinib or vehicle control daily (0.2, 0.5 mg/kg/day) protein levels represent a promising therapeutic strategy for or every 3 days (1 mg/kg) for 15 days. genetic disorders associated with genomic deletions/duplica- Results: In vitro, 10−10M infigratinib led to significant tions. An instructive example is Autosomal Dominant Leu- inhibition of ERK1/2 phosphorylation (p<0.05) in TD koDystrophy (ADLD), a rare disease caused by LMNB1 chondrocytes, while vosoritide treatment had significant >10−5M. accumulation due to gene duplication or to a regulatory activity only at concentrations In vivo, alteration. We have screened by HTS ~ 400 FDA-approved significant improvement was observed in upper limbs drugs and we have identified a positivehit. This drug (name (humerus+7%,ulna+11%),lowerlimbs(femur +11%, reserved) has been validated in 5 different cell lines con- tibia +16%), foramen magnum length and organization firmingitsabilitytospecificallyreduceLMNB1levels(30%- ofgrowthplatestructureinmicetreatedwithinfigratinib 80%ofreduction).Finally,thetreatmentofADLDfibroblasts (daily and intermittent injections). Infigratinib activity showed a decrease of about 50% of cytoplasmic LMNB1, was dose dependent with no apparent toxicities. supportingthetherapeutic valueofourmolecule.Our results Conclusions: Infigratinib has superior activity over pavethewaytowardsaclinicaltrialforADLDfollowingthe vosoritide in vitro, suggesting that inhibition of multipleAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 89 pathways downstream of FGFR3 may lead to better percentage greater than 44% and undesired in/dels lower efficacy. Results in vivo indicate that clinically relevant than 12%. Here we show that, moving to a preclinical doses of infigratinib significantly promote growth. Pre- approach, it is possible to correct the causative COL4A5- clinical data support development of infigratinib in ACH, Ex9-10bp-deletioninanaturallyoccurringdogmodel,using with a clinical study launching this year. a macro-500bp-DNA-Donor. The target region, in 80% of B. Demuynck: None. J. Flipo: None. G. Li: A. Employ- all treated cells, was corrected without in/dels in the neigh- ment(fullorpart-time);Significant;QEDTherapeuticsInc. boringsites.Asilentmutation,insertedasatagonthePAM, E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other was used to monitor the correction and to protect the DNA intellectual property); Significant; QED Therapeutics Inc. from a new spCas9 cut. Based on AAV2/GFP biodistribu- C. Dambkowski: A. Employment (full or part-time); tion, in-vivo infection with (AAV)2-CRISPR/Cas9 will be Significant; QED Therapeutics Inc. E. Ownership Interest performed at 2-3 months of age using single carotid artery (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); catheterization to target both renal arteries. This patented Significant; BridgeBio Pharma, Novonate, Origin Bios- approach, providing the proof-of-principle for a revolu- ciences. L. Legeai-Mallet: None. tionary AS gene therapy, can open up the possibility to novel clinical trials, based on personalized strategy. C17.3 Italian patent application n102018000020230 CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing approach completely S. Daga: None. K. Capitani: None. F. Donati: None. G. repaired the causative COL4A5 10bp deletion in a Beligni: None. S. Croci: None. F. Valentino: None. C. naturally occurring dog model of Alport Syndrome. Fallerini: None. R. Tita: None. C. Rivera: None. S. Clark: None. M. Mencarelli: None. M. Baldassarri: None. E. S.Daga1*,K.Capitani2,3,F.Donati2,G.Beligni1,S.Croci1, Benetti: None. S. Furini: None. E. Frullanti: None. M. F. Valentino1, C. Fallerini1, R. Tita4, C. Rivera5, S. Clark5, Nabity:None.A.Auricchio:None.S.Conticello:None.A. M. Mencarelli4, M. Baldassarri4, E. Benetti1, S. Furini3, E. Renieri: None. A. Pinto: None. Frullanti1, M. Nabity5, A. Auricchio6,7, S. Conticello2, A. Renieri1,4, A. Pinto4 C17.4 Single-intrathecal delivery of a new AAV9-mediated 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Core gene therapy vector provides long-term safe expression Research Laboratory - ISPRO, Florence, Italy, 3Depart- of frataxin and prevents neurological and cardiac ment of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, deficits, neurodegeneration and iron deposition in a Siena, Italy, 4Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Friedreich’s Ataxia mouse model Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 5Department of Veter- inary Pathobiology, Texas A&M University College of E.Balagué1*,D.Cota-González1,K.Adrián-Campbell1,B. Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, College García-Lareu2, A. Bosch2, J. Coll-Cantí3, M. Chillón4, I. Station, TX, United States, 6Telethon Institute of Genetics Sánchez1,5, A. Matilla-Dueñas1,5 and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy, 7Department of Advanced Biomedicine, Federico II University, Naples, 1TranslationalandFunctionalNeurogeneticsUnit,Depart- Italy ment of Neuroscience, Germans Trias Research Institute (IGTP), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona-Campus Can AlportSyndrome(AS)isageneticdisordercharacterizedby Ruti, Badalona, Spain, 2Institut de Neurociències (INc), clinicopathologic alterations ranging from GBM abnormal- Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, ities up to ESRD. Extensively reported mutations in the Universitat Autònoma Barcelona 5th level, Edifici H, COL4A3/A4/A5 genes are causative of both the autosomal Institut Neurociencies, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, Spain, and the X-linked forms. Although great pharmacological 3Unitat de Neuromuscular, Hospital Universitari Germans advanceshavebeenachievedinthepastyears,unfortunately Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, 4Institució Catalana de no definitive therapy is currently available. Podocytes, RecercaiEstudisAvançats(ICREA),Valld’HebronInstitut terminally differentiated cells, produce a unique collagen in de Recerca, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Vector theGBM. Wehavepreviously demonstratedthatpodocyte- Production Unit (UPV) and Universitat Autònoma Barce- lineagecellscanbeisolatedfromASpatients’urine,andwe lona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Functional Biology and Experi- have proven the efficiency of a bi-plasmid (AAV)2- mental Therapeutics lab, Translational and Functional CRISPR/Cas9 approach to restore the wild-type genotype NeurogeneticsUnit,DepartmentofNeuroscience,Germans in-vitro.Twomutations,namelytheCOL4A5p.G624Dand Trias Research Institute (IGTP), Universitat Autònoma de theCOL4A3 p.G526E, mimicking XLASandADASforms Barcelona-Campus Can Ruti, Badalona, Spain respectively, were effectively corrected with an HDR90 J.delPicchia Introduction: Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) is a recessively JohannesGutenbergUniversity,Mainz,Germany,3Institute inherited neurodegenerative disease caused by frataxin of Neurophysiology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Ger- (FXN) deficiency. FRDA is characterised by progressive many, Frankfurt, Germany, 4University Medical Center of ataxia, sensory loss and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany, NeurodegenerationisidentifiedinDRGneurons,peripheral Mainz, Germany, 5LabEx ICST, Institut de Pharmacologie sensorynerves,theposteriorcolumn,andcerebellardentate Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS and Université de Nice- nucleus. To date, proof-of-concept approaches have high- Sophia Antipolis, Valbonne, France, 6University Medical lighted the therapeutic potential of AAV-gene therapy in Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, FRDA. However, these studies have used synthetic pro- Germany, 7Department of Internal Medicine I, University moters initially providing very high-yields of FXN levels Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, andknowntoshutdownovertime.Recentdatapointtothe Mainz,Germany,8SenckenbergCenterofHumanGenetics, importanceofmaintainingfrataxinlevelswithinarangedue Frankfurt, Germany, 9Orphan Diseases of the Central to potential toxicity. NervousSystem,UniversityMedicalCenteroftheJohannes Methods: We generated a new AAV9-gene therapy Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany vector encoding a DNA sequence for frataxin regulated by the hPGK1 promoter, which provides constitutive, ubiqui- Epigenetic modulators provide a powerful tool for disease tous, and long-term expression of frataxin in YG8R treatment through alteration of the epigenomic regulative FRDA mice. system.Inourstudy,wefocusedontheeffectofepigenetic Results: Here we show that a single intrathecal admin- modulators on the maternally imprinted Kcnk9 gene. istrationofthisvectorinto2-month-oldFRDAmiceresults Mutations in the Kcnk9 gene were shown to affect the in effective transduction of the recombinant frataxin gene modulation of the membrane potential and excitability of into DRG, spinal cord, cerebellar dentate, heart, and liver, neurons,causingBirk-Barelintellectualdisabilitysyndrome resulting in expression of recombinant frataxin protein at (BBIDS). Using the BBIDS mouse model, we here present levelswithinthoseinWTmice,foratleast12monthswith evidence for a small yet evident non-canonical expression no apparent vector-induced toxicity. AAV9-FXN treated of the parental Kcnk9 allele in Kcnk9KOmat animals, which FRDA mice show preservation of motor coordination, the was sufficient to provide an intermediate phenotype in electrophysiological properties in sensory caudal nerve, the nocturnallocomotoractivitycomparedtoKcnk9KOhom.We clasping reflex, the neuronal structural preservation of the further identified the locus coeruleus (LC), a region DRG, spinal cord and dentate nucleus, along with involved in regulation of arousal and nocturnal activity in cardiomyopathy correction, reduction of iron deposits and mice, as the main target region altered in Kcnk9KOmat preservation of mitochondrial electron transport chain. animals. Following screening of numerous epigenetic Conclusion: These data provide support for the clinical modulators,weshowthatCI-994,aclassIHDACinhibitor, therapeutic potential of this gene therapy vector for the could increase paternal Kcnk9 expression up to three-fold treatment of Friedreich’s ataxia. and fully rescue the behavioral phenotype in Kcnk9KOmat E. Balagué: None. D. Cota-González: None. K. Adrián- animals.WeutilizedChIP-qPCRtofurtherdemonstratethat Campbell: None. B. García-Lareu: None. A. Bosch: None. CI-994affectshistone3lysine27acetylation(H3K27ac)at J. Coll-Cantí: None. M. Chillón: None. I. Sánchez: None. the promoter and intronic region of Kcnk9 in the LC tissue A. Matilla-Dueñas: None. samples thereby promoting open accessible chromatin and increasing expression of Kcnk9. Interestingly, using allele- C17.5 specific ChIP, we show that the effects on the inactive HDAC inhibitor CI-994 rescues phenotype in a mouse paternalalleleweresignificantlyhigherthatonthematernal model of Birk-Barel intellectual disability syndrome allele. Taken all together, our findings provide further characterizationoftheroleofKcnk9inBBIDSpathologyas A. Cooper1, T. Butto2*, N. Hammer3, S. Jagannath3, D. well as exciting evidence for a promising therapeutic effect Lucia Fend-Guella1, J. Akhtar2, K. Radyushkin4, F. of CI-994 in mouse model for BBIDS. Lesage5, J. Winter1,6, S. Strand7, J. Roeper3, U. Zechner1,8, A. Cooper: None. T. Butto: None. N. Hammer: None. S. S. Schweiger1,9 Jagannath: None. D. Lucia Fend-Guella: None. J. Akhtar: None. K. Radyushkin: None. F. Lesage: None. J. Winter: 1InstituteofHuman Genetics,UniversityMedicalCenterof None.S.Strand:None.J.Roeper:None.U.Zechner:None. the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany, S. Schweiger: None. 2Institute for Developmental Biology and Neurobiology,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 91 C18 Cancer Genetics II: Clinical Cancer Research S. Raad: None. M. Rolain: None. S. Coutant: None. C. Derambure: None. R. Lanos: None. F. Charbonnier: None. C18.1 J. Bou: None. E. Bouvignies: None. G. Lienard: None. S. Development of a rapid functional assay on peripheral Vasseur:None.M.Farrel:None.O.Ingster:None.S.Baert- blood for clinical interpretation of germline TP53 var- Desurmont:None.E.Kasper:None.G.Bougeard:None.T. iants and detection of non-coding functional variants Frébourg: None. I. Tournier: None. S. Raad1, M. Rolain1, S. Coutant1, C. Derambure1, R. C18.2 Lanos1, F. Charbonnier1, J. Bou1, E. Bouvignies1, G. Are pathogenic germline variants in metastatic mela- Lienard1, S. Vasseur1, M. Farrel2, O. Ingster3, S. Baert- noma associated with unfavorable survival? Desurmont1, E. Kasper1, G. Bougeard1, T. Frébourg1, I. Tournier1* S. Biskup1*, T. Amaral2, T. Sinnberg2, M. Nieser1, P. Martus2,C.Garbe2,F.Battke1,A.Forschner2,M.Schulze1 1Inserm U1245, UNIROUEN, Normandie Univ, and Genetics Department, Rouen University Hospital, Nor- 1CeGaT, Tuebingen, Germany, 2University clinic, Tuebin- mandy Centre for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, gen, Germany Rouen, France, 2Mater Private Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 3Angers University Hospital, Department of Genetics, Immunotherapy has revolutionized the treatment landscape Angers, France of patients with advanced melanoma. Despite the survival improvementstherearestillpatientsthatdonotbenefitfrom Interpretation of germline TP53 variants remains complex immunotherapy. For those patients early biomarkers that and is critical for an appropriate medical management of indicate potential resistance are highly relevant and other patients. We developed a functional assay directly per- therapeutic alternatives should be considered. We compre- formedonbloodfortherapidinterpretation,withinaweek, hensively analyzed tumor and blood samples from 116 ofunclassifiedTP53variants.Inthisassay,peripheralblood patients with advanced melanoma and scheduled for sys- mononuclearcellsarecultured andactivatedfor48hhours, temic therapy between January and June 2018. Descriptive exposed to doxorubicin and the p53-mediated transcrip- andsurvivalanalysiswereperformedforallpatientsandfor tional response is quantified using RT-MLPA and RT- those receiving combined immunotherapy (n=59). We QMPSF, including 10 p53 targets and 2 amplicons to focused on tumor mutational burden, genome instability, measure p53 mRNA levels. Functional assay and TP53 major driver and tumor suppressor genes. Interestingly, a molecular screening were performed in 71 individuals, in total of 20 germline variants were identified in our cohort. parallel and blind conditions. In 51 wild-type TP53 indi- Nine patients with germline variants received combined viduals,themeanp53functionalityscorewas12.7.Among immunotherapy. The 1-year melanoma specific survival 8 individuals harboring likely pathogenic or pathogenic (mMSS)forthesub-groupwithagermlinevariantwas52.9 variants, the scores were reduced (mean 4.8) and p53 percent versus 71.9 percent for the sub-group without mRNAlevelswerereducedinpatientsharboringtruncating germline variant. For patients receiving combined immu- variants allowing to identify them unambiguously. The notherapy with ipilimumab and nivolumab, the 1y-MSS assayappliedto11rareunclassifiedvariants[p.(Pro72His), was 33.3 percent and 67.2 percent respectively for patients p.(Gly105Asp), p.(Arg110His), p.(Phe134Leu), p. with and without a germline variant (p=0.019; 95 percent (Arg158Cys), p.(Pro191Arg), p.(Pro278Arg), p.(Arg283- CI: 2.5-64.1 and 54.1-80.3). The median progression-free Cys), p.(Asp352Tyr), p.(Asn131del), c.-117G>T] led us to survivalwas2.0monthsforpatientswithagermlinevariant consider them, except the p.(Pro72His), p.(Pro191Arg) and and 4.0 months for those without a germline variant c.-117G>T variants, as pathogenic. Remarkably, the assay (p=0.021; 95 percent CI: 1.5-2.5 and 0.6-7.4). Conclusion: also revealed that the c.*1175A>C polymorphic TP53 For the first time, we show in patients with advanced variant located within the polyadenylation signal impacts, melanoma that the presence of germline variants might be when present on both alleles, p53 functionality with the associated with worse prognosis and failure in response to samemagnitudeasagermlinepathogenicTP53variantand combinedimmunotherapy.Othertherapeuticoptionsshould couldactasamodifierfactorinpathogenicvariantcarriers. be considered early as alternative or in combination with This assay should therefore be a useful tool for the rapid immunotherapy. interpretation of germline TP53 variants of unknown sig- S. Biskup: None. T. Amaral: None. T. Sinnberg: None. nificance and the indirect detection of cryptic alterations M. Nieser: None. P. Martus: None. C. Garbe: None. F. withinregulatoryregionsimpacting p53function.SR,MR: Battke: None. A. Forschner: None. M. Schulze: None. equal contribution92 J.delPicchia C18.3 Roche, GlaxoSmithKline, Lilly, Merck, Novartis, Peloton, Germline, somatic and clinical associations with Pfizer, Prometheus Labs,Corvus, Calithera,Analysis Group, response toImmune Checkpoint Inhibitors and adverse Sanofi/Aventis, Takeda. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria events in a large patient cohort (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; AstraZeneca,Alexion,Sanofi/Aventis, Bayer, Bristol Meyer- S. Groha1*, S. Abou Alaiwi1, K. Taraszka2, E. Lepisto1, M. Squibb/ER Squibb and sons LLC, Cerulean, Eisai, Founda- Manos1, O. Rahma1, T. Choueiri1, M. L. Freedman1, D. tion Medicine Inc., Exelixis, Genentech, Roche, Roche Schrag1, K. Kehl1, A. Gusev1 ProductsLimited,F.Hoffmann-LaRoche,GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Novartis, Peloton, Pfizer, EMD Serono, Prometheus 1DanaFarberCancerInstitute,Boston,MA,United States, Labs, Corvus, Ipsen, Up-to-Date, NCCN, Analysis Group, 2UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States Michael J. Hennessy (MJH) Associates, Inc (Healthcare Communications Company with several brands such as Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors (ICIs) have led to an OnClive, PeerView and PER), Research to Practice, L-path, unprecedented improvement in durable responses in cancer Kidney Cancer Journal, Clinical Care Options, Platform Q, therapybutonlyafractionofpatientsderivelastingbenefit, Navinata Healthcare, Harborside Press, American Society of with many patients developing auto-immune disease-like Medical Oncology, NEJM, Lancet Oncology, Heron Ther- adverse events (irAE), motivating research into ICI apeutics,LillyOncology.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock response mechanisms and biomarkers. options,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest;Pionyr, Using a large cohort of ICI patients at DFCI in a clinical Tempest. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; AstraZe- setting (N=1800 pan-cancer), we probe the influence of neca, Alexion, Sanofi/Aventis, Bayer, Bristol Myers-Squibb/ genetic and clinical factors on overall survival (OS) and ER Squibb and sons LLC, Cerulean, Eisai, Foundation irAEincidence.Weimputecommongermlinefeaturesfrom Medicine Inc., Exelixis, Genentech, Heron Therapeutics, panel sequenced tumors and investigate clinical, somatic Lilly, Roche, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, Novartis, Peloton, andgermlineinfluencesonOSandirAEsusingmultivariate Pfizer,EMDSerono,PrometheusLabs,Corvus,Ipsen,Up-to- and multistage survival analysis. date, NCCN, Analysis Group, Pionyr, Tempest, Lilly WefindsignificantassociationsbetweenOSandcommon Ventures.M.L.Freedman:None.D.Schrag:None.K.Kehl: germlineHLAalleles(q<0.1),validatingoneassociationin None. A. Gusev: None. an external cohort. We furthermore find somatic copy number alterations (CNAs) (q<0.1), with alterations of C18.4 AKT3, RSPO2 and MYC validating in at least two Rare germline variants in the tumor suppressor gene independent cohorts. Moreover, we find general lab tests CDH1 are associated with familial glioma takenattreatmentinitiationareassociatedwithOS,specific to patients on ICIs. We show that an integrated prognostic A. Förster1*, F. Brand1, R. Banan2, R. Hüneburg3,4, C. A. model using somatic, germline and clinical data from EHR M. Weber1, N. Elyan1, C. Previti5, J. Kronenberg6,7, U. records significantly outperforms the baseline model of Beyer1, H. Martens1, B. Hong8, J. K. Krauss8, J. H. demographics and tumor mutational burden (a known Bräsen9,A.Zimpfer10,M.Stangel6,7,A.Samii11,S.Wolf5,S. putative biomarker), increasing concordance from 0.63 to Aretz3,12, B. Wiese8,13, C. Hartmann2, R. G. Weber1 0.70. We furthermore find significant predictors of future irAEsfrompreviousauto-immunediseasediagnosis(p<1e- 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical 5), individual cancer driver mutations, and common HLA School, Hannover, Germany, 2Division of Neuropathology, alleles (q<0.01). Department of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Our study identifies novel mechanisms influencing OS Hannover, Germany, 3National Center for Hereditary and irAEs in patients on ICIs and shows the benefit of Tumor Syndromes, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, prognostic models utilizing clinical patient history. Germany, 4Department of Internal Medicine I, University NCI R01CA227237, Claudia Adams Barr Foundation HospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany,5GenomicsandProteomics S.Groha:None.S.AbouAlaiwi:None.K.Taraszka:None. Core Facility, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), E. Lepisto: None. M. Manos: None. O. Rahma: None. T. Heidelberg, Germany, 6Clinical Neuroimmunology and Choueiri: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- Neurochemistry, Department of Neurology, Hannover borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 7Center for Systems already received); Modest; AstraZeneca, Alexion, Bayer, Neuroscience,UniversityofVeterinaryMedicineHannover, Bristol Myers-Squibb/ER Squibb and sons LLC, Cerulean, Hannover, Germany, 8Department ofNeurosurgery, Hann- Eisai, Foundation Medicine Inc., Exelixis, Ipsen, Tracon, over Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 9Department of Genentech,Roche,RocheProductsLimited,F.Hoffmann-La Pathology,HannoverMedicalSchool,Hannover,Germany,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 93 10Institute of Pathology, University of Rostock, Rostock, AstraZeneca, Melbourn, Royston, Hertfordshire, United Germany, 11Department of Neurosurgery, International Kingdom Neuroscience Institute, Hannover, Germany, 12Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Ger- Germline mutations in DNA Damage Response (DDR) many, 13Department of Neurology, Henriettenstift, Diako- genes such as BRCA2 and ATM have been associated with vere Krankenhaus gGmbH, Hannover, Germany prostate cancer risk and agressiveness. These associations are largely based on studies that ascertain for cancer diag- The genetic basis of familial gliomas, representing about nosis and family history and provide risk estimates with 5% of all gliomas, is poorly understood. In search of rare limited population-level accuracy. Here we evaluate the germline alterations predisposing to glioma, we applied clinical significance of germline pathogenic variants in 20 whole-genome, whole-exome and targeted sequencing to DDR genes and four known susceptibility coding variants germline-DNA of21gliomapatients from 15familieswith in POUF51B, HOXB13 and KLK3 using whole exome at least two glioma cases each. Thereby, we identified two sequencesfrom(1)theUKBiobank(UKBB),apopulation- families with rare variants in the tumor suppressor gene based cohort (200,000 participants) and (2) patients CDH1 encoding E-cadherin that co-segregate with the recruited in AZ clinical trials. Whole exomes from 4,975 tumor phenotype, a significant overrepresentation of rare prostate cancer patients (3,954 UKBB and 1,021 AZ) and CDH1 variants in glioma families versus controls. In a 59,438 cancer-free males were analysed. Known and novel separate cohort of 45 individuals from 25 gastric cancer pathogenic variants were identified and population risk of families carrying CDH1 germline mutations, brain tumors disease, metastasis and overall survival (UKBB only) were were observed in two cases, a significantly higher pre- estimated (multiplicity corrected P value <0.005). ATM valencethaninthegeneralpopulation.AsmostrareCDH1 (1.15%),BRCA2(1.11%)andHOXB13G48E(1.29%)were variantcarriers inthe two gliomafamilies were affected by the largest contributors to prostate cancer risk, each con- oligodendroglioma, we performed mutational analysis in a ferring an increase of ~4-fold; followed by CHEK2 with a separate cohort of 101 oligodendroglioma-DNAs identify- moderate contribution (0.4%). BRCA2 carriers were more ing rare CDH1 alterations in about 6% of tumors. CDH1 likely to metastasise (OR 3.32, 95% CI 1.74-6.45, expression was detected in oligodendroglial precursor cells p=9.94E-05) and had poorer overall survival (Log-Rank and differentiated oligodendrocytes isolated from rat brain. p=1.33E-08), with 85% dying from prostate cancer com- Functional studies of CDH1 germline variants using pared to 53% of non-BRCA2 carriers. This is the largest CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knock-in or stably transfected cell study to date providing population-based estimates of modelsdemonstratedtheirpathogenicitywithrespecttocell prostatecancerrisk,metastasisansurvival.Analyseswillbe surface expression, cell migration and aggregation com- updatedwithdatafromthefull500,000UKBBparticipants pared to control cells. One CDH1 variant showed reduced (11,000 prostate cancers). binding to beta-catenin and increased nuclear levels of N. Camacho Ordonez: A. Employment (full or part- active beta-catenin that were diminished by treatment with time); Significant; AstraZeneca. L. Dong: A. Employment the MAPK interacting serine/threonine kinase 1 inhibitor (full or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. A. Mataki- CGP57380. Our data provide evidence for a role of rare dou: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; CDH1 variants in the risk and tumorigenesis of gliomas, AstraZeneca. particularly of oligodendrogliomas (supported by Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung grant 2018.097.1). C18.6 A. Förster: None. F. Brand: None. R. Banan: None. R. Clinicalandmolecularcharacterizationof1253carriers Hüneburg: None. C. A. M. Weber: None. N. Elyan: None. of a deleterious CHEK2 mutation from the German C.Previti:None.J.Kronenberg:None.U.Beyer:None.H. Consortium for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Martens: None. B. Hong: None. J. K. Krauss: None. J. H. (GC-HBOC) Bräsen: None. A. Zimpfer: None. M. Stangel: None. A. Samii: None. S. Wolf: None. S. Aretz: None. B. Wiese: W. Habhab1*, U. Faust1, G. Günther1, U. Siebers-Renelt2, None. C. Hartmann: None. R. G. Weber: None. M. Kiechle3, C. Ott4, N. Dikow5, K. Kast6, A. Vesper7, C. Solbach8, N. Harbeck9, M. Stiller10, A. Gehrig11, C. C18.5 Thomssen12,H.Wallaschek13,N.Arnold14,I.Holzhauser15, Prostate cancer risk and prognosis for carriers of S. Kaulfuß16, A. Volk17, W. Janni18, C. Engel19, R. germlinepathogenicvariantsindiseaseimplicatedgenes Schmutzler20, O. Rieß1, C. Schroeder1, K. Bosse1 N. Camacho Ordonez*, L. Dong, A. Matakidou 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Institute94 J.delPicchia of Human Genetics, University of Muenster, Muenster, breast- and/or ovarian cancer. Approximately 13% of the Germany,3DepartmentofGynecology,UniversityHospital, females with breast cancer reported a contralateral cancer. Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 4Insti- Ovarian cancer was diagnosed in 35 carriers (2.98%; 13 of tute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité them <50yrs). About 6.5% of the males developed breast UniversitymedicineofBerlin,Berlin,Germany,5Instituteof cancer. Sixteen mutation carriers developed skin and 14 Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidel- thyroid cancer, respectively. The most common observed berg,Germany,6DepartmentofGynecologyandObstetrics, variant was c.1100delC followed by Del Ex9-10. Medical Faculty and University Hospital Carl Gustav Conclusion:CHEK2-mutationsareasubstantialcauseof Carus,TechnischeUniversityDresden,Dresden,Germany, hereditary female breast cancer in the German population. 7Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Medical Female carriers face a relevant risk of developing Faculty and University Hospital Duesseldorf, Heinrich- contralateral cancer. CHEK2 mutation carriers present with Heine University Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany, a broad spectrum of additional cancers. Besides ovarian 8Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University cancer, thyroid and skin cancer are the most frequent Hospital, Frakfurt, Germany, 9Department of Obstetrics entities. A causal association with an increased risk of & Gynecology, University of Munich (LMU), Munich, ovariancancerandmalebreastcancerremainstobeproven Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics, University of in larger study cohorts and matched to healthy controls. LeipzigHospitalsandClinics,Leipzig,Germany,11Institute W.Habhab:None.U.Faust:None.G.Günther:None.U. of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Siebers-Renelt: None. M. Kiechle: None. C. Ott: None. N. Germany, 12Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Dikow:None.K.Kast:None.A.Vesper:None.C.Solbach: Medical Faculty and University Hospital Halle, Halle, None. N. Harbeck: None. M. Stiller: None. A. Gehrig: Germany, 13Institute of Human Genetics, University None. C. Thomssen: None. H. Wallaschek: None. N. Hospital of Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 14Department Arnold: None. I. Holzhauser: None. S. Kaulfuß: None. A. of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Schles- Volk: None. W. Janni: None. C. Engel: None. R. wig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Christian Albrechts University Schmutzler: None. O. Rieß: None. C. Schroeder: None. Kiel Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, University K. Bosse: None. Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Christian- Albrechts Universi, Kiel, Germany, 15Institute of Human C19 Multiple Malformation Syndromes II Genetics,UniversityofRegensburg,Regensburg,Germany, 16Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center C19.1 Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany, 17Institute of Human One test for all: whole genome sequencing in 62 trios Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, with congenital limb malformation identifies structural Hamburg, Germany, 18Department of Obstetrics and variants and new disease genes Gynecology,UniversityClinicUlm,Ulm,Germany,19Insti- tute of Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, J.Elsner1,M.A.Mensah1,M.Holtgrewe2,W.Hülsemann3, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 20Center of S. Mundlos4,1, M. Spielmann4,1* Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, Introduction: Published relative risk estimates for breast 2Core Unit Bioinformatics, Berlin Institute of Health, cancer for CHEK2 mutation carriers vary between 1.5 and Berlin, Germany, 3Handchirurgie, Katholisches Kinderk- 3. The risk for contralateral breast cancer is elevated. An rankenhausWilhelmstift,Hamburg,Germany,4MaxPlanck association with ovarian cancer is still under debate. Here Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany wepresenttheclinicalandmolecularcharacteristicsof1253 female and male CHEK2 mutation carriers recruited by the Introduction: The extensive clinical and genetic hetero- German Consortium for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian geneity of congenital limb malformation requires compre- Cancer (GC-HBOC). hensive analysis of genome-wide genetic variation. Whole Materials and Methods: Deleterious mutations in genome sequencing (WGS) has the potential to identify BRCA1 and BRCA2 had been excluded in the study group. bothcodingandnon-codingaswellasstructuralvariantsin The information was gained from the central registry asingletest.Thus,WGSmayincreasethediagnosticratein database of the Consortium. cases of congenital limb malformation. Results: A total of 1253 patients were tested positive for Methods: We collected a cohort of 62 trios featuring a pathogenic germline CHEK2 variant (1176 females, 77 congenital limb malformations that were mutation negative males).Morethan60%ofthefemalecarriershaddeveloped after standard clinical genetic testing. The cohort wasAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 95 subjected to whole genome sequencing (Ilumina, 30x underlying a Meckel-Gruber-like phenotype in two sibling coverage, paired-end, 150bp). Data were analyzed for both foetuses. coding and non-coding single nucleotide variants and Methods: we used a trio-based whole exome sequencing structuralvariantsusingtheSODARandVarFishpipelines. (WES) strategy to identify candidate variants in Results: Overall we identified coding pathogenic single TOGARAM1. In silico, in vitro and in vivo (C. elegans) nucleotidevariantsin9cases(14%).Wefoundmutationsin studies were carried out to explore the impact of mutations 7 known disease genes including one repeat expansion in on protein structure and function, and relevant biological HOXD13. In two unrelated cases of ectrodactyly we processes. identified likely pathogenic variants in UBA2 establishing Results: TOGARAM1 encodes a member of the Cres- it as a novel disease gene. In addition we found two cerin1 family of proteins regulating microtubule dynamics. pathogenic structural variants (3%) : one inversion Its orthologue in C. elegans, che-12, is expressed in the segregating with the phenotype and one de novo deletion. cilium of a subset of sensory neurons, where it is required Furthermore, we identified variants in 3 novel high for chemosensation. Nematode lines harbouring the mis- confidence candidate genes. We also describe and perform sense variant in TOGARAM1 were generated by CRISPR/ a framework to identify potential non-coding pathogenic Cas9 technology. Although chemotaxis ability on a NaCl variants. gradient and lipophilic dye-uptake were not impaired, che- Conclusions: Whole genome sequencing is a powerful 12 knock-in mutants displayed a shorter cilium in sensory strategy toidentify alltypes ofgenomicvariants associated neurons, and even shorter cilia in hemizygous worms, with congenital limb malformation. It also detects repeat which recapitulate the genotype observed in the affected expansions and copy number neutral inversions that are foetuses. Finally, in vitro analysis of microtubule polymer- missed by most other approaches. ization in the presence of the wild-type or mutant TOG2 J. Elsner: None. M. A. Mensah: None. M. Holtgrewe: domainrevealedafasterpolymerizationassociatedwiththe None. W. Hülsemann: None. S. Mundlos: None. M. mutant protein, indicating aberrant tubulin binding. Spielmann: None. Conclusions: Our data suggest a causative role of TOGARAM1 variants in the pathogenesis of this novel C19.2 disorder, connecting this gene with primary ciliopathy. Biallelic mutations in TOGARAM1 cause a novel V.Morbidoni:None.E.Agolini:None.K.C.Slept:None. primary ciliopathy L. Pannone: None. D. Zuccarello: None. E. Grosso: None. G. Gai: None. L. Salviati: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. A. V. Morbidoni1,2, E. Agolini3, K. C. Slept4, L. Pannone5, D. Novelli: None. S. Martinelli: None. E. Trevisson: None. Zuccarello1, E. Grosso6, G. Gai6, L. Salviati1,2, B. Dallapiccola7, A. Novelli3, S. Martinelli5, E. Trevisson1,2* C19.3 Biallelic loss-of-function variations in SMO, encoding 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Dept of Women’s and Children’s the key transducer of the Sonic Hedgehog pathway, Health, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Istituto di causeabroadphenotypicspectrumofhedgehogopathies Ricerca Pediatrica IRP, Padova, Italy, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetics, IRCCS-Bambino Gesù Children’s Hos- T. L. LE1,2*, Y. Sribudiani3,4, X. Dong5,6, C. Huber1, C. pital, Roma, Italy, 4Department of Biology, University of Kois7, G. Baujat1,8, C. T. Gordon1, V. Mayne5, L. North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 5Depart- Galmiche8, V. Serre9,2, N. Goudin2, M. Zarhrate1, C. Bole- ment of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Super- Feysot2, C. Masson2, P. Nitschké2, F. W. Verheijen3, L. iore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Città Pais10, A. Pelet1, S. Sadedin5, J. A. Pugh7,N. Shur11,S. M. della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital, Torino, White5, S. E. Chehadeh12, J. Christodoulou5,6, V. Cormier- Italy, 7Scientific Directorate, Bambino Gesù Children’s Daire1,8, R. M. W. Hofstra3, S. Lyonnet1,2,8, T. Y. Tan5,6, T. Hospital and Research Institute, Roma, Italy Attié-Bitach1,2,8, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse13, J. Amiel1,2,8, S. Thomas1 Background: Dysfunction in non-motile cilia is associated with a broad spectrum of developmental disorders char- 1Imagine Institute - INSERM U1163, Paris, France, 2Uni- acterized by clinical heterogeneity. Despite over one hun- versité de Paris, Paris, France, 3Erasmus Medical Center, dred genes have been associated with primary ciliopathies, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Universitas Padjadjaran, Ban- with wide phenotypic overlap, some patients still lack a dung, Indonesia, 5Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, molecular diagnosis. The aim of this work was to investi- Australia, 6University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, gate and functionally characterize the molecular cause 7Albany Medical Center, Albany, NY, United States, 8Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 9Institut96 J.delPicchia Jacques Monod - CNRS U7592, Paris, France, 10Broad Klee12,H.E.Shamseldin13,F.A.Mutairi14,E.Mayatepek6, Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 11Children’s T. M. Strom1, T. Meitinger1, F. S. Alkuraya13, Y. Anikster7, National, Washington, WA, United States, 12Hôpital de A. R. Saltiel3, F. Distelmaier6 Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 13University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands 1Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Institute for Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neu, The evolutionarily conserved Hedgehog (Hh) pathway is Germany, 3San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, essentialfororganogenesisandplayscriticalrolesinpostnatal United States, 4Sheba Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, tissue maintenance and renewal. A unique feature of verte- 5Department of Pediatrics, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, brate Hh pathway is that signal transduction requires the 6University Children´s Hospital, Düsseldorf, Germany, primary cilium (PC) where major pathway components are 7Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 8Atrium dynamically enriched. These factors include Smoothened Health Levine Children’s Hospital, Charlotte, NC, United (SMO)andPatched,thatconstitutethecorereceptionsystem States, 9Department of Pediatric Oncology, Düsseldorf, for Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) as well as GLI transcription Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics, Düsseldorf, factors, the key mediators of the pathway. Here, we report Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, biallelic loss-of-function variations in SMO in seven cases Germany, 12Department of Diagnostic and Interventional from five independent families causing a wide phenotypic Radiology, Düsseldorf, Germany, 13King Faisal Specialist spectrum of hedgehogopathies affecting development of the Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, brain (hypothalamic hamartoma, microcephaly), heart (atrio- 14King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia ventricular septal defect), skeleton (postaxial polydactyly, narrow chest, shortening of long bones) and the enteric ner- Introduction: Ral (Ras-like) GTPases play an important vous system (aganglionosis). Patient-derived cells showed role in the control of cell migration and have been impli- normal ciliogenesis but severely altered Hh signal transduc- cated in Ras-mediated tumorigenicity. Recently, variants in tionduetoeitheralteredPCtraffickingorabnormalactivation RALA were described as a cause of intellectual disability of the pathway downstream of SMO. In addition, Hh-inde- and developmental delay, indicating the relevance of this pendent GLI2 accumulation at the PC tip in patient cells pathway to neuropediatric diseases. suggestapotentialnovelfunctionofSMOinregulatingbasal Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing was per- ciliarytraffickingofGLI2whenthepathwayisoff.Thus,loss formed in four affected individuals. Immunoblotting, qRT- ofSMOfunctioninhumansresultsinabnormalPCdynamics PCR, immunofluorescence, flow cytometry and a drug ofkeycomponentsoftheHhsignalingpathwayandleadstoa screenpipelineusingcellviabilitywereusedtofunctionally large continuum of malformations in humans. characterize patient derived fibroblasts. T.L.Le:None.Y.Sribudiani:None.X.Dong:None.C. Results: Biallelic variants in RALGAPA1 were identified Huber: None. C. Kois: None. G. Baujat: None. C. T. in four unrelated individuals with profound neurodevelop- Gordon: None. V. Mayne: None. L. Galmiche: None. V. mental disability, muscular hypotonia, feeding abnormal- Serre: None. N. Goudin: None. M. Zarhrate: None. C. ities, recurrent fever episodes, and infantile spasms. Bole-Feysot: None. C. Masson: None. P. Nitschké: None. RalGAPA1 was absent in the fibroblasts derived from two F. W. Verheijen: None. L. Pais: None. A. Pelet: None. S. affected individuals and levels of RalGAPB, a scaffolding Sadedin: None. J. A. Pugh: None. N. Shur: None. S. M. subunit of the RalGAP complex, were reduced. RalA White: None. S. E. Chehadeh: None. J. Christodoulou: activity was increased in these cell lines, implying that None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. R. M. W. Hofstra: None. RalGAPA1 deficiency causes a dysfunctional RalGAP S.Lyonnet:None.T.Y.Tan:None.T.Attié-Bitach:None. complex and a constitutive activation of RalA. Addition- W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. J. Amiel: None. S. ally, RalGAPA1 deficiency increased cell-surface levels of Thomas: None. lipidraftcomponentsindetachedfibroblasts,indicatingthat anchorage-dependenceofcellgrowthsignalingisdisturbed. C19.4 Thedrugscreenassayshowedalteredsurvivalratesofcells Bi-allelic Variants in RALGAPA1 Cause Profound upon treatment with pathway specific compounds. Neurodevelopmental Disability, Muscular Hypotonia, Conclusions:Ourfindingsindicatethatthedysregulation Infantile Spasms, and Feeding Abnormalities of the RalA pathway has an important impact on neuronal function and brain development. In light of the partially M.Wagner1,2*,Y.Skorobogatko3,B.Pode-Shakked4,C.M. overlapping phenotype between RALA and RALGAPA1- Powell5,B.Alhaddad1,A.Seibt6,O.Barel7,G.Heimer7,C. associated diseases, it appears likely that dysregulation of Hoffmann4, L. A. Demmer8, Y. Perilla-Young5, M. Remke9, the RalA signaling pathway leads to a distinct group of D. Wieczorek10, T. Navaratnarajah6, P. Lichtner11, D.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 97 genetic syndromes that we suggest could be named ZNF462).Cell-based andanimal modelfunctional analyses RALopathies. are ongoing for other novel candidates. Conclusion: UDP- M. Wagner: None. Y. Skorobogatko: None. B. Pode- Vic has been highly effective in extending the diagnostic Shakked: None. C. M. Powell: None. B. Alhaddad: None. yield beyond that achieved by cES. Our multifaceted A. Seibt: None. O. Barel: None. G. Heimer: None. C. strategy has enabled us to query clinically-driven hypoth- Hoffmann: None. L. A. Demmer: None. Y. Perilla-Young: eses and identify cryptic diagnoses. We plan to incorporate None. M. Remke: None. D. Wieczorek: None. T. additional ‘-omics’ approaches to our pipeline. Navaratnarajah: None. P. Lichtner: None. D. Klee: None. T. Y. Tan: None. T. Cloney: None. N. B. Tan: None. L. H. E. Shamseldin: None. F. A. Mutairi: None. E. Gallacher: None. J. Elliott: None. G. Helman: None. C. Mayatepek:None.T.M.Strom:None.T.Meitinger:None. Simons: None. S. Sadedin: None. L. Pais: None. A. F. S. Alkuraya: None. Y. Anikster: None. A. R. Saltiel: O’Donnell-Luria: None. J. Christodoulou: None. S. M. None. F. Distelmaier: None. White: None. C19.5 C19.6 Functional genomics and extended analyses of unsolved Identification of DNA methylation episignatures for exome-negativecasesthroughtheUndiagnosedDiseases PRC2-related overgrowth syndromes Project in Victoria (UDP-Vic) M.A.Levy1,2*,E.Aref-Eshghi1,T.B.Balci1,2,3,J.Kerkhof1, T. Y. Tan1*, T. Cloney1, N. B. Tan1, L. Gallacher1, J. G. Merla4, C. Schwartz5, B. Sadikovic1,2 Elliott1, G. Helman2, C. Simons2, S. Sadedin1, L. Pais3, A. O’Donnell-Luria3, J. Christodoulou2, S. M. White1 1London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, 2Western University, London, ON, Canada, 3Lawson 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Mel- Health Research Institute, London, ON, Canada, 4IRCCS- bourne,Australia,2MurdochChildren’sResearchInstitute, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Parkville,Melbourne,Australia,3BroadCenterforMende- Italy,5GreenwoodGeneticCenter,Greenwood,CT,United lian Genomics, Cambridge, MA, United States States Clinical exome sequencing (cES) achieves a diagnostic Introduction: An expanding number of genetic syndromes yieldof40-50%inindividualswithasuspectedmonogenic have been shown to have unique genomic DNA methyla- disorder. Optimal strategies for solving cES-negative cases tion patterns (episignatures). EZH2 and EED are core are unclear. Aim: Develop a research program to identify components of thepolycombrepressive complex 2(PRC2) diagnoses in unsolved cES-negative individuals. Methods: chromatin remodeling complex which catalyzes methyla- We established the Undiagnosed Diseases Project in Vic- tionoflysine27onhistoneH3(H3K27).Mutationsinthese toria (UDP-Vic) in collaboration with the Broad Center for genes lead to the overgrowth/intellectual disability syn- MendelianGenomicstoundertakefamily-basedsequencing dromes Weaver syndrome (EZH2) or Cohen-Gibson andmultifacetedapproachesincludinggenomicre-analysis, syndrome (EED). copy number variant identification, RNA-sequencing and Materials and Methods: We used DNA methylation functional studies. Results: We recruited 288 cES-negative microarrays which interrogate 450,000-850,000 individual families to UDP-Vic for family-based exome (ES; 263) or CpGs,alongwithmachinelearningstatisticaltechniques,to genome sequencing (GS; 25). Probands are paediatric with identify EZH2- and EED-specific DNA methylation syndromic neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Analysis is signatures present in peripheral blood from affected complete in 133 families, of which 56 (42.1%) are con- individuals. sidered solved (comprising known, newly emerging, and Results:Usingthesesignatureswedifferentiatedbetween strongnovelcandidategenes).Family-basedES/GSwasthe individuals with EZH2 or EED mutations, controls, and most useful strategy in identifying candidate variants, and those with a wide range of other developmental disability/ adjunctive analyses such as RNA-sequencing (4/18 cases intellectual disability (DD/ID) syndromes. In addition, we analysed; 22.2%), high-resolution microarray (2/32 cases were able to distinguish between pathogenic and benign analysed; 6.3%); re-analysis of original data (2/12 cases mutations in either gene, demonstrating the usefulness of analysed; 16.7%) provided additional diagnoses. GS iden- these DNA methylation signatures for classifying variants tifiedonlyonecodingvariantthatwasmissedintheoriginal of uncertain significance. Weaver and Cohen-Gibson cES. We identified strong candidates in 20 novel disease syndromes exhibit overlapping clinical characteristics and genes, of which data-sharing and functional analyses led to their methylation signatures reflect this. publication of 6 (MSL3, THOC2, FIG4, HNRNPU, SYT1,98 J.delPicchia Conclusions: These results contribute to the growing ofGenomicMedicine, Children’sHospital ofPhiladelphia, catalogue of DNA methylation episignatures useful for the Philadelphia, PA, United States, 16Division of Pediatric clinical diagnosis of DD/ID and related syndromes. Neurology, The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, M. A. Levy: None. E. Aref-Eshghi: None. T. B. Balci: Perelman School of Medicine at the University of None. J. Kerkhof: None. G. Merla: None. C. Schwartz: Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 17William None. B. Sadikovic: None. Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 18Medical Genetics C20 Neurogenetics Laboratory, Alzahra University Hospital, Isfahan Univer- sityofMedicalSciences,Isfahan,Iran,IslamicRepublicof, C20.1 19Department of neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Isfahan An ancestral 10bp repeat expansion in gene encoding University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran, Islamic component of ECM causes a novel autosomal-recessive Republic of, 20Department of Pathology, University of peripheral neuropathy Gothenburg,SahlgrenskaUniversityHospital,Gothenburg, Sweden, 21School of Health Science, Division Biomedicine A. T. Pagnamenta1*, Y. Zou2, S. Donkervoort2, S. B. and Translational Medicine, University of Skovde, Skovde, Neuhaus2, R. Maroofian3, N. Dominik3, H. Y. Yip3, A. H. Sweden, 22Mitochondrial Medicine Frontier Program, Nemeth4,5, M. O’Driscoll6, F. Norwood7, J. Rankin8, T. Division of Human Genetics, Children’s Hospital of Lavin9, C. Marini-Bettolo10,11, H. Jungbluth12,13,14, L. Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 23Radboud Medne15,S.Y.Yum16,A.R.Foley2,A.Need17,M.Sedghi18, University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands B. Ansari19, K. Basiri19, A. R. Moslemi20, H. Tajsharghi21, C.C.Muraresku22,Z.Zolkipli-Cunningham22,S.Lassche23, The extracellular matrix (ECM) comprises a network of C. Marcelis23, Genomics England Research Consortium, J. macromolecules such as collagens, proteoglycans and gly- C. Taylor1, C. G. Bönnemann2, H. Houlden3 coproteins. VWA1 encodes a component of the ECM that interacts with perlecan/collagen VI, is essential in stabiliz- 1Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of ing ECM structures and demonstrates high expression Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Neuromuscular and levels in tibial nerve. Vwa1-deficient mice manifest with Neurogenetic Disorders of Childhood Section, NINDS, abnormal peripheral nerve structure and function, however NationalInstitutesofHealth,Bethesda,MD,United States, VWA1variantshavenotyetbeenassociatedwithdiseasein 3Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen humans. Interrogation of genome sequences of 74,180 Square Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, individuals from the 100K Genomes Project yielded 10 4Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University unrelated patients with rare biallelic variants in VWA1 of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Oxford Centre for (NM_022834.5). A single disease-associated allele Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS (c.62_71dup10; p.G25Rfs*74) was homozygous in 7 indi- Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Birmingham Women’s viduals and compound-heterozygous with other likely- NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, deleterious variants in another 3. Given an AF of ~1/1000, 7Department of Neurology, King’s College Hospital, observation of 7 homozygotes constitutes a substantial London, United Kingdom, 8Peninsula Clinical Genetics enrichment from expectation, consistent with the variant Service,RoyalDevonandExeterNHSTrust,Exeter,United playing a causative role in the patients’ disease. The wide Kingdom, 9Department of Neurology, Salford Royal NHS age-range of patients (6-70 years) helps us delineate the Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 10The clinical phenotype over time. Initial assessment suggests a John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, consistent clinical presentation with common features Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, New- including muscle weakness, motor delay, pes cavus and castle, United Kingdom, 11Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals SMA-like electrophysiology. Additional families with NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle, United Kingdom, biallelic variants in VWA1 have been identified through 12Department of Paediatric Neurology – Neuromuscular collaborativeeffortsandpartialnonsensemediateddecayof Service, Evelina Children’s Hospital, Guy’s & St Thomas’ mRNAwasobservedinfibroblasts.Ongoingworkincludes NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 13Ran- targeted-screening of a large cohort of unsolved CMT dall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics Muscle patients. We hypothesise that this disease gene has pre- SignallingSection,King’sCollegeLondon,London,United viously evaded detection using exome sequencing due to Kingdom, 14Department of Basic and Clinical Neu- high GC content, consequential low coverage and compu- roscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neu- tational difficulties associated with robustly detecting roscience, King’s College London, London, United repeat-expansions.Itisanticipatedthatreviewofpreviously Kingdom, 15Divisions of Neurology and Human GeneticsAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 99 unsolved exomes using lower QC filters may generate fur- progressive distal muscle weakness and musculoskeletal ther diagnoses. deformities (scoliosis, pes cavus, and hammertoes). Electro- A.T.Pagnamenta:None.Y.Zou:None.S.Donkervoort: physiological studies confirmed chronic neurogenic changes None. S. B. Neuhaus: None. R. Maroofian: None. N. with axonal involvement. Three patients had additionally Dominik:None.H.Y.Yip:None.A.H.Nemeth:None.M. distal sensory loss. GBF1 plays a pivotal role in Golgi O’Driscoll: None. F. Norwood: None. J. Rankin: None. T. maintenance and retrograde trafficking as well as in Lavin:None.C.Marini-Bettolo:None.H.Jungbluth:None. mitochondrial positioning and function. Immunostaining L. Medne: None. S. Y. Yum: None. A. R. Foley: None. A. analyses revealed Golgi fragmentation in all patients’ Need:None.M. Sedghi: None.B. Ansari:None. K.Basiri: fibroblasts, being more severe in W1175*. Subtle mitochon- None. A. R. Moslemi: None. H. Tajsharghi: None. C. C. drial defects, including reduced mitochondrial content and Muraresku: None. Z. Zolkipli-Cunningham: None. S. fragmentation,wereobservedinallfibroblastlines;exceptfor Lassche: None. C. Marcelis: None. J. C. Taylor: None. C. A1137V. These defects are in linewith co-immunoprecipita- G. Bönnemann: None. H. Houlden: None. tion studies in HEK293T cells that demonstrated reduced GBF1-Miro2interactioninC982YandR1461Q.Noneofthe C20.2 GBF1 variants affects splicing. MutationsintheGolgiproteinGBF1asanovelcauseof Conclusion: Previous studies have linked Golgi frag- distal hereditary motor neuropathy mentation and mitochondrial fusion-fission defects with motor neuron degeneration and atrophy. Our results N. Mendoza Ferreira1*, M. Karakaya1, N. Cengiz1, D. emphasize the role of GBF1 in these contexts and indicate Beijer2,N.Fuhrmann1,I.Hölker1,B.Schrank3,K.Brigatti4, that GBF1 mutations are a novel dHMN cause. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui5, E. Puffenberger4, G. Wunderlich6, N. Mendoza Ferreira: None. M. Karakaya: None. N. P. De Jonghe2,7, T. Deconinck2, K. Strauss4, J. Baets2,7, B. Cengiz: None. D. Beijer: None. N. Fuhrmann: None. I. Wirth1 Hölker: None. B. Schrank: None. K. Brigatti: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. E. Puffenberger: None. G. 1Institute for Human Genetics, Centre for Molecular Wunderlich: None. P. De Jonghe: None. T. Deconinck: Medicine and Center for Rare Diseases, Cologne, Ger- None. K. Strauss: None. J. Baets: None. B. Wirth: None. many, 2Neurogenetics Group, Center for Molecular Neu- rology (VIB), Laboratory of Neuromuscular Pathology, C20.3 Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Biallelic JAM2 variants lead to early-onset recessive Belgium, 3DKD HELIOS Kliniken, Department of Neurol- primary familial brain calcification ogy, Wiesbaden, Germany, 4Clinic for Special Children, Strasburg, PA, United States, 5Regeneron Genetics Center, L. V. Schottlaender1,2,3*, R. Abeti4, Z. Jaunmuktane4,5, C. Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Tarrytown, NY, United Macmillan6,V. Chelban2,B.O’Callaghan2,J.McKinley7,8, States, 6Department of Neurology, University Hospital R. Maroofian2, S. Efthymiou2, A. Fragkou2, R. Forbes9, M. Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Neuromuscular Reference Soutar10, J. Livingston11, B. Kalmar2, O. Swayne12, G. Centre, Department of Neurology, Antwerp University Hotton12, A. Pittman2, J. Mendes de Oliveira13, M. de Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium Grandis14, A. Richard-Loendt10, F. Launchbury10, J. Althonayan4, G. McDonnell8, A. Carr2,12, S. Khan15, C. Introduction: Distalhereditarymotorneuropathies(dHMN) Beetz15, A. Bisgin16, S. Tug Bozdogan16, A. Begtrup17, E. are heterogeneous diseases characterized by motor neuron Torti17, L. Greensmith2, P. Giunti4, P. Morrison18, S. degenerationandatrophy.50%oftheindividualswithdHMN Brandner5, M. Aurrand-Lions14, H. Houlden2,12 have a mutation in a hitherto undiscovered gene. Materials and Methods: WES/WGS to identify the 1FLENI Neurological Research Institute, Capital federal, dHMN-causative gene. Assessment of candidate variants Argentina, 2Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL consequences on splicing, protein expression, and sub- Queen Square Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, UK, cellular localization, using various cellular systems. London, United Kingdom, 3Dubowitz Neuromuscular Results: We identified de novo or inherited variants Centre, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child (c.2945G>A,p.C982Y;c.3410C>T,p.A1137V;c.4382G>A, Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Clinical p.R1461Q and c.3524G>A, p.W1175*) in GBF1 (Golgi andMovementNeurosciences,UCLQueenSquareInstitute Brefeldin A-Resistant Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factor- of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 5Division of 1) in four unrelated families with dominant or sporadic Neuropathology, The National Hospital for Neurology dHMN. Other known dHMN-implicated genes were and Neurosurgery, University College London Hospitals excluded. Affected individuals show dHMN with slowly NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom,100 J.delPicchia 6DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityofChicago,Chicago, that defective cell-to-cell adhesion and dysfunction of the IL, United States, 7Department of Neurology, Dublin movement of solutes through the paracellular spaces in the Neurological Institute at the Mater Misericordiae Uni- neurovascularunitisakeymechanisminCNScalcification. versity Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 8Regional Neurosciences L. V. Schottlaender: None. R. Abeti: None. Z. Jaunmuk- Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, tane: None. C. Macmillan: None. V. Chelban: None. B. 9Neurology Centre, Southern HSC Trust, Craigavon Area O’Callaghan: None. J. McKinley: None. R. Maroofian: Hospital, Portadown, United Kingdom, 10Department of None. S. Efthymiou: None. A. Fragkou: None. R. Forbes: NeurodegenerativeDisease,UCLQueenSquareInstituteof None. M. Soutar: None. J. Livingston: None. B. Kalmar: Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 11Paediatric Neurol- None. O. Swayne: None. G. Hotton: None. A. Pittman: ogy, The Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds None. J. Mendes de Oliveira: None. M. de Grandis: None. GeneralInfirmary,Leeds,UnitedKingdom,12TheNational A. Richard-Loendt: None. F. Launchbury: None. J. Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, Althonayan: None. G. McDonnell: None. A. Carr: None. London, United Kingdom, 13Universidade Federal de S. Khan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Pernambuco, Departamento de Neuropsiquiatria, Recife, CENTOGENE. C. Beetz: A. Employment (full or part- Brazil, 14Aix-Marseille University, Inserm, CNRS, Institut time); Significant; CENTOGENE. A.Bisgin:None. S. Tug Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille, France, 15CENTO- Bozdogan:None.A.Begtrup:A.Employment(fullorpart- GENE AG, Rostock, Germany, 16Medical Genetics Depart- time);Significant;Genedx.E.Torti:A.Employment(fullor ment of Medical Faculty & AGENTEM (Adana Genetic part-time); Significant; Genedx. L. Greensmith: None. P. Diseases Diagnosis and Treatment Center), Çukurova Giunti: None. P. Morrison: None. S. Brandner: None. M. University, Adana, Turkey, 17GeneDx, 207 Perry Parkway, Aurrand-Lions: None. H. Houlden: None. Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 18Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast, C20.4 Belfast, United Kingdom Loss of UGP2 in brain leads to a severe epileptic encephalopathy, emphasizing that bi-allelic isoform Primary familial brain calcification (PFBC) is a rare neu- specific start-loss mutations of essential genes can cause rodegenerative disorder characterised by a combination of genetic diseases neurological, psychiatric and cognitive decline associated with calcium deposition on brain imaging. To date, muta- E. Perenthaler1*, A. Nikoncuk1, S. Yousefi1, W. M. tions in five genes have been linked to PFBC. However, Berdowski1,M.Alsagob2,I.Capo3,H.C.vanderLinde1,P. over 50% of individuals affected by PFBC have no mole- van den Berg1, E. H. Jacobs1, D. Putar1, M. Ghazvini1, E. cular diagnosis. We report four unrelated families present- Aronica4, W. F. J. van IJcken1, W. G. de Valk1, E. ing with initial learning difficulties and seizures and later Medici–vandenHerik1,M.vanSlegtenhorst1,L.Brick5,M. psychiatric symptoms, cerebellar ataxia, extrapyramidal Kozenko5,J.N.Kohler6,J.A.Bernstein6,K.G.Monaghan7, signs and extensive calcifications on brain imaging. A.Begtrup7,R.Torene7,A.AlFutaisi8,F.AlMurshedi9,F. Through a combination of homozygosity mapping and Al Azri9, E. Kamsteeg10, M. Mojarrad11, A. Eslahi11, E. exome sequencing, we mapped this phenotype to chromo- Ghayoor Karimiani12, J. Vandrovcova13, F. Zafar14, N. some 21q21.3 and identified biallelic variants in JAM2. Rana14, K. K. Kandaswamy15, J. Hertecant16, P. Bauer15, JAM2 encodes for the junctional-adhesion-molecule-2, a D. Colak2, S. Efthymiou13, H. Houlden13, A. M. Bertoli- key tight-junction protein in blood-brain-barrier perme- Avella15, R. Maroofian13, K. Retterer7, A. C. Brooks1, N. ability. We show that JAM2 variants lead to reduction of Kaya2, T. J. van Ham1, T. Barakat1 JAM2 mRNA expression and absence of JAM2 protein in patient’s fibroblasts, consistent with a loss-of-function 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2King Faisal mechanism. We show that the human phenotype is repli- Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi cated in the jam2 complete knockout mouse (jam2 KO). Arabia, 3Faculty of Medicine Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia, Furthermore, neuropathology of jam2 KO mouse showed 4Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5McMaster prominent vacuolation in the cerebral cortex, thalamus, Children’s Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 6Stanford cerebellum and particularly widespread vacuolation in the UniversitySchoolofMedicine,Stanford,CA,UnitedStates, midbrain with reactive astrogliosis and neuronal density 7GeneDX, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 8Sultan reduction. The regions of the human brain affected on Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 9Sultan Qaboos Uni- neuroimaging are similar to the affected brain areas in the versity Hospital, Muscat, Oman, 10Radboud University, myorg PFBC null mouse. Along with JAM3 and OCLN, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 11Mashhad University of Medical JAM2 is the third tight-junction gene in which biallelic Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 12St. variants are associated with brain calcification, suggesting George’s University, London, United Kingdom, 13UCLAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 101 Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, United AG. D. Colak: None. S. Efthymiou: None. H. Houlden: Kingdom, 14Children’s hospital and institute of Child None. A. M. Bertoli-Avella: A. Employment (full or part- health, Multan, Pakistan, 15CENTOGENE AG, Rostock, time);Significant;CENTOGENEAG.R.Maroofian:None. Germany, 16UAE University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates K.Retterer: A.Employment (fullorpart-time); Significant; GeneDX. A. C. Brooks: None. N. Kaya: None. T. J. van Developmental and/or epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) Ham: None. T. Barakat: None. are a group of devastating genetic disorders, resulting in early onset, therapy resistant seizures and developmental C20.5 delay. Here we report on 19 individuals from 12 families Human-lineage-specific genomic elements are enriched presentingwithasevereformofintractableepilepsy,severe within genes implicated in neurodegenerative diseases developmental delay, progressive microcephaly and visual disturbance. Whole exome sequencing identified a recur- Z.Chen1*,D.Zhang1,R.H.Reynolds1,J.Hardy1,J.Botía2, rent, homozygous variant (chr2:64083454A>G) in the S. A. Gagliano Taliun3, M. Ryten1 essential UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (UGP2) gene in all probands. This rare variant results in a tolerable 1Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, UCL Queen Met12Val missense change of the longer UGP2 protein Square Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, isoform but causes a disruption of the start codon of the 2Departamento de Ingeniería de la Información y las shorter isoform. We show that the absence of the shorter Comunicaciones. Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain, isoformleadstoareductionoffunctionalUGP2enzymein 3Center for Statistical Genetics and Department of brain cell types, leading to altered glycogen metabolism, Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, upregulated unfolded protein response and premature neu- United States ronal differentiation, as modelled during pluripotent stem celldifferentiationinvitro.Incontrast,thecompletelackof Introduction: While encephalization has had advantages all UGP2 isoforms leads to differentiation defects in mul- for humans, this process may predispose us to neurode- tiplelineagesinhumancells.ReducedexpressionofUgp2a/ generativedisordersincludingAlzheimer’sandParkinson’s Ugp2b in vivo in zebrafish mimics visual disturbance and diseases, which do not occur naturally in aged non-human mutant animals show a behavioral phenotype. Our study primates.Thissuggeststhatgenomicfeaturesspecifictothe identifies a recurrent start codon mutation in UGP2 as a human lineage may provide insights into brain-related cause of a novel autosomal recessive DEE. Importantly, it diseases. alsoshowsthatisoformspecificstart-lossmutationscausing Methods: In this study, we leverage high-depth whole expression loss of a tissue relevant isoform of an essential genome sequencing data from ~8,000 individuals and proteincancauseageneticdisease,evenwhenanorganism- improved conservation metrics to generate a combined wide protein absence is incompatible with life. We provide annotation identifying regions simultaneously depleted for additional examples where a similar disease mechanism genetic variation (constrained regions) and have low applies. conservation at ten base pair resolution. We test our E. Perenthaler: None. A. Nikoncuk: None. S. Yousefi: proposal that these constrained, non-conserved regions None. W. M. Berdowski: None. M. Alsagob: None. I. (CNCRs) result from human-specific purifying selection Capo: None. H. C. van der Linde: None. P. van den Berg: and are enriched for neurological disease risk loci. None. E. H. Jacobs: None. D. Putar: None. M. Ghazvini: Results: We find that CNCRs are significantly depleted None.E.Aronica:None.W.F.J.vanIJcken:None.W.G. from protein-coding genes but enriched within lncRNAs. de Valk: None. E. Medici–van den Herik: None. M. van Weuse stratified-linkage disequilibriumscore regression to Slegtenhorst: None. L. Brick: None. M. Kozenko: None. J. demonstrate that CNCRs are enriched for per-SNP herit- N. Kohler: None. J. A. Bernstein: None. K. G. Monaghan: ability of complex human-specific phenotypes, namely A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;GeneDX.A. intelligence (coefficient p=1.4e-3). We find that high Begtrup: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; CNCR density is a feature of genes already implicated in GeneDX. R. Torene: A. Employment (full or part-time); neurological diseases, including MAPT and APOE. Focus- Significant;GeneDX.A.AlFutaisi:None.F.AlMurshedi: ing on APOE, we identify high CNCR density within an None.F.AlAzri: None.E. Kamsteeg:None.M.Mojarrad: unannotated intron-3 retaining non-coding transcript None. A. Eslahi: None. E. Ghayoor Karimiani: None. J. reported to regulate neuronal APOE. Using human frontal Vandrovcova:None.F.Zafar:None.N.Rana:None.K.K. cortex RNA-sequencing data, we find the proportion of the Kandaswamy: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- intron-3-retainingtranscriptishigherinAlzheimer’sdisease cant; CENTOGENE AG. J. Hertecant: None. P. Bauer: A. than control participants (p<2.2e-16) and associated with Employment (fullor part-time); Significant; CENTOGENE102 J.delPicchia more severe Braak pathology (adjusted r^2=0.6778, p< Tseng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; 2.2e-16). PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent Conclusions: We generate a highly-granular annotation or other intellectual property); Significant; PacBio. T. Hon: that supports the importance of human-lineage-specific A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; PacBio. E. sequencesinneurodegenerativedisorders with implications Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other for disease modelling and interpretation of non-coding intellectual property); Significant; PacBio. J. Underwood: variants. A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; PacBio. E. ZC: LWENC Doctoral-Funding Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Z. Chen: None. D. Zhang: None. R. H. Reynolds: None. intellectual property); Significant; PacBio. J. Hardy: None. J. Botía: None. S. A. Gagliano Taliun: None. M. Ryten: None. C21MethodsandApplicationsofAssociationStudiesin Large Cohorts C20.6 Full-length RNA sequencing of Alzheimer brain sample C21.1 using long reads reveals complex alternative splicing A genome-wide association study of sex at birth in 3 patterns million individuals reveals widespread sex-differential participationbiaswithpotentialimplicationsforGWAS J. Ekholm*, E. Tseng, T. Hon, J. Underwood interpretation Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States N.Piratsu1,M.Cordioli2,G.Mignogna3,A.Abdellaoui4,P. Nandakumar5, B. Hollis6, M. Kanai7, V. Manikandan8, P. Long-read mRNA sequencing such as PacBio’s Iso-Seq DellaBriottaParolo2,N.Baya7,C.Carey7,J.Karjalainen2, method offer high-throughput transcriptome profiling that T. D. Als8, M. D. Van der Zee4, F. R. Day6, K. K. Ong6, T. circumventsthetranscriptassemblyproblembysequencing Morisaki9, E. de Geus4, R. Bellocco3, Y. Okada9, A. full-length cDNA. The Iso-Seq method has emerged as the Børglum8, P. Joshi1, A. Auton5, D. Hinds5, B. Neale7, R. most reliable technology for fully characterizing isoforms Walters7, Finngen Study, 23andMe Research Team, and, in turn, help shed light on underlying disease iPSYCH Consortium, M. G. Nivard4, J. R. B. Perry6, a. mechanisms. Here, we have utilized the Iso-Seq method to ganna2* sequence an Alzheimer’s disease whole brain sample. This is a devastating neurodegenerative disease that affects ~44 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, million people worldwide, making it the most common 2Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Fin- form of dementia. Studies looking into disease mechanism land, 3University of Milano Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 4VU have shown that changes in gene expression due to alter- amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 523andMe Inc, Sun- native splicing likely contribute to the initiation and pro- nyvale, CA, United States, 6University of Cambridge, gression of Alzheimer’s disease. Hence, efforts have been Cambridge, UnitedKingdom,7BroadInstitute,Cambridge, made to better understand the gene expression changes in MA, United States, 8Aarhus university, Aarhus, Denmark, the Alzheimer brain by sequencing the transcriptome of 9University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan affected brain regions. In this study, complex alternative splicing patterns emerged, with 162,290 unique transcripts Genetic association results are often interpreted with the up to 14 kb in length from 17,670 genes being detected. assumption that factors influencing voluntary participation Morethan60%ofthesetranscriptswerenovelisoforms,the do not affect downstream analyses. Understanding the vast majority of which have supporting cage peak data and genetic basis of this participation bias is challenging as it polyadenylation signals. To further investigate the sample, involvesthegenotypesofunseenindividuals.Asaproofof we also applied the Iso-Seq solution to single cell RNA concept, we demonstrate that sex at birth becomes a heri- samples. In this experiment we obtained between 150,000- table trait in the presence of sex-differential participation 180,000 unique isoforms from 15,000-17,000 genes. Over bias. By performing a GWAS of sex in ~3.3M men and 50% of the isoforms categorized as novel isoforms, sug- women, we identify over 150 genome-wide significant loci gesting a high degree of undiscovered transcripts in the which highlight complex traits underpinning differences in humansamples,demonstratingtheutilityoflong-readRNA studyparticipationbetweensexes. Forexample, bodymass sequencing for human disease research. index (BMI) raising alleles were observed at higher fre- J. Ekholm: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- quency in men compared to women, suggesting that cant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, genetically higher-weight women are less likely to partici- patentorotherintellectualproperty);Significant;PacBio.E. pate in population studies than men. We demonstrate howAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 103 these biases can lead to incorrect inferences in Mendelian knowndiseasegenesbutnovelphenotypeassociations,and Randomization analyses and propose a conceptual frame- 15% are novel disease genes. We uncovered associations work for addressing these biases. Our findings highlight a driven by missense variants clustered in genic regions that new dimension of challenges genetic studies may begin to were missed when missense constraint was not considered. face as sample sizes continue to grow. Some of these were not captured by a LoF model, N. Piratsu: None. M. Cordioli: None. G. Mignogna: suggesting possible gain-of-function signals. None. A. Abdellaoui: None. P. Nandakumar: A. Employ- We will illustrate AstraZeneca’s use of these data to ment (full or part-time); Significant; 23andMe Inc. B. rapidlyvalidate and inform safety profiles ofpotential drug Hollis: None. M. Kanai: None. V. Manikandan: None. P. targets, identify novel targets, predict drug repositioning Della Briotta Parolo: None. N. Baya: None. C. Carey: opportunities,andstudyprevalenceofmoleculardiagnoses. None.J.Karjalainen:None.T.D.Als:None.M.D.Vander Q.Wang:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Significant; Zee:None.F.R.Day:None.K.K.Ong:None.T.Morisaki: AstraZeneca. K. Carss: A. Employment (full or part-time); None. E. de Geus: None. R. Bellocco: None. Y. Okada: Significant; AstraZeneca. K. Smith: A. Employment (full None. A. Børglum: None. P. Joshi: None. A. Auton: A. or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. S. Petrovski: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; 23andMe Inc. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; AstraZeneca. D. Hinds: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; 23andMe Inc. B. Neale: None. R. Walters: None. M. G. C21.3 Nivard: None. J. R. B. Perry: None. A. ganna: None. FinnGen - study at its midway: already identifying dozens of novel variants for tens of diseases and traits C21.2 A phenome-wide gene-based collapsing analysis of rare M. Perola1,2,3* loss-of-function and missense variation in 268,451 UK Biobank exomes 1Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3On Q. Wang, K. Carss, K. Smith, S. Petrovski* behalf of the FinnGen Study, Helsinki, Finland Centre for GenomicsResearch (CGR), DiscoverySciences, TheFinnGenprojectisapublic-privatepartnershipstudyin BioPharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, Uni- Finland designed to benefit from the genetic isolation of ted Kingdom Finnish population to identify variants contributing to common and rare diseases. All Finnish biobanks across the Historically, the genetic basis of complex disease has been country participate in the study. The final aim is to collect investigated by genome-wide association studies using morethan10%oftheadultpopulationofFinland,e.g.about genotyping arrays. This approach is cost efficient but lim- 500.000 participants, and utilize the well validated high- itedtoknownandcommonvariants.Viaadvancedaccessto quality, lifelong health registry data for a GWAS-PheWas 300K UK Biobank participant exomes, we studied the rare setting.Todate,aftertwoandahalfyearsofrecruitment,we protein-coding variation contribution to thousands of phe- have GWAS genotyped 224 578 individuals and analysed notypicendpoints.Containingclinical,biomarker,andother this data against 3882 endpoints and 84 million health care phenotypic information, this resource is unique in breadth events.Thecurrentnumberofbiobankedparticipantsforthe and depth. projectisalready>340000.Previously,wehaveshownthat Weperformedcollapsinganalysesconsideringarangeof the average Finn has more low-frequency loss-of-function genetic architectures. In total, 12 classes of qualifying variants and complete gene knockouts as non-Finn Eur- variants were studied according to predicted protein effect, opeans. Following this, now in FinnGen we have so far allele frequency, and zygosity. We expanded our scope identified more than 400 genome-wide significant loci beyond loss-of-function (LoF) variation with models (about 350 novel), which have a Finnish enriched, low fre- targeting missense variation predicted to be deleterious or quency(MAF<0.1,enrichment>1.5)variant.Morethan60 located in regions of missense tolerance ratio (MTR) of these loci have a missense or protein truncating variant. constraint. A synonymous genetic model was used to Thelongitudinalsettingandinclusionoftheparentalcause- define our empirical null p-value distribution. of-death are producing novel insights into aetiology and Using exomesfrom268,451individuals, we performed a progression of hundreds of diseases. FinnGen first year PheWAS studying the relationships between ~19K genes summaryresultsof96,499individualsfromNovember2018 and ~15K phenotypes. Our cloud-based platform delivered are now publicly released at http://r2.finngen.fi/. >2.5 billion analyses within 24 hours. Among study-wide M. Perola: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, significant findings 68% are previously known, 17% are collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as104 J.delPicchia grantsalreadyreceived);Significant;Abbvie,AstraZeneca, C21.5 Biogen, Celgene, Genentech, GSK, Janssen Biotech, Maze Simultaneous estimation of bi-directional causal effects Therapeutics, MSD, Pfizer, Sanofi. and heritable confounding from GWAS summary statistics C21.4 Discovery, estimation and prediction analysis using a L. Darrous1,2*, N. Mounier1,2, Z. Kutalik1,2,3 Bayesian survival model for complex traits 1University Center for Primary Care and Public Health, S.E.Ojavee1*,D.Trejo-Banos1,M.Patxot1,K.Fischer2,A. Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Kousathanas1, M. R. Robinson3 Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Univer- Kingdom sity of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Science and Technology, Vienna, Austria Introduction: Mendelian Randomisation (MR), an increasingly popular method that estimates the causal Time-to-event analysis using genotypic data may enable a effects of risk factors on complex human traits, has seen better understanding of the mechanisms and underlying several extensions that relax its basic assumptions. How- genetic architecture behind the onset and development of ever, most of these extensions suffer from two major lim- commoncomplexdisease.Typically,time-to-eventdataare itations; under-exploitation of genome-wide markers, and notnormallydistributed,arerightcensoredandingenomic sensitivity to the presence of a heritable confounder of the studies, the number of covariates strongly exceeds the exposure-outcome relationship. To overcome these limita- number of observations. Previous work has not adequately tions, we propose a Latent Heritable Confounder MR addressedtheseissues,potentiallyleadingtounderpowered (LHC-MR) method applicable to association summary sta- models and biased effect size estimates. tistics,whichsimultaneouslyestimatesbi-directionalcausal Here, we propose a hierarchical Bayesian model which effects, direct heritability, and confounder effects while assumes that time-to-event has a Weibull distribution, accounting for sample overlap. handles sparsity with spike and slab variable selection and Results: We demonstrate that LHC-MR outperforms variance partitioning, considers right censoring, and yields several existing MR methods in terms of bias and estimates of the proportion of genetic variance explained variance for a wide range of simulation settings and apply (SNP heritability). The model can handle datasets of it to summary statistics of 13 complex traits. Besides hundreds of thousands of people and millions of genetic several concordant results, LHC-MR unravelled new markersbycombiningsynchronousparallelGibbssampling mechanisms (how being diagnosed for certain and adaptive rejection sampling. diseases might lead to improved lifestyle) and revealed In simulations, our approach outperformed previous potential false positive findings of standard MR approaches and provided better genetic effect estimation. methods (apparent causal effect of body mass index on WethenappliedourmodeltoUKBiobankdataforawide- educational attainment may be driven by a strong ignored range of traits, including time-to-death, time to cardiovas- confounder). Phenome-wide search to identify LHC- cular disease and time-to-menopause. We achieved 68% implied heritable confounders showed remarkable agree- higher SNP heritability estimates compared to previous mentbetweentheLHC-estimatedcausaleffectsofthelatent results for both time-to-menopause and time-to-menarche confounder and those for the potentially identified ones. (SNP heritabilities of 0.26 and 0.42 respectively). Finally,LHC-MRnaturallydecomposesgeneticcorrelation Our general framework enables more accurate discovery tocausaleffect-drivenandconfounder-drivencontributions, and estimation of the survival-related genomic marker demonstrating that the genetic correlation between systolic effects providing novel insight into the genetic architecture blood pressure and diabetes is predominantly confounder- of any very large-scale time-to-event data, and unprece- driven. dented statistical power to predict risk for medically Conclusion:LHC-MR,astructuralequationmixedeffect important traits. model, isa novel method that tackles both causal inference This work was funded by an SNSF Eccellenza Grant with increased precision and the genetic architecture of (PCEGP3_181181) to M.R.R. complex disease. S. E. Ojavee: None. D. Trejo-Banos: None. M. Patxot: L. Darrous: None. N. Mounier: None. Z. Kutalik: None. None. K. Fischer: None. A. Kousathanas: None. M. R. Robinson: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 105 C21.6 Methods: We apply Multi-Trait Analysis of GWAS Multi-trait genome-wide association analysis of blood (MTAG) software to jointly analyse systolic BP, diastolic pressure identifies 45 additional loci BP and pulse pressure traits using our recent GWAS discovery results from ~750k individuals of European C. P. Cabrera1,2*, R. Pazoki3,4,5, A. Giri6, J. N. Hellwege7, ancestry from UK Biobank and the International Con- E. Evangelou3,8, J. Ramírez1, L. V. Wain9,10, I. Tzoulaki3,8, sortium of Blood Pressure. To detect additional loci we T. L. Edwards11, P. Elliott3,12,13, P. B. Munroe1,2, M. R. tested ~7 million imputed genetic variants applying the Barnes1,2, M. J. Caulfield1,2, H. R. Warren1,2, on behalf of samecombined1-stageand2-stagedesigncriteriaasinthe the VA Million Veteran Program and the ICBP working original GWAS, withreplicationusingMTAG results from group the US Million Veteran Program (n~220k). Results: Single-trait GWAS yielded a higher number of 1William Harvey Research Institute,Bartsand The London significantindependentsignalsgenome-wide.Nevertheless, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary Univeristy our multi-trait analysis identified 45 new BP loci that were ofLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,2NationalInstitutefor notdetectedintheequivalentGWAS,ofwhichnineremain Health Research, Barts Cardiovascular Biomedical novel (based on further BP loci discoveries since 2018). Research Center, Queen Mary University of London, Conclusions: Our multi-trait GWAS discovered addi- London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Epidemiology tional BP loci. However, our results illustrate that the andBiostatistics,ImperialCollegeLondon,London,United benefitsofMTAGaretrait-specific,requiringhighpairwise Kingdom, 4Department of Life Sciences,College of Health correlation between all pairs of traits, and that more power and Life Sciences, Brunel University, London, United is gained when MTAG is also used for meta-analysis of Kingdom, 5Centre for Inflammation Research and Transla- traits from different samples. This suggests that future BP tional Medicine, Brunel University, London, United King- genetics discovery projects should focus efforts on larger dom, 6Vanderbilt Genetics Institute,Vanderbilt meta-analyses including new cohorts. Epidemiology Center, Department of Obstetrics and C. P. Cabrera: None. R. Pazoki: None. A. Giri: None. J. Gynecology,Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nash- N.Hellwege:None.E.Evangelou:None.J.Ramírez:None. ville, TN, United States, 7Vanderbilt Genetics Institute, L.V.Wain:None.I.Tzoulaki:None.T.L.Edwards:None. Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Insti- P.Elliott:None.P.B.Munroe:None.M.R.Barnes:None. tute for Medicine and Public Health,Vanderbilt University M. J. Caulfield: None. H. R. Warren: None. MedicalCenter, Nashville, TN, United States, 8Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina C22 Immunology and Hematology Medical School, Ioannina, Greece, 9Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United King- C22.1 dom, 10NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, Newborn screening for severe combined immunodefi- Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom, 11Vander- ciency (SCID) using combined T cell reception excision bilt Genetics Institute, Division of Epidemiology, Depart- circles (TREC)/kappa-deleting element recombination mentofMedicine,InstituteforMedicineandPublicHealth, element(KREC)assaysandnextgenerationsequencing: Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, diagnostic yield from the new established Swiss United States, 12National Institute for Health Research programme Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College London, M. Elgizouli1*, J. Pascal1, A. Bahr1, S. Prader2, D. London, United Kingdom, 13UK Dementia Research Drozdof2,J.PachlopnikSchmid2,K.Steindl1,A.Rauch1,J. Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Reichenbach2 Kingdom 1InstituteofMedicalGenetics,UniversityZurich,Schlieren, Introduction: Single-trait genome wide association studies Switzerland, 2Department of Immunology, University Chil- (GWAS)haverevealedover1,000bloodpressure(BP)loci. dren’s Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland However, these loci only account for less than one third of the BP genetic variation. Multi-trait GWAS is reported to Introduction: Infants with severe combined immunodefi- increase discovery power by jointly analysing highly cor- ciency(SCID),afatalformofprimaryimmunodeficiencyin related traits. By performing the first large-scale multi-trait the absence of early definitive therapy, show an improved BP GWAS, we aimed 1) to compare multi-trait vs single- outcome if diagnosed and treated within the first few trait results and 2) identify additional loci. months of life, making the condition a suitable target for newborn screening. Country-wide newborn screening for106 J.delPicchia SCID was initiated in Switzerland in January 2019 with primary immunological diagnosis. Whilst the referring about 80.000 live births per year. clinical centres review variants in known genes for a Methods: DNA samples from dried blood spots of from given patient’s presenting condition, the Genomics Eng- all neonates born in Switzerland in 2019 were assayed for land Clinical Interpretation partnerships (GECIPs) can T-cell receptor excision circles (TREC) and kappa-deleting investigate the pathogenesis of ’unsolved’ cases, poten- elementrecombinationexcisioncircles(KREC).Caseswith tially leading to the identification of novel disease genes, low TREC and/or low KREC counts subsequently under- phenotypes or mutation mechanisms. In the Immune went clinical genetic assessment and whole exome sequen- GECIP we have taken a gene-focused approach to screen cing (WES)-based mutation screening and/or high- groups of subjects for whom no pathogenic mutation has resolution chromosomal microarray testing. Children with yetbeenconfirmed,whichismoreefficientthananalysing dysmorphic features suspicious of DiGeorge syndrome results on a case-by-case basis. We started by screening wereinitiallytestedforthecommon22q11.2microdeletion. known-diseasegenes(n=482)forthepresenceofvariants In cases with suspected syndromes not detectable with with high/moderate impact and frequency ≤ 1% in popu- WES, targeted Sanger sequencing was performed. lation databases across all probands. For each variant, we Results: Out of 15 neonates with low TREC/KREC counted the number of homozygotes and heterozygotes counts identified through the screening procedure, we among probands of the Immunology domain compared diagnosed 5 neonates with SCID and 6 with syndromic with the remaining probands, and further compared the conditions in which a severe immunodeficiency constitutes groups at various levels to identify any enrichment. a component of the clinical picture. Notably, 2 of the Results from this approach include i) identification of 6 syndromic immunodeficiencies were caused by RNA- digenic cases among patients with complex phenotypes, genes and thus are not included in standard exome capture ii) detection of immune disease-causing variants in procedures. patientsoutwiththeImmunologydomain,iii)detectionof Conclusion: Our findings support the utility of WES as compound heterozygotes involving structural variants. an efficient and rapid mutation screening method in Thishaspavedthewayfordiscoveryofnovelgenesinthe newborns with low TREC/KREC counts and suggest a remaining patients while assisting in the timely delivery Swiss incidence of SCID above the US incidence of 1 in ofclinicallyactionablefindings,providinganexemplarof 58,000 live births. how the 100K genomes dataset can be used to identify M. Elgizouli: None. J. Pascal: None. A. Bahr: None. S. novel disease genes and mechanisms as well as refining Prader:None.D.Drozdof:None.J.PachlopnikSchmid:None. disease entities. K. Steindl: None. A. Rauch: None. J. Reichenbach: None. C.Camps:None.H.Griffin:None.K.Engelhardt:None. S.Y.Patel:None.S.Hambleton:None.J.C.Taylor:None. C22.2 Strategiesforincreasingdiagnostic rateinpatientswith C22.3 primary immunological disorders within the Genomics Dysregulated expression of the long intergenic non- England 100,000 Genomes Project coding RNA (lincRNA), LINC01871, implicated in Sjögren’s Syndrome pathogenesis C. Camps1,2*, H. Griffin3, K. Engelhardt3, Genomics England Research Consortium, S. Y. Patel2,4, S. M. L. Joachims1, B. Khatri1, K. L. Tessneer1, A. M. Hambleton3,5, J. C. Taylor1,2 Stolarczyk1, G. B. Wiley1, A. Rasmussen1, J. M. Guthridge1,2,J.A.James1,2,R.H.Scofield1,2,K.L.Sivils1,I. 1Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Adrianto3, C. J. Lessard1,2* Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Oxford NIHR Biomedi- calResearchCentre,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,3Instituteof 1OKLAHOMA MEDICAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION, Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, United States, 2University of Tyne, United Kingdom, 4Department of Clinical Immunol- Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, ogy, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United States, 3Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Great North Children’s Hospi- United States tal,NewcastleuponTyneHospitalsNHSFoundationTrust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom Introduction: Sjögren’s syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune disease characterized by inflammatory destruction of exo- The UK’s 100,000 Genomes Project has completed its crine glands. Here, we aimed to identify and characterize sequencing and includes 74,180 rare disease genomes of candidate lncRNAs with potential relevance to SS which 2,005 are from patients or family members with a pathology.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 107 Results: RNA-seq was used on whole blood from SS Faculty of Medicine, Southampton, United Kingdom patients (n=30 autoantibody negative (SSRo-); n=27 autoantibody positive (SSRo+ )) and healthy controls (HC, n Age-related clonal hematopoiesis (CH) is associated with =27)toidentifydifferentiallyexpressed(DE)lncRNAs(log2 the development of hematological malignancies and non- fold change (FC) ≥2 or ≤0.5; p <0.05). We identified 1054 hematological disorders. We sought to determine the adj unique DE ncRNAs between Ro+ , Ro− , and a combined significance of myeloid CH in the UK Biobank cohort analysisrelativetoHC.Ofthese,45(1lincRNA,1antisense, (n=502,524, median age = 58 years, median follow 43 pseudogenes) were overexpressed in all 3 SS subsets. To up = 10.6 years). Utilizing data from single nucleotide investigate the function of the novel lincRNA, LINC01871, polymorphism arrays (n=486,941) and whole exome we performed correlationanalysis of the SSRo- transcriptome sequencing (n=49,956), we identified 1166 (0.24%) yieldingseveralco-expressed protein coding RNAs involved participants with myeloid CH, defined by myeloid-asso- in immune regulation (THEMIS, TBX21, IL10RA, IL2RB, ciated mosaic chromosome abnormalities (mCA) and/or etc.). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of the SS and publicly likely somatic driver mutations in DNMT3A, TET2, available RNA expression data identified shared immune- ASXL1, JAK2, SRSF2 or PPM1D. The frequency of related pathways including cytotoxic T cell, NK cell, and myeloidCHincreasedwithagebyapproximately10%per T cell regulation. We used CRISPR editing to generate a year (OR = 1.10; P ≤ 2×10−16). Genome-wide associa- single cell LINC01871-/- clone of HSB2 cells. RNA-seq of tion analysis identified two distinct signals within TERT LINC01871-/- compared to unmodified HSB2 cells identified that predisposed to CH, plus a weaker signal corre- 1166 DE transcripts. Pathway analyses clustered DE sponding to the JAK2 46/1 haplotype. CH and specific transcripts into similar immune regulatory, cytotoxic and T mutation types were associated with several blood fea- cell pathways. Further, several T cell regulatory transcripts tures and clinical phenotypes, including an association correlated with LINC01871 in SSRo- were downregulation between TET2 mutations and chronic obstructive pul- after LINC01871 deletion: CD109 (FC=−9.7; p = monary disease. Smoking history was significantly asso- adj 5.3×10−16), IL22 (FC=−8.1; p =7.6×10−11), PDCD1 ciated with CH: 53% (n=622) of CH cases were past or adj (FC=−6.2;p =1.1×10−6),THEMIS(FC=−3.8;p = current smokers compared to 44% (n=13,651) of con- adj adj 2.7×10−165), TBX21 (FC=−2.1; p =3.3×10−25). trols (P=3.38×10−6), a difference principally due to adj Conclusion: LINC01871 is a potential mediator of current (P=6.14×10−6, OR=1.09) rather than past dysregulated T cell inflammatory pathways implicated in smoking (P=0.085). Strikingly, breakdown of CH by spe- SS pathogenesis. Funding: NIGMS P30GM110766; Pres- cific mutation type revealed that ASXL1 loss of function byterian Health Foundation mutations were most strongly associated with current M. L. Joachims: None. B. Khatri: None. K. L. Tessneer: smoking status (P=1.92×10−5, OR=1.07), and the only (P=2.60×10−3, None. A. M. Stolarczyk: None. G. B. Wiley: None. A. abnormality associated with past smoking Rasmussen: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers OR=1.04). Indeed, 69% of participants with ASXL1 muta- bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novartis, tions(n=69)werepastorcurrentsmokers.Wesuggestthat ThermoFisher. J. M. Guthridge: B. Research Grant theinflammatoryenvironmentinducedbysmokingpromotes (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and the outgrowth of ASXL1-mutant clones. pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; A. A. Z. Dawoud: None. W. J. Tapper: None. N. C. P. Dxterity. J. A. James: B. Research Grant (principal Cross: None. investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Progentec C22.5 Biosciences. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Abb- A genome-wide meta-analysis yields 46 new loci vie, Novartis, Jannsen. R. H. Scofield: B. Research Grant associating with biomarkers of iron homeostasis (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; E. Ferkingstad1*, M. K. Magnusson1,2, S. Bell3, A. S. Pfizer. K. L. Sivils: None. I. Adrianto: None. C. J. Rigas4, E. Allara3, G. Bjornsdottir1, A. Ramond3, E. Lessard: None. Sørensen4,5, G. H. Halldorsson1, D. S. Paul3, K. S. Burgdorf4, H. P. Eggertsson1, S. Kristmundsdottir1, W. J. C22.4 Astle3, C. Erikstrup5, J. K. Sigurdsson1, D. Vuckovic3, V. Clonal myelopoiesis in the UK biobank cohort: somatic Tragante1,P.Surendran3,B.Vidarsson6,I.Jonsdottir1,2,T. ASXL1 mutations are strongly associated with smoking Hansen7, O. Sigurdardottir8, H. Stefansson1, D. Rye9, history DBDS Genomic Consortium, J. E. Peters3, D. Westergaard7, H. Holm1, N. Soranzo10,3, K. Banasik7, G. A. A. Z. Dawoud*, W. J. Tapper, N. C. P. Cross Thorleifsson1, W. H. Ouwehand3, U. Thorsteinsdottir1, P.108 J.delPicchia Sulem1, A. S. Butterworth3, D. F. Gudbjartsson1,2, J. (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Danesh3, S. Brunak11, E. Di Angelantonio3, H. Ullum4, K. Inc. A. Ramond: None. E. Sørensen: None. G. H. Stefansson1,2 Halldorsson:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. D. S. Paul: None. K. S. 1deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Uni- Burgdorf: None. H. P. Eggertsson: A. Employment (full or versity of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3University of part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. S. Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Copenhagen Kristmundsdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Aarhus Uni- Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. W. J. Astle: versity Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 6The Laboratory in None. C. Erikstrup: None. J. K. Sigurdsson: A. Employ- Mjodd, Reykjavik, Iceland, 7University of Copenhagen, ment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/ Copenhagen, Denmark, 8Akureyri Hospital, Akureyri, Ice- Amgen, Inc. D. Vuckovic: None. V. Tragante: A. Employ- land, 9Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States, ment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/ 10Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Amgen, Inc. P. Surendran: None. B. Vidarsson: None. I. 11Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Jonsdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Copenhagen, Denmark deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. T. Hansen: None. O. Sigurdardottir: None. H. Stefansson: A. Employment (full Iron deficiency is a major public health problem affecting orpart-time);Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen,Inc.D. maternal and child mortality, and iron overload has Rye: None. J. E. Peters: None. D. Westergaard: None. H. important health implications due to end-organ iron Holm: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; toxicity. In order to better understand the genetic regula- deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. N. Soranzo: None. K. tion of iron homeostasis we carried out three genome- Banasik: None. G. Thorleifsson: A. Employment (full or wide association studies in Iceland, the UK and Denmark part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. W. of blood levels of ferritin (N=246,139), total iron H. Ouwehand: None. U. Thorsteinsdottir: A. Employment binding capacity (N=135,430), iron (N=163,511) and (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, transferrin saturation (N=131,471), which are the bio- Inc. P. Sulem: A. Employment (full or part-time); markers routinely measured for clinical assessment of Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. A. S. Butter- iron status. In a meta-analysis we found associations worth: None. D. F. Gudbjartsson: A. Employment (full or with iron homeostasis biomarkers represented by part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. J. 62 sequence variants at 56 loci. Fourteen of the variants Danesh:None.S.Brunak:None.E.DiAngelantonio:None. associatewithmorethanonebiomarker,bringingthetotal H. Ullum: None. K. Stefansson: A. Employment (full or number of observed associations to 87. Of the identified part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. loci, 46 are novel and 10 are known. We assessed the association of these variants with proteomics data and C22.6 various clinical endpoints. Five variants show sexual Identification of regulators of hematopoietic stem and dimorphism: four have stronger effects in women while progenitor cells in vivo in humans using population one has a stronger effect in men. The four variants with genetics larger effects in women also have stronger effects in pre- menopausal than post-menopausal women, and their A.LopezdeLapuentePortilla1*,L.Ekhdal1,C.Cafaro1,Z. effect is likely working through blood loss and primarily Ali1, G. Thorleifsson2, K. Zemaitis1, N. Ugidos menstrual bleeding. The associations implicate novel iron Damboriena1, E. Johnsson1, G. Norddahl2, U. regulating proteins contributing to physiological pro- Thorsteinsdottir2, J. Larsson1, K. Stefansson2, B. Nilsson1 cesses involved in iron homeostasis: iron sensing and storage,inflammation,gutironabsorption,ironrecycling, 1Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2deCODE Genetics, erythropoiesis and bleeding/menstruation. We further- Reykjavik, Iceland more identify both common and rare sequence variants contributing to risk of iron deficiency anemia, a major Introduction:Understandinghowhematopoieticstem-and clinical entity that hitherto has not been studied thor- progenitor cells (HSPCs) are regulated is of central impor- oughly from a genetic point of view. tance for the development of new therapies for blood dis- E. Ferkingstad: A. Employment (full or part-time); orders and for regenerative medicine. Traditionally, Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. M. K.Magnus- however, HSPC regulation has been studied in model sys- son: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; tems, and little is known about the situation in vivo in deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. S. Bell: None. A. S. Rigas: humans. None. E. Allara: None. G. Bjornsdottir: A. EmploymentAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 109 Methods: To learn how HSPCs are regulated under 5Illawara Cancer Care Centre, Wollongong, Sydney, native conditions in humans, we carried out a first large- Australia + scale genome-wide association study on CD34 cells, representingHSPCsinblood.WeusedcirculatingCD34+ Introduction: Communication with children about her- levels as a proxy trait to expose regulators of key editary conditions is difficult for parents. Yet, good com- phenomena like HSPC pool size, migration, and early munication strategies are leading determinants of differentiation.Wecreatedauniquephenotypingplatform adaptation and resilience. With inherited cancer predis- basedonhigh-throughput,high-resolutionflow-cytometry positionsyndromesthatcanaffectveryyoungchildrene.g. and machine learning-based algorithms for automated Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) and Hereditary Phaeochro- flow data analysis, and quantified CD34+ cells in 9,936 mocytoma and Paraganglioma Syndrome (HPPS), genetic adults. testingandsubsequentsurveillanceinat-riskchildrenisthe Results:Weidentified8genome-wide(P<5×10−8)and optimal intervention. Given this often commences early, 20 suggestive loci (P<5×10−6) associated with CD34+ providing these children and their parents appropriate levels.ThetwostrongestweretheHSPCmigrationreceptor genetic counselling and communication strategies is CXCR4 and a novel protein phosphatase never previously important. By adopting a bibliotherapeutic framework- implicated in stem cell biology. Using eQTL, ATAC-seq, where stories are delivered prescriptively (i.e. ‘bib- and promoter capture Hi-C analysis in isolated HSPCs, we liotherapy’), we developed and evaluated the first psycho- pinpoint likely causal variants, including variants in distant educationalresourceinAustraliaforchildrenatriskofLFS regulatory elements selectively active in specific HSPC and HPPS. subpopulations. Furthermore, shRNA knockdown in pri- Materials and Methods: Illustrated storybooks for maryCD34+ cellssupportsthatsomeoftheidentifiedgenes children aged 5-10 years old at risk of either LFS or HPPS affect CD34+ proliferation and differentiation. were created based on models of developmental compre- Conclusions: We report the first large-scale analysis of hension.Parentswereinvitedtoparticipateinthestudyand the genetic architecture of HSPC regulation, with potential read the relevant storybook to their child/ren. Semi- implications for stem cell transplantation and the treatment structured qualitative interviews were conducted and of hematologic malignancies. analysed thematically using a general inductive approach Grant information: European Research Council, Swed- toascertainparents’experiencereadingthisstorybookwith ish Research Council, Swedish Cancer Society. their children. A.LopezdeLapuentePortilla:None.L.Ekhdal:None.C. Results and Conclusion: Twelve parents were inter- Cafaro: None. Z. Ali: None. G. Thorleifsson: A. Employ- viewed (total 29 children). Unanimously, parents reported ment (full or part-time); Modest; deCODE Genetics. K. thisresourcewouldhavebeenausefulcommunicationtool Zemaitis: None. N. Ugidos Damboriena: None. E. Johns- had it been available when their children were first tested son:None.G.Norddahl:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); and/or diagnosed. Parents reported that the resource Modest; deCODE Genetics. U. Thorsteinsdottir: A. supported them with communication without raising Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;deCODEGenetics. emotional distress. We anticipate that by incorporating J. Larsson: None. K. Stefansson: E. Ownership Interest parental views, this cost-effective and easily deployable (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); resource will have psycho-educational benefit and will Modest; deCODE Genetics. B. Nilsson: None. improvetheprocessofcommunicationbetweenparentsand children about paediatric inherited cancer syndromes. C23 Counselling, Communication and Deliberation G. Schlub: None. A. Crook: None. J. Fleming: None. K. Barlow-Stewart: None. J. Kirk: None. K. Tucker: None. S. C23.1 Greening: None. Helping very young children understand inherited can- cer predisposition syndromes using bibliotherapy C23.2 Towards personalized genetic counselling: exploring G.Schlub1*,A.Crook2,J.Fleming1,K.Barlow-Stewart1,J. subgroups among counselees based on different facets Kirk3, K. Tucker4, S. Greening5 of empowerment before the first visit 1University of Sydney, Faculty of Health and Medicine, J.Voorwinden1*,E.Birnie1,M.Plantinga1,M.Ausems2,N. Sydney, Australia, 2Cancer Services, Royal North Shore Knoers1, M. Velthuizen2, A. Lucassen3, I. van Langen1, A. Hospital,Sydney,Australia,3CrownPrincessMaryCancer Ranchor1 Centre, WestmeadHospital,Sydney,Australia, 4Hereditary CancerClinic,PrinceofWalesHospital,Sydney,Australia,110 J.delPicchia 1UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2UMCU, Utrecht, Neth- Introduction:Somepatientsappearto‘know’whetherthey erlands, 3University of Southampton, Southampton, United wish to have a genetic test or not, whilst others deliberate Kingdom extensivelybeforedeciding.Littleisunderstoodabouthow patients deliberate such decisions. Previous research has Introduction: The main goal of genetic counselling is focused on the result of the deliberation process, but little improving empowerment (cognitive/affective outcomes). attention has been paid to the process of arriving at a The aim of this study is to explore subgroups among decision itself and the role medical and lifeworld frames counselees based on different facets of empowerment. play in this deliberation. Our research explored both the Subsequently, to examine if these subgroups are associated deliberation and eventual decision made by patients at risk withsocio-demographicandclinicalvariables.Recognizing of Huntington’s disease. the specific needs regarding genetic counselling for each Methods:Werecruited15patientswhowereconsidering subgroup, could facilitate personalized genetic counselling. predictive testing for Huntington’s disease from four UK Materials and Methods: Data from 2446 unselected regional genetics services. We gathered qualitative data counselees from two Dutch academic centreswas collected frompatients’clinicalconsultationsandreflectivediariesto with a validated questionnaire: the GCOS-18, which explore deliberation and patient interviews to explore measures six facets of empowerment (hope, knowledge decisions. We took an ethnographic approach to consulta- about the condition, knowledge about genetic services, tions, applied discourse analysis to clinic consultations and negative emotions, uncertainty about heredity, uncertainty reflectivediaries,andaccountanalysistothefinalinterview about the treatment). Subgroups were analysed with latent with participants. profile analysis. Results: Our findings show how consultations, discus- Results: Six subgroups could be distinguished. Profile 1 sions with others, misconceptions, and information seeking (n=727) scored best on all facets of empowerment, and influence four key areas: 1. Patient knowledge of the consisted of more higher educated and pre-symptomatic options available; 2. Forecasting of emotions regarding counselees. Profile 2 (n=724) scored average on all facets different options; 3. Imagined futures and 4. Hypothetical ofempowerment.Profile3(n=225)experiencedlesshope, scenarios(if/then).Wecomparedclinicalconsultationswith and consisted of more index patients. Profile 4 (n=130) reflective diaries to further explore deliberation inside and experienced less hope and knowledge; parents of referred outside the clinical appointment. children were overrepresented. Profile 5 (n=491) had Conclusion: Our findings illustrate how medical frames strong uncertainty about heredity, these counselees were sit alongside patient lifeworld frames and how this older and more often at risk of hereditary cancer. Profile 6 influences deliberation and shared decision making. We (n=149) had strong negative emotions, uncertainty about make recommendations regarding the development of heredity and uncertainty about the treatment. These decision support tools for use in clinical practice. ESRC counselees were older and lower educated. Grant ES/R003092/1 Conclusion: This study reveals subgroups among L. M. Ballard: None. S. Doheny: None. A. M. Lucassen: counselees.Thescoringondifferentfacetsofempowerment None. A. J. Clarke: None. allows to distinguish specific subgroups, each having their ownspecificneeds,whichcouldbeusedforpersonalization C23.4 of the genetic counselling process. Negotiatingautonomyandinterdependencewithfamily: J. Voorwinden: None. E. Birnie: None. M. Plantinga: how young people and health professionals navigate None.M.Ausems:None.N.Knoers:None.M.Velthuizen: genetic testing for Li-Fraumeni syndrome None. A. Lucassen: None. I. van Langen: None. A. Ranchor: None. R. Forbes Shepherd1,2*, L. A. Keogh3, A. V. Werner-Lin4, M. B. Delatycki5,6, L. E. Forrest1,2 C23.3 Exploring patient deliberation prior to predictive 1Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum genetictestingintheabsenceofimmediateclinicalutility Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 2Sir Peter MacCal- lumDepartmentofOncology,TheUniversityofMelbourne, L.M.Ballard1*,S.Doheny2,A.M.Lucassen1,A.J.Clarke2 Melbourne, Australia, 3Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Mel- 1University of Southampton, Southampton, United King- bourne, Australia, 4School of Social Policy and Practice, dom, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 111 Australia, 6Department of Paediatrics, The University of The DecipheringDevelopmental Disorders(DDD)Study is Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia investigating the genetic aetiology of abnormal develop- ment in >13,500 children with severe developmental dis- Background/Purpose: The intersection of adolescence orders from across the UK and Ireland. Diagnoses have and young adulthood (AYA: aged 15-39 years) with high been identified in around 35% of individuals, and over 50 multi-organ cancer risk caused by Li-Fraumeni syndrome genes have been newly implicated in developmental dis- (LFS), complicates the process and implications of orders. We sought to investigate the clinical and psycho- genetic testing. This research aims to investigate how socialoutcomesofreceivingageneticdiagnosisinasubset AYAsexperience,andhealthprofessionalsnegotiate,this of DDD participants. Individuals recruited through the process. Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Trust who received a con- Methods: A multi-method approach using qualitative firmed genetic diagnosis from the DDD study before interviews with AYAs together with a survey of Australa- August2019wereselectedforinclusion(n=112).Genetics sian genetic and oncology health professionals examined notes were reviewed to assess pre-defined clinical out- experiences and practice of LFS genetic testing. comes. Disease-specific treatment was indicated for seven Findings: Thirty AYAs (mean age 25.5; 26 TP53+ve; 4 individuals, including Carbamazepinefor seizure control in at 50% risk) participated. Reliance on family at this life individuals with pathogenic variants in KCNQ2, and stage complicated AYAs’ autonomous decision-making antenatal L-serine treatment for pregnancies at risk of capacityforgenetictesting,withparent-driventestingbeing pathogenic variants in PHGDH. Additionally, 69 indivi- common among adolescents. Adolescents who underwent duals werereferredtootherspecialties for investigations or diagnostictestinghadlimitedinvolvementingenetictesting ongoing screening, 25 individuals were recruited to further decisions due to a power differential between parents and genetic research studies, three families were able to access providers. Forty-three respondents completed the survey prenatal testing techniques, and 87 families were given or (56% genetic counsellors), 65% had facilitated predictive signposted to disease-specific information and/or gene- TP53 testing for AYAs, 33% had facilitated testing for specificpatientsupportgroups.Individuals(n=16)whohad minors(<18years).Usingvignettes,respondentsweremore no recorded clinical outcomes were invited to interview to supportive of testing for emotionally mature compared to assess the psychosocial impact of the diagnosis for the immature minors (p=0.009), and more supportive of individual and wider family. Preliminary results highlight adolescent wishes compared to parental wishes for testing thebroadimpactofadiagnosis,includingclinicaloutcomes (p=0.020)whenfamilieshelddiscordantviewsontesting. for both the patient and family, as well as wider social and Conclusion: Despite health professionals supporting psychological benefits. This presentation will discuss the AYA autonomy in vignettes, the reality of genetic testing clinical and psychosocial impact of receiving a genetic forLFSdescribedbyAYAswasmorecomplexandsubtle, diagnosis through DDD. involving both developmental and familial considerations, H. Copeland: None. E. Kivuva: None. G. Hall: None. T. which require developmentally appropriate genetic DDD Study: None. C. Wright: None. counselling. R. Forbes Shepherd: None. L. A. Keogh: None. A. V. C23.6 Werner-Lin: None. M. B. Delatycki: None. L. E. Improving the communication of genomics results to Forrest: None. patients and families with rare diseases using Experi- ence-Based Co-Design (EBCD) C23.5 Exploring outcomes from the Deciphering Developmen- A. Costa1,2, V. Frankova3,4*, E. Alexander5, A. tal Disorders study Arellanesová6, V. Bros-Facer7, J. Clayton-Smith5,8, G. Gumus9, M. Havlovicova4, A. Hunter10, M. Macek4, A. H. Copeland1,2*, E. Kivuva1, G. Hall2, T. DDD Study3, C. Metcalfe11, C. Patch12,2, R. Pourová-Kremlíková4, M. Wright4 Pritchard13, G. Robert1, L. Roberts13 1Department of Clinical Genetics, RD&E, Exeter, United 1Florence Nightingale Faculty of Nursing, Midwifery & Kingdom, 2School of Biological Sciences, University of Palliative Care King’s College, London, United Kingdom, Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome 2Society and Ethics Research, Connecting Science, Well- Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cam- come Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3Insti- bridge, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Biomedical and tute for Medical Humanities, Charles University, First Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School, FacultyofMedicine,Prague,CzechRepublic,4Department Exeter, United Kingdom of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, 2nd112 J.delPicchia Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, C24 Best Posters 2 Prague,CzechRepublic,5ManchesterCentreForGenomic Medicine, University of Manchester, St Mary’s Hospital, C24.02 Manchester, United Kingdom, 6CAVO, Prague, Czech A novel disorder involving dyshematopoiesis, inflam- Republic, 7EURORDIS, Paris, France, 8Division of Evolu- mation and HLH due to aberrant CDC42 function tion and Genomic Sciences School of Biological Sciences University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, S. Coppola1*, M. T. Lam2,3,4, O. H. Krumbach5, G. 9EURORDIS, Barcelona, Spain, 10Genetic Alliance UK, Prencipe6, I. Insalaco6, C. Cifaldi7,8, I. Brigida9, E. Zara1, London, United Kingdom, 11Sheffield Hallam University, S. Scala9, S. Martinelli10, M. Di Rocco10,11, A. Pascarella6, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 12Genomics England, Queen M. Niceta12, F. Pantaleoni12, A. Ciolfi12, F. Carisey2,4, M. Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, Akbarzadeh5, L. Farina1,6, L. Pannone10,12, H. C. 13SWAN UK, London, United Kingdom Erichsen13, A. C. Horne14,15, Y. Bryceson16,17, L. Torralba- Raga16, K. Ramme18,8, A. Finocchi19,8, F. Locatelli20, C. Introduction: We present the methods and findings of a Cancrini19,8, A. Aiuti9, M. R. Ahmadian5, J. S. Orange2, F. research study aimed to improve the communication of De Benedetti6, M. Tartaglia12 genomic results to families with rare diseases. The pre- sentation will include a short video produced with family 1National center for rare diseases, Istituto Superiore di participants. Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, Columbia Materials and methods: The study was set in two University, Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, United geneticservices,oneintheUnitedKingdomandoneinthe States, 3Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine Czech Republic. Using EBCD, we carriedout observations Graduate Program and Medical ScientistTraining Pro- of clinical appointments and interviews with families gram, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United (n=18) and health professionals (n=22). Over a series of States, 4Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of workshops, we worked with participants to identify Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Institute of priorities for improvement and develop more appropriate Biochemistry and Molecular Biology II, Medical Faculty ways of communicating genomic results. of the Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany, Results:Prioritiesforimprovementidentifiedincluded:i) 6Division of Rheumatology, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino communicationatthepointtesting(UK);ii)counsellingon Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 7Department of Pediatrics, feeling ofguilt(CZ)andiii) follow upcare (both sites). To Ospedale Pediatricon Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, address these, participants co-designed two types of 8Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor interventions: i) educational interventions for workforce Vergata, Rome, Italy, 9San Raffaele Telethon Institute for and ii) service model improvements. Gene Therapy (SR-TIGET), IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Conclusions: The results provide important evidence Institute, Milan, Italy, 10Department of Oncology and on key competencies for the workforce in the new Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, genomic era, and practical recommendations to achieve Italy, 11Department of Cellular Biotechnology and Haema- effective family-centred communication. They also tology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 12Genet- indicate the need for new models of service delivery ics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale and greater attention to follow up care after results have Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 13Depart- been shared. Finally, the study offers practical lessons mentofPediatricandAdolescentMedicine,OsloUniversity on how to enable patient and family involvement to Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 14Pediatric Rheumatology, Astrid co-designing genomic services that can best meet Lindgren Childrens Hospital, Karolinska University Hos- their needs. pital, Stockholm, Sweden, 15Department of Women’s and The study is part of the larger Solve-RD project. The Children’s Health, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska Uni- SolveRDhasreceivedfundingfromtheEuropeanUnion’s versity Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden, 16Department Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University grant agreement No 779257. Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 17Broegelmann A.Costa:None.V.Frankova:None.E.Alexander:None. Research Laboratory, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Uni- A. Arellanesová: None. V. Bros-Facer: None. J. Clayton- versity of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 18Pediatric Hematol- Smith: None. G. Gumus: None. M. Havlovicova: None. A. ogy, Immunology and HCT Section, Astrid Lindgren Hunter: None. M. Macek: None. A. Metcalfe: None. C. Children’sHospital,KarolinskaUniversityHospital,Stock- Patch: None. R. Pourová-Kremlíková: None. M. Pritchard: holm, Sweden, 19Department of Pediatrics, Ospedale None. G. Robert: None. L. Roberts: None. PediatricoBambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy,Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 113 20Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, C24.04 Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy Loss of costameric supervillin causes myopathy with myofibrillar disorganization and autophagic vacuoles Introduction: The diagnosis and delineation of novel genetic syndromes is often difficult given the limited C.Hedberg-Oldfors1,R.Meyer2,K.Nolte3,Y.A.Rahim1,C. availability of patients, genetic heterogeneity, and clinical Lindberg4, K. Karason5, I. J. Thuestad6, K. Visuttijai1, M. variability. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is Geijer7,8, M. Begemann2, F. Kraft2, E. Lausberg2, L. characterized by hyper-inflammation driven by excessive Hitpaß9, R. Götzl10, E. J. Luna11, H. Lochmüller12,13, S. activation and expansion of macrophages and defective Koschmieder14, M. Gramlich15, B. Gess16, M. Elbracht2, J. NaturalKiller(NK)cytotoxicity;itcanbefatalifuntreated. Weis3, I. Kurth2, A. Oldfors1, C. Knopp2* Here, we identify a previously unrecognized hematological and autoinflammatory condition in four unrelated patients 1Department of Pathology and Genetics, Sahlgrenska with superimposable features, including neonatal-onset tri- Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, linear cytopenia with dyshematopoiesis, autoinflammation, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH rash, and HLH. Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 3Institute of Neuro- Methods:Todelineatethisnewsyndrome,weperformed pathology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, phenotype and whole-genome/exome analyses. In silico, Aachen, Germany, 4Department of Neurology, Neuromus- in vitro and in vivo (C. elegans) assays allowed to cular Centre, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothen- characterize the impact of mutation on localization and burg, Sweden, 5 Department of Cardiology and Transplant function. Institute, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Results: All patients shared the same de novo CDC42 Sweden, 6Department of Pediatrics, Skane University mutation (Chr1:22417990C>T, p.R186C) and altered Hospital, Malmö, Sweden, 7Department of Radiology, hematopoietic compartment, immune dysregulation, and Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothen- inflammation. We documented unique effects of the p. burg, Sweden, 8Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund R186C on CDC42 localization and function. Indeed, University, Lund, Sweden, 9Institute of Human Genetics, CDC42^R186C showed impaired interaction with known MeDepartmentofDiagnosticandInterventionalRadiology, CDC42 regulators and effectors, including RHOGDI, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen Universitydical Faculty, IQGAP1 and WASP, leading to aberrant Golgi accumula- RWTHAachenUniversity,Aachen,Germany,10Department tion, cytoskeleton rearrangement and reduced growth and of Plastic Surgery, Hand and Burn Surgery, Medical migration, which likely HB1underlie the distinctiveness of Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, thetraitofthissyndrome.AberrantCDC42functioncaused 11Division of Cell Biology and Imaging, Department of defective NK cytotoxicity, which likely contributes to the Radiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, HLHphenotype.TimelytherapeuticneutralizationofIL-1? Worcester, MA, United States, 12Children’s Hospital of and IFN? was critical to the survival of one patient, who Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Division of Neurology, underwent successful bone marrow transplantation. Department of Medicine, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Conclusions: The presented data emphasize the crucial ON,Canada,13BrainandMindResearchInstitute,Ottawa, role played by CDC42 in hematopoiesis and inflammation. ON, Canada, 14Department of Hematology, Onkology, Early recognition of the disorder and establishment of Hemostaseology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Medical treatmentfollowedbybonemarrowtransplantareimportant Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, to survival. 15Department of Invasive Electrophysiology, Medical S. Coppola: None. M. T. Lam: None. O. H. Krumbach: Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, None. G. Prencipe: None. I. Insalaco: None. C. Cifaldi: 16Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, RWTH None. I. Brigida: None. E. Zara: None. S. Scala: None. S. Aachen University, Aachen, Germany Martinelli: None. M. Di Rocco: None. A. Pascarella: None. M. Niceta: None. F. Pantaleoni: None. A. Ciolfi: Introduction: Archvillin, the muscle specific isoform of None.F.Carisey:None.M.Akbarzadeh:None.L.Farina: supervillin encoded by the SVIL gene, is a large sarco- None. L. Pannone: None. H. C. Erichsen: None. A. C. lemmal protein. Despite an important role of supervillin in Horne: None. Y. Bryceson: None. L. Torralba-Raga: muscle cell physiology has been suggested, no muscular None. K. Ramme: None. A. Finocchi: None. F. Locatelli: diseaseassociatedwithSVILmutationshasbeendescribed. None. C. Cancrini: None. A. Aiuti: None. M. R. We here report a new structural myopathy in four indivi- Ahmadian: None. J. S. Orange: None. F. De Benedetti: duals of two unrelated, consanguineous families caused by None. M. Tartaglia: None. biallelic loss-of-function mutations in SVIL.114 J.delPicchia Material and Methods: Patients were comprehensively episignatures, (for example for Kabuki syndrome, BAFo- investigated clinically, and whole exome sequencing on pathies and Cornelia de Lange syndrome), 6 are imprinting genomic DNA was performed in all affected individuals. disorders and 2 are repeat expansion disorders. Validation Skeletal muscle biopsies were morphological analyzed by of the test was based on 38 positive samples (with known enzyme and immunohistochemical techniques and electron pathogenic variant) and 24 negative controls. All samples microscopy. were called correctly provided that the DNA was extracted Results: Affected patients share a distinctive phenotype from peripheral blood and there was no low mosaicism for that includes a wide neck, anteverted shoulders, and a the pathogenic variant. Reasons for requesting an EpiSign prominent trapezius muscle together with variable contrac- clinical test were: the presence of a variant of unknown tures besides further skeletal and mild heart muscle clinical significance, clinical diagnosis without molecular involvement. Muscle biopsies of both families demon- confirmation, or as a test complementary to WES/WGS, strated complete loss of supervillin in muscle tissue by without a prior (suspected) diagnosis. In approximately western blot and immunohistochemical analyses. Compre- 40% of cases with a suspected (VUS present) or clinical hensive light and electron microscopical investigations of diagnosis, EpiSign was able to confirm this diagnosis. This muscle biopsies showed striking similarities between shows that EpiSign is a powerful new diagnostic tool, in patientsandrevealedastructuralmyopathywithprominent particular for patients for whom conventional genetic test- lobulatedtype1fibers,myofibrillardisintegrationandsigns ingwasinconclusive.InMarch2020anupdatedversionof of altered proteostasis and impaired autophagy. EpiSign will be available (EpiSignv2), allowing diagnosis Conclusions: The results underline the importance of ofanadditional23syndromes(45intotal).Foracurrentlist supervillin for the structural integrity of muscle fibers in of syndromes detected by EpiSign see https://genomedia humans and show that recessive loss-of-function mutations gnostics.amsterdamumc.nl/ in SVIL cause a novel myopathy with distinct histological, M. Alders: None. P. Henneman: None. E. Aref-Eshghi: ultrastructural and clinical findings. None. A. Venema: None. J. Kerkhof: None. B. Sadikovic: Funding: This study was supported by the Swedish None. M. Mannens: None. ResearchCouncil to AO (grant number2018-02821) and by theGermanResearchFoundation(DFG)toIK(KU1587/4-1). C24.08 C. Hedberg-Oldfors: None. R. Meyer: None. K. Nolte: The landscape of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants from None.Y.A.Rahim:None.C.Lindberg:None.K.Karason: 300,000 individuals in the UK Biobank population None. I. J. Thuestad: None. K. Visuttijai: None. M. Geijer: sampling None. M. Begemann: None. F. Kraft: None. E. Lausberg: None. L. Hitpaß: None. R. Götzl: None. E. J. Luna: None. Z. Ghazoui* H.Lochmüller:None.S.Koschmieder:None.M.Gramlich: None.B.Gess:None.M.Elbracht:None.J.Weis:None.I. AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom Kurth: None. A. Oldfors: None. C. Knopp: None. Prior prevalence estimates of BRCA1 and BRCA2 protein- C24.06 truncating variants (PTVs) have been generally limited to Genome wide methylation profiling, EpiSign, as a studies that have ascertained for cancer patients or indivi- diagnostic test dualswithafamilyhistoryofcancer.Theaimofthisstudy is to utilise one of the largest sequenced Biobank popula- M. Alders1*, P. Henneman1, E. Aref-Eshghi2, A. Venema1, tions to investigate the prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 J. Kerkhof2, B. Sadikovic2,3, M. Mannens1 PTVs and ClinVar pathogenic/likely pathogenic classified missense variants. We analysed whole-exome sequence 1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2London data from 300,000 UK Biobank participants (https://www. Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, 3Western ukbiobank.ac.uk/), which is a prospective cohort study University, London, ON, Canada linked to deep phenotypic data. Among the 300,000 exomes,weidentified1332carriersofhighconfidencerare A growing number of neurodevelopmental syndromes are PTVs in BRCA1/2 and another set of 62 carriers of rare shown to have unique genomic DNA methylation profiles. ClinVar pathogenic/likely pathogenic classified missense These episignatures can be used to diagnose patients with variants in BRCA1/2. Of the 1394 BRCA1/2 putatively such syndromes. We have recently implemented genome pathogenicvariantcarriers,529(38.0%)havebeendiagnosed wide methylation profiling as a diagnostic test in our with cancer, 455 (32.6%) have a reported family history of laboratory. This test, named EpiSign(v1), is able to recog- cancer but are not diagnosed with cancer and 410 (29.4%) nize22syndromes,14ofwhicharesyndromeswithspecific havenoreportedhistory(orfamilyhistory)ofcancer.FortheAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 115 529individuals with a cancerdiagnosis we furtherevaluated karyotype data from samples for which the cell cultivation thecontributionthattheyhaveto100distinctICD10primary failed. cancer phenotypes and identified that ovarian (5.3% of Conclusion: We show that nanopore-sequencing can reported), breast (2% of reported), prostate (1% of reported), speed-up and potentially improve the comprehensive pancreas (1.5% of reported) and lung (1.1% of reported) analysis of SV in AML. Rapid classification according to cancersareamongstthecancersthataresignificantlyenriched ELN risk stratification will immediately impact on targeted fortheseBRCA1/2putativelypathogenicvariants.Thisstudy and risk adapted treatment of AML patients. provides an unbiased summary of germline BRCA1/2 con- F. Kraft: None. P. Krüger: None. S. Koschmieder: None. tribution to various primary cancers and highlights the value E. Jost: None. M. Crysandt: None. I. Kurth: None. of careful variant interpretation. Z. Ghazoui: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- C24.10 nificant; AstraZeneca. Classification of ATM variants identified in Spanish patients with suspicion of hereditary cancer C24.09 Nanopore-sequencing-based high-resolution karyotyp- L. Feliubadaló1,2,3*, M. Santamariña Peña4,5,6, L. M. ing of AML patients Porras7,8, A. Moles-Fernández9, A. T. Sánchez10,11, A. Blanco12,13,5, O. Diez9,14, S. Gutiérrez-Enríquez9, M. de la F. Kraft1*, P. Krüger1, S. Koschmieder2, E. Jost2, M. Hoya15,16,A.Lopez-Novo17,A.Osorio18,5,M.Pineda1,2,3,D. Crysandt2, I. Kurth1 Rueda19,20, C. Ruiz-Ponte21,5, A. Vega12,13,5, I. J. Molina22, X. de la Cruz7,8,23, C. Lázaro1,2,3 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Medicine 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncol- (Hematology Oncology, Hemostaseology, and Stem Cell ogy,IDIBELL,HospitaletdeLlobregat,Spain,2Programin Transplantation), University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Molecular Mechanisms and Experimental Therapy in Aachen, Germany Oncology (Oncobell), IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Introduction: The current diagnostic scheme for classifi- Cáncer(CIBERONC),Madrid,Spain,4GrupodeMedicina cationofacutemyeloidleukemia(AML)patientsisusually Xenómica. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago based on cytogenetic and molecular biology methods. The de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, turnaround time for karyotype analysis is up to two weeks, 5CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 6Universidad de Santiago de due to the indispensable cultivation of hematopoietic cells. Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 7Research Although initial PCR or FISH-based testing for recurrent Unit in Clinical and Translational Bioinformatics, Vall structural variations (SV) can be carried out within few d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain, hours, the AML classification is demanding and requires 8Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, accurate karyotyping. 9Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Vall d’Hebron Methods: Weutilized nanopore-sequencing toovercome Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain, 10Heredi- the time-consuming karyotyping and further increase tary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, resolution and accelerate SV analysis for AML classifica- Barcelona, Spain, 11Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, tion. In detail, low-coverage whole genome sequencing United Kingdom, 12Fundación Pública Galega Medicina (LC-WGS) was carried out incombination witha modified Xenómica-SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, SMURFseq protocol on AML bone marrow or blood 13Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de samples (?20% blasts). LC-WGS data was used to identify Compostela(IDIS),SantiagodeCompostela,Spain,14Area classification-relevant SV in AML. Genome-wide CNV of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, University Hospital of analysis was done from SMURFSeq data. Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 15CIBER-ONC, Instituto Results: For all 16 samples the results from nanopore- de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 16Molecular Oncology sequencing confirmed the SV identified by conventional Laboratory, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, IdISSC (Instituto cytogenetic and FISH analyses. Translocations, inversions, de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San tandem duplications and CNVs were identified at single Carlos), Madrid, Spain, 17Fundacion Publica Galega de base resolution. We could detect additional small CNVs in Medicina Xenómica, Grupo de Medicina Xenomica-Uni- growth regulatinggenes whichmay modify theaggressive- versidade de Santiago de Compostela, Instituto de Inves- ness of the leukemia. Moreover, the procedure from DNA tigacion Santiago de Compostela (E035), Santiago de isolation to obtaining results requires less than 48h and is Compostela, Spain, 18Human Genetics Group, Spanish not operator dependent. The method can also generate National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain,116 J.delPicchia 19Digestive Cancer Research Group, 12 de Octubre C24.12 Research Institute, Madrid, Spain, 20Molecular Biology Reduced male reproductive success drives selective Laboratory, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, constraint on human genes Spain,21FundacionPublicaGalegadeMedicinaXenomica, GrupodeMedicinaXenomica-UniversidadedeSantiagode E. J. Gardner1*, M. D. C. Neville1, K. E. Samocha1, M. E. Compostela, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria de San- K. Niemi1, K. J. Barclay2, M. Kolk3, G. Kirov4, H. C. tiago de Compostela (E035), Santiago de Compostela, Martin1, M. E. Hurles1 Spain, 22Institute of Biopathology and Regenerative Med- icine, University of Granada, Granada, Spain, 23Institució 1Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barce- 2Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research, Rostock, lona, Spain Germany, 3Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden, 4School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United The use of NGS gene panels for clinical testing has Kingdom increased the diagnostic yield, but also the frequency of variants of unknown significance (VUS) per patient. With Sequencing of human populations has revealed highly the aim of improving and standardizing variant classifica- variable patterns of natural selection acting on human tion, we’ll create a national registry of genetic variants in genes, with a minority of genes appearing to be under cancer predisposing-genes. To that end, seven Spanish strong selection against heterozygous variants that abolish molecularlaboratorygroupscurrentlyusingNGSpanelsfor the function of the encoded protein. Although these selec- hereditary cancer diagnostics created a variant database. tivelyconstrainedgenesarestronglyenrichedfordominant Our current database gathers all variants with less than 1% single gene disorders, for most of these genes the nature of allele frequency in all GnomAD outbred populations, the selective constraint is unknown. We called large dele- starting with the ATM gene, study because of its moderate tions from SNP genotyping data on 500K UK Biobank increase in breast cancer risk and its remarkable number of participants and analysed protein truncating variants from VUSes. The methodology consisted of: 1) selection and exome data on 50K UK Biobank participants. We deter- curation of 50 representative variants from our cohort; 2) mined the cumulative burden of likely loss-of-function evaluation of each by three members; and 3) discussion of variants in each UK Biobank participant, weighted evidences for classification in monthly teleconferences. As according to the degree of selective constraint of the ATM-specificguidelineshavenotbeenpublished,we have impacted gene(s), which we term their Shet burden. We previously carried out our own ACMG/AMP criterion found that increasing Shet burden results in substantially adjustment. So far, 842 variants belonging to 730 tested reduced male reproductive success, driven by an increased patientswithdifferenthereditarycancerconditions.Among risk of childlessness (p= 4x10-15). This reduction in the 265 unique variants, 97 appeared more than once, and reproductive success is much weaker in females (p= 35haddifferencesinclassificationamonggroups.Ournew 0.0026). Shet burden is also associated with reduced fluid ATM-specific criteria have allowed us to improve and intelligence, educational attainment and household income, standardize the classification of the 50 pilot variants. We’ll but without strong sex-bias. We present evidence that this next submit our classifications to international databases reduced male reproductive success is most likely mediated and extend our database to other Spanish participants and by cognitive and behavioural traits, which, due to female hereditary cancer genes. Grant support: Carlos III National preferencesfor mating partnerslikelytoinvest resourcesin Health Institute - FEDER funds [PI19/00553; PI16/00563; their offspring, renders male carriers of such variants less PI16/01898; SAF2015-68016-R and CIBERONC]; the able to find mating partners. Our findings support a sub- Government of Catalonia [PERIS_MedPerCan and URD- stantial role for sexual selection due to mate choice pre- Cat projects, 2017SGR1282 and 2017SGR496]. ferences shaping the recent evolution of human genes. L.Feliubadaló:None.M.SantamariñaPeña:None.L.M. E. J. Gardner: None. M. D. C. Neville: None. K. E. Porras: None. A. Moles-Fernández: None. A. T. Sánchez: Samocha: None.M.E. K.Niemi:None. K.J.Barclay:None. None. A. Blanco: None. O. Diez: None. S. Gutiérrez- M. Kolk: None. G. Kirov: None. H. C. Martin: None. M. E. Enríquez: None. M. de la Hoya: None. A. Lopez-Novo: Hurles: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or None.A.Osorio:None.M.Pineda:None.D.Rueda:None. other intellectual property); Modest; Congenica. C.Ruiz-Ponte:None.A.Vega:None.I.J.Molina:None.X. de la Cruz: None.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 117 C24.13 and investigation of neurodevelopmental disorders. While Widespreadsexualdifferencesingeneticarchitecturein manyevolutionarilyconserveddevelopmentalprocessesare UK Biobank wellstudiedinmousemodels,ourunderstandingofhuman- specific neurodevelopmental processes is limited. Our lab E.Bernabeu1*,O.Canela-Xandri2,K.Rawlik1,A.Talenti1, aims to provide transcriptomic and epigenomic reference J. Prendergast1, A. Tenesa1,2 atlases with single-cell resolution. In this ongoing project, wearecharacterizingchromatinaccessibilityofcelltypesin 1The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, the human brain during early development (5 - 13 p.c.w.) United Kingdom, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, University using single-cell ATAC-sequencing. So far, we have of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom sequenced a few tens of thousands of cells and will profile up to one million individual human cells, identifying both Despite males and females sharing nearly identical gen- region- and cell lineage-specific enhancers as well as enri- omes, there are differences between the sexes in complex ched motifs and gene accessibility. We use a two-step traits and in the risk, incidence, and prevalence of a wide approach to feature identification, first performing super- array of diseases. Gene by sex interactions (GxS) are ficial decomposition and clustering on binned genomic thought to underlie some of this sexual dimorphism. ranges to stratify peak calling and then performing Hier- However, the extent and basis of these interactions are archical Poisson Factorization on more detailed PeakxCell poorly understood. Here we provide insights into both the data to identify lineages and cell types. We have identified scope and mechanism of GxS across the genome of circa 29 clusters and 325.484 unique peaks. 115.048 of these 450,000individualsofEuropeanancestryand530complex peaksareintergenicand28.622ofthesepeaks(25%)don’t traits in UK Biobank. We report sex differences in herit- align to any known element in the GENCODE GRCh38 ability for 71 traits, through genetic correlations for 69 reference, indicating the presence of unannotated cell line- traits, and in associations of genetic variants located in the agespecificenhancers.Tovalidatetheclusteridentitiesand autosome and X-chromosome for 103 traits. We also show lineages, our scATAC-seq data will be integrated with the thatsexspecificpolygenicriskscoresmayleadtoamodest scRNA-seq data that has been acquired as part of the improvement of phenotypic prediction and highlight how HumanDevelopmentalCellAtlasinitiative.Thiscombined sex agnostic analyses could be missing loci of interest. resourcemayserveasareferenceforfuturestudiesrelating Finally, we studied the potential functional role of this to development of the human nervous system. European dimorphism through sex-biased eQTL and gene-level ana- Union - H2020-SC1-BHC-2018-2020 - BRAINTIME lyses. This study marks the largest examination of the C. C. Mannens: None. L. Hu: None. E. P. Braun: None. geneticsofsexualdimorphismtodate.Ourfindingsparallel P. Lönnerberg: None. S. Linnarsson: None. previousreports,provingthewidespreadpresenceofsexual genetic heterogeneity across complex traits, though be it of C25 Late Breaking Session generally modest magnitude. This warrants the need for future studies to consider sex-stratifying analyses, in order C25.1 to both shed light into possible sex-specific molecular Deciphering genomic inversions mechanisms as well as improve prediction of high-level phenotypes. C. M. Grochowski1*, M. Pettersson2, J. Eisfeldt2, M. E. Bernabeu:None.O. Canela-Xandri: None. K.Rawlik: Gandhi1,3, D. Pehlivan1, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui4, M. None. A. Talenti: None. J. Prendergast: None. A. Withers1, P. Stankiewicz1,5, A. C. V. Krepischi6, J. R. Tenesa: None. Lupski1, A. Lindstrand2, C. M. B. Carvalho1 C24.14 1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, Profiling the chromatin landscape of early neurodeve- 2Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3University of lopment using scATAC-seq Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States, 4Regeneron, Tarrytown, NY, United States, 5Baylor C. C. Mannens*, L. Hu, E. P. Braun, P. Lönnerberg, S. Genetics, Houston, TX, United States, 6University of São Linnarsson Paulo, SP, Brazil Karolinska institutet, Solna, Sweden Genomic inversions are a class of structural variation (SV) relevantinevolution,speciationanddiseasebutchallenging Understanding the molecular processes underlying healthy to detect/resolve. Copy number neutral inversions contain developmentofthehumanbrainiscrucialinthemodelling two breakpoints in cis, often located within repetitive118 J.delPicchia regions. Contrastingly, inversions accompanied by copy Spain, 3Broad Institute, BOSTON, MA, United States, number variation (CNV, deletions/duplications/triplica- 4University of Tartu, BARCELONA, Estonia, 5Universitat tions) may havemore than twobreakpoints.Those features Pompeu Fabra, BARCELONA, Spain contribute to the high error rates that characterize inversion detection resulting in many events being overlooked. Background: The burden of several common diseases We hypothesize that proper detection/investigation of including obesity, diabetes, hypertension, asthma, and inversions require a strategy utilizing multiple methodolo- depression is increasing in most world populations. The giesincludingcytogeneticsandnext-generationsequencing. mechanisms underlying the numerous epidemiological and We applied karyotyping, short-read WGS, linked-read genetic correlations among these disorders remain largely WGS, droplet digital PCR, array CGH, long-read WGS unknown. Genomic inversions can alter the function of (ONT)oropticalmapping(OM)intwocohortsofinversion genesbymultiplemechanismsaffectingseveraldiseases.Its carriers:1.paracentricorpericentricinversions(N=18)and impact remained largely unknown because they were dif- 2. inversions accompanied with complex rearrangements ficult to genotype in large cohorts. (N=3)andoneindividualwithmultipledenovoinversions. Methods: We performed an inversion association For cohort 1, we achieved nucleotide-resolution of inver- analysis including 21 inversions and 25 obesity-related sion for 13/18 (72%) samples studied by WGS providing traits, on a total of 408,898 Europeans, and validated the mechanistic insights and challenging the dogma of how results in 67,299 independent individuals. Inversion calling most inversions are formed. Remarkably, we observed that wasperformedusingourscoreInvHaptoolthatusesexiting ~17% of apparently neutral inversions are accompanied by GWAS data. CNVs. For cohort 2, we observed that ONT/OM resolved Results: Seven inversions were associated with multiple the complex inversion structure through the use of single diseases while inversions and inversions 8p23.1, 16p11.2 molecules preserving the architecture, enabling identifica- and 11q13.2 were strongly associated with the co- tionofmultiplejunctionswithinrepetitivesegmentsmissed occurrence of obesity with other common diseases. by WGS. Transcriptome analysis across numerous tissues revealed No single technology solves all SVs. While short-read strongcandidategenesofobesity-relatedtraits.Analysesin WGS can resolve a proportion of neutral inversions, those human pancreatic islets indicated the potential mechanism mediated by repeats or accompanied by CNVs remain of inversions in the susceptibility of diabetes by disrupting challenging. Utilization of multiple technologies and the cis-regulatory effect of SNPs from their target genes. visualization of unbroken DNA through OM/ONT sequen- Conclusions: We report the largest association study of cing facilitates detection/resolution of structures containing genomic inversions and human traits that represents a multiple breakpoint junctions. breakthrough for genomic association of comorbid dis- C. M. Grochowski: None. M. Pettersson: None. J. orders. Inversions have major genetic contribution into the Eisfeldt: None. M. Gandhi: None. D. Pehlivan: None. C. joint susceptibility to common diseases. The results in Gonzaga-Jauregui: A. Employment (full or part-time); obesity and diabetes reveal a mechanism in which cis- Significant; Regeneron Genomics Center. M. Withers: regulatory SNPs are separated from their target genes by None. P. Stankiewicz: None. A. C. V. Krepischi: None. J. inversion breakpoints. Future studies in other diseases are R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, now accessible to the research community thanks to our patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest;23andMe.F. inversion genotyping tool. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Regeneron Pharma- J. R. Gonzalez: None. C. Ruiz: None. A. Caceres: None. ceuticals, Novartis. A. Lindstrand: None. C. M. B. I. Moran: None. M. Lopez: None. L. Alonso: None. I. Carvalho: None. Tolosana: None. M. Guindo-Martinez: None. J. M. Mercader: None. T. Esko: None. D. Torrents: None. J. C25.2 Gonzalez: None. L. A. Perez-Jurado: None. Polymorphic inversions underlie the shared genetic susceptibility of obesity-related diseases C25.3 Discovery of rare variants associated with blood J. R. Gonzalez1*, C. Ruiz1, A. Caceres1, I. Moran2, M. pressureregulationthroughmeta-analysisof1.3million Lopez1, L. Alonso2, I. Tolosana1, M. Guindo-Martinez3, J. individuals M. Mercader3, T. Esko4, D. Torrents2, J. Gonzalez5, L. A. Perez-Jurado5 E. V. Feofanova*, the Blood Pressure-International Consortiumof Exome chip Studies (BP‐ICE), CHARGE 1Barcelona Institute for Global Health, BARCELONA, consortium, CHD Exome+, Exome BP, GoT2D:T2Dgenes, Spain, 2Barcelona Supercomputing Center, BARCELONA, deCODE, the Million Veteran Program (MVP)Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 119 Human Genetics Center, The University of Texas Health Informatics, Technical University Munich, Garching, Ger- Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, United States many, 4Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectro- metry, BayBioMS, Technical University Munich, Freising, Elevated blood pressure (BP) is a major risk-factor for Germany, 5Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Istituto cardiovascular disease worldwide. Most prior genetic stu- Neurologico ‘Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy, 6Department of dies of BP explored Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) Metabolism, Chiba Children’s Hospital, Chiba, Japan, with minor allele frequency [MAF]>0.01. The majority of 7DepartmentofPaediatrics,ParacelsusMedicalUniversity, identified BP-SNVs are non-coding and the corresponding Salzburg, Austria, 8Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum causalgenesremainunknown.Weexploredtheroleofrare Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany, 9INSERM U1163, Uni- variants (MAF<=0.01) on BP and elucidated candidate versitéParis,InstitutImagine,Paris,France,10Department causal BP genes, to further our understanding of BP of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Ludwig-Maximi- regulation. lians-University, Munich, Germany, 11Department of Gen- The Exome array facilitates analyses of rare coding eral Pediatrics, University Hospital Heidelberg, variants with potential functional consequences. Over 80% Heidelberg, Germany, 12University Medical Center Eppen- of SNVs on the array are rare and ~80% are missense, dorf, Hamburg, Germany, 1313Department of General implicating a candidate causal gene. We performed an Pediatrics, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düssel- Exome Array-Wide Association Study (EAWAS) of dorf,Germany,1414ResearchUnitforMolecularMedicine, ~247,000 SNVs in ~1.32 million participants (95 studies) Aarhus University and University Hospital, Aarhus N, toidentifySNVsassociatedwithSBP,DBP,pulsepressure Denmark, 15Department of Medical Genetics, The Chil- and hypertension. We additionally performed a rare-variant dren’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, Genome-Wide Association Study (RV-GWAS) of ~29 16Department of Internal Medicine and Paediatrics, Ghent million imputed and genotyped SNVs in ~670,000 University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium participants (UKBiobank, MVP). We discovered 105 new BP-associated genomic regions, With genomic advancement, came the shift from variant containing nine rare SNV-BP associations in the EAWAS discovery to interpretation, which must be rigorous to avoid and 23– in the RV-GWAS (P<5x10−8); 55 additional rare misinterpretation. Here, we analyzed 150 fibroblast cell lines variants were distinct novel SNVs within known BP- from undiagnosed patients with suspected mitochondrial associated loci. Many BP-associated rare variants highlight disorders. Transcriptome analysis facilitates genome-wide potential candidate causal genes (e.g. GATA5, PLCB3), DNAvariantinterpretationontheRNAlevel,forbothcoding with 17% located in or near potentially druggable genes and non-coding variants. Proteomics allows quantification of (e.g. NR3C2, NPPA). proteins in one assay, removing the need for individual Our study is the largest analysis of rare variants to date, Westernblotanalyses.Missensevariantsaccountingforover revealing candidate genes at new and previously reported 50%ofallmutationsreportedinHGMD.Theymayhaveno BP loci, highlighting potential therapeutic targets. We also functional consequence or may exercise their pathogenicity report new observations from both rare and common loci bydisruptinginteractionsordestabilizingtheproteinstructure enriching our understanding of genetic BP regulation in which can be detected by proteomics as aberrantly low health and disease. expression. We established a protocol for quantitative deep E. V. Feofanova: None. proteomeanalysisallowingusto quantifyamedianof7,500 proteins per sample. Discarding lowly expressed genes, C25.4 around13,000transcriptsaredetectable.Forthediagnosisof Multi-Omics integration for molecular diagnostics of Mendelian disease, we analyzed three aberrant events: 1) mendelian disorders aberrant splicing, 2) low expression, 3) monoallelic expres- sion, and variants often present as a combination of these R. Kopajtich1,2*, D. Smirnov1,2, S. Loipfinger3, C. Meng4, events. Combining DNA and RNA sequencing we increase D. Ghezzi5, K. Murayama6, J. A. Mayr7, P. Freisinger8, M. the diagnostic yield by 15%. Proteomics allowed us to vali- D. Metodiev9, A. Rötig9, T. Klopstock10, G. F. Hoffmann11, date 12/27 missense VUS (44%). In additional 12 cases, we R. Santer12, F. Distelmaier13, R. Olsen14, D. Piekutowska- wereabletoreachadiagnosisbydetectinglowproteinlevels Abramczuk15, P. Verloo16, C. Lamperti5, J. Gagneur3, C. of known disease genes which have not been prioritized by Ludwig4, H. Prokisch1,2 WES. In 14 of those cases, we were able to validate the pathogenic character by the impact on additional proteins 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,TechnicalUniversityMunich, functionally associated. In summary, we established a multi- München, Germany, 2Institute of Neurogenomics, Helm- omics integration pipeline and propose its application to holtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Department of advanced molecular diagnostics.120 J.delPicchia R. Kopajtich: None. D. Smirnov: None. S. Loipfinger: for Sick Children, Department of Ophthalmology and None. C. Meng: None. D. Ghezzi: None. K. Murayama: Vision Sciences, The University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, None. J. A. Mayr: None. P. Freisinger: None. M. D. Canada,17ResearchCentreforMedicalGenetics,Moscow, Metodiev:None.A.Rötig:None.T.Klopstock:None.G.F. Moscow, Russian Federation, 18Department of Neurology, Hoffmann:None.R.Santer:None.F.Distelmaier:None.R. UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany,19Departmentof Olsen: None. D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. P. Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochem- Verloo: None. C. Lamperti: None. J. Gagneur: None. C. istry, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, Ludwig: None. H. Prokisch: None. 20Department of Experimental Epileptology and Cognition Research, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 21Bavarian C25.5 Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Impaired complex I repair causes recessive Leber’s Technische Universität München, München, Germany, hereditary optic neuropathy 22Institute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Goethe-Univer- sity, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 23Department of S.L.Stenton1,2*,N.Sheremet3,C.Catarino4,N.Andreeva3, Pediatrics, Salzburger Landeskliniken and Paracelsus Z. Assouline5, P. Barboni6, O. Barel7, I. Bychkov8, L. Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 24Sackler Caporali9, P. Charbel Issa10, P. Freisinger11, S. Gerber12, Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, D. Ghezzi13, J. Heidler14, M. Hempel15, E. Heon16, Y. 25Ophthalmology Department, Centre National d’Ophtal- Itkis17, E. Javasky7, J. Kaplan12, R. Kopajtich1,2, C. mologie des Qinze-Vingts, Paris, France Kornblum18, R. Kovacs-Nagy19,1, T. Krylova8, W. Kunz20, C. La Morgia9, C. Lamperti13, C. Ludwig21, P. Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is one of the Malacarne22,J.Mayr23,J.Meisterknecht14,T.Nevinitsyna3, most frequent and first genetically defined mitochondrial F. Palombo9, B. Pode-Shakked24, M. Shmelkova3, M. diseases. The majority of LHON cases are caused by Tzadok24, A. van der Ven15, C. Vignal-Clermont25, M. mutations in mitochondrial DNA-encoded complex I (CI) Wagner1, E. Zakharova8, N. Zhorzholadze3, J. Rozet12, V. genesandarecharacterizedbyamildCIdefect.However,a Carelli9, P. Tsygankova8, T. Klopstock4, I. Wittig14, H. significant number still remain genetically undefined. Uti- Prokisch1,2 lizing human genetics and tracking of protein turnover in mitochondrial supercomplexes, we delineate the role of an 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität orphan chaperone protein in a novel mechanism of CI München,München,Germany,2InstituteofNeurogenomics, function and describe a recessive form of LHON resulting Helmholtz Zentrum München, München, Germany, 3Fed- from defects in this protein. Biallelic recessive DNAJC30 eral State Budgetary Institution of Science “Research mutations were discovered in LHON cases from 29 famil- Institute of Eye Diseases”, Moscow, Russian Federation, ies,breakingthelongstandingdogmaofexclusivematernal 4Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Uni- inheritance. In 27 of the families, the variant is ascribed to versity Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität an Eastern European founder event. Moreover, incomplete München, München, Germany, 5Fédération de Génétique penetrance and male predominance hallmarking maternally et Institut Imagine, Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital inherited LHON are recapitulated, indicating that these NeckerEnfantsMalades,Paris,France,6ScientificInstitute features originate downstream of the genetic defect. Given San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 7Genomics Unit, Sheba Cancer the combination of variable penetrance and higher than Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, expected allele frequency of the founder variant, the dis- Israel, 8Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, coveryprovedchallengingtocurrentdiagnosticapproaches. Russian Federation, 9IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neuro- Our experimental data from patient-derived fibroblast cell logiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 10Oxford Eye Hospital, linesindicatethatthepathologyunderpinningthedisease,a Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, mildbutconsistentCIdefect,isduetoreducedexchangeof Oxford, United Kingdom, 11Department of Pediatrics, subunitsoftheCIN-module,responsibleforthefirstpartof Klinikum am Steinenberg, Reutlingen, Germany, 12Labora- electron transport and exposed to higher risk of damage. torygeneticsinophthalmology(LGO),INSERMUMR1163 The identification of this repair system is of general biolo- - Institute of genetic diseases, Imagine, Paris, France, gical importance, and may open promising avenues for 13UnitofMedicalGeneticsandNeurogenetics,Fondazione future therapeutic interventions for defective CI. Grant IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy, references: 01GM1906D, 01GM1906A, 01GM1603, SFB 14Functional Proteomics, SFB815 Core Unit, Medical 815/Z1, GR-2016-02361449, EXC2026. School, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, S. L. Stenton: None. N. Sheremet: None. C. Catarino: 15Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center None.N.Andreeva:None.Z.Assouline:None.P.Barboni: Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 16The Hospital None. O. Barel: None. I. Bychkov: None. L. Caporali:Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 121 None. P. Charbel Issa: None. P. Freisinger: None. S. Neurosciences, University of Siena, Policlinico Le Scotte, Gerber: None. D. Ghezzi: None. J. Heidler: None. M. Siena,Italy,9DeptofMedicalSciences,UniversityofSiena, Hempel:None. E. Heon:None. Y.Itkis: None.E. Javasky: Siena, Italy, 10Research Center of Systemic Autoinflamma- None. J. Kaplan: None. R. Kopajtich: None. C. Kornblum: tory Diseases and Behçet’s Disease and Rheumatology- D.Speakers Bureau/Honoraria(speakers bureau, symposia, Ophthalmology Collaborative Uveitis Center, Department and expert witness); Modest; Santhera Pharmaceuticals. R. of Medical Sciences, Surgery and Neurosciences, Univer- Kovacs-Nagy:None.T.Krylova:None.W.Kunz:None.C. sityofSiena,Siena,Italy,11DeptofSpecializedandInternal LaMorgia:None.C.Lamperti:None.C.Ludwig:None.P. Medicine, Infectious Diseases Unit, San Donato Hospital Malacarne: None. J. Mayr: None. J. Meisterknecht: None. Arezzo, Arezzo, Italy, 12Dept of Emergency, Anesthesia T. Nevinitsyna: None. F. Palombo: None. B. Pode- Unit, San Donato Hospital, Arezzo, Italy, 13Dept of Shakked: None. M. Shmelkova: None. M. Tzadok: None. Specialized and Internal Medicine, Pneumology Unit and A. van der Ven: None. C. Vignal-Clermont: None. M. UTIP, San Donato Hospital, Arezzo, Italy, 14Clinical Wagner: None. E. Zakharova: None. N. Zhorzholadze: Chemical Analysis Laboratory, San Donato Hospital, None. J. Rozet: None. V. Carelli: None. P. Tsygankova: Arezzo, Italy, 15Dept of Emergency, Anesthesia Unit, None. T. Klopstock: B. Research Grant (principal investi- Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto, Italy, 16Dept of Specia- gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell lized and Internal Medicine, Infectious Diseases Unit, as grants already received); Modest; Santhera Pharmaceu- MisericordiaHospital,Grosseto,Italy,17ClinicalChemical ticals and GenSight Biologics. D. Speakers Bureau/ Analysis Laboratory, Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto, Honoraria(speakersbureau,symposia,andexpertwitness); Italy, 18Dept of Prevention, ASL South-East Tuscany, ASL Modest;SantheraPharmaceuticalsandGenSightBiologics. South-East Tuscany, Italy, 19Territorial Scientific Techni- I. Wittig: None. H. Prokisch: None. cianDepartment,ASLSouth-EastTuscany,ASLSouth-East Tuscany, Italy, 20Otolaryngology Unit, University of Siena, C25.6 Siena, Italy WES profiling of COVID-19 Introduction: Italy has been the first European Country A. Renieri1,2*, E. Benetti3, F. Montagnani3,4, R. Tita2, C. experiencing the epidemic wave of SARS-CoV-2 infection Fallerini1, S. Amitrano2, M. Bruttini2, G. Doddato1, A. reaching200,000cases.OnMarch16,westartedtheGEN- Giliberti1,F.Valentino1,S.Croci1,L.DiSarno1,F.Fava1,2, COVID project (https://sites.google.com/dbm.unisi.it/gen- M. Baldassarri1, A. Tommasi1,2, M. Palmieri1, A. covid) aiming to collect 2,000 COVID-19 patients all over Emiliozzi3,4, M. Fabbiani4, B. Rossetti4, G. Zanelli3,4, L. Italy, the first 500 being already collected. Bergantini5, M. D’Alessandro5, P. Cameli5, D. Bennet5, F. Material and Methods: A first cohort of 130 Tuscanian Anedda6, S. Marcantonio6, S. Scolletta6, F. Franchi6, M. COVID-19 patients (100 of which hospitalised) was Mazzei7, E. Conticini8, L. Cantarini9, B. Frediani10, D. subjected to clinical and molecular characterisation by Tacconi11, M. Feri12, R. Scala13, A. Ognibene14, G. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES). Spargi15, C. Nencioni16, G. Caldarelli17, M. Spagnesi18, A. Results: Searching for common genes by Collapsing Canaccini19, E. Frullanti1, I. Meloni1, M. Mencarelli2, C. Methods against 300 WES controls of Italian population Lo Rizzo2, A. Pinto2, E. Bargagli5, M. Mandalà20, S. failed to give straightforward statistically significant results Furini3, F. Mari1,2 with the exception of a pair of genes, one belonging to the Olfactory Receptor families with many paralogs in the 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, genome. This result is not unexpected since we are facing 2Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria the most challenging common disorder triggered by Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Dept of Medical Biotechnologies, environmental factor with a strong underlying heritability University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 4Dept of Specialized and (50%). Learning the lesson of Autism Spectrum Disorder, Internal Medicine, Tropical and Infectious Diseases Unit, westartedtore-analysethecohorttreatingeachpatientasan Siena, Italy, 5Unit of Respiratory Diseases and Lung independent case, following a Mendelian-like model. We Transplantation, Department of Internal and Specialist identified for each patient an average of 3 pathogenic Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 6Dept of mutations involved in virus infection susceptibility and Emergency and Urgency, Medicine, Surgery and Neuros- pinpoint to one or more rare disorder(s); the number being ciences, Unit of Intensive Care Medicine, Siena University higher in the most severely affected cases. To our knowl- Hospital, Siena, Italy, 7Dept of Medical, Surgical and edge, this is the first report on WES and COVID-19. Our Neuro Sciences, Diagnostic Imaging, University of Siena, results pinpoint to a combined model for COVID-19 Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, susceptibility with a number of, yet unknown, common 8RheumatologyUnit,DepartmentofMedicine,Surgeryand susceptibilitygeneswhichrepresentthefavoritebackground122 J.delPicchia inwhichadditionalraremutationsconfertothehostthebest We demonstrate wide-ranging genomic applications of environment for virus growth and organ damage. the GenapSys platform, which include whole genome A. Renieri: None. E. Benetti: None. F. Montagnani: sequencing of small genomes such as bacteria and viruses, None. R. Tita: None. C. Fallerini: None. S. Amitrano: whole exome sequencing of human samples, and transcrip- None. M. Bruttini: None. G. Doddato: None. A. Giliberti: tomic applications. We also demonstrate that the high None. F. Valentino: None. S. Croci: None. L. Di Sarno: accuracy of the GenapSys platform makes it ideal for None. F. Fava: None. M. Baldassarri: None. A. Tommasi: germline and somatic variant calling for inherited diseases None.M.Palmieri:None.A.Emiliozzi:None.M.Fabbiani: and cancer. Thus, the GenapSys NGS platform is an None. B. Rossetti: None. G. Zanelli: None. L. Bergantini: accurate, scalable, and low cost solution for genomics None. M. D’Alessandro: None. P. Cameli: None. D. research and clinical applications. Bennet: None. F. Anedda: None. S. Marcantonio: None. S. Paliwal: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- S. Scolletta: None. F. Franchi: None. M. Mazzei: None. E. cant; Genapsys Inc. A. Nabi: A. Employment (full or part- Conticini: None. L. Cantarini: None. B. Frediani: None. D. time); Significant; Genapsys Inc. M. Fallahi: A. Employ- Tacconi: None. M. Feri: None. R. Scala: None. A. ment (full or part-time); Significant; Genapsys Inc. M. R. Ognibene: None. G. Spargi: None. C. Nencioni: None. G. Barmi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Caldarelli: None. M. Spagnesi: None. A. Canaccini: None. GenapsysInc.M.Jouzi:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); E. Frullanti: None. I. Meloni: None. M. Mencarelli: None. Significant;GenapsysInc.S.Stern:A.Employment(fullor C. Lo Rizzo: None. A. Pinto: None. E. Bargagli: None. M. part-time); Significant; Genapsys Inc. X. Gomes: A. Mandalà: None. S. Furini: None. F. Mari: None. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Genapsys Inc. H. Nezamfar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- C26 New Technologies and Approaches cant; Genapsys Inc. E. LoPrete: A. Employment (full or part-time);Significant;GenapsysInc.B.Dong:A.Employ- C26.1 ment (full or part-time); Significant; Genapsys Inc. P. Electrical impedance detection based GenapSys Kenney: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; sequencer enables diverse genomic applications Genapsys Inc. K. B. Parizi: A. Employment (full or part- time); Significant; Genapsys Inc. H. Rategh: A. Employ- S.Paliwal*,A. Nabi,M.Fallahi,M.R. Barmi,M.Jouzi,S. ment (full or part-time); Significant; Genapsys Inc. S. Stern, X. Gomes, H. Nezamfar, E. LoPrete, B. Dong, P. Sankar: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Kenney, K. B. Parizi, H. Rategh, S. Sankar, H. Genapsys Inc. H. Esfandyarpour: A. Employment (full or Esfandyarpour part-time); Significant; Genapsys Inc. Genapsys Inc, Redwood City, CA, United States C26.2 A bespoke gene-to-patient approach uplifts novel gene Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technologies have discovery for rare disease diagnostics made rapid strides in the throughput and accuracy of DNA sequencing in recent years. These advances have revolu- E. G. Seaby1,2*, D. Smedley3, R. Scott3, M. Caulfield3, D. tionized biomedical and clinical research. Here, Genapsys Baralle1, H. L. Rehm2, A. O’Donnell-Luria2, S. Ennis1 presentsanovel,scalable,lowcost,andhighaccuracyNGS platform, which enables wide-ranging genomic 1UniversityofSouthampton,Southampton,UnitedKingdom, applications. 2Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, The GenapSys NGS platform is based on accurate UnitedStates,3GenomicsEngland,London,UnitedKingdom detection of electrical impedance changes resulting from single base incorporations during sequencing-by-synthesis. Next generation sequencing has revolutionised rare disease We show that impedance changes measure a steady state diagnostics. Concomitant with advancing technologies has dNTPincorporationsignal,leadingtohigheraccuracy.The been a rise in novel disease-gene discoveries. However, coreofthetechnologyisaCMOS-basedelectronicchipthat diagnostic rates remain suboptimal at ~30%. Novel gene enables scalability and low instrument and consumable discovery is still hindered by vast quantities of variants of costs.Chipswith1M,16Mand144Msensorscanberunon uncertain significance found in genes of undetermined the same GenapSys instrument, giving a lab flexibility in biological function. This necessitates intensive functional NGS assay design and sample multiplexing. We demon- experiments on genes of equally-predicted causality that is stratethatasinglerunwitha16Msensorchipgeneratesup proving a major bottleneck. Herein we propose a bespoke to 2 Gb of high accuracy data, with greater than 99% raw methodthatreversesthetraditional approachofnovel gene accuracy and average read lengths of 150 bp. discovery. We apply the LOEUF metric of intolerance toAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 123 gene inactivation to curate a list of predicted haploinsuffi- additionally classified into one of three windows of cientdiseasegenes.Byleveraginggenomicandphenotypic embryonic lethality: early, mid or late gestation. Early data from the 100,000 Genomes Project, we adopt a gene- lethal genes showed a lower percentage of genes with to-patient approach that matches de novo loss-of-function abnormal phenotypes reported in the human orthologues variants in constrained genes to rare disease patients, thus when compared to late lethal genes (40% vs 51%, reducing most of the analytical noise that currently pre- P=0.048),whilethepercentageofdiseasegenesassociated cludes novel discoveries. Preliminary data reveal the most with autosomal recessive inheritance was significantly constrained LOEUF genes (n=1044) are highly correlated higher (74 % vs 46%, P=0.0005). Consistent with this with OMIM disease genes. Yet, 70% have no disease observation, we found higher pRec scores among the early association, leaving many probable disease genes yet to be lethals(medianpRecforearly,midandlatewindows:0.80, discovered. Pilot data from the 100,000 Genomes Project 0.50 and 0.36; median pLI: 0.004, 0.07 and 0.32). (n=28,000)reveal655rare(MAF<0.001),denovoloss-of- Neurological and neurodevelopmental were the most functioneventsin1044LOEUF-constrainedgenes.476are frequent type of diseases across windows (19%, 24% and in known OMIM genes and 179 are in novel genes (174 27%). Skeletal disorders were the second most frequent cases involving 138 genes). Of these, 27 genes have more class among those genes lethal at mid-gestation, which than one kindred affected and 17 have the same/similar correlates with the organogenesis phase of embryonic phenotypes. Therefore, rethinking current practices by uti- development. Conversely, early lethal disease genes were lising large cohorts and adopting gene-based approaches highly enriched for metabolic disorders (OR 4.27, can accelerate novel gene discovery and target the most P=0.0003). appropriate genes for functional validation. The mouse embryonic development stage where LoF E. G. Seaby: None. D. Smedley: None. R. Scott: None. leads to lethality allows us to establish associations with M. Caulfield: None. D. Baralle: None. H. L. Rehm: None. human disease features. This knowledge may assist the A. O’Donnell-Luria: None. S. Ennis: None. prioritisation of candidate genes. P. Cacheiro: None. S. A. Murray: None. V. Muñoz- C26.3 Fuentes: None. H. Westerberg: None. M. E. Dickinson: Analysis of Mendelian phenotypes through mouse None. A. Mallon: None. T. F. Meehan: None. D. embryo viability screening Smedley: None. P. Cacheiro1*, S. A. Murray2, V. Muñoz-Fuentes3, H. C26.4 Westerberg4,M.E. Dickinson5, A.Mallon4,T. F.Meehan3, Patient-derived retinal organoids to model retinitis D. Smedley1, the International Mouse Phenotyping pigmentosa 1 (RP1) Consortium P. Berber*, A. Milenkovic, C. Brandl, B. H. F. Weber 1WilliamHarveyResearchInstitute,QueenMaryUniversity of London, London, United Kingdom, 2The Jackson University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States, 3European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Introduction: Human induced pluripotent stem cells Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 4Medical Research (hiPSC) are an excellent starting point for generating 3D Council Harwell, Mammalian Genetics Unit and Mary retinal organoids, which contain many cell types native to Lyon Centre, Harwell, United Kingdom, 5Department of the retina. Still, retinal organoids lack critical physiological Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of contact between photoreceptors and retinal pigment epi- Medicine, Houston, TX, United States thelium (RPE) cells. Nevertheless, retinal organoids offer exciting new pathways of scientific discovery, including We have recently described a gene classification across the modelingretinaldystrophiessuchasRetinitisPigmentosa1 Full Spectrum of Intolerance to Loss-of-function (LoF) (RP1, OMIM #180100), where vision loss is caused by the (FUSIL) by combining mouse viability screens and human degeneration of photoreceptors. Here, we have differ- cell proliferation assays, and showing specific enrichment entiated retinal organoids from healthy controls and RP1 of disease genes in discrete categories. Here, we further patients harboring autosomal dominant mutations in the dissect this spectrum by assessing the embryonic stage at RP1 gene (OMIM # 603937). MaterialsandMethods:Humandermalfibroblastswere which homozygous LoF results in lethality in mice, and explore the correlation with human phenotypes. obtainedfromskinbiopsiesofsixRP1patientsandhealthy Four hundred mouse lethal genes identified by the controls, and reprogrammed into hiPSCs. An organoid International Mouse Phenotyping Consortium were differentiation protocol was adapted from published124 J.delPicchia protocols.AnovelmethodtoharvestandexpandRPEcells for the current technology. Correctly detected aberrations as byproducts from the organoid differentiation protocol, included8microdeletionsand8duplications,11translocations, was also established. 1 inversion and 4 aneuploidies. Results: Successful retinal organoid differentiation was Bionano genome-imaging is a promising technology with confirmed, via immunocytochemistry staining for ganglion potentialtobecomeagenericcytogenetictestforalltypesof and photoreceptor markers. Photoreceptor differentiation (molecular-)cytogenetic aberrations. The 10.000-time higher was improved by culturing the organoids on an orbital resolution as compared to standard karyotyping thereby shaker, facilitating the redistribution of fresh media and enables precise breakpoint mapping and strikingly, even waste. Organoids differentiated from RP1 patient hiPSC balanced translocations and inversions are picked up easily. showedadramaticreductionincellsexpressingrecoverin,a 1. Neveling et al. (2020). bioRxiv-https://doi.org/10. developingphotoreceptormarker(13±4.35vs80.3±4.51, 1101/2020.02.06.935742 p-value=4.92*10−05). RPE cells were used to establish a K. Neveling: None. T. Mantere: None. E. Kater-Baats: co-culture with the organoids, to induce physiological None. R. van Beek: None. M. Oorsprong: None. S. contact between photoreceptors and RPE. Vermeulen: None. M. Pauper: None. D. Olde Weghuis: Conclusions: Retinal organoids can be differentiated from None.M.Stevens-Kroef:None.G.vanderZande:None.D. hiPSC, and provide an exciting new avenue of research to Smeets: None. A. Hoischen: None. model inherited retinal dystrophies, including RP1. P.Berber:None.A.Milenkovic:None.C.Brandl:None. C27 Genome Variation and Architecture B. H. F. Weber: None. C27.1 C26.6 NCBI ALFA: Providing Sequence Variation Resource Nextgenerationcytogenetics:genome-imagingimproves from 1 Million dbGaP Subjects structural variant detection for constitutional chromo- somal aberrations L. Phan*, NCBI dbSNP, NCBI dbGaP K. Neveling*, T. Mantere, E. Kater-Baats, R. van Beek, M. NCBI, Bethesda, MD, United States Oorsprong,S.Vermeulen,M.Pauper,D.OldeWeghuis,M. Stevens-Kroef, G. van der Zande, D. Smeets, A. Hoischen The aim of the NCBI Allele Frequency Aggregator (ALFA) project (https://go.usa.gov/xdNvF) is to make frequency data Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands from over 1M subjects in the database of Genotype and Phe- notype(dbGaP),previouslyunderauthorizedaccess,available Recently,weraisedthequestionwhethertheBionanogenome- for open-access to facilitate discoveries and interpretations of imagingtechnologywouldhavepotentialtoreplaceall,FISH, variants with biological impacts or causing diseases. The karyotyping and CNV-microarray studies, in the analysis of ALFAprojectwillcomputeallelefrequencyforvariantsacross somatic aberrations for different kind of leukemia samples.1 approved un-restricted dbGaP studies. This involved harmo- Hereweaimedtotesttheclinicalutilityofthistechnologyfor nizing and normalizing Heterogeneous data and file formats theanalysisofconstitutionalaberrationsinDNAderivedfrom from GWAS chip array genotyping, exomes, and whole gen- various tissues. We analyzed samples with known aberrations omes.wereQCandtransformedinto standard VCFformatas of patients with infertility, recurrent abortions or intellectual inputintoanautomatedpipelineusingthenewSPDInotation disability, as well as prenatal samples by genome imaging. (Holmes et al., 2019) to aggregate, remap and cluster to For 30 samples, ultra-high molecular weight gDNA was existing dbSNP rs, and computed allele frequency. Allele fre- isolated either from blood (EDTA/Heparin) or cell lines quencies are computed for 12 major populations including (fibroblasts/amniotic fluid/chorionic villi). DNA was pro- European, Hispanic, African, Asian, and other diverse popu- cessed and imaged on the Saphyr instrument (Bionano lation ancestries that were determined using GRAF-pop soft- Genomics).1 For each sample at least 100x genome ware developed by dbGaP (Jin et al., 2019). The data is coverage was obtained. Using Bionano Access software, integrated with dbSNP 680 million Reference SNP (rs) and denovogenomeassembly,SVandCNVvariantcallingand existingallelefrequencyreportedforover500millionrsfrom annotation was performed. various projects including 1000Genomes, ExAc, GnomAD, Samplepreparationforalldifferentmaterialswassuccessful. TopMed,andmanyotherpopulationstudies.TheinitialALFA Dataanalysisonaverageresultedin~50rareSVsand~20high aggregate data release is from 110 thousand dbGaP subjects, confidence CNVs per sample. In the analyzed cases, all ~10% of available data. Aggregated from 677 billion geno- previously clinically reported structural aberrations were types,theresultsincludedallelecountsandfrequencyfor531 detected except for Robertsonian translocations, as expected million known dbSNP rs site and 18 million novel ones.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 125 Subsequent quarterly releases will include additional new 1UnivBrest,Inserm,EFS,UMR1078,GGB,Brest,France, dbGaPstudiesandcombinedcanreachoverabillionvariants 2CHRUBrest,ServicedeGénétiqueMédicaleetdeBiologie from millions of subjects. de la Reproduction, Brest, France, 3Institute of Medical L. Phan: None. Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom C27.2 Predicting the effects of structural variants in the We have recently reported a homozygous Alu insertion var- human genome iant (termed Alu_Ins) within the 3′-untranslated region (3′- UTR) of the SPINK1 gene as the cause of a new pediatric P. Kleinert*, M. Kircher disease entity. Although Alu_Ins had been shown, by means of a cell culture-based full-length gene expression assay Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany (FLGEA;expressionvectorcontainedSPINK1’s~7-kbentire codingandintronicsequences),toresultinthecompleteloss Inrecent years,we saw rapidtechnologicaladvancesinthe of SPINK1 mRNA expression, the precise underlying identification of structural variants (SVs). However, the mechanism(s) has remained elusive. Herein, we filled this interpretationofthesevariantsremainschallenging.Several knowledge gap by adopting a hypothesis-driven approach. methods were developed that utilize individual mechanistic Employing RepeatMasker, we identified two Alu elements principles like the deletion of coding sequence or 3D gen- (termed Alu1 and Alu2) within the SPINK1 locus; both are ome architecture disruptions. However, a comprehensive locateddeepwithin intron 3 and, most importantly,reside in tool that uses the broad spectrum of available annotations the opposite orientation to Alu-Ins. We then performed the for estimating the effect of SVs and prioritize functional cellculture-basedFLGEAonatotalof7full-lengthSPINK1 variants in health and disease is missing. Here we describe expression vectors (i.e., wild-type (WT), mutant (Mut), CADD-SV,amethodtoretrieveandintegrateawidesetof WT_delAlu1, Mut_delAlu1, WT_delAlu2, Mut_delAlu2 and annotations across the range and in the vicinity of SVs for inversionofAlu_Ins)inthepresenceofanonsense-mediated functional scoring. So far, supervised learning approaches mRNA decay inhibitor, cycloheximide. The results clearly wereofverylimitedpowerforthiskindofapplication,due demonstratedthatAlu_InsdisruptssplicingbyformingRNA to a very small number of functionally annotated (e.g. secondary structures with Alu1 in the pre-mRNA sequence pathogenic/benign) SV sets. We overcome this problem by ratherthanbyitsprimarysequence.Thisisthefirsttimethat using a surrogate training-objective, the combined annota- anAluinsertionvarianthasbeenshowntoexertitseffectvia tion dependent depletion (CADD) of functional variants in suchamechanismcausinghumangeneticdisease.Giventhe evolutionary derived variant sets. Our tool computes sum- abundance of pre-existing Alu elements within the human mary statistics and uses a trained linear model to differ- genome and the potential insertion of new Alu elements into entiate deleterious from neutral structural variants. We use virtuallyanysite,ourfindingshaveimportantimplicationsfor humanandchimpanzeederivedallelesasproxy-neutraland the detection and interpretation of Alu elements in human contrast them with matched simulated variants as proxy- disease genes. (This work was supported by INSERM). pathogenic, an approach that has proven powerful in the E.Masson:None.S.Maestri:None.D.N.Cooper:None. interpretation of SNVs and short InDels (Kircher & Witten C. Férec: None. J. M. Chen: None. et al, 2014). In a proof-of-principle study, we show that CADD-SVscorescorrelatewithknownpathogenicvariants C27.4 in individual genomes as well as allelic diversity observed Increasedmutationratesandgenomevariationatactive across the population. The ability of the current model to spermatogonial regulatory sites prioritize functionally relevant and pathogenic variants is unmatched by existing methods. V. B. Kaiser*, L. Talmane, Y. Kumar, F. Semple, M. P. Kleinert: None. M. Kircher: None. MacLennan, Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study, D. R. FitzPatrick, M. S. Taylor, C. A. Semple C27.3 RNAsecondarystructuremediatedbyAluinsertionasa MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom novel disease-causing mechanism Introduction: The germline is the ultimate source of E. Masson1,2, S. Maestri1,2, D. N. Cooper3, C. Férec1,2, J. genetic variation, but we know little about the influence of M. Chen1* germlinechromatinstructureontheprocessesthatgiverise to mutations. Here, we use germline epigenomic data to study the influence of transcription factor binding sites126 J.delPicchia (TFBSs)inthegermline onthepatterns ofdifferent classes Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States, 9Depart- of mutation across the human genome. mentofPediatrics,UniversityofCalifornia,SanDiego,San Materials and Methods: We use novel spermatogonial Diego, CA, United States, 10Department of Neurosurgery, ATAC-seqdatatoinferthelocationsofTFBSsandmeiotic University of California San Diego – Rady Children’s recombination initiation sites (PRDM9 binding sites). We Hospital, Sam Diego, CA, United States, 11Department of then relate these sites to structural variants in the DDD Neurosciences, University of California San Diego – Rady (Deciphering Developmental Disorders) cohort, very rare Children’s Hospital, San Diego, CA, United States, (gnomAD database) variants from extant human popula- 12Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and tions, and de novo mutations. Immunology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Results: Germline TFBSs are impacted by significantly Germany, 13Arima Genomics, Inc, San Diego, CA, United increased rates of structural variant breakpoints: 32% of States, 14Moores Cancer Center, University of California singleton DDD breakpoints are within 1KB of an ATAC- San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA, United States Seq peak, and particular testis-active factors are enriched. Both de novo and rare gnomAD short insertions are Introduction: Brain and other tumors of the CNS are the enriched at the same TFBSs, suggesting these sites are most common cancers in children aged 0-14 years in the particularlysusceptibletomutationandthattheyemployan USA. Ependymoma is the third most common pediatric unusual DNA repair mechanism. The increased mutation brain tumor and a leading cause of death in childhood rates associated with germline TF binding disproportio- cancer patients. The most common and aggressive sub- nately affect a class of enhancers active in human group,posteriorfossaependymomagroupA(PFA),occurs neurodevelopment, since these enhancers overlap TFBSs in young children and frequently leads to recurrences. active in spermatogonia (odds ratio of mutation = 6.82, Despite extensive DNA sequencing studies, the only 95% CI = [5.34,8.71] for deletion breakpoints). molecularmarkerassociatedwithparticularlypoorsurvival Conclusion: Spermatogonial TFBSs drive genome is gain of chromosome 1q. increased mutation rates and regulatory redundancy may MaterialsandMethods:Through profilingenhancersin lead to neurodevelopmental disease. ependymoma tumors, we have recently identified putative V.B.Kaiser:None.L.Talmane:None.Y.Kumar:None. oncogenes, molecular targets, and functional pathways F. Semple: None.M.MacLennan: None. D.R.FitzPatrick: (Mack et al, Nature 2018). Complementary to the analysis None. M. S. Taylor: None. C. A. Semple: None. of enhancers, we have now mapped the 3D organization of tumor chromatin in primary and relapse ependymoma C27.5 tumors using HiC. Resolving complex structural variants in recurrent Results:By an integrative analysisof enhancer and gene brain tumors expressioninthecontextofthenewlyderivedHiCdata,we identify new tumor-dependency genes activated by tumor- K. Okonechnikov1,2, J. Hübner1,2, O. Chapman3, A. specificchromatinclustersofregulatoryelements.Wehave Chakraborty4, M. Pagadal3, R. Bumb5, S. Chandran5, K. alsoleveragedtheHiCdataforresolvingstructuralvariants Kraft6, R. Hidalgo7, S. Mundlos7, R. Wechsler-Reya8, N. (SVs) underlying copy number alterations. As a result, we Coufal9, M. Levy10, J. Crawford11, K. Pajtler1,2,12, D. identify complex inter-chromosomal SVs that result in the Reid13, A. Schmitt13, H. Carter3, F. Ay4, J. Dixon5, J. formation of new topologically associated domains (‘neo- Mesirov3,14, S. M. Pfister1,2,12, M. Kool1,2, L. Chavez3,14* TADs’) leading to transcriptional activation of putative oncogenes. 1Hopp Children’s Cancer Center at the NCT Heidelberg Conclusions: We propose a new molecular mechanism (KiTZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 2Division of Pediatric by which chromosome 1q gains lead to complex inter- Neurooncology, GermanCancerResearchCenter(DKFZ), chromosomal SVs. By forming neo-TADs, these SVs lead Heidelberg,Germany,3DepartmentofMedicine,University to the transcriptional activation of oncogenes and thus of California San Diego (UCSD), San Diego, CA, United potentially contribute to resistance in a subgroup of very States,4DivisionofVaccineDiscovery,LaJollaInstitutefor aggressive pediatric brain tumors. AllergyandImmunology,LaJolla,CA,UnitedStates,5Salk K. Okonechnikov: None. J. Hübner: None. O. Chapman: InstituteforBiologicalStudies,LaJolla,CA,UnitedStates, None.A.Chakraborty:None.M.Pagadal:None.R.Bumb: 6Center for Personal Dynamic Regulomes, Stanford Uni- None. S. Chandran: None. K. Kraft: None. R. Hidalgo: versity,Stanford,Stanford,CA,UnitedStates,7MaxPlanck None. S. Mundlos: None. R. Wechsler-Reya: None. N. Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 8Tumor Coufal: None. M. Levy: None. J. Crawford: None. K. Initiation and Maintenance Program, NCI-Designated Pajtler: None.D.Reid: None.A.Schmitt: None. H.Carter: CancerCenter,SanfordBurnhamPrebysMedicalResearchAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 127 None. F. Ay: None. J. Dixon: None. J. Mesirov: None. S. Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, LUMC, M. Pfister: None. M. Kool: None. L. Chavez: None. Leiden, Netherlands, 17Unité Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France, 18Genetic Department, C28 Neurodevelopment Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, APHP. Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 19Praxis für Neuropädiatrieund humangen- C28.1 etische Beratung, Landau, Germany, 20MVZ für Human- Pathogenic variants in RLIM/RNF12 lead to syndromic genetik und Molekularpathologie GmbH, Greifswald, X-linked intellectual disability and congenital, neurolo- Germany, 21RareREACH Research Patient Liaison, Rare gic and behavior disorders Genomics Institute, 4859 West Slauson Avenue #573, Los Angeles, CA 90056, USA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, S.G.M.Frints1,2*,A.Ozanturk3,G.RodriguezCriado4,U. 22Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Bordeaux, Labor- Grasshoff5,M.Field6,S.Manouvrier-Hanu7,8,S.Hickey9,10, atoire MRGM, INSERM U1211, Univ., Bordeaux, France, K. Gripp11, C. Bauer5, C. Schroeder5, A. Toutain12,13, T. 23Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max MihalicMosher9,14,B.J.Kelly14,P.White9,14,A.Dufke5,S. Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, Moon3,D.C.Koboldt9,14,E.Gerkes15,A.vanHaeringen16, 24Adelaide Medical School and Robinson Research Insti- C. Ruivenkamp16, C. Mignot17, B. Keren18, A. Müller5, S. tute, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, Waldmüller5,M.Blandfort19,U.Kordaß20,K.Gardner21,A. 25SouthAustralianClinicalGeneticsService,SAPathology Trimouille22, K. E. P. van Roozendaal1,2, S. A. Haas23, L. (at Royal Adelaide Hospital), Adelaide, Australia, 26Genet- Murray6, E. Haan24,25, R. Carroll24, J. Liebelt25, L. ics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, Hobson26, M. De Rademaeker27, H. Brunner1,2,28, J. Australia,27CentreforMedicalGenetics,Reproductionand Glatz1,2,K.Devriendt29,J.Vermeesch29,M.Raynaud12,13,30, Genetics, Reproduction Genetics and Regenerative Medi- O. Riess5, J. Gribnau31, N. Katsanis3, P. Bauer5, J. cine, FreeUniversity Brussel (VUB), UZBrussel,Brussels, Gecz25,32, C. Golzio33, C. Gontan34, V. Kalscheuer35 Belgium, 28Radboud University Medical Center, Depart- ment of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 29Center 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, MedicalCenter+,MUMC+,azM,Maastricht,Netherlands, Belgium, 30Inserm U930 "Imaging and Brain", Tours, 2Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, FHML, France, 31Department of Developmental Biology, Oncode Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Center Institute, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotter- for Human Disease Modeling and Departments of Pedia- dam, Netherlands, 32South Australian Health and Medical tricsandPsychiatry,DukeUniversity,Durham,NC,United Research Institute, Adelaide, Australia, 33U964; Université States, 4Unidad de Genética Clínica, Hospital Virgen del de33Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 5Institute of Medical Genetics and Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, Germany, 6GOLD (Genetics of Learning and Disability) 34Department of Developmental Biology, Oncode Institute, Service, Hunter Genetics, Waratah, Australia, 7Clinique de Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Génétique médicale Guy Fontaine, Centre de référence Rotterdam, Netherlands, 35Research Group Development maladies rares Anomalies du développement Hôpital and Disease, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 8Département Universi- Berlin, Germany taire de Génétique, EA RADEME Maladies Rares du Développement et du Métabolisme, Faculté de Médecine, Introduction: RLIM/RNF12 is an X-linked E3 ubiquitin Université Lille 2, Lille, France, 9Division of Molecular & ligase acting as a negative regulator of LIM-domain con- Human Genetics, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Colum- taining transcription factors and participates in X-chromo- bus, OH, United States, 10Department of Pediatrics, The some inactivation (XCI) in mice. Ohio State University College of Medicine, Ohio, OH, MaterialandMethods:Weperformedexomesequencing, United States, 11Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children invitroandinvivostudies.Clinicalgenetic(re)evaluationwas Nemours, Wilmington, DE, United States, 12Service de performed using a Human Phenotype Ontology scoring list. Génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, CHU de Tours, Tours, Methylation-based assays were used for determining X- France, 13UMR INSERM U930, Faculté de Médecine, chromosome inactivation in carrier females. Université François Rabelais, Tours, France, 14The Insti- Results:Wewillprovideareviewonaffected males and tute for Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children’s Hospi- carrierfemalesfrom9familieswhichwepublishedrecently tal,Columbus,OH,UnitedStates,15DepartmentofClinical and on 10 novel families who have unique missense Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, UMCG, variants in RLIM. All surviving affected males presented Groningen, Netherlands, 16Department of Clinical with X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) disorders. Ten128 J.delPicchia percent of the heterozygous carrier females showed mild Kingdom, 6University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, physical features. X-chromosome inactivation was skewed 7Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Ontario, ON, in >91% of the carrier females. Most of the RLIM variants Canada, 8University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, identified are predicted to affect protein function. Nine 9Heinrich-Heine-University, Dusseldorf, Germany, altered amino acids are conserved and lie within a domain 10HowardHughesMedicalInstitute,California,CA,United essential for binding interacting proteins or in the C- States, 11University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, terminalRING-fingercatalyticdomain.Invitroexperiments 12IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 13Radboud University revealed that the amino acid changes investigated impaired Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands RLIM ubiquitin ligase activity. In vivo experiments in rlim mutant zebrafish showed that wild-type RLIM rescued the Aminoacyl-tRNA-synthetases (ARSs) are ubiquitous, ancient zebrafish rlim microcephaly phenotype, whereas the so far enzymesthatchargeamino-acidstocognatetRNAmolecules, 9/9patient-specificmissensevariantstestedfailedtorescue theessentialfirst-stepofproteintranslation.Here,wedescribe the phenotype and thus represent likely severe loss of 20 families consisting of 31 individuals with de-novo hetero- function mutations. zygous and biallelic mutations in the asparaginyl-tRNA-syn- Conclusions: The identified spectrum of functionally thetase gene (NARS1), with a phenotype characterised by investigatedpathogenicRLIMmissensevariants(9/9)cause microcephaly, neurodevelopmental delay, seizures, peripheral related XLID disorders and impaired ubiquitin ligase neuropathy and ataxia. NARS1 mRNA and protein expression activity, suggesting that proper function of RLIM is from both patient fibroblasts and induced neural progenitor required for normal development, cognition and behavior. cells (iNPCs) were reduced; NARS1 enzyme levels in these S. G.M.Frints: None.A.Ozanturk: None. G.Rodriguez tissueswerealsosignificantlyreduced.Yeastcomplementation Criado: None. U. Grasshoff: None. M. Field: None. S. assay on the recessive p.Arg545Cys mutation was not detri- Manouvrier-Hanu:None.S.Hickey:None.K.Gripp:None. mental, but molecular modelling of this mutation showed C. Bauer: None. C. Schroeder:None. A.Toutain: None. T. weaker spatial positioning and tRNA selectivity. Zebrafish Mihalic Mosher: None. B. J. Kelly: None. P. White: None. modellingoftheprevalentp.Arg534*de-novomutationgavea A. Dufke: None. S. Moon: None. D. C. Koboldt: None. E. severely abnormal locomotor phenotype. Here, we show that Gerkes: None. A. van Haeringen: None. C. Ruivenkamp: de-novoandbiallelicmutationsinNARS1areaprevalentcause None.C.Mignot:None.B.Keren:None.A.Müller:None. of abnormal neurodevelopment, where the mechanism for de- S. Waldmüller: None. M. Blandfort: None. U. Kordaß: novo mutations is dominant negative and for recessive muta- None.K.Gardner:None.A.Trimouille:None.K.E.P.van tions partial loss-of-function. MRC Centre grant (G0601943) Roozendaal: None. S. A.Haas: None. L. Murray: None. E. E. O’Connor: None. A. Manole: None. S. Efthymiou: Haan:None.R.Carroll:None.J.Liebelt:None.L.Hobson: None. M. Mendes: None. M. Jennings: None. D. Jenkins: None. M. De Rademaeker: None. H. Brunner: None. J. None. M. Lopez: None. R. Maroofian: None. V. Salpietro: Glatz: None. K. Devriendt: None. J. Vermeesch: None. M. None.S.Antonarakis:None.J.Vincent:None.T.B.Haack: Raynaud: None. O. Riess: None. J. Gribnau: None. N. None.F.Distelmaier: None.R. Horvath: None.J.Gleeson: Katsanis:None. P. Bauer: None. J. Gecz: None. C. Golzio: None. H. Becker: None. J. Mandel: None. D. Koolen: None. C. Gontan: None. V. Kalscheuer: None. None. H. Houlden: None. C28.2 C28.3 De-novo and Biallelic pathogenic variants in NARS1 Biallelic loss-of-function variants in TBC1D2B cause a cause neurodevelopmental delay due to dominant neurodevelopmentaldisorderwithseizuresandgingival negative and partial loss of function effect overgrowth E.O’Connor1,A.Manole1,S.Efthymiou1*,M.Mendes2,M. F.L.Harms1*,P.Parthasarathy2,D.Zorndt1,M.Alawi3,S. Jennings3, D. Jenkins4, M. Lopez5, R. Maroofian1, V. Fuchs1, B. J. Halliday2, C. McKeown4, H. Sampaio5,6, N. Salpietro1, S. Antonarakis6, J. Vincent7, T. B. Haack8, F. Radhakrishnan7, S. K. Radhakrishnan8, R. Sachdev4, S. P. Distelmaier9, R. Horvath3, J. Gleeson10, H. Becker11, J. Robertson2, S. Nampoothiri9, K. Kutsche1 Mandel12, D. Koolen13, H. Houlden1 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center 1UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 2Department of 2Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, Women’s and Children’s Health, Dunedin School of Netherlands,3UniversityofCambridge,Cambridge,United Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, Kingdom, 4Institute of Child Health, London, United 3BioinformaticsCore,UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg- Kingdom, 5Institute of Healthy Aging, London, United Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 4Centre for ClinicalAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 129 Genetics,SydneyChildren’sHospital,Randwick,Australia, C28.4 5Department of Women and Children’s Health, Randwick De novo pathogenic variants in CSNK2B cause a new Campus, University of New South Wales, Randwick, intellectual disability-craniodigital syndrome distin- Australia, 6Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, Austra- guished from Poirier-Bienvenu neurodevelopmental lia, 7Department of Ophthalmology, Amrita Institute of syndrome Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Cochin, India, 8Department of Neurology, Amrita Institute of Medical M. Asif1,2,3*, E. Kaygusuz1,2,4, M. Shinawi5, A. Nickelsen6, Sciences&ResearchCentre,Cochin,India,9Departmentof J. Hochscherf7, D. Lindenblatt7, A. A. Noegel1,3, S. Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & Tinschert8, K. Niefind7, P. Fortugno9, J. Jose6, F. Research Centre, Cochin, India Brancati9,10, P. Nürnberg1,3, M. S. Hussain1,2,3 The family of Tre2-Bub2-Cdc16 (TBC)-domain con- 1Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, taining GTPase activating proteins (RABGAPs) is not Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry I, Medical only known as key regulators of RAB GTPase activity, Faculty,UniversityofCologne,Cologne,Germany,3Center but also has GAP-independent functions. RAB GTPases for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of are implicated in membrane trafficking pathways, such Cologne,Cologne,Germany,4InstituteofHumanGenetics, as vesicular trafficking. We report biallelic loss-of- UniversityMedicalCenterGöttingen,Göttingen,Germany, function variants in TBC1D2B, encoding a member of 5Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department theTBC/RABGAPfamilywithyetunknownfunction,as of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, the underlying cause of cognitive impairment, seizures, St. Louis, MO, United States, 6Institute of Pharmaceutical and gingival overgrowth in two individuals from unre- and Medicinal Chemistry, Westphalian Wilhelms-Univer- lated families. TBC1D2B mRNA amount was drastically sity, Münster, Germany, 7Department of Chemistry, Insti- reduced and the protein was absent in fibroblasts of one tute of Biochemistry, University of Cologne, Cologne, patient. In immunofluorescence analysis, ectopically Germany, 8Zentrum Medizinische Genetik, Medizinische expressed TBC1D2B co-localized with vesicles positive Universität, Innsbruck, Austria, 9Istituto Dermopatico for RAB5, a small GTPase orchestrating early endocytic dell’Immacolata (IDI) IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 10Medical vesicle trafficking. In two independent TBC1D2B Genetics, Department of Life, Health and Environmental CRISPR/Cas9 knockout HeLa cell lines that serve as Science, University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy cellular model of TBC1D2B deficiency, epidermal growth factor internalization was significantly reduced Introduction: In a cohort of patients with intellectual dis- compared with the parental HeLa cell line suggesting a ability, microcephaly, growth failure, facial and digital role of TBC1D2B in early endocytosis. Serum depriva- anomalies,werecentlyidentifiedmutationsinCKAP2Lasa tion of TBC1D2B-deficient HeLa cell lines caused a cause of Filippi syndrome (FS). One of these patients was decrease in cell viability and an increase in apoptosis. tested negative for CKAP2L and had a slightly different Our data reveal that loss of TBC1D2B causes a neuro- phenotype. developmental disorder with gingival overgrowth, pos- Materials and Methods: To identify the causal variants, sibly by deficits in vesicle trafficking and/or cell trio whole-exome sequencing was performed. To further survival. explore the consequences of identified variants, pulldown F. L.H.was supportedby the ResearchPromotionFund assays, microscale thermophoresis, immunofluorescence of the Faculty of Medicine (FFM) of the University and whole transcriptome and whole phosphoproteome Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf. This work was (WPP) profiling were conducted. supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsge- Results: A pathogenic de novo CSNK2B variant was meinschaft (KU 1240/10-1) to K. K. and from Curekids identified in the proband, while a second patient recruited New Zealand to S.P.R. through GeneMatcher showing similar phenotype harbored F. L. Harms: None. P. Parthasarathy: None. D. Zorndt: adenovoCSNK2Bvariantonsamecodon.Bothvariants,p. None. M. Alawi: None. S. Fuchs: None. B. J. Halliday: (Asp32Asn) and p.(Asp32His), caused an up-regulation of None. C. McKeown: None. H. Sampaio: None. N. CSNK2B expression at transcript and protein level, which Radhakrishnan: None. S. K. Radhakrishnan: None. R. resulted in impaired cross talk between α and β subunits of Sachdev: None. S. P. Robertson: None. S. Nampoothiri: casein kinase 2 (CK2). The effect of p.(Asp32His) was None. K. Kutsche: None. observed in the canonical Wnt signaling (CWS) and DNA damage response (DDR) pathways. In CWS, an impaired130 J.delPicchia interaction of DVL3 with mutant CK2β and up-regulation Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi aswell asmislocalization ofβ-catenin inmutantLCLswas Arabia, 11Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist found. In DDR, γH2AX, 53BP1 and CHK1 was substan- Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, tially increased in mutant LCLs. Additionally, RNA-seq 12Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen data confirmed differential expression of genes involved in Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, the aforementioned pathways. Finally, WPP showed London, United Kingdom, 13Department of Pediatric hypophosphorylation of 344 substrates of CK2. Neurology, Institute of Child Health, The Children’s Conclusions: Our findings suggest that CSNK2B is a Hospital Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan, 14Department of novel candidate gene for a rare distinguished craniodigital PaediatricMedicine,WahMedicalCollege,Wah,Pakistan, syndrome. The underlying pathogenic variants exert their 15University Institute of Biochemistry & Biotechnology, pleiotropic effects through a dysregulation of CWS PMAS–AridAgricultureUniversity,Rawalpindi,Pakistan, and DDR. 16Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, M. Asif: None. E. Kaygusuz: None. M. Shinawi: None. Cologne, Germany, 17Institute of Human Genetics, Klini- A. Nickelsen: None. J. Hochscherf: None. D. Lindenblatt: kum rechts der Isar, School of Medicine, Technical None.A.A.Noegel:None.S.Tinschert:None.K.Niefind: University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 18Department of None.P.Fortugno:None.J.Jose:None.F.Brancati:None. Medical Genetics, Centre for Applied Neurogenetics, P. Nürnberg: None. M. S. Hussain: None. University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 19Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Uni- C28.5 versity of British Columbia and BC Children’s Hospital, Biallelic and monoallelic variants in PLXNA1 cause a Vancouver, BC, Canada, 20AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpê- syndromic disorder with neurodevelopmental and trière, Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 21Center oculo-cerebral anomalies for Mendelian Genomics, The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 22Kids Neu- G. C. Dworschak1,2,3*, J. Punetha4, J. C. Kalanithy1, E. roscience Centre, Kids Research, The Children’s Hospital Mingardo1, H. B. Erdem5, Z. C. Akdemir4, E. Karaca6, T. at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 23Broad Institute of Mitani4, D. Marafi4, J. M. Fatih4, S. N. Jhangiani7, J. V. Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam- Hunter8, T. Dakal9, B. Dhabhai9, O. Dabbagh10, H. S. bridge, MA, United States, 24GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, Alsaif11,F.S.Alkuraya11,R.Maroofian12,H.Houlden12,S. United States, 25Department of Pediatrics, University of Efthymiou12, N. Dominik12, V. Salpietro12, T. Sultan13, S. Illinois, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States, Haider14, F. Bibi15, H. Thiele16, J. Hoefele17, K. M. 26South West Thames Regional Genetics Centre, St. Riedhammer17, M. Wagner17, I. Guella18, M. Demos19, B. George’s Healthcare NHS Trust, St. George’s, University Keren20, J. Buratti20, P. Charles20, C. Nava20, E. of London, London, United Kingdom, 27Department of Valkanas21,L.B.Waddell22,K.J.Jones22,E.C.Oates22,S. Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, University T. Cooper22, D. MacArthur23, R. E. Schnur24, G. E. Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany Hoganson25,J.E.Burton25,M.McEntagart26,D.Pehlivan4, J. E. Posey4, J. R. Lupski4,7, H. Reutter1,27 PLXNA1 encodes plexin-A1, a neuronal transmembrane receptor for semaphorin signaling in the central nervous 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, systemthatissuggestedtoplayakeyroleinaxonguidance. Germany, 2Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Here, we describe rare and novel potentially deleterious Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital, variantsinPLXNA1identifiedbyexomesequencinginfive University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of families with biallelic variants and four families with Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of monoallelic variants. Shared phenotypic features among Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 5Department of affected individuals include global developmental delay Medical Genetics, University of Health Sciences, Diskapi (11/12), congenital brain anomalies (7/12), craniofacial Yildirim Beyazit Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, dysmorphisms (7/12), and ocular anomalies (7/12). Nota- Turkey,6DepartmentofGenetics,UniversityofAlabamaat bly, seizures were almost exclusively reported in indivi- Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States, 7Human duals with monoallelic variants. Structural modeling of all Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, missense variants in PLXNA1 suggests distortion in the Houston, TX, United States, 8Department of Radiology, native protein. Knockdown of the zebrafish homolog Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, plxna1a in zebrafish larvae caused anomalies of the central 9Genome and Computational Biology Lab, Department of nervous system and the eye supporting our observations in Biotechnology, Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur, affected individuals. Our human genetic and functional India, 10Department of Neuroscience, King Faisal studies in zebrafish indicate that PLXNA1 plays anAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 131 indispensableroleinneurodevelopmentandimplicateitina Importantly,knockingdownrigormortis,flyhomologueof syndromic disorder with neurodevelopmental and oculo- human GEMIN5, showed a reduced lifespan and motor cerebralanomalies.Grant:BONFORgrantO-120.0001and dysfunction similar to human patients. Furthermore, we Herbert-Reeck foundation (2019) to GCD identified transcriptomic changes that are caused by G. C. Dworschak: None. J. Punetha: None. J. C. pathogenic mutations in GEMIN5 in patients. Here, we Kalanithy: None. E. Mingardo: None. H. B. Erdem: None. provide the first evidence that, patients carrying autosomal Z.C.Akdemir:None.E.Karaca:None.T.Mitani:None.D. recessive mutations in GEMIN5 display neurological Marafi: None. J. M. Fatih: None. S. N. Jhangiani: None. J. symptoms. Our data suggests that pathogenic mutations in V. Hunter: None. T. Dakal: None. B. Dhabhai: None. O. GEMIN5 perturb the physiological functions by potential Dabbagh: None. H. S. Alsaif: None. F. S. Alkuraya: None. loss-of-function of GEMIN5 protein. R. Maroofian: None. H. Houlden: None. S. Efthymiou: U. Pandey: None. None. N. Dominik: None. V. Salpietro: None. T. Sultan: None. S. Haider: None. F. Bibi: None. H. Thiele: None. J. C29 Skin & Bones Hoefele: None. K. M. Riedhammer: None. M. Wagner: None. I. Guella: None. M. Demos: None. B. Keren: None. C29.1 J. Buratti: None. P. Charles: None. C. Nava: None. E. Homozygousloss-of-functionmutationsinCCDC134are Valkanas:None.L.B.Waddell:None.K.J.Jones:None.E. responsible for a severe form of osteogenesis imperfecta C. Oates: None. S. T. Cooper: None. D. MacArthur: None. R. E. Schnur: None. G. E. Hoganson: None. J. E. Burton: J. Dubail1*, P. Brunelle1, G. Baujat1, C. Huber1, M. None. M. McEntagart: None. D. Pehlivan: None. J. E. Doyard1, C. Michot1, P. Chavassieux2, A. Khairouni3, V. Posey: None. J. R. Lupski: None. H. Reutter: None. Topouchian4, S. Monnot1, E. Koumakis1,5, V. Cormier- Daire1 C28.6 MutationsinGemin5 causedevelopmentaldelay, motor 1Institut Imagine INSERM U1163, Paris, France, 2Univer- dysfunction and cerebellar atrophy sitédeLyon,INSERMUMR1033,Lyon,France,3Pediatric Orthopedics, Casablanca, Morocco, 4Necker-Enfants U. Pandey* Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 5Cochin Hospital, Rheumatology department, Paris, France University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, United States Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a primary bone fragility disorder with an estimated prevalence of 1/15 000 births. GEMIN5,anRNA-bindingproteinisessentialforassembly The majority of OI cases are inherited in an autosomal- of the SMN complex. It facilitates the formation of small dominant manner, while five to ten percent have recessive nuclearribonucleoproteins(snRNPs),thebuildingblocksof or X-linked inheritance. Up to now, approximately 10% of spliceosomes. GEMIN5 is involved in regulating the spli- OIcasesremainwithoutmutationdemonstrated,supporting cing of pre-mRNAs and has been shown to bind snRNA- the involvementof other genesin thedisease spectrum. By binding protein of the SMN complex. Here we show whole exome sequencing, we identified a homozygous identification of novel autosomal recessive variants in the variant (c.2T>C) in CCDC134 gene in three patients from GEMIN5 gene in 5 unrelated patient families with total 7 twounrelatedfamilies,withbisphosphonate-resistantsevere affected individuals. These variants have not been reported bone fragility, short stature, gracile long bones with pseu- in any publicly available databases. The probands present darthroses, but no dentinogenesis imperfecta. CCDC134 with developmental delay, central hypotonia, ataxia and encodes a secreted protein widely expressed, implicated in cerebellar hypoplasia. In addition to this, we found novel the regulation of some mitogen-activated protein kinases compound heterozygote variants including deletions and (MAPK) signaling pathway. Western blot and immuno- frameshift mutations in 14 additional unrelated families fluorescence analyses confirmed the absence of CCDC134 with 17 affected individuals sharing overlapping clinical protein in patient cells, compared to controls. Furthermore, symptoms. We observed that patient iPSC-derived neurons we demonstrated that CCDC134 mutations are associated expressing GEMIN5 variants drastically reduced the with increased Erk1/2 phosphorylation and decreased expression of snRNP components (SMN,Gemin2,Gemin4 COL1A1andOPNmRNAexpressioninpatientosteoblasts andGemin6)ascomparedtocontrolssuggestingapotential compared tocontrols. These data support that CCDC134is disruption in snRNP complex. Pathogenic mutations in a new gene involved in severe progressive deforming GEMIN5 as well as shRNA mediated knockdown of recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (type III). endogenousGEMIN5perturbedsnRNPcomplexassembly.132 J.delPicchia J. Dubail: None. P. Brunelle: None. G. Baujat: None. C. Shaheen: None. M. McQuaid: None. K. Kernohan: Huber: None. M. Doyard: None. C. Michot: None. P. None. K. Boycott: None. Z. Alhassnan: None. F. Chavassieux: None. A. Khairouni: None. V. Topouchian: Alkuraya: None. None. S. Monnot: None. E. Koumakis: None. V. Cormier- Daire: None. C29.3 Homozygous EMILIN1 loss-of-function variants impair C29.2 both elastin and collagen fiber formation and cause a Hypomorphic variants in the replication complex novel entity with arterial tortuosity and osteopenia member GINS3 result in a Meier Gorlin phenotype A.Beyens1,2*,C.Adamo3,4,E.YilmazGulec5,A.Gezdirici5, P. Kannu1*, E. Campos1, H. Wurtele2, K. Ahmed1, R. P. Bonaldo6, H. Bornaun7, E. Brauchle8, J. Brinckmann9, Shaheen3, M. McQuaid2, K. Kernohan4, K. Boycott5, Z. W. P. Devine10, B. Gangaram11, T. Sasaki12, K. Schenke- Alhassnan3, F. Alkuraya3 Layland8,13, S. Symoens1, A. Tam11, G. Sengle3,4,14, B. Callewaert1 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3King 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent and Department of Faisal Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Chil- Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, dren’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada, Belgium, 2Department of Dermatology, Ghent University 5Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Center for Biochemistry, Canada Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Introduction: Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGORS) is a rare Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital of genetic disorder characterized by primordial dwarfism, Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Department of Medical microtia, and patellar aplasia//hypoplasia, which is caused Genetics, Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research by impaired DNA replication. Here we report the identifi- Hospital, Health Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey, cation of four individuals from two unrelated families pre- 6Department ofMolecularMedicine, UniversityofPadova, senting a MGORS like phenotype, characterized by Padova, Italy, 7Department of Pediatric Cardiology, unreported recessive hypomorphic variants in the GINS3 Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, gene, which encodes a subunit of the CMG helicase. The Health Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Research evolutionarily conserved CDC45/MCM2-7/GINS1-4 Centre for Women’s Health, University of Tübingen, (CMG) protein complex is an essential helicase that Tübingen, Germany, 9Institute of Virology and Cell unwinds DNA during DNA replication. Biology,University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany,10Pathol- Results:WefoundthatvariantsinGINS3limitoriginof ogy Department, University of California San Francisco, replication firing, hence slowing cellular proliferation, San Francisco, CA, United States, 11Department of providing a potential mechanism for the dwarfism Pediatrics, University of California San Francisco, San phenotype.Furthermore,thevariantsdestabilizetheGINS Francisco, CA, United States, 12Department of Biochem- subcomplex, thereby affecting the entire DNA replication istry II, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University, Oita, Japan, forkaltogether.CellswiththeGINS3variantsaccumulate 13NMI Tübingen, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, in the S and G2-phases of the cell cycle. Infection of Germany, 14Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne patient cells with a lentivirus expressing wt GINS3 (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany rescues the origin of firing of replication forks and proliferation rates. We also show that the GINS3 variants Introduction: EMILIN1 belongs to the Elastin Microfibril alterprotein-proteininteractionswithincomponentsofthe Interface-Located Proteins (EMILINs), a family of structu- replication machinery and are hypersensitive to DNA rally related extracellular glycoproteins. It is found in var- damage. ious tissues characterized by pronounced resilience and Conclusions: In summary, we have identified variants in elastic recoil, such as skin and arteries, where it associates GINS3 as a new cause of MGORS and established GINS3 with elastic fibers and preferentially targets fibrillin micro- as a critical component required for efficient DNA fibrils. EMILIN1 has been reported to bind and co-localize replication and genome stability. with fibulin-4 in the extracellular matrix. Fibulin-4 is a P. Kannu: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers knowncarrier oflysyloxidase(LOX), an enzymeinvolved bureau,symposia,andexpertwitness);Modest;Alexion, in elastin and collagen crosslinking. Arterial tortuosity can Ipsen. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Ipsen. E. be found in several connective tissue disorders, such as Campos: None. H. Wurtele: None. K. Ahmed: None. R.Abstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 133 FBLN4-related cutis laxa and arterial tortuosity syndrome gene expression of over fifty thousand cells from four cri- (ATS), caused by SLC2A10 mutations. tical days of mouse early limb development (E9.5, E10.5, Results: Exome sequencing in two unrelated families E11.5, and E12.5) by performing a single-cell RNA with arterial tortuosity revealed homozygous loss-of-func- sequencing. We implemented an unsupervised approach to tion mutations in EMILIN1. Patients exhibit widespread identify the general transcriptional patterns of disease- arterial tortuosity and fractures of ribs and long bones. causing genes during mouse embryonic limb development. Immunofluorescence of patient fibroblasts reveals a direct We curated a gene-set of over 1400 genes that are asso- dependence of fibulin-4 fiber assembly on EMILIN1 ciated with limb malformationin mice.25% ofthese genes deposition. Western blotting and mass spectrometry analy- ranked among the topmost informative gene expression sis show altered levels of LOX and collagen 1. Raman variances during early limb development. Over sixty of microspectroscopyanalysiscarriedoutininEmilin1-/-mice these genes present cell-type-specific gene expression pat- shows structural changes in the collagen and elastic fiber terns, mainly in the ectoderm and the apical ectodermal networks. Biochemical analysis of human fibroblast cul- ridge. We show that mutations in genes expressed during tures and Emilin1-/- mice skin demonstrates a disturbed earlylimbdevelopmentareparticularlypronetogiveriseto collagen crosslinking pattern. Transmission electron micro- limbmalformation.Ourstudyprovidesanatlasofcandidate scopy of patient skin displays a frayed and moth-eaten genes thatareco-expressedwithknownlimb diseasegenes aspect of the elastin with disorganization of microfibrillar and represents a resource to study cell-types and molecular structures. Collagen fibrils show increased and more mechanisms involved in limb malformation. variable diameters. C. A. Prada-Medina: None. G. Cova: None. J. Glaser: Conclusion: This study describes a novel syndrome None. C. Dietrich: None. J. Henck: None. S. Mundlos: associatedwitharterialtortuosityandsuggestsamechanism None. M. A. Mensah: None. M. Spielmann: None. through which altered elastic fiber homeostasis affects collagenfiber formation.(Grant Reference BOF01N04516) C29.5 A. Beyens: None. C. Adamo: None. E. Yilmaz Gulec: Tendon-to-boneattachmentcellsarebi-fated<and>are None. A. Gezdirici: None. P. Bonaldo: None. H. Bornaun: regulated by shared enhancers <and> KLF transcrip- None. E. Brauchle: None. J. Brinckmann: None. W. P. tion factors Devine: None. B. Gangaram: None. T. Sasaki: None. K. Schenke-Layland:None.S.Symoens:None.A.Tam:None. S. Kult1, T. Olender1*, M. Osterwalder2, S. Krief1, R. G. Sengle: None. B. Callewaert: None. Blecher-Gonen1, S. Ben-Moshe1, L. Farack1, H. Keren- Shaul1, D. Leshkowitz1, T. M. Salame1, T. D. Capellini3, S. C29.4 Itzkovitz1, I. Amit1, A. Visel2, E. Zelzer1 Transcriptional single-cell atlas of human limb mal- formation candidate genes 1TheWeizmannInstiuteofScience,Rehovot,Israel,2Lawr- ence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United C. A. Prada-Medina1*, G. Cova1, J. Glaser1, C. Dietrich1, States,3HarvardUniversity,Cambridge,MA,UnitedStates J. Henck1, S. Mundlos1,2, M. A. Mensah2, M. Spielmann1,2 The mechanical challenge of attaching elastic tendons to 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, stiff bones is solved by the formation of a unique transi- Germany, 2Institute for Medical Genetics and Human tional tissue, the enthesis. A comprehensive molecular Genetics Charité, Berlin, Germany signature of the developing enthesis cells has yet been uncovered. Here, we show that tendon-to-bone attachment The extensive clinical and genetic heterogeneity of con- cells are bi-fated, activating a mixture of chondrocyte and genital limb malformation requires a comprehensive ana- tenocyte transcriptomes, under regulation of shared reg- lysis of genome-wide genetic variation. Large exome and ulatory elements and Krüppel-like factors transcription genomesequencing studies haveledto theidentificationof factors (KLFs). RNA and ATAC sequencing of embryonic hundreds of candidate genes. However, few variants have attachment cells, chondrocytes and tenocytes revealed been functionally characterized. The sheer number of these expression of both chondrogenic and tenogenic genes by candidate genes makes traditional functional analyses e.g., attachment cells. Indeed, in situ hybridization and single- inanimalmodelsalmostimpossible.Therefore,forthevast molecule ISH showed that attachment cells co-express majority of patients, the molecular mechanism is still tenocyte and chondrocyte markers. ATAC-Seq analyses unknown.Inourstudy,weusedhighthroughputsingle-cell combined with ENCODE histone mark data, conservation, transcriptomicstocreateareferenceatlasofcandidategenes and other datasets revealed that attachment cells are regu- during embryonic limb development. We characterized lated by putative enhancers that are shared with either134 J.delPicchia tenocytes or chondrocytes. Transgenic mouse enhancer of 42,404 white British participants from UK Biobank reporter assay verified the shared activity of three enhan- and performed a GWAS in the same sample. We cers, supporting the notion that the mixed transcriptome of found that WES identified genes were more strongly enri- attachment cells is regulated by sharing enhancers with ched for positive control genes (odds ratio [OR] = 119, P=5.2×10−6), tenocytes or chondrocytes. Combining over-represented and this enrichment was 5-fold higher transcription factor analysis with transcriptome results comparedtoenrichmentof GWAS-identified genes (OR= 22.5,P=5×10−5).FromWESdata,weidentified38genes suggested a regulatory role for KLFs in attachment cells. Indeed, blocking expression of Klf2 and Klf4 in the devel- withexonicvariantswithfunctionalimpactthatcollectively oping limb mesenchyme impaired attachment cell differ- associated with eBMD, one of the most prominent genes (SKATO,P=1.8×10−9).We entiation, establishing that KLFs are key regulators of the was CADM1 usedCRISPR- fate of these cells. Overall, we provide the first molecular Cas9 to knockout (KO) CADM1 in SaOS-2 osteoblast cell overview of the developing transitional tissue, connecting lines, suppressing protein abundance at the cell surface, tendontobone,showingthatactivationofacombinationof which resulted in increased expression of early bone mar- cartilage and tendon transcriptomes by the bi-fated attach- kers: RUNX2, COL1A1/2 and ALPL. We previously ment cells leads to the formation of a new, intermediate demonstrated that Cadm1 KO mice had reduced bone cell fate. mineralcontent(-3.2standarddeviations[SD])andstrength S. Kult: None. T. Olender: None. M.Osterwalder:None. (-2.0 SD) compared to wildtype. These findings demon- S. Krief: None. R. Blecher-Gonen: None. S. Ben-Moshe: strate that WES is a powerful approach to identify genes None. L. Farack: None. H. Keren-Shaul: None. D. influencing bone density, such as CADM1, which could Leshkowitz: None. T. M. Salame: None. T. D. Capellini: serve as targets for osteoporosis therapies. None.S.Itzkovitz:None.I.Amit:None.A.Visel:None.E. S. Zhou: None. L. Laurent: None. J. P. Kemp: None. V. Zelzer: None. Forgetta: None. J. Morris: None. A. Pramatarova: None. P. I.Croucher:None.J.Bassett:None.D.Goltzman:None.D. C29.6 M. Evans: None. J. Richards: None. Identifying targets for osteoporosis via whole exome sequencing and CRISPR-Cas9 C30 Polygenic Risk Scores: From Tool to Practice S. Zhou1*, L. Laurent1, J. P. Kemp2, V. Forgetta1, J. C30.1 Morris3, A. Pramatarova4, P. I. Croucher5, J. Bassett6, D. Using reference-fixed principal components to improve Goltzman7, D. M. Evans2, J. Richards1 polygenic risk score prediction 1McGill University, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, O. Naret*, J. Fellay QC, Canada, 2University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Aus- École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, tralia, 3New York Genome Center, New York, NY, United Switzerland States, 4McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Garvan Institute of Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 6Molecular Endocri- multiple genetic variants associated with traits or diseases. nology Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Imperial They confirmed that most common diseases have a strong College London, London, United Kingdom, 7Research genetic component coming from many genetic variants, Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, each having a small effect size on disease risk. Using the QC, Canada summary statistics from highly powered GWAS, it is now possible to build polygenic risk scores (PRS) that can help New drug targets are needed for osteoporosis. It is not predict the individual risk of common diseases. We here knownwhetherwholeexomesequencing(WES)orGWAS propose to improve PRS prediction by leveraging popula- followed by target gene mapping can better identify causal tion stratification due to demographic history, which is a genes for this disease. To compare these approaches, we typical confounding factor removed during GWAS. We first identified a set of 54 positive control genes whose provide a tool that 1) map a discovery cohort to the prin- perturbation causes a Mendelian form of osteoporosis, or cipal component (PC) space of the 1000 Genomes Project which act as drug targets for approved therapies. We cohort and train a model to associate the phenotype dis- undertook sequence kernel association tests (SKATO) to tribution to this PC space; 2) map a target patient to the associate 18,350 autosomal protein-coding genes with same PC space and use the previously trained model to estimated bone mineral density (eBMD), using WES data compute its PC score. We compared two disease riskAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 135 models, one using PRS only and one using PRS and PC training/validation cohorts (phenotyping, sample size, scorejointly.ApplyingthismethodtoUKBiobankdata,we ancestry), and reported performance metrics. demonstrate improvement for all tested phenotypes: <10% Results: The current PGS Catalog contains over 100 for menarche age, blood pressure, BMI, baldness, and consistently annotated PGS for 43 different traits, distrib- height),14%formenopauseage,50%fordiabetes,59%for uted in an open database (www.PGSCatalog.org), initially bone mineral density and 455% for skin color. This focusing on purpose-built PGS developed after 2010 for approach has the potential to allow ethnically diverse cardiometabolic diseases and cancers. The Catalog is populations to benefit from genomic medicine.(Grant: regularly updated to broaden its coverage, and we invite SNF:175603) researchers to submit their PGS to maximize their utility. O. Naret: None. J. Fellay: None. We aim to provide a comprehensive resource of available PGS along with a complete picture of their predictive C30.2 accuracy - to this end we outline our upcoming efforts to ThePolygenicScore(PGS)Catalog:anopendatabaseto systematically evaluate the cataloged PGS in diverse enable reproducibility and systematic evaluation external cohorts, in order to distribute directly comparable measures of PGS performance. S.A.Lambert1,2,3*,L.GIl2,4,S.Jupp3,M.Chapman2,1,4,H. S. A. Lambert: None. L. GIl: None. S. Jupp: None. M. Parkinson3,2, J. Danesh1,2,5,4, J. A. L. MacArthur3, M. Chapman: None. H. Parkinson: None. J. Danesh: F. Inouye1,2,5,6,7 Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis, Sanofi, AstraZeneca.J.A.L.MacArthur:None.M.Inouye:None. 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Health DataResearch UK-Cambridge, WellcomeGenome C30.3 Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3European Molecular Polygenic risk, breast cancer susceptibility genes, and Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, breast cancer over the life course Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, N. Mars1*, E. Widén1, T. Meretoja2,3, S. Kerminen1, M. Hinxton, United Kingdom, 5National Institute for Health Pirinen1,4,5, P. Palta1,6, A. Palotie1,7,8, J. Kaprio1,5, H. Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre at the Joensuu9,3, M. Daly1,8, S. Ripatti1,5,8 Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Baker Heart and Diabetes 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 7The Alan Turing Institute, HiLIFE, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Breast London, United Kingdom Surgery Unit, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Introduction: Polygenic [risk] scores (PGS), which Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Helsinki Institute for Informa- aggregatehundreds-to-millionsofgenomicvariant’seffects tion Technology HIIT and Department of Mathematics and into a single score, can enhance prediction and under- Statistics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, standing of common diseases and traits. Rapidly-evolving 5Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, research into PGS and their potential clinical utility has, Helsinki, Finland, 6Estonian Genome Center, Institute of however, been limited by inadequate and/or incomplete Genomics,UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,7Psychiatric reporting, heterogeneity in evaluation techniques, and & Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Department of variable performance in populations of non-European Psychiatry, Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, ancestry. DepartmentofMedicine,andtheDepartmentofNeurology, Objective: An accurate understanding of each PGS and Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United its predictive value is necessary for its application. States, 8Broad Institute of the Massachusetts Institute of Collaborating with the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog, we Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, have developed the PGS Catalog to provide an open United States, 9Comprehensive Cancer Center, Helsinki resource of consistently annotated PGS, to increase their University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland reproducibility and availability. Methods: We developed a framework to summarise and Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women, with represent PGS. For each PGS we extract metadata both monogenic and polygenic germline inheritance. describing the score (rsID, effect allele & weight), its Among 99,969 women in FinnGen, we set out to evaluate development and application details, links to GWAS how breast cancer polygenic risk score (PRS) and high- Catalog summary statistics employed, characteristics of impact frameshift variants jointly impact the risk of breast cancer.Secondly,weevaluatedwhetherPRSimpactsbreast136 J.delPicchia cancer mortality in the population, and the risk of recur- genetic variants. Cox regression and Weibull survival rence and mortality among breast cancer patients. analysis were implemented adjusting for sex. The lifetime risk of breast cancer (by age 80) for carriers Results: An increment of one standard deviation (SD) in (pv<2×10−16) of two Finnish-enriched frameshift variants, c.1592delT in the GRS represented an increase of 1.20 in PALB2 (242-fold enrichment in Finland, 270 carriers) and the hazard ratio of fracture. When analyzed in quintiles, c.1100delCinCHEK2(3.7-foldenrichment,1,543carriers) individuals in the highest quintile had 1.52 HR of fracture was 57% and 32%, respectively. The PRS modifies the (95%CI 1.09-2.11) as compared to these individuals in the breast cancer risk conferred by the two variants. Women middle quintile, despite their similitude in anthropometric with PALB2 and average PRS (20-80th percentile) had a characteristics (Table 1). In addition, fracture occurred lifetimeriskof56%,whichincreasedto85%withhighPRS significantlyearlierintheformergroup(eventtimeratio= (>90th percentile), and decreased to 27% with low PRS 0.95, 95%CI 0.91-0.99). (<20th percentile). For CHEK2, these lifetime risks were Conclusion:OurresultssuggestthatGRScanbeusedfor 27%, 59%, and 18%. personalized genetic risk estimates that can predict for age We move beyond the simple binary definition of breast at fracture. We show how a suboptimal epidemiological cancer:thePRSwasassociatedwithamoreseveredisease, predictive tool, as ultrasound measurements for fracture both in the population (HR 2.25, 95%CI 1.72-2.95 for prediction, is leveraged within the genetic framework. breastcancer-relatedmortalitywithaPRS>90thpercentile), and in breast cancer cases (HR 1.21, 95%CI 1.09-1.34 for Table 1 riskofbreastcancerrecurrence;similarresultsadjustingfor QuintilesGRS 1N=54 2N=1758 3N=6497 4N=2892 5N=150 P surgery type, age, and stage at diagnosis). Fracture% 9.2% 14.1% 18.7% 22.4% 24.7% 1.8E-11 We demonstrate opportunities to improve genetic risk HR 0.6 0.7 Ref 1.2 1.5 <2E-16 assessment in breast cancer, both using PRS alone and for ETR 1.07 1.04 Ref 0.97 0.95 <2E-16 facilitating better management of women carrying muta- FN-BMD(g/cm2) 1.00 0.94 0.91 0.87 0.83 <2E-16 tions in breast cancer susceptibility genes. Female% 64.0% 58.0% 57.0% 59.0% 58.0% 0.47 Age(yrs) 63.0 65.5 65.2 65.4 65.2 0.86 N. Mars: None. E. Widén: None. T. Meretoja: None. S. Weight(kg) 76.5 75.8 76.1 76.5 77.0 0.23 Kerminen: None. M. Pirinen: None. P. Palta: None. A. Height(m) 1.67 1.68 1.68 1.68 1.69 0.51 Palotie:None.J.Kaprio:None.H.Joensuu:None.M.Daly: None. S. Ripatti: None. C. Medina-Gomez: None. K. Trajanoska: None. C. Fan: C30.4 None. O. A. Andreassen: None. M. Zillikens: None. A. M. Genetic assessment of age-associated fracture risk Dale:None.A.G.Uitterlinden:None.T.M.Seibert:None. F. Rivadeneira: None. C. Medina-Gomez1*, K. Trajanoska1, C. Fan2, O. A. Andreassen3, M. Zillikens1, A. M. Dale2, A. G. C30.5 Uitterlinden1, T. M. Seibert2, F. Rivadeneira1 Integrative analysis of the plasma proteome and polygenic risk of cardiometabolic disease 1ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2University of California, San Diego, CA, United States, 3University of S. C. Ritchie1*,Y. Liu2,S. A. Lambert1,B. G. Drew2, A. C. Oslo, Oslo, Norway Calkin2, A. S. Butterworth1, J. Danesh1, M. Inouye1,2 Aim: Identifying individuals at risk of early-onset osteo- 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, porosis is of outmost importance. The largest GWAS to 2Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia date, identified 1,103 genetic variants associated with ultrasound-derived Bone Mineral density (eBMD). We Introduction: Polygenic risk scores (PRSs) capture the investigated whether a genetic risk score (GRS) from these genetic architecture of common diseases by aggregating variantswouldassociatewithfractureincidenceandpredict genome-wide genetic variation into a single score that time to fracture. reflects an individual’s disease risk. These present new Methods: We included in this study 11,351 participants opportunities to identify molecular pathways involved in of the Rotterdam Study with up to 20 years of follow-up. disease pathogenesis. Incident non-vertebral fractures were reported in 2,153 Materials and Methods: We performed association (19%)individuals.GRSwasconstructedasaweightedsum analysis between PRSs and 3,442 plasma proteins using of the number of putative eBMD-decreaser alleles at 1,031 linear regression models in 3,175 healthy individuals to identify proteins whose levels associated with PRSs forAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 137 atrial fibrillation, coronary artery disease, chronic kidney these applications in collaboration with multiple depart- disease, stroke, or type 2 diabetes. Mendelian Randomisa- ments at the Erasmus MC. tion analysis was used to test whether levels of PRS- Results:Ourpreliminaryresultssuggestthat>90%ofthe associated proteins were causal of disease risk. Tissue- mutations routinely determined in our hospital are covered specific gene expression levels of PRS-associated proteins by the array design. We have selected 240 known breast were tested for correlations with cardiometabolic pheno- cancer mutation carriers for array genotyping to check types in mouse models. We investigated potential drug concordance. Comparison of array vs. WES of 197 repurposing opportunities by overlaying PRS to protein population samples shows an overall non-reference con- associations with drug target information. cordance of 98%, and 95% for singletons. Population pilot Results: We identified 48 proteins whose levels asso- resultsdemonstratesignificantprimarycasestratificationby ciated with PRSs for coronary artery disease, chronic PRS for breast cancer, coronary artery disease, myocardial kidney disease, or type 2 diabetes, including well-known infarction, osteoarthritis and age-related macular disease-associated proteins along with novel associations. degeneration. Mendelian Randomisation supported a causal effect for Discussion:Ourpreliminaryresultssuggestthataportion changes in levels of three PRS-associated proteins on ofhospital-wideclinicalgenetic testing cancost-effectively disease. Mouse models revealed strong correlations with be replaced by array-based genotyping. In addition to relevantcardiometabolictraitsfortissue-specificexpression reportinghighlyconcordantresults,array-basedgenotyping of seven PRS associated proteins with no previous known allows additional reporting of several PRS, HLA- and link to cardiometabolic disease. Finally, we identified three ancestry-typing and pharmacogenomics. This data can promising potential drug repurposing opportunities where easily be stored and re-analyzed, or unblinded when a the effect of on-market drugs on protein levels were patient requires further (secondary) genetic testing. consistent with PRS to protein associations. J. van Rooij: None. A. Verkerk: None. B. Sedaghati- Conclusions: Overall, our study provides a framework khayat: None. L. Broer: None. J. de Vries: None. G. van for polygenic association studies, demonstrating the power Dijk: None. J. van Meurs: None. A. Uitterlinden: None. of PRSs to identify and prioritise novel disease biology. S.C.Ritchie:None.Y.Liu:None.S.A.Lambert:None. C31 Shaping the Genomic Medicine Era B. G. Drew: None. A. C. Calkin: None. A. S. Butterworth: None. J. Danesh: None. M. Inouye: None. C31.1 "It’s probably nothing, but⋯" Couples’ experiences of C30.6 pregnancy following a uncertain prenatal genetic result Genotyping On ALL patients (GOALL); clinical imple- mentation of high-throughput genotyping arrays S. Lou1,2*, K. Lomborg3, C. Lewis4, S. Riedijk5, O. Petersen6, I. Vogel1,7 J.vanRooij*,A.Verkerk,B.Sedaghati-khayat,L.Broer,J. de Vries, G. van Dijk, J. van Meurs, A. Uitterlinden 1Center for Prenatal Diagnostics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Defactum - Public Health & Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands Health Services Research, Aarhus, Denmark, 3Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, Introduction: Genetic testing is increasingly used in stan- 4London North Genomic Laboratory Hub, Great Ormond dardclinicalpractice.Densegenotypingarrayscoveralarge Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Erasmus portion of known clinically relevant genetic variation and Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Fetal Medicine provide a cost-effective, high-throughput and highly stan- Unit, Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Rigshospi- dardized alternative. In the GOALL project, we are deter- talet Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Den- mining the clinical utility and applications of genotyping mark,7DepartmentofClinicialGenetics,AarhusUniversity arrays. Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark Methods: We investigate the clinical utility of the GSAMD_v2 and PMDA arrays by: 1) technical validation Introduction: The introduction of Chromosomal Micro- of common and rare variants 2) offering polygenic risk Arrayinprenataltestingincludesthepotentialidentification scores (PRS) as primary utility in clinical practice, 3) of uncertain copy number variants (CNV) where sig- prospectively counseling and testing eligibility of feeding nificance and implications for the unborn child can be dif- back secondary findings (pharmacogenomics, ACMG ficultorimpossibletopredict.Theaimofthisstudywasto mutations) using array based genotyping. We are piloting explore how prospective parents manage uncertainty and experience pregnancy in light of an uncertain CNV result.138 J.delPicchia Material and methods: Qualitative interviews with 16 available, AF are offered concurrently with diagnostic women and 10 partners who had received a prenatally testing. To examine decisions about AF and investigate diagnosed,uncertainCNV.Participantswereinterviewed1- other models of care, we offered AF to 200 adults at a 14 weeks after birth. Data were analyzed using thematic separate genetic counselling appointment after completion analysis. of diagnostic testing (i.e. after results)Patients completed Results: Following the CNV diagnosis, some couples surveys after AF genetic counselling, after AF result return focused on the severe syndromes ruled out by the result, and 6 months following last contact with the service. while others were more concerned with the new potential Consultations were recorded and analysed. Participating risks, e.g. learning disabilities. During pregnancy, the geneticcounsellorswereinterviewed.Eightythree(83/200, couples used various strategies to reduce worry such as 42%) patients attended pre-test counselling with 81 (98%) limitinginformationseeking,reducingtalkoftheCNVand accepting AF. Patients felt supported in decision making: deferring thoughts of potential consequences. Furthermore, 79/83 (95%) agreed the level of information they received additional ultrasound was appreciated by all. Inherited was‘aboutright’and73/78(94%)reportedcounsellingwas CNVs caused relief, but also feelings of responsibility for helpful. Participants and counsellors identified valuable the child’s potential challenges. After birth, worry elements of counselling, including establishing a relation- decreased considerably. However, all couples paid extra ship.Geneticcounsellorsalsoreportedaddressingconcerns attention to the child’s development, while also being alert and misconceptions yet, despite relatively intensive coun- to the risk wrongfully interpreting the child’s development selling,34%(28/83)ofparticipantsmistakenlybelievedthe in terms of the CNV. Eleven couples appreciated knowing test was for all known genetic conditions or would provide about the child’s CNV. Five couples would rather not information about their primary condition. All respondents have known. to the post-result survey correctly recalled their AF result Conclusions: Health professionals should be mindful of (49/49) but confusion about its implications was evident. terminology,remembertopointoutwhathasbeenruledout Research is needed to identify communication strategies by the CNV result, and discuss potential coping strategies thateffectivelyaddresscommonAFmisconceptionsandare withthecouple.Funding:NovoNordiskFoundation(Grant achievable in public health systems in order to realise the NNF16OC0018722) ideal of a feasible, effective service for AF. S. Lou: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, E. Lynch: None. M. Martyn: None. L. Lee: None. A. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Kanga-Parabia: None. R. Weerasuriya: None. R. Tyther- grants already received); Modest; Novo Nordisk Founda- leigh: None. C. L. Gaff: None. tion.K.Lomborg:None.C.Lewis:None.S.Riedijk:None. O. Petersen: None. I. Vogel: B. Research Grant (principal C31.3 investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants Analysis of laboratory exome sequencing reporting as well as grants already received); Modest; Novo Nordisk practices using a ‘virtual patient’ Foundation. D. F. Vears1,2,3,4*, M. G. Elferink5, M. Kriek6, P. Borry1,4, C31.2 K. L. van Gassen7 Additional Genomic Findings: towards a feasible, effective model of care 1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,KU Leuven, Leuven, E.Lynch1,2,M.Martyn1,3,4*,L.Lee1,3,4,A.Kanga-Parabia2, Belgium, 2University of Melbourne, Carlton, Australia, R. Weerasuriya1,3,4, R. Tytherleigh1,3, C. L. Gaff1,3,4 3Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, Austra- lia, 4Leuven Institute for Human Genomics and Society, 1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Parkville, Austra- Leuven, Belgium, 5University of Utrecht, Utrecht, Nether- lia, 2Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, lands, 6Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Nether- Australia, 3Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Park- lands, 7University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, ville, Australia, 4Department of Paediatrics, University of Netherlands Melbourne, Parkville, Australia Studies have suggested that laboratories performing exome Genomic sequencing for diagnosis makes possible deliber- sequencing return different types of results to clinicians. ate analysis for variants predictive of future health risk While some report variants of uncertain significance, (‘additional findings’). Challenges to provision of AF in unsolicited findings, and/or secondary findings, others do public health systems exist but evidence to guide develop- not. To investigate the degree of variation in reporting, we mentofafeasible,effectivemodelofcareislacking.When created a ‘virtual patient-parent trio’ by in silico mergingAbstractsfromthe53rdEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference:OralPresentations 139 eight disease-causing variants from patients into “normal” applicationof PRS were described. Content analysis was background exomes. We sent the sequence data and details undertaken of free-text responses. of the patient’s phenotype (developmental delay, dys- Results: A total of 128 health professionals took part in morphic features, cardiac hypertrophy), to laboratories the questionnaire (geneticcounsellors n=86%; oncologists worldwide and asked them to issue a diagnostic report. n=5%; clinical geneticists n=4%; other n=5%). Many Participating laboratories completed a questionnaire to haddiscussed PRS with a patient (61%), but only 20% explain their rationale for (not) reporting each of the var- reportedhavingorderedatest.Overhalf(69%)reportedthat iants integrated. Of the 39 participating laboratories, 30 the use of PRS in future clinical practice was certain or reported the X-linked dominant inherited variant in the likely.Many(49%)reportedthatgeneralpractitionerswould HDAC8 gene, which was the partial cause of the patient’s have a primary role in the provision of PRS,supported by phenotype, and 26 reported the de novo BICD2 variant, genetics health professionals. Overall, confidence in which explained another component of the phenotype. explaining PRS to patientswas low, and participants Laboratories who did not report these variants explained reported concern about insufficient health professional they used either a filter or a targeted gene panel that resources,uncertainty about individual risk and barriers to excludedthevariant, ortheydidnotconsiderthevariantto obtaininglifeinsurance.Perceivedbenefitsof PRSincluded be responsible for the phenotype. There was also variation greater incentive for patients to engage in preventive in reporting associated with the cardiac phenotype; 30 behaviours and accessto increased or tailored surveillance reported MYBPC3 and only 16 reported PLN, often due to and screening. the filtering strategies used. Reporting of unsolicited/sec- Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate that health ondary findings also varied widely. We identified con- professionals are already providingpolygenic risk informa- siderablevariabilityinreportingofdisease-causingvariants, tion,althoughfewerareorderingtesting,andthereisaneed primarily due to different analysis strategies. This sig- foreducationalandpoint-of-contactresourcestosupportthis nificantly impacts whether causative variants are identified, process. These findings will informthe development of with important implications for patients. Analysis strategy implementation strategies for incorporating PRS into best-practice guidelines may help reduce variability and clinical practice. improve patient care. A. K. Smit: None. A. E. Cust: None. K. Dunlop: None. D. F. Vears: None. M. G. Elferink: None. M. Kriek: M. Young: None. B. Meiser: None. J. Tiller: None. T. None. P. Borry: None. K. L. van Gassen: None. Yanes: None. C31.4 C31.5 Knowledge, attitudes and preparedness for polygenic Impact of the discussion of uncertainty on former risk testing in clinical practice: a cross-sectional survey counselees’ outcomes. An experimental vignettes study of health professionals N. Medendorp1*, M. Hillen1, C. Aalfs2, A. Stiggelbout3, E. A. K. Smit1*, A. E. Cust1, K. Dunlop1, M. Young2, B. Smets1 Meiser3, J. Tiller4, T. Yanes5,3 1Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University 1The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Garvan Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Leiden Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 3Univer- University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands sity of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 4Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 5University of Queens- Introduction: Uncertainty increasingly needs to be dis- land, Woolloongabba, Australia cussed during cancer genetic counseling due to technolo- gical developments. How discussions about uncertainty Introduction: Strategies to prepare and support health affect counselees may depend on communication style. professionals for the potentialimplementation of polygenic Ideally,counseleesareenabledtodealwithuncertaintyand risk scores (PRS) into clinical practice are required. make well-informed decisions. We tested the impact of Materials and Methods: An anonymous questionnaire different ways of conveying uncertainty and addressing was distributed online byprofessional organisations in counselees’ uncertainty on counselees’ outcomes, and Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the US. Eligibleparti- explored moderating effects of counselees’ characteristics. cipants were health professionals who provide cancer risk Materials and methods: Former counselees viewed one assessments. Knowledge,perceived self-efficacy, concerns, (outofsix)randomlyassignedvideodepictingaconsultation benefits and expectations for the future clinical involving the discussion of a multigene panel test. In a 2x3 design geneticists’ communication of uncertainty140 J.delPicchia (comprehensive vs. gist) and responses to counselees’ United Kingdom, 3Yorkshire and Humber Genomics uncertainty expressions (providing information vs. providing Medicine Centre, Leeds, United Kingdom spacevs.balancinguncertainty)weresystematicallymanipu- lated. Before and after watching, participants completed Health Education England’s Genomics Education Pro- questionnaires. Primaryoutcome wasfeelingsof uncertainty. gramme (GEP) has developed a roadmap for defining Results: Preliminary analyses were performed on 91% General Practitioners’ (GPs) learning needs and identifying (n=178) of the required sample. Communication of prioritiesforresourcedevelopment,suitableforadoptionby uncertainty was successfully manipulated: the comprehen- other specialties. With the implementation of England’s sive version was perceived as more detailed (p=. 099). National Health Service’s (NHS) Genomic Medicine Ser- However, differences in how responses to counselees’ vice, genomic information will be used within routine uncertainty expressions were not perceived (p=.303). No clinical care by an increasing number of specialties. The effectsonfeelingsofuncertaintywerefoundforgeneticists’ GEP exists to ensure NHS staff are prepared for the inte- communication about uncertainty (p=.323), or response gration of genomics into clinical practice. With the Royal style (p=.630). Statistical analysis on the complete dataset, College of General Practitioners (RCGP), the GEP devised including effects on secondary outcomes and moderating a three-stage process - plan; develop; deliver - to identify effects of counselees’ characteristics will be performed and GPs’ learning requirements and appropriate interventions. discussed. UsingtheDelphimethod,anexpertworkinggroup(n=30), Conclusions: Preliminary analysis showed that different comprising GPs, genetic specialists, patients and educa- manners of communicating uncertainty and addressing tionalists,identified22themesaroundtheknowledge,skills counselees’ uncertainty expressions did not lead to and behaviours GPs require to manage clinical activities differences in feelings of uncertainty. Findings will inform involving genomics (stage 1). Alongside this, a desktop a training intervention to support geneticists in discussing exercise (stage 2) mapped genetic/genomic education uncertainty. resources relevant to GPs through targeted searches of Funding:DutchCancerSociety(KWFKankerbestrijding; organisational websites, supplemented by web searches. UvA 2015-7607) From these, resources from 21 organisations were identi- N. Medendorp: None. M. Hillen: None. C. Aalfs: None. fied. Next, a gap analysis (stage 3) mapped resources from A. Stiggelbout: None. E. Smets: None. stage 2 against the knowledge, skills and behaviours from stage 1, establishing a list of resources requiring develop- C31.6 ment. These resources, with those identified in stage 2, Primary Care Genomics: A roadmap for curriculum formedthefoundationofaneducationtoolkit,hostedonthe change and educational resource development RCGP website. Findings from stage 1 also informed the revised RCGP training curriculum for GPs. The toolkit has J.Hayward1,2,3,I.Rafi1,S.Simpson2,E.Miller2,A.Seller2, become a go-to destination for GPs learning about geno- M. Bishop2* mics,anditsdevelopmentroadmapcanbeadoptedbyother specialties. 1Royal College of General Practitioners, London, United J. Hayward: None. I. Rafi: None. S. Simpson: None. E. Kingdom, 2Genomics Education Programme, Birmingham, Miller: None. A. Seller: None. M. Bishop: None.