www.nature.com/ejhg ABSTRACTS COLLECTION th Abstracts from the 54 European Society of Human Genetics (ESHG) Conference: Oral Presentations EuropeanJournal of HumanGenetics (2022) 30:3–87;https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-021-01025-2 Volume30|Supplement 1 Virtual Conference August28-31, 2021 Sponsorship:PublicationofthissupplementwassponsoredbytheEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics.Allcontentwasreviewedand approvedby theESHG ScientificProgramme Committee, whichheld full responsibilityfor theabstract selections. DisclosureInformation:Inordertohelpreaders,formtheirownjudgmentsofpotentialbiasinpublishedabstracts,authorsareaskedto declareany competing financial interests. :,;)(0987654321 Contributions of up to EUR 10 000.- (Ten thousand Euros, or equivalent value in kind) per year per company are considered “Modest”. Contributions above EUR10000.- per yearare considered “Significant”. Presentingauthor namesarebolded inthecontributor lists. PLENARY SESSIONS speed, was enabled by prioritization of shared resources and analytical frameworks. This working model of international colla- PL1OpeningPlenary boration a blue-print for future genetic discoveries in the event of pandemicsorforanycomplexhumandisease. PL1.2TheCOVID-19hostgeneticsinitiative-aninternational, A.Ganna: None. open science effort to identify genetic risk factors for COVID19severity andsusceptibility PL2What’sNew? HighlightSession AndreaGanna PL2.1 Clinical implementation of RNA sequencing for Men- delian diseasediagnostics Finnish Institutefor Molecular Medicine, Helsinki,Finland. VicenteYepez1, Mirjana Gusic2,Julien Gagneur1, Holger Prokisch2 Thegeneticmakeupofanindividual contributes tosusceptibility and response to infectious viruses. While environmental, clinical and social factors play a role in exposure to SARS-CoV-2 and 1Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Helmholtz COVID-19 disease severity, host genetics may also be important. Zentrum,Munich, Germany. Identifying host-specific genetic factors indicate biological mechanisms of therapeutic relevance and clarify causal relation- Introduction: Whole exome (WES) and whole genome sequen- ships of modifiable environmental risk factors for SARS-CoV-2 cing remain unsuccessful in providing a firm diagnosis for about infection and outcomes. We formed a global network of half of the individuals with a suspected Mendelian disorder. RNA researchers to investigate the role of human genetics in SARS- sequencing (RNA-seq), which directly probes gene expression COV-2infectionandCOVID-19severity.Wedescribetheresultsof defects, has emerged as a promising complementary tool three genome-wide association meta-analyses comprising 49,562 increasingthediagnosisrate. MaterialsandMethods:WeperformedRNA-seqonfibroblasts COVID-19patientsfrom46studiesacross19countriesworldwide. We reported 15 genome-wide significant loci that are associated from 305 individuals affected with a mitochondrial disease who with SARS-CoV-2 infection or severe manifestations of COVID-19. had previously undergone WES, which represents one of the Several of these loci correspond to previously documented largest RNA-seq compendium for rare disease diagnostics. To associations to lung or autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. detectthegeneticcause,weprioritizegenesharbouringaberrant Theyalsorepresentpotentiallyactionablemechanismsinresponse expression(usingOUTRIDER),aberrantsplicing(usingFRASER),or toinfection.Wefurtheridentifiedsmokingandbodymassindexas mono-allelicexpressionofarareallele,compiledwithourrecently causal risk factors for severe COVID-19. The identification of novel developed computational workflow DROP, which is further hostgeneticfactorsassociatedwithCOVID-19,withunprecedented extendedwith an RNA-seqbased variant callingmodule.4 Results: We provided a diagnosis for 16% (33 out of 205) of Hodge10, Alexandre Reymond3, Zoltan Kutalik3, Nicholas Katsanis6, WES unsolved cases. By associating transcriptome aberrations Erica E. Davis6, Hakon Hakonarson2, Shamil Sunyaev11, Harrison with rare variants, we found a major role of nonsense-mediated Brand1,Michael E. Talkowski1 decay in underexpression outliers and of coding and intronic variants in splicing outliers. We also assessed the importance of 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 2Children’s RNA source material and showed that the majority of OMIM Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 3University of disease genes are expressed in clinically accessible tissues, with Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4University of Cologne, Cologne, the highest number in fibroblasts. Finally, we have gathered a Germany, 5Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology referencedatasetcontaininggene-andjunction-levelcountsthat (M.I.T.)andHarvard,Cambridge,MA,USA,6LurieChildren’sHospital, canbeintegratedascontrols forstudieswithsmallsamplesizes. Chicago, IL, USA, 7Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Conclusion: Our study demonstrates the routine implementa- Kingdom, 8GeneDx, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 9Invitae Corp., tionofRNA-seqasacomplementary tooltoDNAsequencingfor Cambridge, MA, USA, 10Indiana University School of Medicine, the diagnosis of rare diseases, paving the path towards more Indianapolis, IN, USA, 11Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, comprehensive OMICS-baseddiagnostics. MA,USA. V. Yepez: None. M. Gusic: None. J. Gagneur: None. H. Prokisch:None. Rare copy number variants (rCNVs) contribute to a broad spectrum of human diseases. Most disease-association studies of rCNVs have focused on haploinsufficiency caused by deletions, PL2.2 Local gene co-expression measurements in single-cells whileourunderstandingoftriplosensitivitycausedbyduplications highlight inter-individual specificity remains rudimentary. We meta-analyzed rCNVs from 753,994 individualsacross30primarilyneurologicaldiseasephenotypesto DiogoRibeiro1,2,Olivier Delaneau1,2 discover 114 rCNV-disease associations at 52 distinct loci surpassing genome-wide significance (P=3.72x10−6), 42% of 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of which involve duplications. Further, we statistically fine-mapped Bioinformatics (SIB),Lausanne, Switzerland. 38 novel triplosensitive disease genes (e.g., GMEB2), including three known haploinsufficient genes that we now reveal as Nearby genes are often expressed as a group. Recent studies bidirectionally dosage sensitive (e.g., ANKRD11). We found that highlight the existence of regulatory domains (e.g. groups of disease-associated rCNV segments were enriched for genes enhancers) orchestrating the organised expression of nearby constrained against damaging coding variation and identified genes (Delaneau et al. 2019 Science 364(6439)). Yet, the likely dominant driver genes for about one-third (32%) of rCNV prevalence and genetic control of local gene co-expression are segments based on de novo mutations from exome sequencing far from being understood. By leveraging gene expression studies of developmental disorders. However, most of the rCNVs measurements across 49 human tissues and hundreds of showing genome-wide significant association were incompletely individuals, we found local gene co-expression to be highly penetrant (mean odds ratio=11.6) and we also identified two prevalent,occurringin13%to53%genespertissue.Notably,we examples of noncoding disease-associated rCNVs (e.g., intronic identified>30.000expressionquantitativetraitloci(eQTLs)which CADM2 deletions). Finally, we developed a statistical model to associate with co-expressed gene pairs and often overlap predict dosage sensitivity for all genes, which defined 3,006 enhancer regions. Due to affecting several genes, these eQTLs haploinsufficient and 295 triplosensitive genes where the effect aremoreoftenassociatedwithmultiplehumantraitsthaneQTLs sizesofrCNVswerecomparabletodeletionsofgenesconstrained associated with only one gene. Next, to understand how the against truncating mutations. These dosage sensitivity scores observedlocalgeneco-expressionanditsregulationmanifestsat classifieddisease genesacrossmolecular mechanisms,prioritized thesingle-celllevel, weanalysed adataset of single-cell RNA-seq pathogenic de novo rCNVs in children with autism, and revealed across 60 genotyped individuals in a homogeneous cell type features that distinguished haploinsufficient and triplosensitive (iPSC). By taking advantage of co-expression measurements for genes. Collectively, the cross-disorder rCNV maps and metrics >50cellsperindividual,weidentified100-550locallyco-expressed derived here set the foundation for future studies of dosage gene pairs per individual. Interestingly, while many co-expressed sensitivity throughout thehuman genome. gene pairs are specific to certain individuals, we discovered that R.L. Collins: None. J.T. Glessner: None. E. Porcu: None. L. those present across >50% of the individuals often participate in Niestroj: None. J. Ulirsch: None. G. Kellaris: None. D.P. thesamebiologicalpathway(OR=16.5,P-value=1e-9).Finally, Howrigan:None.S.Everett:None.K.Mohajeri:None.X.Nuttle: in a bid to comprehend disease comorbidity and provide None.C.Lowther:None.J.Fu:None.P.M.Boone:None.F.Ullah: functional interpretation of QTL and GWAS findings, we identify None. K.E. Samocha: None. K. Karczewski: None. D. Lucente: eQTLs affecting co-expressed gene pairs in individuals suffering None. J.F. Gusella: None. H. Finucane: None. L. Matyakhina: A. fromvariousdiseasecomorbiditiesintheUKBiobank.Grant:Marie Employment (full or part-time); Significant; GeneDx, Inc. S. Sklodowska-Curienº885998 Aradhya: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Invitae D.Ribeiro: None. O.Delaneau: None. Corp. J. Meck: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; GeneDx,Inc..D.Lal:None.B.M.Neale:None.J.C.Hodge:None. A. Reymond: None. Z. Kutalik: None. N. Katsanis: None. E.E. PL2.3 A cross-disorder dosage sensitivity map of the Davis:None.H.Hakonarson:None.S.Sunyaev:None.H.Brand: humangenome None.M.E. Talkowski:None. RyanLewisCollins1,JosephT.Glessner2,EleonoraPorcu3,Lisa-Marie Niestroj4,JacobUlirsch5,GeorgiosKellaris6,DanielP.Howrigan5,Selin PL2.4 Biallelic ATG7 variants impair autophagy leading to Everett1, Kiana Mohajeri1, Xander Nuttle1, Chelsea Lowther1, Jack neurological disease Fu1, Philip M. Boone1, Farid Ullah6, Kaitlin E. Samocha7, Konrad Karczewski5, Diane Lucente1, The Epi25 Consortium, James F. Jack J. Collier1, Claire Guissart2, Monika Olahova1, Souphatta Gusella1, Hilary Finucane5, Ludmilla Matyakhina8, Swaroop Ara- Sasorith2, Fumi Suomi3, Florence Piron-Prunier4, David Zhang5, dhya9, Jeanne Meck8, Dennis Lal4, Benjamin M. Neale5, Jennelle C. Nuria Martinez-Lopez6, Nicolas Leboucq7, Angela Bahr8, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–875 Silvia Azzarello-Burri8, Selina Reich9, Ludger Schols9, Tuomo Heuvel1,CédricH.G.Neutel3,Pieter-JanGuns3,MandyVermont3,Erik Polvikoski10, Francois Rivier7, Pierre Meyer7, Lise Larrieu2, Andrew Fransen1,4, Melanie H. A. M. Perik1, Joe Davis Velchev1, Maaike Schaefer1, Hessa Alsaif11, Suad Alyamani11, Stephan Zuchner12, Ines Alaerts1,DorienSchepers1,5,SilkePeeters1,IsabelPintelon6,Abdulrah- Barbosa13, Charu Deshpande14, Angela Pyle1, Fowzan Alkuraya11, man Almesned7, Matteo P. Ferla8, Jenny C. Taylor8, Anthony R. Mina Ryten5, Agnes Delahodde4, Anita Rauch8, Matthis Synofzik9, Dallosso9,MaggieWilliams9,JulieEvans9,JillA.Rosenfeld10,11,Thierry Robert McFarland1, Thomas G. McWilliams3, Michel Koenig2, Robert Sluysmans12, Desiderio Rodrigues13, Ashish Chikermane14, Gang- W.Taylor1 adhara Bharmappanavara15, Kayal Vijayakumar16, Reza Maroo- fian17,ZuhairN.Al-Hassnan18,JulieVogt19,NicoleRevencu20,Isabelle 1Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle, United Maystadt21, Alistair T. Pagnamenta8, Lut Van Laer1, Bart Loeys1,2, Kingdom, 2University of Montpellier and University Hospital, AlineVerstraeten1 Montpellier,France,3UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki,Finland,4Institut deBiologieIntégrativedelaCellule,Paris,France,5UniversityCollege 1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp London, London, United Kingdom, 6Albert Einstein College of University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 2Department of Human Medicine,NewYorkCity,NY,USA,7CHUdeMontpellier,Montpellier, Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, France, 8University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 9University of Netherlands, 3Laboratory of physiopharmacology, University of Tubingen, Tubingen, Germany, 10Newcastle University, Newcastle, Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4StatUA Center for Statistics, University United Kingdom, 11King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research ofAntwerp,Antwerp,Belgium,5LaboratoryofMolecular,Cellularand Center,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,12UniversityofMiami,Miami,FL,USA, Network Excitability, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 13King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 14Guy’s and St 6LaboratoryofCellBiologyandHistology,DepartmentofVeterinary Thomas’NHSFoundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 7Prince Sultan Cardiac Centre, Qassim, Saudi Arabia, 8NIHR Oxford Biomedical Autophagyisanessentialdevelopmentalandhomeostaticprocess, ResearchCentre,WellcomeCentreforHumanGenetics,Universityof driving the endolysosomal degradation of protein aggregates, Oxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,9BristolGeneticsLaboratory,South organelles and pathogens. Dysfunctional autophagy has been West Genomic Laboratory Hub, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, United implicated in complex human diseases, yet congenital autophagy Kingdom, 10Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor disordersremainexceedinglyrare.Usingwholeexomesequencing College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 11Baylor Genetics Labora- we identified pathogenic, biallelic variants in ATG7, encoding the tories, Houston, TX, USA, 12Department of Pediatric Cardiology, principal driver of autophagy, in twelve patients from five families. Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, University of Louvain, Brussels, These patients display complex neurodevelopmental disorders Belgium, 13Birmingham Women’s and Children’s Hospital NHS distinguished by selective neurological, neuromuscular and endo- Foundation Trust, Steelhouse Lane, Birmingham, United Kingdom, crine dysfunction. Contrasting conditional Atg7 deletion in mice 14BirminghamWomen’sandChildren’sHospital,Birmingham,United which causes perinatal lethality, patients survive into adulthood Kingdom,15MusgroveParkHospital,SomersetNHSFoundationTrust, despitelossofATG7.Fibroblastsfromeachaffectedfamilydisplayed Taunton, United Kingdom, 16Department of Paedriatic Neurology, diminished autophagy, and expression of mutated ATG7 failed to University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, Bristol, United rescue autophagy-deficient model systems, supporting the patho- Kingdom, 17Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Queen genicity of these variants. ATG7-deficient patient muscle revealed Square Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 18Cardio- myopathic and inflammatory changes, together with subsarcolem- vascular Genetic Program, Department of Medical GEnetics, King malP62accumulation.DespitelossofATG7,autophagicstructures FaisalSpecialistHospitalandResearchCentre,Riyadh,SaudiArabia, werereadilydetectedinpatientfibroblastsandmuscle,suggesting 19WestMidlandRegionalGeneticsService,BirminghamWomen’sand that ATG7-independent autophagosome biogenesis pathways are Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 20Center for sufficienttomaintainbasalautophagicdegradationinhumancells. Human Genetics, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, University of Our study provides the first clinical, genetic and mechanistic Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 21Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut demonstration that mutated ATG7 leads to neurodevelopmental de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium. disease in humans, who can survive for decades with defective canonical autophagy. Importantly, two patients with undetectable Introduction: IPO8 encodes importin-8, a ubiquitously expressed ATG7displayarelativelymildphenotype,revealingthathumanlife nuclear transport receptor belonging to the importin-β protein iscompatiblewiththeabsenceofanonredundantcoreautophagy family that translocates cargo molecules such as proteins, RNAs gene, thereby challenging current perceptions regarding the and ribonucleoprotein complexes to the nucleus in a RanGTP- relationshipbetweenautophagyandhumanhealthanddisease. dependent manner. Important cargoes of importin-8 are sug- J.J. Collier: None. C. Guissart: None. M. Olahova: None. S. gestedto beTGF-βsignaling componentssuch as SMAD1-4. Sasorith: None. F. Suomi: None. F. Piron-Prunier: None. D. Materials and methods: Exome or genome sequencing are Zhang: None. N. Martinez-Lopez: None. N. Leboucq: None. A. used to identify variants in IPO8. A C57Bl/6N Ipo8 knock-out Bahr: None. S. Azzarello-Burri: None. S. Reich: None. L. Schols: mouse model is phenotypically characterized and studied using None. T. Polvikoski: None. F. Rivier: None. P. Meyer: None. L. transthoracic echocardiography, immunohistological investiga- Larrieu: None. A. Schaefer: None. H. Alsaif: None. S. Alyamani: tion,compliance assays to study biomechanical properties of the None.S.Zuchner:None.I.Barbosa:None.C.Deshpande:None. ascending aorta andRT-qPCR assays. A.Pyle:None.F.Alkuraya:None.M.Ryten:None.A.Delahodde: Results: Four bi-allelic loss-of-function variants in IPO8 were None. A. Rauch: None. M. Synofzik: None. R. McFarland: None. discovered in unrelated families causing a novel syndromic form T.G.McWilliams: None. M.Koenig: None. R.W.Taylor: None. ofthoracicaorticaneurysm(TAA)withclinicaloverlapwithLoeys- Dietz and Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome. Patients are young children clinically characterized by early-onset TAA, motor PL2.5Thefirsthumanimportin-β-relateddisorder:syndromic developmental delay, craniofacial dysmorphic features and con- thoracic aortic aneurysm caused by bi-allelic loss-of-function nectivetissuefindings.TheIpo8knock-outmousemodelshowed variants in IPO8 a TAA development from 8-12weeks onwards in both sexes, but most prominently shows ascending aorta dilatation with a Ilse Van Gucht1, Josephina A. N. Meester1, Jotte Rodriguez Bento1, propensity for dissection in males. Immunohistological investiga- Maaike Bastiaansen1, Jarl Bastianen1, Ilse Luyckx1,2, Lotte Van Den tion and RT-qPCR assays of the aortic wall revealed elastic fiber EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–876 disorganization andfragmentation andnuclearpSmad2accumu- TheChinese University ofHongKong, Hong Kong, China. lation, respectively a decreased Smad6/7 and increased Mmp2 expression, reinforcing a role for dysregulation of the TGF-β My group first reported the presence of cell-free fetal DNA in signaling pathway inTAAdevelopment. maternal plasma in 1997. This phenomenon has contributed to Conclusions: We report the first importin-β-related human thedevelopmentofnon-invasiveprenataltesting(NIPT).Circulat- disease caused by bi-allelic loss-of-function variants in IPO8 ing DNA in plasma exists in the form of short DNA fragments. presentinga novelaortopathy syndrome. Circulating fetal DNA molecules are generally shorter than those I.VanGucht:None.J.A.N.Meester:None.J.RodriguezBento: derived from the mother. Recently, I have been particularly None. M. Bastiaansen: None. J. Bastianen: None. I. Luyckx: interested in the fragmentation process of such DNA molecules, None. L. Van Den Heuvel: None. C.H.G. Neutel: None. P. Guns: now referred to as fragmentomics. Through the use of mouse None. M. Vermont: None. E. Fransen: None. M.H.A.M. Perik: models inwhich different nucleasegeneshave beeninactivated, None.J.Velchev:None.M.Alaerts:None.D.Schepers:None.S. differentstepsofthefragmentationprocesshasbeenworkedout. Peeters:None.I.Pintelon:None.A.Almesned:None.M.P.Ferla: Nucleases that participate in this process include DNASE1L3, None.J.C.Taylor:None.A.R.Dallosso:None.M.Williams:None. DNASE1andDNAfragmentationfactorbeta(DFFB).Theendmotif J. Evans: None. J.A. Rosenfeld: None. T. Sluysmans: None. D. sequencesofcirculatingDNAmoleculescarrycleavagesignatures Rodrigues: None. A. Chikermane: None. G. Bharmappanavara: from these nucleases. My group has also demonstrated that None. K. Vijayakumar: None. R. Maroofian: None. Z.N. Al- circulating DNA molecules consist of a predominance of Hassnan: None. J. Vogt: None. N. Revencu: None. I. Maystadt: molecules carrying jagged ends. More recently, circular DNA None. A.T. Pagnamenta: None. L. Van Laer: None. B. Loeys: species have been found in plasma. Interestingly, the sizes and None.A. Verstraeten: None. topology of circulating DNA species have been found to be correlatedtotheirtissuesoforigin.Apartfromsheddinglighton the mechanism of cell-free DNA generation, these observations PL2.6Epilepsypolygenicriskscoresin>269kindividualswith may also contribute towards the development of novel biomar- andwithout epilepsy kersfor prenatal andcancer liquid biopsies. Y.M.D. Lo: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collabora- HenrikeO. Heyne1, FinnGen, Reetta Kälviäinen2,Mark J.Daly1 tor or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; Grail. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finnland: FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Grail, 2Epilepsy Center, KuopioUniversity Hospital, Kuopio, Finland. Take2, DRA Limited, Illumina, Sequenom, Xcelom. F. Consultant/ AdvisoryBoard; Significant; Grail,Decheng Capital. Epilepsy affects approximately 1% of individuals worldwide. Makinganepilepsydiagnosisisoftendifficultwithestimatesthat up to 25% of epilepsy could initially be misdiagnosed. The SNP CONCURRENT SYMPOSIA heritabilityofgeneticgeneralizedepilepsyishigh(32%)andithas recently been shown that individuals with epilepsy also have S01Machine learning methods forprioritizing genetic elevatedepilepsypolygenicriskscores(PRS).However,systematic variants investigationofPRSfordistinctepilepsydiagnoseshassofarbeen lacking. Here, we studied epilepsy PRS in detailed longitudinal S01.2Leveraging public epigenomic datasets to examine the electronichealthrecordsof>269kFinnsincludingICDcodesand roleofregulatory variation in complex traits drug purchases of over 50 years. Our dataset included 9660 individualswith epilepsyrelated diagnoses. Wecould confirman SushmitaRoy elevatedPRSfor generalizedepilepsy (PRS ) inindividualswith gen generalized epilepsy. This was particularly high for adolescent myoclonic epilepsy, which could be because it represented the University ofWisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI,USA. largest diagnosis group of the GWAS that was used to construct thePRS.Wealsomademultiplesurprisingdiscoveriese.g.oneICD Many variants identified by genome-wide association studies diagnosisG40.1definedasafocalepilepsyhadanelevatedPRS (GWAS) occur in non-coding sequences. Understanding the butnoincreasedPRSforfocalepilepsy(PRS ).Wefurtherfoug ne dn impact of such variants on complex phenotypes is a significant focal thatoverhalfofindividualswithspecificdiagnosesofgeneralized challenge.This is because such regulatory variants can affect the orfocalepilepsywereinitiallydiagnosedwithunclearconvulsions expression of gene hundreds of kilobases away, and the target (R56.8) or unclear epilepsy (G40.9). Their PRS and PRS was genes themselves are part of a larger unknown biological gen focal significantly higher than of those individuals who had only one pathway. High-throughput Chromosome Conformation Capture unclear seizure event and did not later receive an epilepsy (3C) technologies that measure the three-dimensional proximity diagnosis.TheseresultsindicateafuturepotentialforepilepsyPRS of genomic loci at high resolution (e.g. 5kb) can be used to link tohelpinpredicting progression to epilepsy inclinicalpractice. genes to regulatory variants over long distances, but they exist H.O. Heyne: None. R. Kälviäinen: None. M.J. Daly: E. Owner- only for a handful of model cell lines due to high sequencing ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual costs. We have developed a computational framework for property); Modest; MaizeTherapeutics. predicting such data, comprising (1) a Random-Forest based regression model to predict in-silico contact counts of pairs of PL4Mendel Award Lecture genomic loci, and (2) a multi-task subnetwork identification approach to identify potential pathways targeted by a set of variantsfromaGWASstudy.Ourcountpredictionapproachtakes PL4.1 Mendel Lecture- Cell-free DNA in Plasma: Coming in as input one-dimensional signals such as histone modifications, DifferentSizes andShapes chromatin accessibility and accessible sequence motifs of architectural proteins such as CTCF and predicts the contact YukM. D.Lo countforpairsofregions.Wetrainedourapproachonfivehigh- resolution Hi-C datasets and applied the trained models to 55 human cell lines and tissues from the Roadmap Epigenomics EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–877 project using both measured and imputed features. Our predic- expressionbytaggingspatialbarcodestotranscriptsafterpoly(A)- tions, when aggregated to a lower resolution (e.g. 40kb), capture. Current protocols for in situ capturing, using barcoded accurately recapitulate the measured low-resolution contact surfaces, are based on short-read sequencing and fresh frozen count, as well as identify larger units of 3D chromosome samples. In this presentation we will provide insights to new organization. Significant interactions from our predicted counts developmentsexpandingtheanalysisintoFFPEmaterialaswellas are associated with increased gene expression and enriched for spatialfulllengthinformation.Weprovideexamplesofhownew interactions from ChIA-PET experiments. We used our compen- data types leads to an improved understanding of biological dium of significant interactions to predict target genes of systems in health an disease and provide an additional layer of regulatory SNPs associated with traits from the NHGRI GWAS informationto Cell Atlas initiatives. catalog. We applied our multi-task graph clustering approach to J. Lundeberg: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, identify subsets of cell types associated with a phenotype of collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants interest, e.g., autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and schizophrenia. already received); Significant; 10X Genomics Inc. F. Consultant/ We found that the subnetworks are enriched for processes that AdvisoryBoard; Significant; 10XGenomics Inc. are relevant to the phenotype of interest (e.g. SNPs associated withASDandschizophreniaareenrichedforcognition,associative S03Transposons andvisuallearningandregulationofnerveimpulseinfetalbrain andfetalspinalcordtissue).Takentogether,ouranalysispipeline S03.2 Retrotransposition in brain: does LINE activity in the offers a powerful resource to study three-dimensional genome central nervous systemmatter? organizationinalargenumberofcelllinesandinterprettherole ofregulatory variationin complexphenotypes. Jose L.Garcia-Perez S.Roy:None. HGU-MRC, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, S02Spatial omics United Kingdom. S02.1Imaging the Accessible Genomeat Nanometer Scale Transposable Elements (TEs) are stretches of DNA that can move withingenomes.AspiecesofmobileDNA,TEactivitycanchange ZheJ.Liu the genome of any species. Indeed, germline TE activity over evolution has significantly shaped the structure and function of JaneliaResearch Campus-HHMI, Ashburn, VA,USA. the genome of all living organisms, including humans. Currently, active TEs in our germline genome (termed LINEs for Long To image active chromatin at nanometer scale in situ, we Interspersed Elements) continue to generate genomic variability developed 3D ATAC-PALM that integrates the assay for amonghumans.Asaresult,LINEactivitycontinuestoimpactthe transposase-accessible chromatin (ATAC), PALM super-resolution functioning and regulation of our genome. As a type of selfish imaging and lattice light-sheet microscopy. Multiplexed with DNA, LINE activity is prominent in cellular niches that transmit oligopaint DNA-FISH, RNA-FISH and protein fluorescence, 3D genetic information to the next generation (i.e., germ cells and ATAC-PALM connected microscopy and genomic data, revealing during early human embryogenesis). However, due to its spatially segregated accessible chromatin domains (ACDs) that mutagenic potential, the activity of LINE elements is tightly enclose active chromatin and transcribed genes. Using these regulated, ensuring an equilibrium with the host. My laboratory methods to analyze genetically perturbed cells, we identify the aims to understand how active LINEs are regulated at the BET family scaffold protein BRD2 as a key factor responsible for molecularlevel,andtoinfertheimpactoftheiractivityinrelevant compartmentalization of the accessible genome. Specifically, cellularmodelsandmodelofdisease.Surprisingly,itwasrecently BRD2 mixes and compacts active compartments in the absence demonstratedthatactiveLINEsalsomoveinneuronalcellsofour of Cohesin. This activity is independent of transcription but brain (and of model organisms). These discoveries were unex- requires BRD2 to recognize acetylated nucleosomes through its pected, and suggest that the same mechanisms used to evolve double bromodomain. We also show that BRD2 safeguards germline genomes can act in our brain, but without leaving compartmentalboundariesbypreventinginterminglingbetween heritabletraces.AnemerginghypothesissuggeststhatTEsaffect active and inactive chromatin. Notably, genome organization brain functionality, and my lab is using zebrafish to dissect how mediatedbyBRD2isantagonizedononehandbyCohesinandon activeTEsaffect thevertebrate brain. theotherbytheBEThomologproteinBRD4,bothofwhichinhibit J.L.Garcia-Perez: None. BRD2 binding to chromatin. Polymer simulation of the data supports a BRD2-Cohesin ‘tug-of-war’ model ofnuclear topology, where genome compartmentalization results from a competition S03.3Activation oftransposons in neurological disorders between loop extrusion and chromatin state-specific affinity interactions. JohanJakobsson Z.J.Liu: None. LundUniversity, Lund,Sweden. S02.2Spatially resolvedgene expression The underlying cause for most neurological disorders is poorly understood and current treatments are largely ineffective. New JoakimLundeberg ideas and concepts are therefore vitally important for future research in this area. In this talk I will discuss the concept that SciLifeLab, KTH RoyalInstitute ofTechnology, Solna,Sweden. dysregulation of transposable elements (TEs) contributes to the appearanceandpathologyofneurodevelopmentalandneurode- Advances in the field of transcriptomics have deepened our generative disorders. Despite TEs making up at least half of the understanding of tissue organization by integrating global gene humangenome,theyarevastlyunderstudied inrelationtobrain expression in a spatial context. Among these approaches, in situ disorders. However, recent advances in sequencing and gene capturingtechnologiesproducewhole-transcriptomespatialgene editing are now starting to unravel the pathological role of TEs. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–878 Aberrant activation of TEs has been found in many neurological foreseesanumberofopeningclausesandscopeforEUMember disorders and the resulting pathogenic effects, which includes State legislation. This will affect the 1+ Million Genome initiative alterations of gene expression, neuroinflammation, and direct inparticularastheprocessingofhealthandgeneticdatabasedon neurotoxicity, are currently being investigated. In summary, our Art. 9(4) GDPR and the processing of personal data for scientific workisbasedontheideathatanincreasedunderstandingofthe research in general based on Art. 89(1) GDPR are subject to relationshipbetweenTEsandpathologicalprocessesinthebrain Member State legislation. In addition, different practices on a willresultinnoveldiagnostictoolandtherapeuticapproachesfor preferredorevenlegallyprescribedlegalbasisfortheprocessing brain disorders. influencestheoverallprocessingconsiderations.Theapplicability J.Jakobsson: None. of national provisions needs to be investigated, which depends largely but not entirely on the assignment of responsibilities as controllerundertheGDPR.Additionalchallengesareprovidedby S04Impact ofGDPRon genomic data sharing divergent interpretations of the GDPR, which leads to further differences in national or local interpretations and implementa- S04.1 How to transfer genomic data internationally in com- tions of the GDPR. The consequences such differences will be pliance withthe GDPR reviewed and potential approaches to find solutions for a European implementation of the 1+ Million Genome initiative HeidiBeateBentzen discussed. R.Becker: None. University of Oslo,Oslo, Norway. Legal challenges currently impede personal data transfers to S05Endogenous andexogenous mutagenesis in cancer outside the European Economic Area (EEA), gravely affecting medical research globally. Ironically, it is even more difficult to S05.2Oncometabolites, DNArepair,andCancer transfergenomicdatafromtheEEAtoapublicresearchinstitution such as the U.S. National Institutes of Health than to a private PeterGlazer company. Though if the U.S. company in question is a cloud provider,difficultiesabound.FollowingBrexit,datatransferstothe Yale University, New Haven,CT,USA. United Kingdom face an uncertain future. It will be explained exactlywhatthelegalissuesarethatarecausingthesechallenges Abnormallyelevatedlevelsofthemetabolites,2-hydroxyglutarate forthegenetics field. (2HG), succinate, and fumarate, can occur in human malignan- Most importantly, how you currently and in the future can cies due to somatic mutations in the isocitrate dehydrogenase- transfer genomic data to non-EEA collaborators in compliance 1/2 (IDH1/2) genes or germline mutations in the fumarate with the European Union General Data Protection Regulation hydratase (FH) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) genes, (GDPR),willbecoveredinthispresentation.Theanswerdepends respectively. These structurally related metabolites inhibit on the country and entity to which you intend to transfer data, alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes, including dioxy- and the purpose for the data transfer. Legal, technical, and genases that modify chromatin. Mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 organizational solutions will be suggested based on extensive are found most frequently in gliomas and acute myelogenous workconducted to facilitate international collaborations. leukemias, along with cholangiocarcinomas, chondrosarcomas, H.Bentzen: None. and melanomas. Inherited mutations in FH and SDH are linked to the familial cancer predisposition syndromes, Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Renal Cell Cancer (HLRCC) and Hereditary S04.31+ Million Genomes Initiative andthe GDPR ParagangliomaandPheochromocytoma(SDHPGL/PCC),respec- tively. Our prior work has made an unexpected connection ReginaBecker betweenelevatedlevelsofthesemetabolitesandDNArepairby showing that they suppress the pathway of homology- ELIXIR-Luxembourg, University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzete, dependent repair (HDR) and confer an exquisite sensitivity to Luxembourg. poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors that is being tested in clinical trials. In this presentation, we will discuss our The 1+ Million Genome Initiative was initiated at the European recent work elucidating the mechanistic basis for this suppres- Digital Day in 2018 by a core group of 13 EU Member States. By sion of DNA repair. Rather than acting indirectly through now,24Europeancountriessignedthejointdeclarationtomake epigenetic regulation of gene expression, we find that these more than 1 million genomes with accompanying phenotypic metabolites act directly by inhibiting HDR factor recruitment to dataavailablecross-borderforresearchandhealthcarepurposes. DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). We have determined that Theaimisnamelyto“providecross-border,data-drivenhealthand oncometabolite-mediated inhibition of the lysine demethylase, care solutions to benefit citizens of the Union”. Scope of the KDM4B,resultsinaberranthypermethylationofhistone3lysine activities to achieve this goal are research for a better under- 9 (H3K9) at loci surrounding DNA double-strand breaks, standing of diseases, secondary use of data for healthcare which effectively prevents a local H3K9 trimethylation signal applications and policy development with the aim to provide that is essential for the proper execution of HDR at the break. better healthcare toa collectiveof patients. As a consequence, the recruitment of Tip60 and ATM, two The ambitious goal is to go beyond a general availability of proximal HDR factors, is significantly impaired at DNA breaks, genomes for healthcare and research and create a virtual with reduced end-resection and diminished recruitment of European genome cohort across the participating countries. This downstreamrepairfactors.Thesefindingsprovideamechanistic impliesamuchstrongerharmonisationofproceduresandajoint basis for oncometabolite-induced HDR suppression and governancetoallowresearch,policyandhealthcareusersfeasible may guide effective strategies to exploit these defects for a and straight-forward access procedures. However, such harmoni- therapeutic gain. sationwillhavetofacethedifferencesinlegislationacrossEurope, P.Glazer:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patentor most notably in the implementation of the General Data other intellectual property); Modest; Cybrexa Therapeutics, Gen- ProtectionRegulation(GDPR).WhilebeingaRegulation,theGDPR naoBio. F.Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; pHLIPInc. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–879 S05.3 Mutational signatures of environmental agents and specific repeat families helped shape the dynamic regulatory chemotherapeutics in humancellular models patternsof mammaliantissues. M. Roller: None. E. Stamper: None. P. Flicek: None. D.T. JillE.Kucab Odom:None. King’sCollege London, London, United Kingdom. S07Mindthegap:Translatinggenomicadvancesintoclinical care Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of human tumours has revealed a multitude of distinct mutational signatures present in S07.1Theart,scienceandpracticeofimplementinggenomics cancers, some of which are linked to environmental exposures. inclinical care Manyenvironmentalcarcinogens,suchasUVlightandchemicals intobaccosmoke,candamageDNAandinducespecificmutation Stephanie Best1,2 patterns.Characterisingthesepatternsexperimentallyallowsusto better understand the mutations observed in human cancer. We 1Australian Institute of Health Innovation, Macquarie University, previously examined whole-genome mutational signatures in Sydney,Australia,2AustralianGenomics,MurdochChildrensResearch human induced pluripotent stem cells (hIPSCs) treated with 79 Institute,Australia. agents, including known or suspected carcinogens and che- motherapeutics. Forty-one agents induced characteristic single Continual progress in genetic discoveries, alongside growing basesubstitutionsignatures,someofwhichwerehighlysimilarto evidence of clinical utility, brings ever increasing calls for signaturesfoundinhumantumours.Toexpanduponourprevious implementationofgenomictestingindaytodayclinicalsettings. work, we are now using organoids derived from normal human Implementationscienceisacknowledgedtosupportimplementa- epithelialtissues,includingthegastrointestinaltract,pancreasand tion of evidence-based practices into front line care, taking in a kidney,todeterminepatternsofchemically-inducedmutationsby range of perspectives from patients and clinicians through to WGS. We performed apilot study using a bottleneck sequencing policy makers. However, clinical genomics is a complex interven- approach (NanoSeq) on DNA from hiPSCs and gastric organoids tion and health care is a complex adaptive system so using treatedwiththemutagenicphytochemicalaristolochicacidIand implementationsciencerequiresanelementofscience,artand,of the tobacco carcinogen benzo(a)pyrene. NanoSeq enables error- course, practice. This presentation will explore the use of free, sensitive detection of subclonal mutations by combining implementation science in clinical genomics, drawing on exam- molecular barcoding with a dilution step prior to library amplification, eliminating the need to isolate single cell clones. plesfromthe Australian healthcaresystem. S.Best: None. Using NanoSeq we were able to identify mutagen-induced signatures consistent with those previously found using a conventional WGS platform, validating our approach. We are S07.3 Humanities and social sciences informing the imple- now using this model to evaluate the mutational signatures of mentationofgenomics additional environmental carcinogens and chemotherapeutics in organoids, which will subsequently be compared to those found Catherine Lejeune1, Charley Robert-Viard1, Anne-Laure Soilly2, inpatients exposedtothese agents. HamzaAchit3, Francis Guillemin3, Valérie Seror4 J.E.Kucab:None. 1InsermCIC-EC1432,Dijon,France,2DRCICHUDijon,Dijon,France, S06Comparative genomics across species andpopulations 3Inserm CIC-EC 1433, Nancy, France, 4IRD, APHM, SSA, VITROME, Marseille, France. S06.1Rapid evolution ofgenome regulation inmammals Context.Genomicsequencinghasseenanincreaseinuseinmost Masa Roller1, Ericca Stamper2, Paul Flicek1, Duncan T. Odom3,2 developed countries, as illustrated by the implementation of national programs. For optimized routine use, data must be collected regarding stakeholders’ viewpoints and the risks and 1EMBL-EuropeanBioinformaticInstitute,Hinxton,UnitedKingdom, advantages for individuals (for patients, families and health 2Cancer Research UK - Cambridge Institute, Cambridge, United professionals)butalsoonacollectivelevel(healthsystem,payers). Kingdom,3DKFZ&UniversityofHeidelberg,Heidelberg,Germany. To explore these trade-offs, multidisciplinary studies are particu- larly useful. This type of approach takes equally into account the Mylaboratoryhasinvestigatedthemechanismsdrivingregulatory medical,economic,organizational,sociological,andpsychological evolution across tissues and species. In this presentation, I will dimensions of genomics. None of these fields are considered as describe how plastic regulatory networks and even genome exclusiveor havingpriority overthe others. architecture is across the mammalian clade, with a focus on our MaterialandMethods:TheDEFIDIAGprojectisoneofthepilot recent work where we experimentally mapped promoters, studiesoftheFrenchPlanforGenomicMedicine2025.Itillustrates enhancers, and geneexpression inliver, brain, muscle, and testis the complementarity of various methodologies from the field of from ten diverse mammals. The regulatory landscape around humanities and social sciences (HSS). DEFIDIAG is a prospective genes included both tissue-shared and tissue-specific regulatory national multicenter study in which patients -children or adults regions, where tissue-specific promoters and enhancers evolved withintellectualdisability(ID)ofunknownetiology-aretheirown mostrapidly.Genomicregionsswitchingbetweenpromotersand controls.Themaingoalofthestudyistocomparethediagnostic enhancers were more common across species, and lesscommon performance (via the percentage of genetic causal diagnoses across tissues within a single species. LINE L1s were associated identified in ID patients) of trio whole genome sequencing withtissue-specificregulatoryregions,whereasmoreancientLINE analysis(WGS )comparedtotheFrenchreferencestrategy(CGH- L2s were associated with tissue-shared regulatory regions and T array, X-fra and genes panel). In addition to this clinical goal, a withthoseswitchingbetweenpromoterandenhancersignatures cost-effectiveness evaluation is planned as well as two impact across species. Our analyses of the tissue-specificity and evolu- studies: the first will estimate the cost of the diagnosis odyssey tionary stability among promoters and enhancers revealed how among previously investigated patients that could be avoided, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8710 whereasthesecondoneaimstoassessthefrequencyandnature recognized that our existing health systems are less accessible, ofchangesinmedical,medico-socialandpsychologicalfollow-up appropriate and effective for many disadvantaged populations. inthefirstyearafterWGSresultsaredisclosed.Aqualitativestudy The transformation of our health systems by precision medicine basedonface-to-faceinterviewsamongparentswillalso explore provides an opportunity to address these disparities and enable theirexpectations,theiremotionaladjustmenttothetestresults, the health benefits of precision medicine to be fairly distributed andtheir perception ofthefuture. betweenpopulationgroups.Currently,thelackofparticipationin Conclusion:DEFIDIAGisamajoropportunityforallbranchesof genomic research among non-European populations means that the scientific community to contribute their skills. This study is precision medicine is more likely to increase rather than narrow expected to participate to the implementation of genomic health disparities (Popejoy and Fullerton 2016), although various sequencinginFrance,whileprovidingalltheinformationneeded initiatives seek to change this (Bentley, Callier and Rotimi 2017). to optimize the decision-making process, financing and how to Indigenous/First Nations groups are the least represented in bestsupport patientsand theirfamilies. genomicresearch,andoftensufferthemosthealthdisadvantage, C. Lejeune: None. C. Robert-Viard: None. A. Soilly: None. H. particularly within settler colonial societies including the United Achit:None. F. Guillemin: None. V.Seror: None. States,Canada,AustraliaandNewZealand.Scholarship,commen- taryandguidelinesproducedbyIndigenousscholarsoverthelast S08Single cell genomicsin cancer decade or so make the following points: 1) Indigenous people experienceongoingdispossession,oppressionanddiscrimination; 2) Indigenous people seek the restoration sovereignty over their S08.2Earlycancerdevelopmentfromasingle-cellperspective: lands,andsovereigntyovertheirculturalandintellectualproperty; limitations, challenges andopportunities 3) Many Indigenous people have had negative experiences with scientificandmedicalresearch-andgeneticresearchinparticular ReneeBeekman -wheretheyhavebeenharmedratherthanbenefitedfromtheir participation; 4) Efforts to include Indigenous people in genomic CRG,Barcelona, Spain. researchneedtobecontrolledbyIndigenouspeoplethemselves. These principles have important implications for establishing a Duetotheevolvingsingle-celltechnologies,theopportunitiesto researchproject and research questions; ethicalreview; negotiat- study biological processes at the single-cell level are expanding ing consent; ownership, control and access to data; benefit rapidly. Those opportunities comprise among others, the identi- sharing arrangements; and acknowledging contributions in fication of rare cell populations, detection of rare events and publications.SomeexamplesofIndigenous-ledgenomicresearch mapping heterogeneity in cell populations. At the same time, willbe discussed. thesetechnologieshavetheirlimitations,dueforexampletopoor E.Kowal: None. sensitivity,lack ofinformationofmultiple layersatthesingle-cell level,aswellasthelimitedopportunitiesfortheanalysisofclonal expansion in non-engineered systems, such as human primary S10Gene-based therapy forinherited liverdiseases samples.Iwilladdresstheseadvantagesanddisadvantagesinthe context ofstudying early cancer development. S10.1AAVgene therapy forglycogen storagediseases Tumor formation is the result of stepwise accumulation of geneticandepigeneticlesions.Inourlab,wespecificallystudythe DwightD. Koeberl process of Non-Hodgkin lymphoma formation, which is a tumor arising from normal B lymphocytes. I will explain how we aim to DukeUniversity Schoolof Medicine, Durham, NC, USA. study this process at the single-cell levelusing different layers of information: single-cell transcriptomics, chromatin accessibility Glycogen storage disease (GSD) is caused by the deficiency of andDNAmethylation.Iwilladdresshowincreasedsensitivitycan specificenzymesinvolvedinthestorageandretrievalofglucose, be achieved and/or how studying heterogeneity of signatures includingglucose-6-phosphatase(G6Pase)inGSDtypeIa.G6Pase rather than analysis of single genes or genomic regions can deficiencyinGSDIaaffectsprimarilyliverandkidney,andcauses circumvent this limiting factor and lead to meaningful results. severe hypoglycemia and related biochemical abnormalities. We Furthermore, I aim to address which technologies are currently developed gene therapy with adeno-associated virus (AAV) available to integrate different layers of information, focusing on vectors to deliver G6Pase. AAV vectors were pseudotyped with thelayersmentionedabove,togetherwithsomaticmutationsand novelAAVserotypes,suchasAAV8,anddemonstratedenhanced cellsurfacemarker expression. tropism for the liver. We demonstrated efficacy through reduc- Overall, in my talk I will present an overview of the tionsinglycogenstorageandcorrectionofassociatedbiomarkers opportunities we see and the challenges we face to study in G6Pase-knockout mice and GSD Ia dogs. The biochemical oncogenesis from the single-cell perspective and the solutions abnormalities in these models of GSD Ia provided robust that single-cell technology and data-analysis tool development endpoints for demonstrating efficacy following AAV vector providetobetter understand this complexprocess. administration, including the correction of hypoglycemia and R.Beekman: None. hyperlipidemia, lactic aciduria, G6Pase deficiency, and glycogen accumulations in the liver and kidney. We demonstrated that an S09Biobanks inunder-represented populations AAV vector encoding human G6Pase reversed these biochemical abnormalitiesandprolongedlong-termsurvivalinmiceanddogs S09.3 Ethics and inclusivity when working with Indigenous with GSD Ia. We have identified abnormalities of autophagy that populations drive the pathobiology of GSD Ia, and showed that new small molecule therapies to reverse these abnormalities. Currently we Emma Kowal are evaluating small molecule therapy and AAV vector mediated genomeediting for GSDIa. DeakinUniversity, Melbourne, Australia. GSDtypeII(Pompedisease)resultsfromthedeficiencyofacid αlpha-glucosidase (GAA) and causes primarily muscle disease. Asprecisionmedicineincreasinglybecomespartofroutinehealth Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has become available for care, many countries are concerned about equity. It is well several lysosomal storage disorders over the past two decades; EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8711 however,thelimitationsofERThavebecomeincreasinglyevident, High grade gliomas in children and young adults are a failure of especially in Pompe disease. Pompe disease is characterized by normal development. As such, they have a paucity of targets for the massive accumulation of lysosomal glycogen in striated therapy, and several remain intractable, especially at relapse or muscle with an accompanying disruption of cellular functions. whenmetastatic.Previousdataweacquiredsuggestthatthehot- While ERT has prolonged the survival of infantile-onset Pompe spothistonemutationsweidentifiedleadtostalleddevelopment, disease patients, no curative therapy is available. Important which is at the root of their oncogenic processes. Importantly, limitations of ERT include the formation of anti-GAA antibodies, there is exquisite temporo-spatial specificity of several of the and poor uptake of GAA in muscle. We demonstrated that AAV drivers identified in these cancers, indicating a major role of vector-mediated gene therapy will likely overcome limitations of altered developmental processes and the impact of the tumour ERT,includingformationofanti-GAAantibodiesandtheneedfor microenvironment in their genesis and progression. We will frequent infusions. Currently we are evaluating liver depot gene review how oncohistone-mediated tumourigenesis is promoted therapy in a clinical trial enrolling adults with late-onset Pompe throughthemaintenanceofearlyprogenitorstatesattheexpense disease. ofdifferentiation indefinedcellular and developmentalcontexts. D.D. Koeberl: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Wewilldescribetheeffectsontheepigenomeandhowco-option collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants of major signaling pathways involved in brain development fuel alreadyreceived);Modest;SangamoTherapeutics,Inc.,Pharming, tumourformation and can be possibly targeted atthebedside. Askbio,Moderna.D.SpeakersBureau/Honoraria(speakersbureau, N.Jabado:None. symposia,andexpertwitness);Modest;Takeda,Moderna,Askbio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other S12Functional annotation ofgenomicvariation intellectual property); Modest; Askbio. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Moderna,Askbio. S12.1 DNA methylation episignatures in Mendelian neurode- velopmental disorders S10.2 mRNA replacement therapy for inborn errors of liver Bekim Sadikovic metabolism Wester University, London, ON, Canada. PaoloMartini One functional consequence of genetic defects in patients with Moderna Inc.,Cambridge, MA, USA. hereditary neurodevelopmental disorders is the disruption of genomicDNAmethylation.Thereisarapidlygrowingnumberof mRNAtherapyforinbornerroroflivermetabolismPaoloG.V. geneticdisordersthatexhibitDNAmethylation“episignatures”or Martini,PhD. “EpiSigns” as highly sensitive and specific DNA methylation Messenger RNA, as a therapeutic agent, is becoming a biomarkers. In this talk I describe how EpiSigns can be used for promising paradigm to address several different diseases includ- diagnosis of patients with a broadening range of neurodevelop- inginfectiousdiseaseswiththenowapprovedvaccinesforCovid mental genetic conditions, as well as effective functional tool for 19aswellasdemonstratedinseveralanimalmodelsofdiseases, resolvingambiguous genetictestfindingsorclinicalphenotypes. in other therapeutic areas such as oncology, cardiovascular, rare B.Sadikovic: None. genetic liver metabolic disorders. While in vaccines, the immune recognition of exogenously injected mRNA seems to be an S13Beauty ofgametogenesis advantage, in rare genetic and metabolic disorders, modification of the mRNA are needed to render it less responsive to the S13.1Newinsights into aneuploidy inmammalian embryos immune system. At Moderna, our efforts have been focused on specificmodificationofthemRNAtobypasstheimmunesystem MelinaSchuh and to favor translation of an active protein to replace the defective one. Moreover, lipid nanoparticles, used to protect and delivermRNAin-vivo,havebeenmodifiedformaximumefficiency Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Ger- intransducingthetargetorgans.mRNAalsoofferstheflexibilityof many. combinationofdifferentmRNAsequences simultaneously,which willtranslatein-vivo,multipleproteinscreating,insomeinstances, The Schuh lab studies meiosis in mammalian oocytes. In her very stable complexes. We will discuss mRNA as therapeutic for presentation, Melina will summarize her lab’s recent research on Propionic acidemia which highlight the combination of 2 mRNA the spindle in mammalian oocytes. Her lab found that human oocytespindlesaresurprisinglyunstable,andidentifiedfunctions subunits in a single drug to translate a PCCA-PCCB hexadodeca- mer complex with significant impact on the phenotype of an for actin and a liquid-like meiotic spindle domain for spindle animalmodel ofdisease assemblyinmammalianoocytes.Inthemainpartofhertalk,she P. Martini: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; willpresentrecentworkfromherlabthatshedslightontheorigin ModernaInc. of high aneuploidy rates in mammalian embryos. The vast majorityofhumanembryosareaneuploid.Aneuploidyfrequently S11Prevention, detection andtherapy in cancer arises during the early mitotic divisions of the embryo, but the origin of this remains elusive. Using bovine embryos as a model for human embryos, we identify an error-prone mechanism of S11.3 Therapeutic vulnerabilities from epigenetic alterations parental genome unification which often results in aneuploidy. incancer Surprisingly,genomeunificationinitiateshoursbeforebreakdown of the two pronuclei that encapsulate the parental genomes. NadaJabado While still within intact pronuclei, the parental genomes polarize towards each other, in a process driven by centrosomes, dynein, McGill University and the Research Institute of the McGill University and microtubules. The maternal and paternal chromosomes HealthCentre, Montreal, QC, Canada. eventually cluster at the pronuclear interface, in direct proximity to each other. Parental genome clustering often fails however, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8712 leading to severe chromosome segregation errors, incompatible cost, something that opens up for new applications in clinical withhealthyembryodevelopment.Nucleoli,whichassociatewith diagnostics and precision medicine. Most recently, we demon- chromatin, also cluster at the pronuclear interface in human stratedthefirstdenovogenomeassembliesofsinglehumancells. zygotes. Defects in nucleolar clustering correlate with failure To achieve this, we constructed a new workflow for whole in human embryo development, suggesting a conserved genome amplification and coupled this with downstream long- mechanism. readsequencing.ThismethodwasappliedtoCD8+T-cellsfroma M.Schuh: None. human donor, and resulted in an assembly size of up to 600Mb with12.8%ofhumangenescompletelyresolved.Further,wewere abletoassemblecompletemitochondrialgenomesequencesand S14Genomearchitecture even to identify mitochondrial heteroplasmy between T cells originating from different clones. In conclusion, we demonstrate S14.1Unravelingthe sequence ofthe centromere thatlong-readgenomeassemblycanbeperformednotonlyata species, population, or individual-level, but also for single KarenH.Miga1,T2.T.CentromereSatelliteWorkingGroup2,T2.T. humancells. Consortium3 A.Ameur: None. 1UCSCGenomicsInstitute,SantaCruz,CA,USA,2https://sites.google. com/ucsc.edu/t2tworkinggroup/who-we-are/centromere-satellite- S14.3Genetic architecture ofautism working-group, Bethesda, MD, USA, 3https://sites.google.com/ucsc. edu/t2tworkinggroup, Bethesda, MD,USA. EvanEichler Despite their essential role in ensuring proper chromosome University ofWashington &HHMI,Seattle, WA, USA. segregation during celldivision, the millions of bases that define endogenous human centromeres remain absent from most The last decade has witnessed tremendous advances in sequen- reference assemblies and are detached from high-resolution cing technology to understand the full spectrum of human sequence-based studies aiming to understand their function. geneticvariationanditsrelationshiptodisordersassociatedwith Here we present a highly accurate genetic and epigenetic mental health. The talk will present the laboratory’s most recent reference of all human centromeric regions, representing 188.2 work based on sequencing and analysis of over 60,000 families Mb, or 6.1% of theCHM13 genome, and thefirst comprehensive with autism and developmental delay. The talk will focus on the characterization of peri/centromeric satellite arrays, novel trans- impact of rare, high-impact variants to our understanding of the posableelements,andcentromere-associatedgenes.Indoingso, geneticarchitectureofneurodevelopmentaldelay.Iwillshowhow weareabletorevealnewpatternsofsatellitearrayorganization, forms of both inherited and sporadic mutations have helped to homogenization,andcomplexinversions.Centromericsequences identify new genes associated with both syndromic and non- are expected to vary in repeat composition and copy number syndromic forms of autism. The available data suggest that betweenindividualsinthepopulation.Tostudytheextentofthis multiple rare, privately inherited genetic variants contribute variation, we report an initial variation map of centromeric significantly to autism disease risk. This oligogenic architecture regions, including array-specific structural variants, repeat copy provides an alternate paradigm distinct from monogenic and number estimates, and centromere-spanning linkage maps. This polygenic models of disease for characterizing more complex high-resolution genetic reference provides an unparalleled geneticformsofthesedisordersandarguesforamorecomplete opportunity to study sites of transcription, spatial organization, analysisofthe geneticvariantspresent infamilies. and sequences that are coincident with centromere formation, E.Eichler: None. defined as the interface with centromere-specific chromatin (CENP-A, B, C). In total, this work offers the first high-resolution genomic and epigenetic study of all human centromeric regions, S15Cells competing cells - mosaicism andcancer and it establishes a foundation for future studies of centromere genomicevolution, structure, and function. S15.2Mechanismsofcellcompetitioninpluripotentstemcells K.H.Miga:None.T.2.T.CentromereSatelliteWorkingGroup: None.T.2.T. Consortium: None. MiguelTorres, JoseA. Valverde-López, Lin Li-Bao CentroNacionaldeInvestigacionesCardiovasculares(CNIC),Madrid, S14.2Denovo assembly ofhumangenomes Spain. AdamAmeur Cell Competition promotes the active elimination of otherwise viable cells when confronted with cells with a fitness advantage. SciLifeLab, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. CellCompetitionisenvisionedasaconservedandwidespreadcell quality control mechanism that eliminates less fit or misplaced Due to advances in long-read sequencing, de novo assembly of cells during embryonic development and tissue homeostasis. high-quality human genomes has gone from being a huge During tumour progression, depending on the context, cell technical challenge to a routine exercise. From the resulting competition may protect the organism by eliminating cells with assemblies,wegainnewinsightsaboutthegenomicarchitecture oncogenicmutations,orpromotetheexpansionoftheoncogenic inanindividualhumanDNAsamplewithoutbeingrestrictedtoa cells by elimination of the surrounding normal cells. Mammalian reference sequence. On a population scale, we assembled the pluripotentcellsintheearlyembryoorincultureundergonatural genomes of two human individuals representing the Swedish Cell Competition according to Myc levels. In this model, Cell population and demonstrated that the resulting de novo Competition surveils the maintenance of pluripotency at the assemblies can be used to improve the analysis of Swedish populationlevelbyeliminationofMyc-lowdifferentiation-primed 1000-genomesreferencedataset.Onanindividuallevel,thelatest cells (losers) through confrontation with Myc-high naive pluripo- long-read technologies have enabled us to assemble near- tent cells (winners). Molecular analysis of this model of Cell complete personal genome sequences at a relatively modest Competition identifies a p53-regulated pathway essential for the EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8713 fitness comparison between winner and loser cells. We find that effects sizes considered are even smaller than in GWAS, such as theexpressionofBH3-familyproteinsNoxAandPuma,controlled geneticcorrelations or MendelianRandomization studies. byP53,regulatecompetitivefitnessinmouseEScells.Wepropose Inmytalk,Iwillexaminesomeofthepossiblesourcesandtypes amodelthatintegratesthep53pathwayandMycinthedefinition of biases that have been described in literature beyond of the loser-cell fitness “status” and suggests that a reduction in population structure, such as collider bias, participation bias and mitochondrial OXPHOS function regulated by P53-mitochondrial reportingbias.Iwillexaminetheirpotentialconsequences,review Pumaunderliescompetitivefitnessinpluripotentcells.Inaddition, some of the solutions which have been proposed, and what we to understand how Myc levels are regulated during cell needtoimplementthem infuture geneticstudies. competition, we identified the genomic regions involved in N.Pirastu: None. regulation of Myc transcription in pluripotent cells. Currently, we are investigating whether the enhancer activity of the identified regionsisrelevantinCellCompetitionandduringoncogenicMyc S17.2 Estimating direct and indirect genetic effects on activationinadult tissues. birthweight M.Torres:None. J.A.Valverde-López: None.L.Li-Bao:None. NicoleM. Warrington S16ESHG-ASHG Building Bridges:Global genetics towards a sociallyjust practice University of Queensland, Brisbane,Australia. S16.3 Global genetics towards a socially just practice: a view Estimation of the direct genetic effect of an individuals’ own fromAfrica genotypeontheirphenotype,independentofanycontaminating indirect parental genetic effects, is becoming increasingly JantinadeVries,Department ofMedicine important. These conditional estimates are of interest in their own right, but are also useful for downstream analyses such as intergenerationalMendelianrandomizationorgeneticcorrelation University of CapeTown, CapeTown, SouthAfrica. analyses. Until recently, such downstream methodologies have Recent years have seen a significant increase in the number of been hampered by the paucity of epidemiological cohorts with large numbers of genotyped parent-offspring pairs. We have genomics studies conducted on the African continent and those developedasuiteofmethodstoestimateasymptoticallyunbiased activities have brought into sharp focus the importance of promoting science equity to ensure the involvement of African direct and indirect genetic effects on offspring outcomes, using individual level data, summary results data and ‘virtual’ parents. researchparticipantsandresearchersisjust.Inthispresentation,I These methods can account for sample overlap, even when the willdrawonconceptssuchasepistemicjusticetosketchapicture overlapisunknown.Estimatesobtainedfromthesemethodscan of what science equity looks like for African genomics and associated practices such as data sharing, what the key impedi- subsequently be used in large-scale two-sample Mendelian randomization studies, such as those investigating the causal ments are to achieving it, and how science equity in African effect of maternal environmental exposures on offspring out- genomicscan befostered. comes. An illustration of our methods will be presented, J.de Vries: None. estimating the direct genetic effect on an individuals’ own birth weightandtheindirectparentalgeneticeffectsonoffspringbirth S17Biases in genetic studies: Estimation andimpact weight. These estimated conditional genetic effects are subse- quentlyusedingeneticcorrelationandMendelianrandomization S17.1BiasesinGWASandwheretofindthem:detectingand analysestoinvestigatetherelationshipbetweenbirthweightand accounting for biases in GWAS studies beyond population later life cardiometabolic disease. We show that without taking structure both the indirect and direct genetic effects into account in such Mendelianrandomizationanalyses,theresultingcausalestimateis NicolaPirastu biasedinfavour ofa causalrelationship. N.M. Warrington: None. Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United King- dom. S17.3The nature ofnurture Inthelast15years,genome-wideassociationstudies(GWAS)have enabled scientists to better understand the role of genetics in PatrickTurley determining complex traits while illuminating their underlying biology.Thefactthatindividualgeneticvariantsmostlyhavevery University of SouthernCalifornia, Los Angeles, CA,USA. small effects has resulted in the use of ever-larger sample sizes, with the biggest studies including millions of participants.The Parentalbehaviorcanhavemajorimplicationsinhowtointerpret massive increase in power has resulted in the increase of the genetic studies. For example, if heritable child-rearing behaviors numberofdiscoveredassociatedvariantsfromtenstothousands, influence the children’s behavior or health, SNPs associated with andbiobankswithhundredsofthousandsofparticipantssuchas child-rearing will also be associated with these outcomes in UK biobank or MVP have become fundamental tools in any children.Furthermore,whenparentssortonheritablephenotypes, geneticisttoolbox.Foralongtime,wehaveworriedmostlyabout this can inflate genetic relationships and generate misleading the biases arising from cryptic population structure and many results. We illustrate these sorts of confounds in several methodshavebeendevelopedtoaccountforit.However,withthe applications. First, we show that the predictive power of a increaseinsensitivity,wehavefoundthatfalseassociationsdueto polygenic score (PGS) for educational attainment (EA) is less othertypesofbiaseshavestartedtoappear.Generally,theeffects predictive of a variety of health outcomes using a sibling design ofbiasesinGWASarerelativelysmall,however,theyaresimilarin than in a population design with unrelated individuals. Second, sizetothesmallestrealeffectsweareabletodetect,makingthe we estimate the genetic correlation between family-based and interpretation of the results more complex. This has even more population-based GWAS estimates and find that it is often importantconsequencesandimplicationsformethodswherethe EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8714 significantly smaller than one, especially for behavioral pheno- challenging, due to ambiguities in patient sampling, potentially types.Third,weshowthatassortativematinginflatesthegenetic low rates of variant allele fraction (VAF), and test sensitivity and correlationbetweenEAandseveralhealthphenotypes.Finally,we breadth. Integrating clinical and molecular findings into a final show that assortative mating produces spurious Mendelian clinico-moleculardiagnosisischallengingbutcanbemademore Randomization estimates between EA and several outcomes. tractableandrationalbyadoptingadyadicapproachtodiagnosis Together, these results highlight that care must be taken when –recognizingthatthemolecularfindingsandclinicalpresentation interpreting population-based genetic studies, especially when areofequalweightandmustbemeldedintoaunitarydiagnosis. theyarerelated to behavioralphenotypes. Finally, management is challenging again due to the enormous P. Turley: None. inter-patientvariabilityduetodistinctaffectedgenes,sometimes variable damaging or activating variants, and dissimilar distribu- tions of VAFacross tissues with wildly varying pathologic effects. S18Overgrowthsyndromes, from discoveryto therapy The risks and benefits of treatment must be weighed against all these factors with shockingly little clinical trials data upon which S18.2Epigenetic signatures in overgrowth syndromes tobasesuchdecisions.Yet,theclinicianandpatientmustdecide and act and these decisions require not only technical acumen, RosannaWeksberg1,2 but wisdom. These larger issues surrounding mosaic overgrowth disorderswillbereviewedwithselectedexamplesandillustrations 1The Hospital for SickChildren, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of to guide the practitioner challenged by these remarkable and Toronto,Toronto, ON, Canada. oftendevastating disorders. L.G. Biesecker: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equip- EverycellinourbodyhasthesameDNA.Yetdifferentcelltypesin ment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; Arqule thebodyareabletodevelopbecauseepigeneticmarks,placedon Inc (Now owned by Merck, Inc.). F. Consultant/Advisory Board; topoftheDNA,directeachcelltypetoreadonlyspecificsections Modest; IlluminaCorp medicalethics board. oftheDNA.Thereareseveraltypesofepigeneticmarksincluding DNAmethylation(DNAm),andhistonemodifications.Thesemarks orchestratenormaldevelopmentalprocessesviatheexpressionof S20Counselling OverVarious Informatic Devices: Lessons several hundred epigenes (genes that function in epigenetic fromCovid-19 regulation). Rapid advances in genomic research have led to the identification of over 60 epigenes which are associated with S20.1The patientperspective Mendelian disorders, many of which are characterized by overgrowth and dysregulation of neurodevelopment. We and Jennifer Jones, AmyHunter others have identified highly specific and highly sensitive genome-wide DNAm signatures for several of these epigenes GeneticAlliance UK, London, United Kingdom. including DNMT3A, NSD1, EZH2/EED, and CHD8; mutations in these genes are associated with Tatton-Brown-Rahman, Sotos, Genetic Alliance UK is a national charity working to improve the Weaver, and Autism syndromes, respectively. These DNAm livesofpatientsandfamiliesaffectedbyalltypesofgenetic,rare signatures can be used as a “second-tier” analysis to improve and undiagnosed conditions. We are a membership organisation molecular diagnostics by classifying sequence variants of uncer- made up of over 200 patient groups and we aim to unify their tain significance (VUS) as either benign or pathogenic with voicearoundkeypolicyissuesthataffectthem.DuringtheCOVID- efficacy far superior to most in silico programs. They can also be 19pandemic,GeneticAllianceUKsetuptheCovid-19Information used for first-tier diagnostics when sequencing is uninformative. Hub (https://covid-19.geneticalliance.org.uk/). The Hub provided However, given the fact that DNAm signatures are still in linkstoorganisationsprovidingconditionspecificinformationand development,DNAm-baseddisorderclassificationinthissituation updatesonrelevant government guidelinesandlegislation.They must be confirmed by sequencing to authenticate a molecular also provided practical information and links to help with the diagnosis. In addition to the utility of DNAm signatures for challengesofself-isolatingandsocialdistancing.Theorganisation molecular diagnostics, we have also shown that gene-specific hostedweeklyvirtualcommunitycheck-inswherepatientgroups DNAm signatures reflect the functional pathophysiology of the could raise concerns or issues, share information and work associated genetic disorders providing opportunities to identify together as a community to meet the challenges of COVID-19. potential noveltherapeutic targets. In June 2020, Genetic Alliance UK launched a patient experience R.Weksberg: None. survey to gather evidence about living with a rare condition and accessing healthcare; this included a section on the impact of the pandemic on people with rare, genetic or undiagnosed S18.3Regional overgrowth conditions. Anonlinesurveyof102questionswascarriedoutwithpeople LeslieG.Biesecker livingwithorcaringforsomeonewithararecondition.Thesurvey instrument used a mixture of close-ended questions with pre- NIH,NHGRI,Bethesda, MD, USA. defined response categories and open-ended questions where respondentscouldsupplyqualitativeinformationintextboxes.In Regional overgrowth associated with somatic mosaic variants total 1,503 people started the survey but those who did not raises a host of challenges for the managing clinician, including consent to take part or indicated that they lived outside the UK clinical diagnosis, molecular testing, clinic-molecular diagnosis, wereexcluded.Allremainingopen-endedanswerswereincluded symptomatic management, and targeted therapy. Clinical diag- forthequalitativeanalysis(n=1,433).Forthequantitativeanalysis nosis,the mainstayof thepracticing clinician has not fundamen- respondentswereonlyincludediftheycompletedmorethantwo tallychanged.Theobjectiveistomatchthepatternpresentedby thirds of the survey (n=1,020). Just under two thirds of the patient to a recognized entity through the differential respondentssaidtheircarehadbeenimpactedbythepandemic; diagnosis process. The difficulty is that mosaicism leads to an around 1 in 5 said they missed hospital appointments as they enormousrangeofexpressivitythattaxestheprocess.Thiscanbe were concerned about going into hospital. Many described mitigated with molecular testing, yet this process as well is feelings of isolation and abandonment which exacerbated their EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8715 experiences before the pandemic; others welcomed the use of andiscurrentlyanapprovedtherapyforDMDintheUSAand telemedicine to avoid travelling for long distances to attend Japan.However,thisroutewasandisnotwithouthurdles.In appointments. this lecture the presenter will outline the challenges of There are many lessons to be learned from listening to the developing a mutation specific approach for a rare disease voices of those affected by rare conditions during the pandemic withverylimitedclinicaltrialexpertise.Shewillalsohighlight and they represent valuable opportunities to improve healthcare the importance of interacting with patient advocates during duringthepandemic andbeyond. drug development as well as bilateral education of the J. Jones: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator different stakeholders (patients, regulators and researchers). or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already WhileDMDisusedasaparadigm,theseprinciplesapplyalso received);Modest; Alexion. A.Hunter: None. to otherrarediseases. A. Aartsma-Rus: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants S20.2Telemedicine in GeneticsServices already received); Modest; Alpha Anomeric, Eisai, Italpharmaco, Silence Therapeutics, PTC Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Santhera, SofiaDouzgou Audentes.B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator,collaboratoror consultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived); Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. Significant; Sarepta Therapeutics. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; PTC Telemedicine is defined as the delivery of healthcare services Therapeutics, BioMarin. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; wheredistanceisacriticalfactor,byallhealthcareprofessionals, SilenceTherapeutics, Sarepta Therapeutics. using technology, exchanging valid clinical or research informa- tionandintheinterestsofadvancingthehealthofindividualsand theircommunities(WorldHealthOrganization2010).Telegenetics S21.3 Patisiran in clinical practice - Experience from the UK isthebranchoftelemedicinethatusesaninternetconnectionand National Amyloidosis Centre web-based applications for clinical genetics services. The role of genomics within healthcare is rapidly expanding and it is JulianD.Gillmore increasingly impacting other branches of clinical practice. Better use of technology and data is a prerequisite for supporting and University College London,London, United Kingdom. enabling this key development. Moreover social distancing was oneofthemaininfectionpreventionandcontrolmeasureduring Objectives:Thepurposeofthisstudywastodeterminetheeffect the COVID-19 crisis and this led to increased use of remote of patisiran on the cardiac amyloid load as measured by cardiac genomicclinicalservices.Manyservicestransitionedto(a)virtual magnetic resonance and extracellular volume (ECV) mapping in (remote) Clinics, (b) virtual Multidisciplinary meetings and (c) casesof transthyretin cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM). remote (home) working. This talk will focus on telegenetics Background: Administration of patisiran, a TTR-specific small initiativesworkingtotransformITanddatasystemstoensurethe interferingRNA(siRNA),hasbeenshowntobenefitneuropathyin bestservicesfor patients; engagewithpatients abouttherole of patientswithhereditaryATTRamyloidosis,butitseffectonATTR- genomicsinhealthcare;delivergenomicseducationtohealthcare CMremainsuncertain. professionals. Methods: Patisiran was administered to 16 patients with S.Douzgou: None. hereditary ATTR-CMwho underwent assessment protocols at the UK National Amyloidosis Centre. Twelve of those patients concomitantly received diflunisal as a "TTR-stabilizing" drug. S21Delivering the promiseofRNA therapeutics Patients underwent serial monitoring using cardiac magnetic resonance,echocardiography,cardiacbiomarkers,bonescintigra- S21.2 Lessons learnt from the “DMD saga”: from genetics to phy,and6-minwalktests(6MWTs).Findingsofamyloidtypesand clinical trials extracellular volumes were compared with those of 16 patients who were retrospectively matched based on cardiac magnetic AnnemiekeAartsma-Rus resonanceresults. Results: Patisiran was well tolerated. Median serum TTR LeidenUniversity Medical Center,Leiden, Netherlands. knockdownamongtreatedpatientswas86%(interquartilerange [IQR]: 82% to 90%). A total of 82% of cases showed >80% Dystrophin connectsthe cytoskeleton ofmuscle fibersto the knockdown. Patisiran therapy was typically associated with a extracellular matrix and thus provides stability to muscle reduction in ECV (adjusted mean difference between groups: fibersduringcontractions.Mutations(mostlydeletionsofone -6.2% [95% confidence interval [CI]: -9.5% to -3.0%]; p = 0.001) or more exons) that disrupt the reading frame of the accompaniedbyafallinN-terminalpro-B-typenatriureticpeptide dystrophin encoding DMD gene lead to non-functional concentrations(adjustedmeandifferencebetweengroups:-1,342 dystrophin proteins and a severely progressive diseases, ng/l [95% CI: -2,364 to -322]; p = 0.012); an increase in 6MWT Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). By contrast mutations distances (adjusted mean differences between groups: 169 m that maintain the reading frame allow the production of [95%CI:57to2,80];p=0.004)after12monthsoftherapy;anda internally deleted but partly functional dystrophins and are medianreductionincardiacuptakebybonescintigraphyof19.6% associated with the milder Becker muscular dystrophy. The (IQR:9.8% to27.1%). aimoftheexonskippingtherapyistoenableDMDpatientsto Conclusions:ReductionsinECVbycardiacmagneticresonance produceBecker-likedystrophins.Thisisachievedbymodula- provided evidence for ATTR cardiac amyloid regression in a tionofpre-mRNAsplicing,whereanantisenseoligonucleotide proportion ofpatients receiving patisiran. (AON) hides an exon from the splicing machinery so it is J.D. Gillmore: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, skipped. This will enlarge the deletion, but restore the collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants reading frame thus allowing dystrophin production. AON already received); Significant; Alnylam Inc. D. Speakers Bureau/ mediatedexonskippinganddystrophinrestorationhasbeen Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); showninDMDpatient-derivedcellculturesover20yearsago EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8716 Modest; Alnylam, Eidos,. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; MDC-BIMSB/BIH/Charité, Berlin, Germany. Alnylam, Eidos,Ionis, Intellia. Our genomes are constantly mutating. During normal develop- S22Integrated approaches forciliopathies mentandageing,geneticmutationscanariseinoursomaticcells, whicharethenpropagated andclonally selectedovertime.How S22.1Primarycilia inhealth anddisease somaticmutationsimpactthefunctionofourtissuesandemerge inthecontextofdiseaseareimportantquestionsinhumanhealth. LotteB. Bang Pedersen Structural variants (SV) are a major source of somatic mutation - theyarethemostcommoncancerdrivermutationtype,theycan ariseinburstsmediatinglarge-scalegenomicrearrangements,and University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. theycandisruptkeymolecularandcancer-relatedpathways.How somaticSVcontributetocellularheterogeneityandothercomplex Primary cilia are dynamic microtubule-based organelles that diseases is still unclear, largely because detecting somatic SVs is project from the surface of most vertebrate cell types. Long challenging.Indeed,subclonalcopy-neutralandcomplexrearran- thought to be evolutionary remnants of limited physiological gements remain largely intractable to genetic variation studies. relevance, it is now clear that primary cilia function as essential Weovercomethisbydevelopingnovelmethodsthatharnessthe cellular signalling hubs during development and in tissue home- powerofsingle-cellandsingle-strandsequencing(i.e.Strand-seq) ostasis. Well-studied examples of signalling pathways operating to measure somatic mutational landscapes in human cells. By via primary cilia include the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway and integrating complementary data layers, including read depth, signalling mediated by polycystin 1 and 2 (PC1 and PC2), which template strand and haplotype phase, we can now reliably regulatedevelopmentandfunctionofthebrain,kidneyandother discover SV in a cell-by-cell basis and explore their functional organsandtissues.Inaddition,specialisedprimaryciliapresenton impact in mutated cells. This advance has lead us to uncover our photoreceptors, inner ear hair cells, and the olfactory somatic SV types that previously escaped detection and directly epitheliumarerequiredforvision,hearingandsmell,respectively. measure complex rearrangement processes, such as breakage- Not surprisingly, mutations affecting the assembly or function of fusion-bridge cycles and subclonal chromothripsis events. Our cilia are associated with a growing number of diseases and ability to now map SV landscapes with single cell resolution syndromes, known as ciliopathies, which can affect most organs positions us to study dynamic clonal expansions, genetic and tissues in the body. The assembly of primary cilia occurs in tight coordination with the cell cycle. Specifically, ciliogenesis is mosaicism and structural rearrangement processes with a new lens, all of which can provide a clearer picture of the processes initiatedinG1/G0asthecentrosomemigratestowardstheplasma behinddevelopment, ageing,and disease. membrane where the mother centriole docks and templates A.D.Sanders: None. extensionoftheciliarymicrotubuleaxoneme.Theciliaryaxoneme issurroundedbyamembranethatiscontinuouswiththeplasma membrane, but contains distinct lipids and receptors involved in E01.3Sequencing GenomeOrganization signalling. Establishment and maintenance of the cilium as a specialised signalling compartment depends on the intraflagellar Gabriele Girelli1, Joaquin Custodio1, Tomasz Kallas1, Federico transport(IFT)machineryaswellasthetransitionzone(TZ),which Agostini1,ErikWernersson1,BastiaanSpanjaard2,AnaMota1,Solrun separatesthebasalbodyfromtheciliumitselfandcontrolsciliary Kolbeinsdottir1, Eleni Gelali1, Nicola Crosetto1, MagdaBienko1 protein entry and exit. Notably, many ciliopathies are caused by mutations in genes coding for TZ components, but disease- causing mutations have also been identified in other genes such 1Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Max Delbrück Center, as those coding for components of the IFT machinery or specific Berlin,Germany. centrosomal proteins. For example, several studies have shown that inactivating variants of the gene coding for centrosomal In the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, a significant portion of the protein CEP78 are associated with cone-rod dystrophy with genome consists of lamina-associated domains, which are prefer- hearing loss (CRDHL), a particular phenotype distinct from Usher entially located at the nuclear periphery. However, how the syndrome. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this remaining parts of the genome are exactly radially organized in phenotype isunclear. thenucleusremainslargelyunknown.Here,Iwilldescribeamethod I will first provide an overview of primary cilia and associated named Genomic loci Positioning by Sequencing (GPSeq), which signallingprocesses,withfocusonthemolecularmechanismsthat allows genome-widemeasurements of the distance to the nuclear regulateciliogenesis.Next,Iwillpresentnewresultsfrommylab lamina.UsingGPSeq,wegeneratedreproduciblemapsoftheradial that dissects the mechanism by which CEP78 regulates cilia organization of the genome in human cells, at various resolutions, assemblyandlength,inturnprovidingmolecularinsightintohow thatrevealedradialgradientsofgenomicandepigenomicfeatures, inactivating mutations in CEP78 lead to CRDHL. Our work also geneexpression,aswellasA/Bcompartmentsandchromatinloops. uncovers a new interaction between CEP78 and CEP350, thereby We assessed the contribution of various features in predicting identifyingthelatter asa putativenovel candidatefor CRDHL. radiality, and found GC-content to have the strongest predictive L.B.Pedersen: None. poweratallresolutions.Finally,weshowthat,bycombiningGPSeq radialinformationwithHi-Cintra-andtrans-chromosomalcontacts, we are able to build whole-genome structure predictions much EDUCATIONAL SESSIONS moreaccuratelythanpossiblethusfar.WeconcludethatGPSeqis abletorevealfundamentalaspectsofgenomearchitecture. G. Girelli: None. J. Custodio: None. T. Kallas: None. F. E01NewTechnologies Agostini: None. E. Wernersson: None. B. Spanjaard: None. A. Mota: None. S. Kolbeinsdottir: None. E. Gelali: None. N. E01.2 Detection of structural variation and haplotype-aware Crosetto:None. M. Bienko: None. genomeassembly throughStrand-Seq AshleyD. Sanders EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8717 E01.4 Single-cell multiomics data reveals extensive epigen- Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3National Cancer omeremodeling during corticaldevelopment Registration and Analysis Service, Public Health England, London, United Kingdom, 4Big Data Institute, Nuffield Department of BoyanBonev Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public PioneerCampus,HelmholtzZentrumMünchen,Munich,Germany. Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Despite huge advances in stem-cell, single-cell and epigenetic Department of Oncology, Cambridge Cancer Centre, University of technologies, the precise molecular mechanisms that determine Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7East Anglian Medical lineage specification remain largely unknown. Applying an GeneticsUnit,CambridgeUniversityHospitalsNHSTrust,Cambridge, UnitedKingdom,8DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,NationalInstitute integrative multiomics approach by combining single-cell RNA- seq,single-cellATAC-seqtogetherwithcell-type-specificDNA for Health Research, Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, methylation and 3D genome measurements, we system- University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 9Manchester aticallymaptheregulatorylandscapeinthemouseneocortex Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science invivo.Ouranalysisidentifiesthousandsofnovelenhancersand Centre, Division of Evolution and Genomic Medicine, University of their target genes, as well as key neuronal transcription factors Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 10St. Mary’s Hospital, associatedwithextensivechangesinchromatinaccessibility,DNA Manchester Universities NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United methylation and 3D looping. We provide evidence that although Kingdom, 11Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine and NW epigenetic remodeling generally precedes transcriptional activa- Laboratory Genetics Hub, Manchester University Hospitals NHS tion, true priming appears limited to a subset of lineage- Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 12Division of determining enhancers. Finally, we discover a novel role for the Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, transcription factor Neurog2 in mediating DNA demethylation, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, increasing chromatin accessibility and facilitating chromatin Health Innovation Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, looping in vivo. Our work provides the first global view of the 13Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, gene-regulatory logic of lineage specification in the cerebral Southampton, United Kingdom, 14Human Genetics and Genomic cortexacross multiple epigenomelayers. Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, South- ampton,UnitedKingdom,15MacmillanSurvivorshipResearchGroup, B.Bonev: None. Schoolof Health Sciences,Faculty ofEnvironmental &Life Sciences, E02ESHG-Y:Human organoids as genetic disease models University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 16St. George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 17Depart- ment of Clinical Genetics, St. George’s University Hospitals NHS E02.1 Human stem cells-based organoids for personalized FoundationTrust,London,UnitedKingdom,18EthoxCentre,Nuffield diseasemodelling in humangenetics Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Sutton, UnitedKingdom,19EthoxCentre,NuffieldDepartmentofPopulation HansClevers Health,University ofOxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. HubrechtInstitute, Utrecht, Netherlands. Background:Identifyingindividualswithinheritedgeneticcancer susceptibility prevents cancer and saves lives through effective Stemcellsarethefoundationofallmammalianlife.Theycomein targeting of resource for enhanced screening and/or prevention twoflavors.Embryonicstemcellsarebrieflypresentintheearly to those at highest a priori risk. Recent advances in sequencing humanormouseembryo,afewdaysafterfertilization.Thesestem technology have catalysed dramatic expansion in genetic cancer cellscanbegrownindefinitelyinthelabandhavethepotentialto susceptibility testing, with imminent roll-out of population-level build each and every tissue in our body. ES cells hold great screeningforcancersusceptibility.Vastamountsofdataarebeing promise in the field of regenerative medicine. Adult stem cells. generated from individuals with different prior risks of inherited Every organ in our body harbors its own dedicated stem cells. cancersusceptibility.Ithasbecomeincreasinglychallenginghow Theseadultstemcellsreplacetissuethatislostduetowearand best we make value of the clinical data generated interpret and tear, trauma and disease. Adult stem cells can only produce the communicate the significance of variants (mutations) and tissueinwhichtheyreside.Theadultstemcellsallowustolive80- associated genetic risk, and ensure the interventions offered are 90 years, but this comes at a cost: they easily turn into cancer. commensuratetorisk,consistentandevidence-based.Supported Both types of stem cells can be used to establish ‘organoids’, 3D by a CRUK Catalyst Award, through the 5-year CanGene-CanVar structuresestablishedinadish,thatrecapitulatemanyaspectsof Programme (2019-2024) we seek to develop tools and resources theoriginalorgan -including itsdiseases. to occupy this ‘Translational Gap’, spanning six distinct work- H.Clevers: None. packages. Workpackages E03Translational collaborations in hereditary cancer 1)DATACOLLECTION ANDLINKAGE: Aggregationofhistoric andprospectivepan-UKdatafromclinicallaboratoryfromtesting E03.1 The CANGEN-CANVAR Programme: Delivering better for variants (mutations) in CSGs; linkage to multiple cancer tools for prevention and early detection in hereditary cancer datasetsandhospitalepisodestatistics(HES)datasetstoproduce syndromes linkedlife-course datasets. 2) VARIANT INTERPRETATION: Development of a national Clare Turnbull1,2, Jem Rashbass3, Eva Morris4, Antonis Antoniou5, cancervariant interpretation group(CanVIG-UK) and datasystem Paul Pharoah6, Richard Houlston1, Marc Tischkowitz7,8, Gareth (CanVar-UK), housing the national accumulated CSG variant Evans9,10, Emma Woodward11,12, Diana Eccles13,14, Claire Foster15, counts, multiple functional datasets, analyses from machine- Kate Tatton-Brown16,17, Katie Snape17, Nina Hallowell18, Ingrid learningandconsensus UKvariant interpretations. Slade19 3) CLINICAL GUIDANCE: In partnership with NHS England, development of focused, dynamic, responsive national clinical 1DivisionofGeneticsandEpidemiology,InstituteofCancerResearch, management protocols for cancer susceptibility based on best Sutton,UnitedKingdom,2CancerGeneticsUnit,RoyalMarsdenNHS currently available data. Workflows will involve horizon-scanning, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8718 literature review, responsive data analyses and clinical various strategies people use to manage these uncertainties. It consultation. ultimately requires promoting uncertainty tolerance—which I 4) PATIENT DECISION AIDS: Patient-facing research using defineasthecapacitytoachieveanoptimalbalanceofresponses nominal group techniques leading to development of a patient- to uncertainty. I discuss key aspects of this capacity and explore facingClinicalDecisionAidsaroundriskandinterventionoptions. potential ways of promoting uncertainty tolerance among 5) EDUCATION OF CLINICIANS: In partnership with Health clinicians and patients. Education England (HEE), development of hub-and-spoke educa- P.K.J.Han: None. tional resources on genetic susceptibility and communication of risk, includingMOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses). 6)ETHICS:Anethicaloverviewofthisfield,focusedinparticular E04.3 Coping with uncertainty of genomic testing in a non- onattitudes and hurdles todata-sharing. genetic setting C. Turnbull: None. J. Rashbass: None. E. Morris: None. A. Antoniou: None. P. Pharoah: None. R. Houlston: None. M. AnthonyS. Wierzbicki Tischkowitz: None. G. Evans: None. E. Woodward: None. D. Eccles:None.C.Foster:None.K.Tatton-Brown:None.K.Snape: Guy’s&St Thomas Hospitals, London, United Kingdom. None.N.Hallowell: None. I. Slade: None. The identification of genetic disorders forms part of the work of lipid and cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk clinics. However, it E03.2BoostinghereditarycancerresearchwiththeEuropean formsonlypartoftheirworkloadwhichalsocomprisesdiagnosis Reference Network GENTURIS andmanagementofpatientsdeemedathighCVDrisk,thosewith non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) or intolerance to lipid- NicolineHoogerbrugge loweringdrugs(commonlystatins).IntheUKtheNationalHealth Service(NHS)planhasprioritisedthedetectionandmanagement Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. of monogenic familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) with the aim being to diagnose 25% of cases by 2025. Classically FH presents Approximately27-36millionpatientsinEuropehaveoneofthe~ withhighcholesterolandanautosomaldominantfamilyhistoryof 5.000-8.000 known rare diseases. The majority of them having a either hypercholesterolaemia or premature CVD. Genetic testing genetic origin. These patients often do not receive the care they forFHincludesscreeningforapanelofcommongenesandinthe needortheyhaveasubstantialdelayfromdiagnosistotreatment. future polygenic risk scores. A number of strategies have been Currently twenty-four European Reference Networks (ERNs) are devised to try to identify potential index cases. Clinical scoring active with the aim to improve care and research for these methodssuchastheSimonBroomecriteria,DutchLipidscoreor patients.OuraimisthatthroughtheERNs,Europeanpatientswith the new FAMCAT calculator are useful but often confounded by a rare disease get access to expert care more often and more other common conditions such as NAFLD, post-menopause lipid quickly, and that research will be accelerated resulting in changes, familial combined hyperlipidaemia and extreme diets. improved diagnostics and therapies. Pedigreedataisoftendifficulttoacquireorvaguewhichlimitsthe The ERN on Genetic Tumour Risk Syndromes (ERN GENTURIS) utility of electronic health record searches. One way to clarify aims to improve research on identification, genetic diagnostics, whichpatientstoselectforgenetictestingistheuseofimagingas prevention of cancer, and treatment of European patients with a FH is distinguished by an excess atheroma burden for age and genetic predisposition for cancer. The ERN GENTURIS focuses on gender. Alternatively, screening can be conducted in children syndromessuchashereditarybreastcancer,hereditarycolorectal where the clearest differentiation between monogenic and cancer and polyposis, neurofibromatosis and more rare syn- polygenic hyperlipidaemia occurs. Imaging is also useful to dromes e.g. PTEN Hamartoma Tumour Syndrome, Li Fraumeni differentiate whether to treat patients with variants of unknown Syndromeandhereditarydiffusegastriccancer.Collaborationand significanceorthosewithelevatedpolygenicriskscoresorother teaming up has shown to be essential for making progress in accelerants of atherosclerosis such as elevated lipoprotein (a). developing new knowledge for rare diseases such as genetic These approaches demonstrate that accurate phenotyping of tumour risk syndromes. The ERN GENTURIS research policy, patientsisnecessarytodealwiththeuncertaintyassociatedwith successful collaborative projects as well as opportunities for genetictestingin non-specialist settings. Europeanresearchers will be discussed. A.S. Wierzbicki:None. N.Hoogerbrugge: None. E05Update onimprinting disorders E04Dealing withuncertainty in genomic medicine E05.1Genetic basis ofimprintingdisordes E04.1 Managing uncertainty in clinical genomics: toward a systematicapproach Thomas Eggermann PaulK. J. Han RWTHAachen,Aachen, Germany. National CancerInstitute, Bethesda, MD,USA. Imprintingdisorderscomprisethirteencongenitaldisorderswhich are molecularly characterised by similar molecular alterations Uncertainty is a pervasive and important problem in clinical affecting the fine-tuned expression of genomically imprinted genomicsandallofmedicine,andmanaginguncertaintyisoneof genes. Clinically, they share features from the same spectrum themostchallengingtasksforboththeprovidersandrecipientsof (growth, metabolism, pubertal timing, cognitive impairment, health care. The objective of this presentation is to outline a tumour predisposition). Their clinical overlap is mirrored by systematic approach to this task that may help clinicians and similar, in some disorders opposite molecular findings, affecting patients manage uncertainty more effectively. This approach eventhesameimprintedloci.Fourtypesofmolecularalterations begins with understanding the nature, causes, and psychological can affect the expression of imprinted genes, i.e. uniparental effectsoftheuncertaintiesthatariseinclinicalgenomics,andthe disomy,copynumbervariantsandmonogenicpointmutationson EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8719 DNAlevel,andaberrantmethylation(epimutations)atdifferentially Thistalkhighlightsdiagnosticdilemmasandtheimportanceof methylated regions. Due to this heterogeneity, genetic testing of treatment inthelong-term prevention ofmedical complications. imprinting disorders is challenging, and the decision on the K. Temple:None. molecular testing strategy might be hindered. With the recent implementationofcomprehensivemolecularassays,theknowledge E06Pharmacogenomics inthe clinic on the contribution of genetic and epigenetic alterations to the etiology of inherited growth disorders has massively expanded, E06.1 Pre-Emptive Pharmacogenetic Testing in Clinical making the interpretation of diagnostic data increasingly complex. Practice Thesecomplexresultsleadtothediscoveryofunexpectedandnew molecular subgroups, as well as of genetic predispositions for Jesse J.Swen epimutations. In the presentation, the different types of molecular alterations in patients with imprinting disorders and differential LeidenUniversity Medical Center,Leiden, Netherlands. diagnosis will be reviewed, and genetic testing strategies will be illustrated. It will be emphasized that the early diagnosis of a Retrospective, prospective and naturalistic studies all provide genetically based endocrine disorder contributes to a precise compellingevidencethatgeneticvariationaffectsthewaypeople management and helps the patients and their families in their respondtodrugs.ForseveralindicationssuchasDPYDtestingin self-determinedplanningoflife.Furthermore,theidentificationofa oncology, PGx testing is routinely applied in clinical practice. In causative (epi)genetic alteration allows an accurate prognosis of this educational setting, we will discuss basic principles of recurrence risks for family planning as the basis of genetic pharmacogenetics testing, show examples of how pharmacoge- counselling. Asymptomatic carriers of pathogenic variants can be netics may be used to personalize drug treatment and outline identified,andprenataltestingmightbeoffered,whereappropriate. opportunities and challengesforthe field. T.Eggermann:None. J.Swen: None. E08Variant interpretation in theclinic E05.2Diagnosisand treatment ofimprinting disorders Karen Temple E08.1 Using genomic resources to interpret the clinical sig- nificance ofrarevariants University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. HeidiL.Rehm Imprintingisanatural,genomicregulatoryprocessinhumansthat controls growth and development in utero. Epigenetic marks are Massachusetts General Hospital and Broad Institute, Boston, MA, laid down in the parental germline and maintained on the USA. offspring’s genome, affecting 35 clusters of imprinted genes Over800millionhumangenomicvariantshavebeenidentifiedto throughout the genome. Consequently, these imprinted genes function differently on the maternal and paternal allele. ‘Imprint- dateandwearefarfromdiscoveringthefullspectrumofhuman ingDisorders’,whicharisefromdysregulationofimprintedgenes, variation.Ofthosevariantsclinicallyinterpretedandsubmittedto are a group of serious congenital conditions that affect ClinVar, 75% have only been submitted by only one source metabolism,growth,developmentandbehaviour,andpredispose underscoring the rarity of most human variation of potential to cancer, significant short stature, obesity and the adult clinical significance. As such, it is imperative that we work as a metabolic syndrome. 10 widely recognised imprinting disorders globalcommunitytoaidtheinterpretationofgenesandvariants clusteraround5/6keyimprintedregions,butthereisconsiderable and their role in human health and disease. Before one can variabilityintheclinicalhistory,dependingontheimprintedgene accurately interpret thepathogenicity of a variant, one must first (s),mutationsandparentalallelesinvolved.•PraderWillisyndrome curate theaggregate evidence todefine agene’s rolein disease. (PWS), Angelman syndrome (AS) - chromosome 15•Beckwith Multiple organizations, both public and private, have curated Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), Silver Russell syndrome (SRS) - gene-disease relationships and these resources have recently chromosome 11 (also chromosome 7)•Temple syndrome (TS), been brought together for free and public access (search. Kagami Ogata syndrome (KOS) - chromosome 14•Transient thegencc.org) by the Gene Curation Coalition (GeneCC). Centra- neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM1), Maternal UPD 6 - chromo- lization of these curations allows comparison of claims and some 6•Pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1b (PHP1b), Mulchani- ultimately a more accurate resource to define valid relationships Bhoj-Conlin syndrome (MCBS) - chromosome 20 between genes and disease. Once the validity of a gene-disease Early treatment and active health surveillance improves prog- relationship has been demonstrated, one can move on to curate nosisintheseconditionsthataffectthelifecourseandyetthereare individualvariantsinthesegenestosupportorrefutepathogeni- anumberoffactorsthatcontributetolateormisseddiagnosis:- city. Accurate variant classification is best facilitated through a i) many of the non-specific clinical features of imprinting multi-pronged strategy including 1) disseminating and applying disorders change with age making diagnosis difficult ii) hetero- consistentstandardsforvariantclassification,2)submittingvariant geneityandclinicaloverlapbetweenconditionsrequiresabroad classifications and supporting evidence through a centralized diagnostic approach across many imprinted loci iii) standard database for sharing and comparing (e.g. ClinVar), 3) working to resolvediscrepanciesinvariantclassificationbetweensubmitters, diagnostic pathways that focus on genomic sequencing do not identifyasignificantproportion ofmolecularmechanisms under- and 4) elevating the most challenging variants to international lying imprinting disorder siv) multi-locus imprinting disturbance panels of experts with disease and gene-specific expertise. This (MLID) may affect the phenotype which can range from early talkwillreviewtheresourcestosupportgeneandvariantcuration miscarriagetolessclassicalnon-specificdevelopmentaldelayand and define progress in generating a global knowledgebase to yetisnottestedforroutinelyinmostlabsv)diagnosticgenomic understandtheroleofvariationinhumandiseaseandsupportthe sequencingfocusesonthepatientandnotthemother.Maternal applicationof geneticand genomic testinginthe clinic. mutationsinakeynetworkofoocyte-expressedgenescanresult H.L.Rehm:None. inMLID intheiroffspring whodo notshare themutations EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8720 E08.2Towardsbetterinterpretationofvariantsinnon-coding and reproducible experimental models has not been as effective regionsofthe genome and straightforward for deriving clear diagnostic criteria when applied to embryo biopsy specimens. The use of subjective NicolaWhiffin thresholds for mosaicism diagnosis has generated a critical inconsistencyindetectionratesreportedacrosslaboratories,with Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, valuesrangingfrom2to40%.Furthermore,thepositivepredictive United Kingdom. valueofamosaicismdiagnosisinPGT-Aisextremelylow.Among all putative mosaic embryos transferred worldwide to date (>2000),thesamemosaicismfindingidentifiedatthepreimplan- Current clinical genetic testing approaches focus almost exclu- tationstagewasconfirmedthroughprenataldiagnosis(PND)only sivelyontheregionsofthegenomethatcodedirectlyforprotein butfindageneticdiagnosisinonlyaroundhalfofallraredisease inonecase.Onthecontrary,thehighrateatwhichmosaicismis patients. Interpreting the effect of individual variants outside of currently reported has shown undeniable issues in the clinical these regions is difficult, given wehave no regulatory equivalent managementofPGT-Acycles.Theseincludeextracostsassociated to the amino acid code. Increasingly, however, whole-genome with genetic counseling, anxiety, and confusion in patients and sequencingisbeingusedasstandardforgeneticallyundiagnosed doctors due to diagnostic uncertainty, new and probably patientsandnon-codingregionvariantsarebeingidentifiedwith unnecessary indications for invasive PND, and more dramatically, asignificantabandonmentofviableembryos.Consideringthatall important roles in rare disease. This talk will discuss challenges and opportunities in better interpretation of non-coding region data currently available on the reproductive competence of variants,specificallyfocussing on(1)identificationandfunctional putative mosaic embryos are retrospective and present biases at characterisationofvariantsin5’untranslatedregionsthatcausea several levels (i.e., population selection), there is an urgent need loss-of-function and lead to severe disease, (2) developing tools for prospective non-selection studies. These trials will provide and resources to aid annotation of these variants in sequence evidence-based estimates of the clinical utility of reporting data, and (3) moving towards consensus guidelines to support intermediatechromosome CNVin NGS-based PGT-A. interpretation of non-coding regionvariants. A. Capalbo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; N.Whiffin:None. Igenomix. E09What’snew in preimplantation genetic testing? E11Polygenic risks andme E09.1StatusofPGTandembryo selection inthe era ofNGS E11.2Polygenic risks in disorders ofaging AntonioCapalbo ValentinaEscott-Price Igenomix, Rome, Italy. CardiffUniversity, Cardiff,United Kingdom. Aneuploidyisextremelycommoninhumanembryosandisoneof Polygenicriskscore(PRS)isusedasaglobaltermforariskscore themaincausesofunsuccessfulinvitrofertilization(IVF)cycles.In includinganynumberofgeneticvariants(SNPs).Amajorproblem particular, advanced maternal age patients experience high rates with disorders of aging when using PRS to categorise people at of implantation failure and miscarriages. Aneuploidy in embryos risk is the age of the study participants. In other polygenic mostly originates from oocyte meiotic segregation errors. diseaseslikeschizophrenia,penetranceofthephenotypeismostly Preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A) is a complete at 40 years of age, while for e.g. Alzheimer’s disease screening strategy employed in IVF cycles that is aimed at (AD),evenat80therearestillindividualsatriskbutwhohavenot improvingimplantationandongoingpregnancyratespertransfer yet developed AD. In addition, about 35% of life-time risk of throughtheidentificationandde-selectionofaneuploidembryos. dementia is modifiable by factors such as education, vascular PGT-Aimplementationhasrapidlygrowninrecentyearsanditis aspects, nutrition, health care and social deprivation, etc., which currently performed in over 20% of US IVF cycles. Two main haspotentiallyledtothedecreaseinincidenceofdementiaover technical developments contributed to this expansion: a) the thelastdecades.Themostcommontypeofdementia,Alzheimer’s implementationandstandardizationofaneffectiveandgenerally disease, mainly affects the elderly population. As a consequence, safetrophectoderm (TE)biopsy approachattheblastocyst stage, comparativecontrolsamplesarelikelytobeenrichedwithfuture b) the development of comprehensive testing platforms for the AD cases who are yet to show symptoms. AD, like many other analysis of all 24 chromosomes in single-cell samples (≃ the disorders of ageing, is a progressive condition which means that typical TE biopsy consisting of 2-10 cells). In particular, the clinical features develop gradually over many years before establishment of high-throughput, automated NGS protocols for diagnosis. The ability to predict disease risk before disease onset PGT-A resulted in an unprecedented reduction of costs, allowing isofgreatimportanceforstratifyingpeopleforclinicaltrialsorthe an increasing number of couples undergoing IVFto benefit from selection of candidates for functional experimental studies. For embryo aneuploidy testing. Although not universally applicable, AD, with the exception of APOE-ε4, the common genome-wide comprehensive 24-chromosomes screening and single gene significant variants which have been discovered though GWAS disorder detection can be combined in a single NGS run. have only small individual effects. Although it is clear that many Furthermore, NGS analytical capabilities were also extended to genesareinvolvedindiseasedevelopmentandprogression,there thedetection ofploidy levelalterations (i.e., haploid or polyploid is no agreement in the field as to whether AD is a polygenic or configurations), which occur in about 1% of human blastocysts oligogenic disorder. We investigate various methodologies and and are missed by standard NGS analysis. Remarkably, NGS has SNP selection approaches for risk prediction. We highlight and been suggested as improved technology for the diagnosis of discussthebeststrategiesforpolygenicprofilingwhenassessing chromosomal mosaicism in TE biopsies. When applied on individualsfor ADrisk. controlled mixtures of fibroblast cell lines mimicking different V.Escott-Price: None. rates of mosaicism, NGS showed increased analytical sensitivity toward intermediate chromosomal copy number values (CNV). However,thetranslationofalgorithmsdevelopedonthesestable EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8721 E12Bayesian methods appliedin clinical settings E14DNAmethylation in Mendelian diseases E12.1 How are the causes of complex disease distributed in E14.1Epivariations in the humangenome the humangenome? AndrewSharp DavidBalding IcahnSchoolof Medicineat Mount Sinai,New York, NY,USA. University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Allelic changes in DNA methylation that result in gene silencing, Iwillreviewrecentprogressinusinggenome-wideSNPstoassess oftentermedepivariations,havebeenrecognizedinanumberof howtheheritabilityforcomplexhumantraitsisdistributedacross conditions, including imprinting disorders, CGG repeat expan- the human genome, and how it varies across traits. In particular sions, and in a growing number of monogenic diseases. Despite welookattherelationshipbetweenheritabilityandawiderange thisevidence,screeningforepivariationsisrarelyperformed,and of genome annotation features, as well as linkage disequilibrium very few studies have attempted to profile the contribution of and minor allele fraction (MAF), focusing on new results for rare epivariations to the burden of genetic disease. Our lab has variants. The relationship between MAF and heritability is recentlyundertakenthefirstlargescalestudiesofepivariationsin informative about the effects of negative or purifying selection, humans, and has investigated the methylomes of >25,000 for different traits and in different genome regions. I will also individuals to date. Importantly, these studies show that (i) discuss how the heritability models that arise from our work can epivariationsoccurrelativelyfrequentlyinthehumangenome,(ii) beused to improvegenomic prediction. represent a subset of pathogenic alleles at known disease- D.Balding:None. associated genes, and (iii) would be missed by purely sequence- based approaches. I will give an overview of the current state of knowledgeoftheinvolvementofepivariationsinhumandisease, E13Mapping thehuman bodyat the cellular level includingtheirpotentialunderlyingmolecularcauses,andinsights that epivariations can provide into the regulatory architecture of E13.1Deciphering liver regeneration cell-by-cell thegenome. A.Sharp: None. Dominic Grün E15Selectionandpopulationstructureinbiobankscaledata Julius-Maximilians-University, Würzburg, Germany. E15.2 Genetic population structure and its consequences in The human liver is an essential multifunctional organ, and liver biobank scaledata diseases are rising with limited treatment options. To better characterize the cell type architecture of the human liver, we DanielJ. Lawson appliedsingle-cellRNA-seqtonormalhumanliverspecimensand established a liver cell type atlas covering all known human liver University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. cell populations. Our analysis revealed previously unknown sub- typesamongendothelialcells,Kupffercells,andhepatocyteswith Population stratification has been well examined over the years transcriptome-wide zonation of some of these populations. We and has some straightforward solutions at the genome-wide discovered heterogeneity of the EPCAM+ population, which association-study (GWAS) level, namely principal component and comprises hepatocyte-biased and cholangiocyte populations as linear mixed models. However, we can show that these are wellasaTROP2intprogenitorpopulationwithstrongpotentialto insufficient in at least two domains. The first is in meta-analysis, form bipotent liver organoids. As proof-of-principle, we utilized where population structure information contained in the full our atlas to unravel phenotypic changes in hepatocellular datasetislostinindividualmeta-analysiscohorts.Thesecondisin carcinoma cells and in human hepatocytes and liver endothelial complex trait analysis, where the out-of-Africa bottleneck has cells engrafted into a mouse liver. To better understand the systematically changed the frequency of variants in study plasticity and differentiation pathways of liver cell populations populations, which is key a component of estimating selection during regeneration, and to elucidate the role of inter-cellular on traits. We describe tools which make very simple changes to crosstalkinthisprocess,wecomplementourhumanliverstudies GWAS - providing additional meta-data - which improve their withtheanalysisofmouseliverdamagemodels.Ourhumanliver performance. We further describe models for complex traits that cell atlas provides a powerful resource enabling the discovery of show that correcting for genetic drift may change our under- previously unknowncelltypes inthenormaland diseased liver. standingofthehistory of complextraits. D.Grün:None. D.J.Lawson: None. E13.2Decoding the developing human immunesystem E16Advances in Mendelian randomisation Muzlifah Haniffa E16.1 Using Mendelian randomization to assess molecular mediators in causal pathways Newcastle University, Newcastle UponTyne, United Kingdom. RebeccaRichmond Muzlifahhas used functional genomics, comparativebiology and single cell RNA sequencing to study human mononuclear University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. phagocytes.Inthisseminar,shewilldemonstratetheapplications ofsinglecellgenomicstodecodethedevelopinghumanimmune Understanding mediation is useful for identifying intermediates system. lying between an exposure and an outcome which, when M.Haniffa: None. intervened upon, will block (some or all of) the causal pathway EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8722 betweentheexposureandoutcome.Mediationapproacheshave architecture of many complex traits. For example, they have been adapted to understanding the role of molecular intermedi- enabled the discovery of more than 400 genomic loci for the ates in situations of high-dimensional omics data with varying complex disease of type 2 diabetes, providing such clues to its degrees of success. One approach which is increasingly being pathophysiology that could not have been achieved with adapted to evaluate molecular mediation is Mendelian randomi- candidategenestudiesthatweredominating,alongwithlinkage zation (MR). MR uses genetic variants associated with a trait of studies, in the pre-GWAS era. While GWAS were first applied interest to estimate the causal effect of that trait on a particular predominantlytosamplesfromindividualsofEuropeanancestry, outcome. Within the context of mediation, MR can be used to scientists have recently understood the importance of studying decompose the effect of an exposure on an outcome which acts genetics in diverse ancestral backgrounds. Hence, new GWAS directly, and that which acts via mediating variables. This continuetobesetupinpreviouslyunderrepresentedpopulations presentation will cover existing methods for applying MR to and learning about GWAS continues to be as topical as it was at assessmolecularmediation,includingtheuseofmultivariableand their introduction in the beginning of the 2000s. In this two-stepMR,andapproachesforestimatingthemediatedeffects, educational talk I will discuss things that led to the need of including the “difference” and “product of coefficients” methods. GWASandthepivotalprojects,such astheHapMapproject, and The use of quantitative trait loci (QTL) as causal anchors in the thenecessarytechnologicaladvances,thatfinallyenabledGWAS.I context of molecular traits will be elaborated on, as well as the willthenfollowtooutlinethestepsinausualGWAS,startingfrom existingresourceswhichcanbedrawnupontoacquirethesedata quality control and finishing in reporting the results in a and integrate them in relation to the exposure and outcome of meaningfulway.Thepurposeofthistalkistogiveanintroduction interest. The relative advantages and limitations of using MR to to a scientist setting up their first GWAS or someone wishing to conduct mediation analysis and to evaluate molecular pathways understandGWASbetter,byprovidinganoverviewofGWASand will be outlined. To date, the approach has been applied to hopefully inspiring the audience to dive further into the understandingtheroleoftheDNAmethylome,metabolomeand fascinating world ofGWAS. proteome in relation to disease risk. A series of examples will M.Kaakinen: None. illustrate the application of the methods and summarise the resultsobtained.Finally,theimportanceofcorroboratingfindings E19Precision medicine in underservedpopulations from MR with other experimental, data-based and statistical approaches, each with orthogonal sources of bias, will be highlighted in order to best triangulate evidence for the role of E19.1ImprovingprecisionmedicineforbreastcancerinAfrica molecular mediation. R.Richmond: None. Samuel Ahuno1, Moses Kamita2, Thomas Ahearn3, Shahin Sayed4, Francis Makokha2, Beatrice Wiafe5, Joel Yarney6, Baffour Awuah7, E17Chromosomal instability across lifetime Paz Polak8, Montserrat Garcia-Closas3, Jonine Figueroa9, The Ghanaand KenyaBreast Health Studies E17.2Genomicinstability in early embryonic development 1Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ewart WKuijk Ghana, 2Mount Kenya University, Thika, Kenya, 3National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA, 4Aga Khan University, Nairobi, Kenya, 5Peace and Love Hospital, Kumasi, Ghana, 6Korle Bu Teaching Center for Molecular Medicine and Oncode Institute, University Hospital, Accra, Ghana, 7Komfo Anyoke Teaching Hospital, Kumasi, Medical CenterUtrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Ghana, 8Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA,9University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. A major challenge in mammalian development is to maintain genomic integrity of the rapidly dividing cells. A failure to DespitelowerincidenceratescomparedtoEuropeanpopulations, maintain genomic integrity can lead to widespread genetic Africanwomenaremorelikelytodiefrombreastcancer,whichis mosaicism, the presence of multiple genetic lineages within an multifaceted, and its incidence is rising. Breast cancer and its individual. Genetic mosaicism may impact on human health clinical complications may be preventable by mitigating factors causing for example neurodevelopmental disorders or increased that trigger the disease process (primary prevention), the use of cancer risk. Recent advances in whole genome sequencing of therapiesthat reducetheriskofdisease before theclinical onset individual cells and small tissue samples have provided insights (secondaryprevention)ormoreeffectivetreatmentofthedisease into the prevalence and the underlying mutational mechanisms subtypeoncediagnosed(Tertiaryprevention/Precisionmedicine). that drive mosaicism in embryo and fetal development. This Recent technological advances in genetics, genomics, metabolo- lecturewill highlight some oftherecent findingson this topic. mics,proteomics, and bioinformatics nowoffer excitingopportu- E.Kuijk:None. nities for biomarker discovery in order to accurately predict risk, prognosis and response to treatment by informing clinical- E18Introduction to statistical analysis ofgenome-wide decision-making. A disproportionate number of poor-prognosis association studies (GWAS) tumours, including hormone receptor negative tumours which have fewer targeted treatments, has been observed in certain E18.1 What, when, and whys of genome-wide association populations in Africa, particularly those of West African ancestry. studies (GWAS) Coupling this with the paucity of treatment facilities and resources, primary and secondary means of prevention are Marika Kaakinen1,2 needed, particularly since the early ages at onset of many breast cancers resultinhigh-associated disability andyears oflifelost. 1University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College Inthisseminar,Iwillreviewmolecularepidemiologystudiesof London,London, United Kingdom. breast cancerincluding biomarkerstudies ofmolecular subtypes, incidence rates and exciting data on liquid biopsies. With Genome-wideassociationstudies(GWAS)wereintroducedalmost increasing number of molecular epidemiology studies, we aim two decades ago now and their continued application to date to more comprehensively understand the combination of both keeps advancing our understanding of the underlying genetic genetic,lifestyleandenvironmentaldeterminantsofbreastcancer EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8723 susceptibilityandprognosistoimproveprecisionpreventionand V. Faundes: None. M.D. Jennings: None. S. Crilly: None. S. medicineforwomen inAfrica. Legraie: None. S.E. Withers: None. S. Cuvertino: None. S.J. S.Ahuno:None.M.Kamita:None.T.Ahearn:None.S.Sayed: Davies:None.A.G.L.Douglas:None.A.E.Fry:None.V.Harrison: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or con- None.J.Amiel:None.D.Lehalle:None.W.G.Newman:None.P. sultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Newkirk: None. M. Splitt: None. J. Ranells: None. L.A. Cross: Modest; Research Grant GSK-ERI. F. Makokha: None. B. Wiafe: None.C.J. Saunders: None.B.R. Sullivan: None. J.L. Granadillo: None. J. Yarney: None. B. Awuah: None. P. Polak: None. M. None.C.T.Gordon:None.P.R.Kasher:None.G.D.Pavitt:None. Garcia-Closas: None. J.Figueroa: None. S.Banka: None. C01.2 Genomic findings in bone blood paired DNA compar- CONCURRENT SESSIONS ison ofnonsyndromic craniosynostosis C01Developmental disorders & syndromesI Yiran Guo1, Christopher L. Kalmar1, Xiaoyan Huang1, Bo Zhang1, YuankunZhu1,StephanieStefankiewicz1,MateuszKoptyra1,Jennifer Mason1, Tatiana Patton1, Elizabeth Appert1, Lina Lopez1, Catherine C01.1ImpairedeIF5Afunction causesanovel developmental Sullivan1, Anna R. Carlson1, Mychajlo S. Kosyk1, Zachary D. syndrome partially rescuedin modelsystems by spermidine Zapatero1, Phillip B. Storm1, Jordan W. Swanson1, Scott P. Bartlett1, VíctorFaundes1,MartinD.Jennings1,SiobhanCrilly1,SarahLegraie1, Joseph M.Serletti2,Adam Resnick1, JesseA. Taylor1 Sarah E. Withers1, Sara Cuvertino1, Sally J. Davies2, Andrew G. L. Douglas3,AndrewE.Fry2,VictoriaHarrison4,JeanneAmiel5,Daphné 1Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Phiadelphia,PA,USA,2Perelman Lehalle5, William G. Newman1, Patricia Newkirk6, Miranda Splitt7, School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Phiadelphia, Judith Ranells6, Laura A. Cross8, Carol J. Saunders9, Bonnie R. PA,USA. Sullivan8, Jorge L. Granadillo10, Christopher T. Gordon11, Paul R. Kasher1,Graham D. Pavitt1, SiddharthBanka1 Objective:Thepurposeofthisstudyistoelucidategeneticvariants contributing to nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (CS) by comparing 1UniversityofManchester,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,2Instituteof samples from abnormally fused bones, unaffected bones, and Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3University of South- parentsaliva,tothosefrompatientperipheralwholeblood(PWB). ampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 4Wessex Clinical Genetics Methods: We applied whole genome sequencing, then Service, Southampton, United Kingdom, 5Hôpital Necker Enfants performed best practice genomic alignment and variant calling, Malades,Paris,France,6UniversityofSouthFlorida,Tampa,FL,USA, trio joint genotyping for germline genomic variants, consensus 7Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United somatic variant calling for PWB-bone comparisons, and variant Kingdom, 8University of Missouri, Kansas City, MO, USA, 9Children’s annotation. Alternative allele frequencies, variant damaging Mercy, Kansas City, MO, USA, 10Washington University School of predictions, andinheritance models wereused to filtervariants. Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA,11Institut Imagine, Paris, France. Results: The study included 109 DNA samples from 26 trios, in which17familieshaveaffectedbonetissueDNA.Patients’affected bonesamplesweresequencedtoanaveragedepthof112.7Xwith Introduction: The structure of proline prevents it from adopting the rest biospecimens to 35.7X.Onaverage, 2629 somatic variants an optimal conformation for rapid protein synthesis. Polyproline- wereidentifiedintheaffectedbones.Afterfiltering,weidentified40 tract(PPT)associatedribosomalstallingisresolvedbythehighly- geneswithsomaticpathogenic/likelypathogenic(P/LP)variants.We conserved eIF5A, the only protein to contain the amino acid, hypusine, a post-translational modification essential for eIF5A also detected germline P/LP variants, mostly from denovo events. WeconfirmedknownCSgenesFGFR3andIHH(bothwithgermline function. de novo variants), and FREM1 (with a somatic variant in affected MethodsandResults:Wedescribeanoveldisordercausedby bone).Fromasinglepatient,wealsodiscoveredagermlinedenovo de novo heterozygous EIF5A variants in 7 unrelated individuals CHPFvariantandasomaticCHPFvariantinaffectedbone. resulting in variable combinations of developmental delay, Conclusions:WeidentifiedanovelcandidateCSgeneCHPFin microcephaly, micrognathia and dysmorphism. To investigate the same pathway as those required for bone development and the mechanism, we studied EIF5A mRNA expression in patient digitpatterning, which showspromise for further investigation. cellsandexpressedmutatedEIF5Aproteinsinyeastcellsdeleted Y. Guo: None. C.L. Kalmar: None. X. Huang: None. B. Zhang: for yeast-eIF5A to perform yeast growth assays, polysome profiling, assessed total/hypusinated eIF5A levels and assessed None.Y.Zhu:None.S.Stefankiewicz:None.M.Koptyra:None.J. Mason:None.T.Patton:None.E.Appert:None.L.Lopez:None. PPT-reporter protein synthesis. These studies revealed that the variants either resulted in haploinsufficiency, or impaired hypusi- C. Sullivan: None. A.R. Carlson: None. M.S. Kosyk: None. Z.D. Zapatero: None. P.B. Storm: None. J.W. Swanson: None. S.P. nationorperhapsreducedproteinstability.Allvariantsultimately Bartlett: None. J.M. Serletti: None. A. Resnick: None. J.A. resultedin reducedeIF5A-ribosome interaction and impaired the Taylor: None. synthesis of PPT-containing proteins. We also demonstrated that genes associated with microcephaly in humans are significantly enriched in PPTs. To explore potential treatment, we generated morpholino knockdown of eif5a in developing zebrafish that C01.3PhospholipaseCeta-1(PLCH1):Anewgenethatcauses Holoprosencephaly partly recapitulated the human phenotype. Both yeast and zebrafish defects caused by eIF5Avariants were partially rescued IchrakDrissi1,EmilyFletcher1,RanadShaheen2,FowzanAlkuraya2, byspermidine supplementation. Geoffrey Woods1 Conclusions: Wedescribe apotentially treatable novelhuman disorder caused by EIF5A mutations that cause reduced eIF5A- ribosome interactions via mutation-specific mechanisms. The 1CambridgeInstituteforMedical Research,University ofCambridge, phenotypes are likely explained by impaired synthesis of specific Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Department of Genetics, King Faisal PPT-rich proteins. These findings uncover the role of eIF5A, and Specialist Hospital andResearch Center, Riyadh,Saudi Arabia. proteinswithPPTs,inhumanbrainandcraniofacialdevelopment. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8724 Holoprosencephaly is a spectrum of developmental disorder of Pediatrics, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, the embryonic forebrain in which there is failed or incomplete 14SW Thames Regional Genetics Service, St George’s, University of separationoftheprosencephalonintotwocerebralhemispheres. London, London, United Kingdom, 15Institute of Medical Genetics, To date, dominant mutations in sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway University Hospital of Wales, Heath Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom, genes are the predominant Mendelian causes and have marked 16NE Thames Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic variability. Here, we describe London, United Kingdom, 17Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, two families in which offspring had holoprosencephaly spectrum SheffieldChildren’sNHSFoundationTrust,NorthernGeneralHospital, and homozygous predicted-deleterious variants in PLCH1. Immu- Sheffield, United Kingdom, 18Departments of Pathology, Neurosur- nocytochemistry was used to examine the expression pattern of gery, Oncopediatry, Genetics and Molecular Biology, Toulouse PLCH1 in human embryos. We used SHH as a marker of University Hospital, Toulouse, France, 19Wessex Clinical Genetics developmentalstageandofearlyembryonicanatomy.Inthefirst Service and Division of Human Genetics, Princess Anne Hospital, family, two siblings had congenital hydrocephalus, significant Southampton, United Kingdom, 20Department of Pediatrics, Section developmentaldelay,andamono-ventricleorfusedthalamiwith ofMedical Genetics,SUNYUpstate MedicalUniversity, Syracuse,NY, a homozygous PLCH1 c.2065C>T, p.(Arg689*) variant. In the USA, 21Department of Pediatrics, Yale New Haven Health, New second family two siblings had alobar holoprosencephaly and Haven, CT, USA, 22Department of Pediatrics, Royal University cyclopia with a homozygous PLCH1 c.4235delA, p.(Cys1079Valf- Hospital, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada, sTer16) variant. All parents were healthy carriers, with no 23LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics,BambinoGesùChildren’sHospital, holoprosencephaly spectrum features. We found that the sub- IRCCS,Rome,Italy,24ServicedePédiatrie,CentreHospitalierRégional cellular localisation of PLCH1 is cytoplasmic, but the p. de Namur, Namur, Belgium, 25Genetic Health Queensland c/-Royal (Cys1079ValfsTer16) variant was predominantly nuclear. Human BrisbaneandWomen’sHospital,Herston,Australia,26Departmentof embryoimmunohistochemistryshowedPLCH1tobeexpressedin Clinical Genetics, Central Hospital, Aichi Developmental Disability the notorcord, developing spinal cord, dorsal root ganglia, Center, Aichi, Japan, 27Osaka Women’s and Children’s Hospital, cerebellum, and dermatomyosome. Furthermore, the embryonic Osaka, Japan, 28Division of Human Genetics, Department of sub-cellular localisation of PLCH1 was exclusively cytoplasmic, Pediatrics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, supportingproteinmis-localisationcontributingtothepathogeni- Bern, Switzerland, 29Department of Pediatric Neurology, National city of the p.(Cys1079ValfsTer16) variant. Our data supports the Hospital, Luxembourg City, Luxembourg, 30Clinical Genetics, Uni- contention that PLCH1 has a role in prenatal mammalian versity Hospitals Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 31Nottingham neurodevelopment, and deleterious variants cause a clinically Clinical Genetics Service, City Hospital Campus, Nottingham, United variableholoprosencephalyspectrumphenotype.Thisprojecthas Kingdom, 32Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University been funded with support from the 2017 Cambridge NIHR MedicalCenter,DondersInstituteforBrain,CognitionandBehaviour, CambridgeBiomedical ResearchCentre award. Nijmegen, Netherlands, 33Department of Human Genetics, Yoko- I. Drissi: None. E. Fletcher: None. R. Shaheen: None. F. hama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Alkuraya:None. G.Woods: None. Japan,34CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,InstitutdePathologie etde Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium. C01.4 Clinical delineation, sex differences and genotype- Introduction: Kabuki syndrome is one of the most recognisable phenotypecorrelationinpathogenicKDM6Avariantscausing multi-systemcongenitaldisorder.Type-2Kabukisyndrome(KS2)is X-linked Kabuki syndrome Type 2 a highly variable X-linked condition caused by KDM6A variants, andisthoughttoberesponsiblefor~5%ofKScases.Itsmutation Víctor Faundes1,2, S Goh2, R Akilapa3, H Bezuidenhout4,5, H T. spectrum and the genotype-phenotype correlations are poorly Bjornsson6,7, L Bradley8, A F. Brady3, E Brischoux-Boucher9, H understood. Methods: Genetic and clinical details of new and Brunner10, S Bulk11, N Canham12, D Cody8, M L. Dentici13, M C. published individuals with pathogenic KDM6A variants were Digilio13, F Elmslie14, A. E. Fry15, H Gill8, J Hurst16, D Johnson17, S compiledand analysed. Julia18,KLachlan19,RR.Lebel20,M.Byler20,EGershon21,ELemire22, Results: 61 distinct pathogenic KDM6A variants (50 truncating, M Gnazzo23, F R. Lepri23, A Marchese24, M McEntagart14, J 11 missense) from 80 patients (34 males, 46 females) were McGaughran25, S Mizuno26, N Okamoto27, C Rieubland28, J identified. Missense variants clustered in the TRP #2, #3, #7 and Rodgers25, E Sasaki8, E Scalais29, I Scurr30, M Suri31, I van der Jmj-C domains. Truncating variants were significantly more likely Burgt32, N Matsumoto33, N Miyake33, V Benoit34, D Lederer34, S to be de novo. Thirteen individuals had maternally inherited Banka2 variants and one had a paternally inherited variant. Neonatal feedingdifficulties,hypoglycaemia,post-natalgrowthretardation, 1University of Chile, Santiago, Chile, 2University of Manchester, poor weight gain, motor delay, intellectual disability (ID), Manchester, United Kingdom, 3NW Thames Regional Genetics microcephaly, congenital heart anomalies, palate defects, renal Service, Northwick Park Hospital, Harrow, United Kingdom, 4Clinical malformations, strabismus, hearing loss, recurrent infections, Unit of Medical Genetics and Genetic Counselling, Tygerberg hyperinsulinism, seizures, joint hypermobility and gastroesopha- AcademicHospital, CapeTown,SouthAfrica, 5Division ofMolecular gealrefluxwerefrequentclinicalfindings.Facialfeaturesof>1/3rd patientswereatypicalforKS.Malesweresignificantlymorelikely Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa, to be born prematurely, have shorter stature and severe 6McKusick-Nathans DepartmentofGeneticMedicine, JohnsHopkins developmental delay/ID. We also highlight the overlaps and University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA, 7University of differences betweenthephenotypes of KS2and KS1. Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Conclusion: This largest-ever KS2 series expands the KDM6A Children’s Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland, 9Centre de mutation spectrum, delineates the KS2 phenotype and demon- GénétiqueHumaine,CentreHospitalieretUniversitaire,Universitéde stratesitssexandvariant-dependentvariability.Theseresultswill Franche-Comté,Besançon,France,10DepartmentofHumanGenetics, improve diagnosis for patients with KS2, especially those with RadboudUniversityMedicalCenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands,11Centre inheritedmissensevariants.Infuturetheseresultswillinformthe de Génétique Humaine, CHU de Liège, Liège, Belgium, 12Liverpool developmentof evidence-driven management guidelinesinKS. CentreforGenomicMedicine,LiverpoolWomen’sHospital,Liverpool, V. Faundes: None. S. Goh: None. R. Akilapa: None. H. United Kingdom, 13Medical Genetics Unit, Academic Department of Bezuidenhout: None. H.T. Bjornsson: F. Consultant/Advisory Board;Modest;MillenniumPharmaceuticals,Inc.L.Bradley:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8725 A.F. Brady: None. E. Brischoux-Boucher: None. H. Brunner: McWalter8, Pedro A. Sanchez-Lara9, Kristin Lindstrom10, Suneeta None. S. Bulk: None. N. Canham: None. D. Cody: None. M.L. Madan-Khetarpal11, Jennifer J. MacKenzie12, Berrin Monteleone13, Dentici: None. M.C. Digilio: None. F. Elmslie: None. A.E. Fry: DihongZhou14,SarahL.Sawyer15,FabìolaPaoliMonteiro16,EricaL. None. H. Gill: None. J. Hurst: None. D. Johnson: None. S. Julia: Macke17, Maria Iascone18, Angelo Selicorni19, Romano Tenconi20, None. K. Lachlan: None. R.R. Lebel: None. M. Byler: None. E. David J. Amor21,22, Karen Stals23, Sara Cabet24, Katharina Steindl25, Gershon: None. E. Lemire: None. M. Gnazzo: None. F.R. Lepri: Karin Weiss26, Alison M. R. Castle27, Louisa Kalsner28, Kate E. None. A. Marchese: None. M. McEntagart: None. J. McGaugh- Chandler6,Willow Sheehan29,Deepali N.Shinde30,DanaGoodloe31, ran: None. S. Mizuno: None. N. Okamoto: None. C. Rieubland: Krista Bluske32, Flavio Faletra33, Evangeline C. Kurtz-Nelson34, Britt- None. J. Rodgers: None. E. Sasaki: None. E. Scalais: None. I. Marie Anderlid35, Tahsin Stefan Barakat36, John M. Graham, Jr9, Scurr: None. M. Suri: None. I. van der Burgt: None. N. Laurence Faivre37,38, Siddharth Banka5,39, Tianyun Wang40, Matsumoto: None. N. Miyake: None. V. Benoit: None. D. Manuela Priolo41, Bruno Dallapiccola1, Lisenka E. L. M. Vissers4, Lederer: None. S. Banka: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Bekim Sadikovic3, Daryl A. Scott2, Jimmy Lloyd Holder, Jr2, MillenniumPharmaceuticals, Inc. MarcoTartaglia1 1Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 2Baylor College of C01.5Mitochondrial dysfunction in FOXG1 syndrome Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 3London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, 4Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Uni- Victoria A. Bjerregaard1, Amanda M. Levy1, Mathis Hildonen1, Rikke versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Manchester Stensbjerre Møller2, TrineBjørg Hammer2,Zeynep Tümer1 Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 1Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen 7IstitutoSuperiorediSanita,Rome,Italy,8GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD, University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Danish USA,9CedarsSinaiMedicalCenter,DavidGeffenSchoolofMedicine Epilepsy Centre, Department of Epilepsy Genetics and Personalized at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 10Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Medicine, University ofSouthern Denmark, Dianalund, Denmark. Phoenix, AZ, USA, 11Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 12McMaster Children’s Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada, Introduction: FOXG1-syndrome, previously described as the 13NYU Langone Long Island School of Medicine, Mineola, NY, USA, congenital form of Rett syndrome (RTT) due to overlapping 14Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, USA, 15Children’s clinicalfeatures,isadistinctneurodevelopmentaldisordercaused Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 16Mendelics by pathogenic FOXG1 variants. Forkhead box protein g1 (FOXG1) Genomic Analysis, Campo Belo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 17Mayo Clinic, is a transcription factor important for brain development and Rochester,MN,USA,18OspedalePapaGiovanniXXIII,Bergamo,Italy, functionandisexpressedinthenucleusandthemitochondria.In 19Azienda Socio Sanitaria Territoriale Lariana, Como, Italy, 20Uni- rodents, nuclear FOXG1 enhances mitochondrial membrane versita`diPadova,Padua,Italy,21VictorianClinicalGeneticsServices, potential and induces mitochondrial fission, while mitochondrial Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 22Uni- FOXG1promotesmitochondrialfusion.Asmitochondrialdysfunc- versityofMelbourne,RoyalChildren’sHospital,Melbourne,Australia, tion contributes to RTT pathogenesis and as FOXG1 regulates 23Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United mitochondrial dynamics and bioenergetics in rodents, we Kingdom, 24Hospices Civils de Lyon, Groupement Hospitalier Est, hypothesized that defective FOXG1 may affect mitochondrial Claude Bernard Lyon 1 University, Lyon, France, 25University of functionin human. Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 26Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Israel Materials-Methods: Fibroblasts were obtained from five Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 27CHEO, University of Ottawa, patients with different FOXG1 truncating or missense variants Ottawa, ON, Canada, 28Connecticut Children’s Medical Center, andfivecontrolindividuals.Mass,membranepotentialandROSof University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA, mitochondriawerequantifiedusinghigh-throughputmicroscopy, 29Shodair Children’s Hospital, Helena, MN, USA, 30Ambry Genetics, andATPcontentwithluciferase-assay.Mitochondrialmorphology Aliso Viejo, CA, USA, 31University of Alabama at Birmingham, was investigated by confocal microscopy and machine learning Birmingham, AL, USA, 3243Illumina Clinical Services Laboratory, (skeletonization). Gene and protein expression were determined SanDiego,CA,USA,33InstituteforMaternalandChildHealth,IRCCS withTaqMan-assay andwestern blot, respectively. Burlo Garofolo’’, Trieste, Italy, 34University of Washington, Seattle, Results:Weobservedmorphologicalchangesinmitochondrial WA,USA,35KarolinskaInstitutetandDepartmentofClinicalGenetics, network complexity and a significant reduction in the mitochon- Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 36Erasmus MC drial content in patient fibroblasts compared to controls. UniversityMedicalCenter,Rotterdam,Netherlands,37FHU-TRANSLAD Mitochondrial depletion was further reflected as a decrease in etInstitutGIMI,Dijon,France,38UMR1231GAD,Inserm-Universite´ therespiratorycapacityevidentbyareductioninATPproduction. Bourgogne-FrancheComte´,Dijon,France,39ManchesterCentrefor Whilebiogenesisandmitophagyappearednormal,mitochondrial Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS fusionactivity waslower inthepatient fibroblasts. FoundationTrust,Manchester,United Kingdom,Manchester,United Conclusion: Our thorough assessment of mitochondrial func- Kingdom, 40University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, tion suggests involvement of mitochondrial dysfunction in the WA, USA, 41Grande Ospedale Metropolitano Bianchi Melacrino pathogenesis of FOXG1-syndrome in human for the first time. Morelli’’di ReggioCalabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy. Further investigations are necessary to elucidate how FOXG1 deficiency impairsmitochondrial homeostasis. Introduction: Deletion 1p36 (del1p36) syndrome is the most V.A.Bjerregaard:None.A.M.Levy:None.M.Hildonen:None. common human disorder resulting from a terminal autosomal R.S.Møller:None. T.B.Hammer:None. Z. Tümer:None. deletion. This condition is molecularly and clinically heteroge- C01.6 SPEN haploinsufficiency causes a neurodevelopmental neous. Deletions involving two non-overlapping regions, known disorder overlapping proximal 1p36 deletion syndrome with an asthedistal(telomeric)andproximal(centromeric)criticalregions, episignature ofX chromosomesin females are sufficient to cause the majority of the recurrent clinical features, although with different facial features and dysmorph- Francesca Clementina Radio1, Kaifang Pang2, Andrea Ciolfi1, isms.SPENencodesatranscriptionalrepressorcommonlydeleted Michael A. Levy3, Lucia Pedace1, Elke de Boer4, Adam Jackson5,6, in proximal del1p36 syndrome and is located centromeric to the Emilia Stellacci7, Stefania Lo Cicero7, Maria Lisa Dentici1, Kirsty proximal1p36 critical region. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8726 Materials and Methods: We used clinical data from 34 was extracted from samples in National Biobanks including individuals with truncating variants in SPEN to define a DBS collected at birth (n=19), post-mortem formalin-fixed neurodevelopmentaldisorder presenting withfeaturesthat over- paraffin-embedded(FFPE)heart(n=8),andfrozenbloodsamples lapconsiderably withthose ofproximal del1p36 syndrome. (n=3). Patient and parental DNA samples (when available) Results: The clinical profile of this disease includes develop- underwentWES. mental delay/intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, Results: Lower yield of DNA (7.3-140 ng) was obtained from anxiety,aggressivebehavior,attentiondeficitdisorder,hypotonia, DBScomparedto FFPE(515-3065 ng).However,100% ofDBS vs. brainandspineanomalies,congenitalheartdefects,high/narrow 62,5%ofFFPElibrariespassedQC.Averagemeantargetdepthof palate,facialdysmorphisms,andobesity/increasedBMI,especially DBS samples (160X) was similar to blood (155X) and higher than in females. SPEN also emerges as a relevant gene for FFPE (82X); and >97% of target regions were covered. Analysis del1p36 syndrome by co-expression analyses. Finally, we show uncovered clinically relevant variants in 12 out of 19 families that haploinsufficiency of SPEN is associated with a distinctive (63%), of which four were located in ARVC genes and six in DNA methylation episignature of the X chromosome in affected another arrhythmogenic syndrome gene. Additionally, we identi- females, providing further evidence of a specific contribution of fied one case with hemochromatosis and one with myotonic the protein to the epigenetic control of this chromosome, and a dystrophy. paradigmofanXchromosome-specificepisignaturethatclassifies Conclusions: DNA from archived DBS is a reliable source for syndromic traits. WES-basedmolecularautopsywithahighdiagnosticyieldinSCD. Conclusions: We conclude that SPEN is required for multiple In a proportion of cases diagnosed post-mortem with ARVC, the developmental processes and SPEN haploinsufficiency is a major molecular autopsy pointed to another diagnosis, highlighting its contributortoadisorderassociatedwithdeletionscentromericto importance for risk stratification and adequate care of surviving thepreviously established1p36 critical regions. relatives. F. Radio: None. K. Pang: None. A. Ciolfi: None. M.A. Levy: A.Delgado-Vega:None.J.Klar:None.V.Kommata:None.A. None. L. Pedace: None. E. de Boer: None. A. Jackson: None. E. Wisten: None. N. Dahl: None. M. Börjesson: None. E. Stellacci: None. S. Lo Cicero: None. M. Dentici: None. K. Stattin:None. McWalter:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;GeneDx. C02.2 Clustering of the cardiac transcriptome of dilated P.A. Sanchez-Lara: None. K. Lindstrom: None. S. Madan- cardiomyopathy patients reveals opposite molecular signatures Khetarpal: None. J.J. MacKenzie: None. B. Monteleone: None. amongpatients withtruncating andmissense TTN variants D.Zhou:None.S.L.Sawyer:None.F.PaoliMonteiro:None.E.L. Macke:None.M.Iascone:None.A.Selicorni:None.R.Tenconi: JobA.J.Verdonschot,PingWang,KasperW.J.Derks,MichielT.H. None. D.J. Amor: None. K. Stals: None. S. Cabet: None. K. M.Henkens,SophieL.V.M.Stroeks,ArthurvandenWijngaard,Ingrid Steindl: None. K. Weiss: None. A.M.R. Castle: None. L. Kalsner: P. C. Krapels, Miranda W. Nabben, Han G. Brunner, Stephane R. B. None. K.E. Chandler: None. W. Sheehan: None. D.N. Shinde: Heymans None.D.Goodloe:None.K.Bluske:None.F.Faletra:None.E.C. Kurtz-Nelson: None. B. Anderlid: None. T. Barakat: None. J.M. MaastrichtUniversity Medical Center,Maastricht, Netherlands. Graham, Jr: None. L. Faivre: None. S. Banka: None. T. Wang: None. M. Priolo: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: Introduction: Truncating variants in titin (TTNtv) are the most None.B.Sadikovic:None.D.A.Scott:None.J.Holder,Jr:None. prevalent genetic cause of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Here, M.Tartaglia: None. we performed unsupervised clustering on the cardiac transcrip- tome of DCM patients to test whether the transcriptomic profile candetectTTNtvandwhethermissensevariantsinTTN(TTNmiss) C02Cardiovascular disorders show a comparable transcriptomic profile. Methods: RNA was isolated from cardiac biopsies of 92 DCM patients (30 TTNtv, 12 C02.1 Sudden cardiac death due to ARVC in the young: TTNmiss,7pathogenicLMNA,9otherpathogenicvariants,and34 molecular autopsy by whole exome sequencing of DNA from non-genetic). The mRNA-sequencing library was generated and dried bloodspots (DBS)collected at birth sequenced on the NextSeq-500. The data of 58k transcripts was subjected to dimension reduction and graph-based clustering. Angelica Maria Delgado-Vega1,2, Joakim Klar2, Varvara Kom- Transcriptomic clusters were afterwards associated with GO- mata3, Aase Wisten4, Niklas Dahl1,2, Mats Börjesson5,6, Eva-Lena biologicalprocess and phenotype-genotype data. Stattin1,2 Results: Six distinct transcriptomic clusters were identified, among which 3 clusters (C2, C3 and C5) formed a super-cluster 1Uppsala University Hospital, Clinical Genetics, Uppsala, Sweden, which was significantly enriched by TTN variants. Cluster 3 (C3) 2Uppsala University, Department of Immunology, Genetics and was dominated by TTNtv and 3 TTNmiss, reflecting a strong Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Uppsala University, Department of upregulation of mitochondrial energy metabolism pathways. Medical Sciences, Cardiology, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Umeå University, Cluster 5 constituted of 5 TTNtv and 3 TTNmiss samples, which Department of Community Medicine and Rehabilitation, Umeå, showed the opposite: downregulation of metabolic and mito- Sweden, 5Department of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothem- chondrialenergypathways.Interestingly,TTNtvpatientsinC3had burg University, Gothemburg, Sweden, 6Center for Health and a low left ventricular mass (LVmass) in contrast to patients in C5 Performance, Department of Food, Nutrition and Sport Science, whichhad smallhearts witha highLVmass andhypertension. GothemburgUniversity, Gothemburg,Sweden. Conclusions: Transcriptomic clustering revealed two distinct TTNtv patient-clusters which show two extremities of cardiac Background: The genetic investigation of sudden cardiac death metabolism. Hypertension could be an important mediator in (SCD) is often limited by access to DNA from the proband. We determining the pathophysiology and phenotype of TTNtv evaluatedthefeasibilityofWESonDNAfromarchiveddriedblood carriers. DCM patients with TTNmiss show similarities to TTNtv in spots(DBS) collectedat thetime ofnewborn screening. thetranscriptomic signature, potentially indicating both diagnos- Methods: Through National Health Registries, we identified all ticand therapeutic value. SwedishcasesofSCDintheyoung(<35y.o.a.)withapost-mortem J.A.J.Verdonschot:None.P.Wang:None.K.W.J.Derks:None. diagnosis of ARVC between 2000 and 2010 (n=22). Medical M.T.H.M. Henkens: None. S.L.V.M. Stroeks: None. A. van den records,familyhistory,andautopsyfindingswerecollected.DNA EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8727 Wijngaard: None. I.P.C. Krapels: None. M.W. Nabben: None. H. Zongsheng He1, Rosan L. Lechner2, Arne IJpma2, Daphne Heijs- G.Brunner: None. S.R.B.Heymans: None. man2, Hence J. M. Verhagen2, Sander ten Raa2, Hennie T. Bruggewirth2, Robert M. W. Hofstra2, Danny F. E. Huylenbroeck2, JohnW.M. Creemers1, Danielle F.Majoor-Krakauer2 C02.3 Heterozygous and homozygous Chkb (Choline kinase beta) deficiencies are associated with cardiomyopathy: 1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Nether- Insightsfroma mousemodel lands. Mahtab Tavasoli1, Tiam Feridooni1, Hirad Feridooni1, Stanislav Abdominal aortic aneurysms are common and occurrence Sokolenko2, Abhishek Mishra1, Abir Lefsay3, Sadish Srinivassane4, increaseswithage,resultingin5-8%ofmenand1-2%ofwomen Joyce Rowsell4, Molly Praest4, Alexandra MacKinnon4, Melissa Stella above 65 years being affected. Age-related extracellular matrix Mammoliti4, Ashley Alyssa Maloney4, Marina Moraca4, Kitipong remodelingandweakeningoftheaorticwalliscausedbygenetic Uaesoontrachoon4,KanneboyinaNagaraju4,5,EricP.Hoffman6,4,KB. predispositions and risks factors like hypertension and smoking. Pasumarthi1, Christopher R.McMaster7 Although familial segregation studies have identified over 40 aneurysm genes, (likely)pathogenic variants only explain ~4% of 1Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie, Halifax, NS, Canada, cases.Inthisstudywehaveperformedwhole-exomesequencing 2Department of Process Engineering & Applied Science, Dalhousie of 677 abdominal aorta aneurysm patients and identified 24 University,, Halifax, NS, Canada, 3Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, (3.5%) unrelated patients with 13 different rare heterozygous Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 4Agada Biosciences Inc., variants in FURIN, encoding the proprotein convertase FURIN. Of Halifax, NS, Canada, 5School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical these 24 patients, 14 had multiple aneurysms and 7 a rupture or Sciences, Binghamton University, State University of New York dissection. Thoracic aneurysm was observed in 6. More than half (SUNY), Binghamton, NY, USA, 6School of Pharmacy and Pharma- ofthepatientsshowedarangeofextravascularconnectivetissue ceutical Sciences, Binghamton University, State University of New features,likeatrophicscarring,hypermobility,scoliosisorapectus York (SUNY), Binghamton, NS, USA, 7Dalhousie, Halifax, NS, excavatum. The steady-state protein levels, protease activity and Canada. shedding of recombinant FURIN variants were affected. The consequences for maturation of pro TGFβ1 by FURIN-mediated Introduction:TheCHKBgeneencodescholinekinasebeta,which cleavagefordownstreamSMAD(SMAD2)andnon-SMAD(MAPK) catalyzesthefirststepinthepathwayforthemajorphospholipid signaling,andexpressionofTGFβ1-responsiveACTA2andCOL4A1, phosphatidylcholine(PC).Homozygouslossoffunctionvariantsin werevariablyimpairedinpatientfibroblasts,indicatingthatTGFβ/ CHKB are associated with a congenital muscular dystrophy. BMP family actions are dysregulated in these aneurysms. The Variable cardiac phenotypes are reported in half of known cases range of effects of the recurrent missense pR745Q FURIN in andareamajorreasonofearlydeath.ThepreciseroleofCHKBin fibroblastsofdifferentpatientsreflectstheinfluenceofindividual cardiac function is not known. Methods: Heart function of 20- geneticbackgrounds inaorta aneurysms. week-oldheterozygousandhomozygous(Chkb+/−andChkb−/−) Conclusion: UsingWES ofa largecohort of unrelatedpatients mice was assessed using echocardiography. The mice were weidentifiedrarevariantsofFURINwithhighprevalenceinaortic studiedforpotentialsusceptibilitytowardsventriculararrhythmias aneurysm. Thisstudy is funded byStichting Lijf enLeven. using ECG recordings. Lipid profile of the cardiac muscle, Z.He:None.R.L.Lechner:None.A.IJpma:None.D.Heijsman: mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate, and gene expression of None. H.J.M. Verhagen: None. S. ten Raa: None. H.T. Brugge- relevant genesweredetermined. wirth:None.R.M.W.Hofstra:None.D.F.E.Huylenbroeck:None. Results:Unlikewildtypemice,60percentoftheChkb+/−and J.W.M.Creemers:None. D.F. Majoor-Krakauer: None. all Chkb−/− mice displayed arrhythmic events when challenged with isoproterenol. Lipidomic analysis revealed that Chkb defi- ciency altered the profile of lipids in the heart. A major change C02.5Clinicalgeneticriskvariantsinformafunctionalprotein was an increase in acylcarnitines in Chkb+/− and Chkb−/− hearts interaction network for tetralogy ofFallot (1.68-foldand3-foldrespectively),andthiswasaccompaniedbya decreased capacity to utilize fatty acids for oxygen production. Miriam S. Reuter1, Rajiv R. Chaturvedi1, Rebekah K. Jobling1, TherewasareductionintheexpressionofANPandANPreceptor Giovanna Pellecchia1, Omar Hamdan1, Wilson W. L. Sung1, Thomas genes as well as ventricular conduction system markers (HCN4 Nalpathamkalam1, Pratyusha Attaluri2, Candice K. Silversides3, andCx40) inboth Chkb+/−and Chkb−/− mice. Rachel M. Wald3, Christian R. Marshall1, Simon Williams4, Bernard Conclusions: Here we report for the first time that Chkb D. Keavney4, Bhooma Thiruvahindrapuram1, Stephen W. Scherer1, deficiencies result in altered cardiac lipid metabolism, decreased AnneS.Bassett1 oxygen consumption, defects in the ventricular conduction system development, and increased susceptibility to ventricular 1The Hospital for SickChildren, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of arrhythmias. Sources of Support: Canadian Institutes for Health Toronto,Toronto,ON,Canada,3UniversityHealthNetwork,Toronto, Research ON, Canada, 4The University of Manchester, Manchester, United M.Tavasoli:None.T.Feridooni:None.H.Feridooni:None.S. Kingdom. Sokolenko: None. A. Mishra: None. A. Lefsay: None. S. Srinivassane: None. J. Rowsell: None. M. Praest: None. A. Background:TetralogyofFallot(TOF),themostcommoncyanotic MacKinnon:None.M.S.Mammoliti:None.A.A.Maloney:None. heart defect in newborns, has evidence of multiple genetic M. Moraca: None. K. Uaesoontrachoon: None. K. Nagaraju: contributingfactors.Identifyingvariantsthatareclinicallyrelevant None. E.P. Hoffman: None. K.B. Pasumarthi: None. C.R. is essential to understand patient-specific disease susceptibility McMaster: None. and outcomes, and could contribute to delineating pathomechanisms. MethodsandResults:Weusedaclinically-drivenstrategyand C02.4 Whole-exome sequencing 677 aneurysm patients currentguidelinestore-analyzeexomesequencingdatafrom811 identifies multiple rare variants in the proprotein convertase probands with TOF, focused on identifying rare loss-of-function FURINcausing impaired TGFBfamily signaling and other likely pathogenic variants in congenital heart disease EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8728 (CHD) genes. In addition to confirming a major contribution of followed by burden testing of candidate pathway was then likely pathogenic variants in FLT4 (VEGFR3; n=14) and NOTCH1 performed. (n=11), we identified 1-3 such variants in each of 21 other CHD Results: We identified 901 genes with 1032 non-synonymous genes, including ATRX, DLL4, EP300, GATA6, JAG1, NF1, PIK3CA, variantswithadifferenceinallelefrequencybetweensevereSVAS RAF1, RASA1, SMAD2, and TBX1. There were also three emerging andno SVAS>5% and CADDphred scores > 10.Amongthe top CHD/TOF candidate genes with multiple loss-of-function variants canonical pathways enriched, we identified the extracellular in this cohort: KDR (n=4), IQGAP1 (n=3), and GDF1 (n=8). In matrix (FDR q=7.19x10−15, with particular enrichment of total, these variants were identified in 64 probands (7.9%). Using collagens and glycoproteins), and cell-matrix interactions (FDR q the 26 composite genes in a STRING protein interaction =4.58x10−5). Genes related to G protein coupled receptor enrichment analysis revealed a biologically relevant network (p- signaling (FDR q=9.02x10−11) and those implicated in the value 3.3e-16), with VEGFR2 (KDR) and NOTCH1 representing response toviral infection(FDR q=1.39x10−5)are also notable. centralnodes.Variantsassociatedwitharrhythmias/suddendeath Conclusions:VariantsinkeypathwaysseparatepeoplewithWS and/or heart failure indicated factors that could influence long- with severe vs. no SVAS. These pathways can be targeted to termoutcomes. understand mechanismof disease anddevelop future therapies. Conclusions:Theresultsarerelevanttoprecisionmedicinefor D. Liu: None. Z.C. Wong: None. C.J. Billington Jr: None. N. TOF. They suggest considerable clinical yield from genome-wide Raja: None. E. Biamino: None. M.F. Bedeschi: None. R. Villa: sequencing,andfurtherevidenceforKDRasaCHD/TOFgeneand None.G.M.Squeo:None.G.Merla:None.B.R.Pober:None.C.A. VEGF and Notch signaling as mechanisms in human disease. Morris:None.C.B.Mervis:None.A.Roberts:None.L.R.Osborne: Harnessing genetic heterogeneity of single gene defects could None.B.A. Kozel: None. informetiopathogenesisandhelpprioritizenovelcandidategenes forTOF. C03Bioinformatics,machinelearningandstatisticalmethods M.S. Reuter: None. R.R. Chaturvedi: None. R.K. Jobling: None. G. Pellecchia: None. O. Hamdan: None. W.W.L. Sung: C03.1Improved prediction of complex traits from individual- None. T. Nalpathamkalam: None. P. Attaluri: None. C.K. leveldata andsummary statistics Silversides: None. R.M. Wald: None. C.R. Marshall: None. S. Williams:None.B.D.Keavney:None.B.Thiruvahindrapuram: DougSpeed None. S.W. Scherer: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Population Diagnostics, Deep Genomics. A.S. Bassett: None. Department of Quantitative Genetics and Genomics, Aarhus, Den- mark. C02.6 Variants in extracellular matrix and G protein coupled Most existing tools for constructing genetic prediction models receptorsignalingpathwaysassociatedwithseveresupraval- (polygenic risk scores) begin with the assumption that all genetic varaortic stenosis inWilliams syndrome variants contribute equally towards the phenotype. However, this represents a suboptimal model for how heritability is distributed DelongLiu1, ZoeC.Wong1, CharlesJ.Billington Jr2,1,Neelam Raja1, acrossthegenome.Toaddressthisproblem,wedevelopeightnew Elisa Biamino3, Maria F. Bedeschi4, Roberta Villa4, Gabriella M. prediction tools, each of which allows the user to specify the Squeo5, Giuseppe Merla5,6, Barbara R. Pober7,8, Colleen A. Morris9, heritability model. Four of our new tools use individual-level data, Carolyn B. Mervis10, Amy Roberts11, Lucy R. Osborne12, Beth A. whilefourusesummarystatistics.Wecompareindividual-leveldata Kozel1 prediction tools by analyzing 14 phenotypes from the UK Biobank (200k individuals per phenotype). Our new tool LDAK-Bolt-Predict 1National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA, 2University of performs best, outperforming the existing tools Lasso, BLUP, Bolt- Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 3University of Turin, Turin, Italy, LMM and BayesR for each of the 14 phenotypes. We compare 4FondazioneIRCCSCa‘GrandaOspedaleMaggiorePoliclinico,Milan, summary statistic prediction tools by analyzing 225 phenotypes Italy,5FondazioneIRCCSCasaSollievodellaSofferenza,SanGiovanni from the UK Biobank (average sample size 285k). Our new tool Rotondo(Foggia),Italy,6UniversityofNaplesFedericoII,Naples,Italy, LDAK-BayesR-SS performs best, outperforming the existing tools 7MassachusettsGeneralHospital,Boston,MA,USA,8HarvardMedical lassosum, sBLUP, LDpred and SBayesR for 223 of the 225 School, Boston, MA, USA,9UNLV Schoolof Medicine, Las Vegas,NV, phenotypes. The increase in prediction accuracy from improving USA,10UniversityofLouisville,Louisville,KY,USA,11BostonChildren’s the heritability model tends to be substantial. For example, when Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 12University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, using LDAK-Bolt-Predict, changing the heritability model increases USA. theproportionofphenotypicvarianceexplainedbyonaverage14% (s.d. 2%), equivalent to increasing the sample size by about a Introduction: Williams Syndrome (WS) is caused by a 1.5-1.8 MB quarter. Moreover, the advantage of our new prediction tools will deletion on 7q11.23. About 15-20% of people with WS have increasefurtherasmorerealisticheritabilitymodelsaredeveloped. severe supravalvar aortic stenosis (SVAS) requiring surgical D.Speed:None. intervention. In contrast, ~40% with WS have no SVAS. Little is known about the genetic features impacting SVAS severity. Conventionalstatisticalapproachesformodifierevaluationwould C03.2 Removing confounders from facial representations require thousands of cases, making it infeasible for the study of trained onthe biased patient images rarediseases.Hereweproposeanalternativeapproachtoidentify disease modifiersinsmaller cohorts. Tzung-Chien Hsieh1, Alexander Harry Ivo Paul Robert Hustinx1, Methods: We sequenced 450 genomes from individuals AviramBar-Haim2,ToriJeanPantel3,NicoleFleischer2,AlexejKnaus1, with WS, including those with severe (n=75) and no (n=186) PeterKrawitz1 SVAS. Variants were jointly called using GATK procedures, identifying ~132,000 non-synonymous variants. CADD phred 1InstituteforGenomicStatisticsandBioinformatics,Bonn,Germany, scores were used to filter out variants with little potential 2FDNA, Boston, MA, USA, 3Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, pathogenicity as well as those with minimal frequency Germany. difference between severity groups. Geneset enrichment, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8729 Introduction: The next-generation phenotyping technology for mitochondriopathy cohorts of WGS with matched RNA-seq syndromology, such as GestaltMatcher, has enabled matching samples. patients with ultra-rare phenotypes by the facial representations Conclusions: Altogether, our approach significantly increases learned from thousands of patient photos. However, the current performances of predicting aberrant splicing events in clinically availablepatientphotosareunbalancedinethnicityandage.For non-accessible tissues, reaching a sufficiently high precision to example,mostofthephotosarefromCaucasiansandtakenatan guide non-invasivegenetic diagnostics. early age. It results in biased models when training on an N.Wagner:None. M. Çelik: None.J. Gagneur:None. unbalanceddataset. The model mightlearn theethnicity instead C03.4 Accounting for temporal information and family history of facial dysmorphic features to classify the disorders. We improvespower ingenome-wide association studies therefore demonstrate how to remove these biases when train onan unbalanced dataset. Emil M. Pedersen1, Esben Agerbo1, Oleguer Plana-Ripoll1, Jakob Methods:Wecompiledanunbiaseddatasetconsistingof1,500 Grove1, Julie W. Dreier1, Kathrine L. Musliner1, Søren Dalsgaard1, patients with ten different rare disorders with equal ethnicity Jakob Christensen1, Preben B. Mortensen1, John McGrath2, Florian distribution. For each individual, a frontal photo and the Privé1,Bjarni J.Vilhjálmsson1 molecularlyconfirmeddiagnosiswereavailable.Weutilizeddeep convolutional neural networks for training a model on patients’ 1Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 2University of Queensland, frontal photos, and the joint learning and unlearning (JLU) Bribane, Australia. technique proposed by Alvi et al. was used to remove age and ethnicity biasduringthemodel training. Introduction: Family history, sex and age at diagnosis are Results: We first showed that training on a dataset with informativevariablesthatareoftenoverlookedingeneticanalysis unbalanced ethnicity distribution resulted in a model predicting such as GWAS, which typically restricts the analysis to the case- ethnicity instead of disorder. We then proved that the JLU control binary phenotype. We aim to develop new method that removedthebias.Furthermore,webenchmarkedonthebalanced provides a refined phenotype to improve power in GWAS by dataset onboth thenetworkwith and without JLU. includinginformation on these variables. Conclusion: This study proved that the adversarial networks Materials and Methods: Here we present LT-FH++, a flexible such as JLU unlearned the bias and generalized better on facial method for estimating a refined phenotype for GWAS that dysmorphic features. With this method, we could improve the accounts for family history, age at diagnosis and sex. We apply disease classification on the patients of minority class in this LT-FH++ to the iPSYCH and UK Biobank cohorts by using extra society. information from Danish health registers for iPSYCH, and data T. Hsieh: None. A.H. Hustinx: None. A. Bar-Haim: A. Employ- fromtheBritishOfficeforNationalStatisticsforstudyingmortality ment (full or part-time); Significant; FDNA. T.J. Pantel: None. N. in the UK Biobank. Results from the LT-FH++ model are Fleischer:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;FDNA.A. comparedwiththeliabilitythresholdconditionalonfamilyhistory Knaus:None. P. Krawitz:Other; Modest; FDNA. (LT-FH)model and case-control status. C03.3 Enhanced SpliceMap and RNA-seq from clinically Results: In simulations, LT-FH++ showed a power increase of accessible tissues improves outlier prediction for non-accessible up to 17.8% over LT-FH and 60.6% over case-control status. We tissues furtherappliedLT-FH++tomortalityintheUKbiobankandfour commonpsychiatric disorders (ADHD, autism, schizophrenia, and NilsWagner, Muhammed Çelik, Julien Gagneur depression) available in the IPSYCH cohort. Across all analyzed traits, we found 20 independent genome-wide significant Technical University of Munich,Garching, Germany. associations for LT-FH++, 10 for LT-FH and 8 for case-control statusacross alltraits. Introduction: Aberrant splicing is a major cause of genetic Conclusion: Linking genetic data with information on family disorders. However, the affected tissues are often not easily history,sexandageatdiagnosiscansignificantlyincreasepower accessible,preventingdirectdetectionofmanyrelevantaberrant in GWAS. As more genetic data is linked with electronic health splicing events in clinical diagnostics. Deep learning models like records, we expect methods such as LT-FH++ to become more SpliceAI and MMSplice have improved prioritizations of rare beneficial and widelyused. variants found by whole genome sequencing (WGS). However, E.M.Pedersen:None.E.Agerbo:None.O.Plana-Ripoll:None. their performance on predicting aberrant splicing in any given J. Grove: None. J.W. Dreier: None. K.L. Musliner: None. S. tissue hasnot beenassessed so far. Dalsgaard: None. J. Christensen: B. Research Grant (principal Materials and Methods: Here, we developed the first investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell benchmark dataset for aberrant splicingpredictionby applying as grants already received); Modest; Novo Nordisk Foundation the aberrant splicing caller FRASER on 6931 RNA-seq samples (grant number: NNF16OC0019126), the Central Denmark Region, from 48 GTEx tissues. We constructed a tissue-specific splicing the Danish Epilepsy Association. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria map (SpliceMap) improving annotations of the GENCODE (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; the annotation by excluding unexpressed splice sites and quantify- Scientific Advisory Board of Union Chimique Belge (UCB) Nordic ing tissue-specific reference levels of alternative splicing. Next, and Eisai AB. Other; Modest; lectures for UCB Nordic and Eisai, webuiltnewmodelscombiningi)state-of-the-artdeeplearning travelfundsfromUCBNordic.P.B.Mortensen:None.J.McGrath: models together with SpliceMap for WGS-only diagnostics None.F. Privé: None.B.J. Vilhjálmsson: None. and ii) furthermore including RNA-seq from clinically accessible tissues (CATs) for integrated WGS and RNA-seq based diagnostics. C03.5 The impact of copy number variants on complex Results: At 20% recall, out-of-the-box application of existing humantraits deep learning models, yield a precision less than 2%. However, when combined with SpliceMap, we reached 20% precision. Chiara Auwerx1,2,3,4, Eleonora Porcu1,2,3,4, Maarja Lepamets5,6, Integrating furthermore RNA-seq of CATs (blood and skin) led to Reedik Mägi6, Alexandre Reymond1, Zoltán Kutalik2,3,4 50% precision. These results replicated in an independent EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8730 1CenterforIntegrativeGenomics,UniversityofLausanne, Lausanne, transformed features were utilized for clustering. A machine Switzerland, 2Department of Computational Biology, University of learningmodelthatincorporatedtheprofilefeatureswastrained Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, forcancer classification. Lausanne, Switzerland, 4University Center for Primary Care and Results: Upon clustering analysis, different cfDNA profiles PublicHealth,Lausanne,Switzerland,5InstituteofMolecularandCell groupedintocancertypespecificclustersthatdifferentiatedfrom Biology,UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,6EstonianGenomeCentre, the profiles of healthy controls. Using the trained classifier, the Instituteof Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. overallaccuracytodiscriminatecancerfromhealthysampleswas 63.8%,resultinginsensitivitiesrangingfrom20.75%to91.01%at Copy number variations (CNVs) are potent phenotypic modifiers 95% specificity among different cancer types and stages. This associatedwithseveralraregenomicsyndromes,buttheirrolein feature-based classification outperformed CNAs only based complex traits remains understudied. To fill this gap, we called analysis. CNVs in 331’522 UK Biobank participants. Association studies Conclusion: We developed a novel machine learning method betweenthecopy-number(CN)ofCNV-proxyprobesand57traits basedonlargesWGScfDNAdatasetsforunbiasedclassificationof revealed 134 independent signals across 47 phenotypes. Some cfDNAprofiles,enablingtumordetectionandtyping.Themethod CNVs exhibited pleiotropy, with 26 and 19 traits associating with could opennew opportunities forcancer management. 16p11.2-BP4-BP5and22q11.2,respectively.Besidesrecapitulating Grants: This work was funded by FWO-Vlaanderen (G080217N) well-established associations (e.g. 16p11.2-weight), we identified andVlaio (HBC.2018.2018). newones.Forinstance,deletionofPDZK1,whichencodesaurate H. Che: None. T. Jatsenko: None. L. Dehaspe: None. L. transporter scaffold protein, decreased urate levels (β Lenaerts:None. N.Brison: None.K. VanDenBogaert:None. L. deletion =-48.3 µmol/L, p=5.8e-13), with a 2.6-fold stronger effect in Vancoillie:None.I.Parijs:None.A.Coosemans:None.F.Amant: males (p =2.1e-3). Furthermore, many associations mapped to None. S. Tejpar: None. K. Punie: None. A. Wozniak: None. P. diff rarediseaseregions,suggestingvariableexpressivityandabroad Schoffsi: None. D. Timmerman: None. D. Lambrechts: None. P. impact of these loci in the general population: SHOX and its Vandenberghe: None. J.Vermeesch: None. regulatory region are implicated in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, which is characterized by short stature, confirming the positive effect of the region’s CN on height (β=2.3 cm, p=7.2e-16); C04Unravelingthe complexity ofneuropsychiatric genetics Heterozygous deletion of the region encoding the hepatic transportersOATP1B1/3isassociatedwithincreasedtotalbilirubin C04.1Identificationof13independentgeneticlociassociated (β deletion=3.1µmol/L,p=2.2e-13),whereashomozygouscarriers with cognitive resilience in healthy aging in 330,097 indivi- affected with Rotor syndrome present with hyperbilirubinemia. dualsin the UK Biobank Finally, our approach highlights new functionalities: The CN of the interval encompassing MARF1, a gene essential to Joan Fitzgerald, Laura Fahey, Laurena Holleran, Pilib Ó Broin, Gary murine oogenesis, correlated negatively with age at menarche Donohoe,Derek W.Morris (β=-0.6 years, p=8.5e-15) and menopause (β =-1.8 duplication years, p=1.7e-6), suggesting a conserved role in female National University of IrelandGalway, Galway, Ireland. reproductive timing. Together, the numerous identified associa- tions suggest that CNVs play an important role in shaping Cognitiveresilienceistheabilitytowithstandthenegativeeffects complex traits and that their study can reveal new gene ofstressoncognitivefunctioningandisimportantformaintaining functionalities. qualityoflifewhileaging.UKBiobank(UKB)doesnothavedirect C. Auwerx: None. E. Porcu: None. M. Lepamets: None. R. measurements of cognitive ability at distal timepoints. Therefore, Mägi: None.A. Reymond: None. Z.Kutalik: None. weusednumberofyearsineducation(EY)asaproxyphenotype C03.6 Cancer detection by mining large cell free DNA for past cognitive performance. Current cognitive performance sequencingdataset was determined based on processing speed. This approach captured an average time span of 40 years between past and Huiwen Che1, Tatjana Jatsenko1, Luc Dehaspe2, Liesbeth Lenaerts1, currentcognitiveperformancein330,097individuals.Aconfound- NathalieBrison2,KrisVanDenBogaert2,LeenVancoillie1,IlseParijs2, ingfactorwasthatEYishighlypolygenicandmaskedthegenetics An Coosemans1, Frédéric Amant1, Sabine Tejpar1, Kevin Punie1, ofresilience.Toovercomethis,weemployedGenomicsStructural Agnieszka Wozniak1, Patrick Schoffsi1, Dirk Timmerman1, Diether Equation Modelling (GenomicSEM) to perform a GWAS-by- Lambrechts1,Peter Vandenberghe1, JorisVermeesch1 subtraction using two GWAS, one GWAS of EY and resilience andasecondGWASofEYbutnotresilience.Subtractingonefrom 1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, the other generated a GWAS of resilience. Replication of this Belgium. approachwasshownusingindependentdiscoveryandreplication samples and the full GWAS results were examined further using Introduction:CellfreeDNA(cfDNA)allowsnon-invasivediagnosis functional genomics analysis. We found 13 independent genetic of cancer patients. Most of the work on cfDNA focused on the loci for resilience. Functional analyses showed enrichment in detection of tumor specific mutations. The targeted nature only several brain regions and involvement of specific cell types, provides partial view and requires knowledge of known tumor including GABAergic neurons (P=6.59x10−8) and glutamatergic mutations.Incontrast,shallowwhole-genomesequencing(sWGS) neurons (P=6.98x10−6) in the cortex. Gene-set analyses impli- ofcfDNAallowstointerrogatecopynumberaberrations(CNAs)in cated the biological process “neuron differentiation” (P= anunbiasedway.WepresenthereacfDNAdataminingapproach 9.7x10−7) and the cellular component “synaptic part” that enables identification of cancer-specific signals in sWGS, (P=2.14x10−6). Mendelian randomization analysis showed a irrespectiveof thedetection ofCNAs. causative effect of white matter volume on cognitive resilience. Methods: We collected cfDNA samples from 307 healthy Toourknowledge,thisisthefirstGWASofcognitiveresilienceina controls and varying stages of hematological (178) and solid largedataset. These results enhanceneurobiological understand- (331) tumors, including breast, colorectal, gastrointestinal and ingof resilience. ovarian samples. sWGS was carried out and genome-wide read J. Fitzgerald: None. L. Fahey: None. L. Holleran: None. P. Ó depth profiles were assessed. Principal component analysis Broin: None.G. Donohoe:None. D.W. Morris:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8731 C04.2GeneticClusteringofRepetitiveSymptoms,Oppositional Ciaran Campbell1,2, David Lewis-Smith3,4, Costin Leu5,6, Helena DefiantDisorderandLanguageDisorderandDelayinPeoplewith Martins6, Roland Krause7, Terence O’Brien8, Graeme Sills9, Federico Autism: A Multivariate Genetic Variance Analysis of Genetic Zara10, Bobby Koeleman11, Chantal Depondt12, Anthony Marson9, Relationship Matrices intheSPARK Sample Hreinn Stefánnson13, John Craig14, Michael R. Johnson15, Pasquale Striano16,AndreaJorgensen17,HolgerLerche18,NormanDelanty2,19, LucíadeHoyos1,MariskaBarendse1,MarjoleinM.J.vanDonkelaar1, TheEpiPGXConsortium,SanjaySisodiya6,RhysThomas3,4,Gianpiero Ellen Verhoef1, Simon E. Fisher1,2, Dheeraj Rai3,4,5,6, Beate St L.Cavalleri1,2 Pourcain1,2,7 1School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, RCSI, Dublin, 1Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Ireland, 2The SFI FutureNeuro Research Centre, RCSI Dublin, Dublin, Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Ireland, 3Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Centre for University, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 4Department of Clinical AcademicMentalHealth,SchoolofSocialandCommunityMedicine, Neurosciences, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Avon and Wiltshire Trust, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 5Genomic Medicine Institute, Partnership NHS Mental Health Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, LernerResearchInstitute,ClevelandClinic,Cleveland,OH,USA,6UCL 5Department of Public Health Sciences, Karolinska Institutet, Stock- Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London and Chalfont Centre holm, Sweden, 6NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, University of forEpilepsy,Bucks,UnitedKingdom,7LuxembourgCentreforSystems Bristol,Bristol,UnitedKingdom,7MRCIntegrativeEpidemiologyUnit, Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg, Luxembourg, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. 8Departments of Medicine and Neurology, University of Melbourne, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 9Department of Background: Autism spectrum disorders (autism) are complex, Molecular & Clinical Pharmacology, Institute of Translational heritable and highly heterogeneous neurodevelopmental condi- Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom, tions. Common genetic variation contributes to the majority of 10Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Neuroscience, IRCCS ’G. Gaslini’ autism liability and there is mounting evidence for considerable Institute,Genova,Italy,11DepartmentofGenetics,UniversityMedical genetic heterogeneity. Here, we investigate whether clusters of Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 12Department of Neurology, co-occurring autism symptoms vary in their common genetic HôpitalErasme,UniversitéLibredeBruxelles,Brussels,Belgium,13CNS architecture and manifest as multiple, distinct, overarching department, deCODE genetics, Reykjavík, Iceland, 14Department of genetic factors. We disentangle autism heterogeneity through Neurosciences Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, United multivariate genetic analysis of co-occurring autism symptoms Kingdom, 15Department of Brain Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, usinga case-only design. Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 16Pediatric Methods: We investigated ~5300 unrelated individuals with Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, IRCCS ’G.Gaslini’ Institute, autism(Caucasianancestry)fromtheSPARKcohortwithgenome- Genoa, Italy, 17Department of Biostatistics, University of Liverpool, wide and phenotypic data, including 46 symptom scores related Liverpool, United Kingdom, 18Department of Neurology & Epileptol- to cognitive, motor, social and language abilities and coexisting ogy, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of psychiatric diagnoses. Univariate and bivariate genetic variance Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 19Department of Neurology, Beau- analyses were conducted using Genome-wide Complex Trait montHospital, Dublin,Ireland. Analysis (GCTA) software. Genetic covariance patterns across symptoms, as captured by genetic relationship matrices (GRM), Background: Psychiatric comorbidities are common in people were modelled with structural equation modelling (SEM) techni- with epilepsy. Roughly one in three people with epilepsy will ques (GRMSEM). The best-fitting model was identified using experience some sort of psychiatric issue, with higher rates in likelihoodratiotests. people with treatment-refractory epilepsy. Finding genetic links Results: The strongest evidence for genetically predictable between epilepsy and psychiatric disorders has proven difficult. symptom heterogeneity was found for quantitatively assessed We used a method known as polygenic risk scoring (PRS) to test ritualisticbehaviour(SNP-h2=0.38(SE=0.12),p=0.00093).Repe- whether people with epilepsy have an increased polygenic titive symptoms were genetically also interrelated with multiple burdenfor depression, psychosis, ADHD,and anxiety. othersymptoms.UsingGRMSEM,wefoundevidenceforashared Methods: Phenotype data in the UKBiobank were assessed to genetic factor contributing to repetitive symptoms, behavioural identify samples with epilepsy (n=8,488), and genotype data problems/Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD) and language were taken of Caucasian samples (n=409,634). PRS for each delay/disorder, capturing >50% of the respective SNP-h2 esti- psychiatric trait were calculated and multinomial regression was mates.Replication ofthese findingsisongoing. used to compare 1) population controls, 2) people with epilepsy Conclusions: Our findings suggest that symptoms in autism and no psychiatric illness, 3) people with epilepsy and the canbeunderstoodascomplexquantitativetraits,wheresymptom psychiatrictraitofinterest,and4)peoplewiththepsychiatrictrait heterogeneity, especially across repetitive behaviours, can be ofinterestandnoepilepsy.Fixed-effectmeta-analysiswasusedto predicted by common genetic variation, assuming underlying compare psychiatric PRS in refractory and responsive polygenicmechanisms. epilepsy samples from the UKBiobank and the EpiPGX consor- L. de Hoyos: None. M. Barendse: None. M.M.J. van tium(n=3,449). Donkelaar: None. E. Verhoef: None. S.E. Fisher: None. D. Rai: Results:WefoundthatpeoplewithepilepsyhaveelevatedPRS B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or con- for Depression(p<2e−16), psychosis(p=0.006) and ADHD(p= sultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); 0.0002). Refractory epilepsy cases had an increased PRS for Significant; Supported by the Simons Foundation (Award ID: psychosis(p=0.002), depression(p=0.0004) and ADHD(p=0.04), 514787).B.StPourcain:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator, relative toresponsive cases. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Conclusions: This presents the first evidence linking the already received); Significant; Supported by the Simons Founda- commongeneticbasisofepilepsytothatofpsychiatricconditions tion (AwardID:514787). which are frequently comorbid in people with epilepsy. Further C04.3 Polygenic risk score analysis reveals shared genetic research will confirm these links, and assess them in non- burdenbetween epilepsy andpsychiatric comorbidities Caucasian individuals. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8732 Thispublicationhasemanatedfromresearchsupportedinpartby Marieke Klein1, Omar Shanta1, Oanh Hong1, Jeffrey MacDonald2, Science Foundation Ireland Grant Number 16/RC/3948 and EpiPGX Bhooma Thiruvahindrapuram2, Agathe de Pins3, Alexander Char- grantnumber279062 ney3, Stan Letovsky4, Jake Humphrey4, Elise Douard5, Zohra Saci5, C. Campbell: None. D. Lewis-Smith: None. C. Leu: None. H. Sébastien Jacquemont5, ADHD, ASD, Bipolar, Schizophrenia, PTSD Martins:None.R.Krause:None.T.O’Brien:None.G.Sills:None. andCNVworkgroupsofthePsychiatricGenomicsConsortium,Genes F. Zara: None. B. Koeleman: None. C. Depondt: None. A. 2MentalHealth Network, Stephen Scherer2,Jonathan Sebat1 Marson: None. H. Stefánnson: None. J. Craig: None. M.R. Johnson:None.P.Striano:None.A.Jorgensen:None.H.Lerche: 1UCSanDiego,LaJolla,CA,USA,2TheCentreforAppliedGenomics None.N.Delanty:None.S.Sisodiya:None.R.Thomas:None.G. andPrograminGeneticsandGenomeBiology,TheHospitalforSick L.Cavalleri: None. Children,Toronto,ON,Canada,3TheDepartmentofPsychiatry,Icahn SchoolofMedicineatMountSinai,NewYorkCity,NJ,USA,4LabCorp, Burlington,NC,USA,5CHUSainte-JustineResearchCentre,University C04.4Unravellingthecell-type-specificmolecularmechanisms ofMontreal, Montreal, QC,Canada. linked to Parkinson’s Disease (PD) using bulk and single-cell geneco-expression networks (GCNs) Copy number variants (CNVs) are major risk factors in neuropsy- chiatric disorders and are partially contributing to their shared Alicia Gómez1, Araks Martirosyan2, Katja Hebestreit3, Catherine genetic etiology. Here, we determine associations of pathogenic Mameffe2, Suresh Poovathingal2, T. Grant Belgard3, C. Anthony CNVs across five psychiatric disorders and investigate the Altar3, Andrew Kottick3, Matthew Holt2, Victor Hanson-Smith3, modifying role of common genetic variants in CNV carriers. SebastianGuelfi3, JuanA. Botía1 Harmonized CNV calling and quality control was performed for data from 262,190 individuals, including patients with 1Information and Communications Engineering Department, Uni- Attention-Deficit/HyperactivityDisorder(ADHD,N=5,364),autism versity Of Murcia, Murcia, Spain, 2VIB Center for Brain & Disease (ASD,N=15,030),bipolardisorder(BD,N=25,766),schizophrenia Research, Leuven, Belgium, 3Verge Genomics, San Francisco, CA, (SZ, N=32,635), control samples (N=70,006), and 113,389 USA. individuals from clinical genetics datasets (CLIN, predominantly developmental delay). We analyzed 42 multi-genic pathogenic Introduction: We wanted to investigate the cell-specific mole- CNVs,includingreciprocaldeletionsandduplications,forassocia- cular mechanisms linked to PD, to contribute to the molecular tion withdifferent psychiatricdisorders. characterization ofits etiology, especially inits early stages. Disorders clustered according to period of onset with Materials and Methods: We used paired bulk and single pediatric disorders (ASD and CLIN) being highly correlated and nucleiRNA-seqdatafromhumanpost-mortemsubstantianigra adult-onset disorders (BP and SZ) being correlated. Groups of pars compacta tissue of 27 donors (30-99 years, 14 cases, 13 CNVstendtoclusterbasedonphenotypeassociations,withthe controls) to create a bulk GCN and a GCN for each cell type. In most distinct CNV cluster showing larger effects in ADHD, BD addition, we employed a new strategy to account for the and SZ. Overall, reciprocal deletions and duplications had sparsity of the single-nuclei matrix: we collapse pairs of cells divergent effects across diagnostic categories, suggesting that from the same individual in an additive manner, create the CNVshave“mirror”effectsonpsychiatrictraits,suchasCLINand correspondingGCNandrepeattheprocesswhilethenumberof SZ. Polygenic risk scores (PRS) and CNV genotype (16p11.2 cells is over 100. locus) showed combined effects on dimensional traits.Specific Results: We detected two bulk GCN modules (M1, M2) with CNValleleshavedistinctpsychiatricriskprofilesandthatmaybe significant overlap with Mendelian PD genes (4.282E-5 and attributabletofunctionorexpressionofunderlyinggenesinthe 0.002849Fisher-testp-values).M1isenrichedforPD(KEGG:05012, brain.PRScontributedtothevariablephenotypicexpressivityin P=3.145e-22), oxidation-reduction process (GO:0055114, P= CNV carriers. We will expand the range of cognitive and 1.169e-17), seizure (HP:0001250, P=1.068e-06), dopaminergic neuropsychiatrictraitsthroughinclusionofadditionaldisorders neurons(1.697e-07)andinterneurons(4.429e-04). M2isenriched and disorder-related phenotypes. for synaptic vesicle cycle (KEGG:04721, P=7.986e-09), neuron M. Klein: None. O. Shanta: None. O. Hong: None. J. differentiation (GO:0030182, P=7.423e-09), rigidity (HP:0002063, MacDonald: None. B. Thiruvahindrapuram: None. A. de Pins: P=1.836e-08), dopaminergic neurons SN (P=4.853e-11) and None.A.Charney:None.S.Letovsky:None.J.Humphrey:None. interneurons (P=2.308e-08). On the other hand, the multi-GCN E. Douard: None. Z. Saci: None. S. Jacquemont: None. S. approach proved to be useful as we discovered new interesting Scherer:None. J.Sebat: None. terms such as substantia nigra development in the 1-st oligodendrocytes GCN (GO:0021762, P=5.916e-06) and Lewy body core in the 4-th dopaminergic neuron GCN (GO:1990037, C04.6 The impact of clinically relevant CNVs in the general P=6.751e-04). population - the health consequences and personalized Conclusions: our results provide an important framework, management of undiagnosed adult CNV carriers in the made up of a bulk GCN and combinated pseudo-cells GCNs of Estonian biobank each subcluster, for detecting potential genes involved in cell- type-specificmechanisms inPD. Margit Nõukas1, Marili Palover1, Maarja Lepamets1, Lucilla Pizzo2, Grants: Fundación Séneca Kelli Lehto1, Anu Reigo1, Helene Alavere1, Liis Leitsalu1, Emmanouil A. Gómez: None. A. Martirosyan: None. K. Hebestreit: None. Theophilos Dermitzakis3,4, Ioannis Xenarios3,5, Mait Metspalu6, C. Mameffe: None. S. Poovathingal: None. T.G. Belgard: None. AlexandreReymond7,SanthoshGirirajan2,NeemeTõnisson1,8,Katrin C.A. Altar: None. A. Kottick: None. M. Holt: None. V. Hanson- Männik3 Smith: None.S. Guelfi:None. J.A.Botía:None. 1Estonian Biobank, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, C04.5 Analysis of genomic copy number variation across PennsylvaniaStateUniversity,UniversityPark,PA,USA,3Health2030 psychiatric disorders Genome Center, Fondation Campus Biotech Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Department of Genetic Medicine and Development at EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8733 theUniversityofGeneva,Geneva,Switzerland,5LausanneUniversity Purpose:Noninvasiveprenatalscreening(NIPS)usingcell-freeDNA Hospital,Lausanne,Switzerland,6InstituteofGenomics,Universityof has transformed prenatal care. Belgium was the first country to Tartu,Tartu,Estonia,7CentreforIntegrativeGenomics,Universityof implement and fully reimburse NIPS as a first-tier screening test Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8Department of Clinical Genetics offered to all pregnant women. A consortium consisting of all inTallinn, TartuUniversity Hospital,Tartu, Estonia. Belgiangenetic centers report the outcome of two years genome- wideNIPSimplementation. TheroleofCNVsiswellestablishedinchildrenwithneurodevelop- Methods: The performance for the common trisomies and for mental disorders (NDDs). However, more research is needed secondaryfindingswasevaluatedbasedon153,575genome-wide towardssystematicunderstandingonhow:i)CNVsaffecthealthin NIP tests. Furthermore, the evolution of the number of invasive theadultpopulationandii)toresponsiblydisclosefindingstoCNV tests and the incidence of Down syndrome live births was carriersathighgeneticriskforcomplexdisorders.Wescreenedthe registered. cohortofEstonianBiobank(EstBB;n=134,546)for41recurrentCNV Results:Trisomies21,18,and13weredetectedinrespectively regionsassociatedwithsusceptibilitytoNDDs.Inthefirststage,we 0.32%,0.07%,and0.06%ofcases,withoverallpositivepredictive used the ‘genotype-first’ approach to fetch health data from the values (PPVs) of 92.4%, 84.6%, and 43.9%. Rare autosomal EstBB, linked electronic health registries (EHRs) and mapped each trisomies and fetal segmental imbalances were detected in ND-CNV with their co-occurring disease traits. In the second stage, respectively 0.23% and 0.07% of cases with PPVs of 4.1% and weselected10ND-CNVsasaparadigmtoreturnofgeneticriskdata 47%. The number of invasive obstetric procedures decreased by and analysis of at-risk individuals’ experience and the impact of 52%.The numberof trisomy 21livebirths droppedto 0.04%. disclosedgeneticfindingontheirhealthsupport.Ourresultsshow Conclusion: Expanding the scope of NIPS beyond trisomy 21 thattheprevalenceofCNVsassociatedwithsusceptibilitytoNDDs fetal screening allows the implementation of personalized intheEstBBis2.5%(n=3,399).FurtherprioritizationofCNVslisted genomic medicine for the obstetric population. This genome- in the DECIPHER database suggested a population prevalence of wideNIPSapproachhasbeenembeddedsuccessfullyinprenatal 0.36% (n=485) for clinically well-established CNV syndromes. geneticcareinBelgiumandmightserveasaframeworkforother AccordingtoEHRs,nearlyhalfofthemhavepreviouslydocumented countries offeringNIPS. neurological or mental and behavioural problems. Notably, only K.VanDenBogaert:None.L.Lannoo:None.N.Brison:None. 2.7% (n=13) of them are aware of their genetic diagnosis. Our V. Gatinois: None. M. Baetens: None. B. Blaumeiser: None. F. results along with reports by others are showing that CNVs Boemer:None.L.Bourlard:None.V.Bours:None.A.DeLeener: associated with NDDs are cumulatively common, but still under- None. M. De Rademaeker: None. J. Désir: None. A. Dheedene: studied health problem in general population. This work was None.A.Duquenne:None.N.Fieremans:None.A.Fieuw:None. supported by the Jacobs Foundation Research Fellowship (Dr J.Gatot:None.B.Grisart:None.K.Janssens:None.S.Janssens: Männik), Swiss National Science Foundation grant (Dr Reymond) None.D.Lederer:None.A.Marichal:None.B.Menten:None.C. andtheEstonianResearchCouncilgrant(DrTõnisson). Meunier:None.L.Palmeira:None.B.Pichon:None.E.Sammels: M. Nõukas: None. M. Palover: None. M. Lepamets: None. L. None. G. Smits: None. Y. Sznajer: None. E. Vantroys: None. K. Pizzo:None.K.Lehto:None.A.Reigo:None.H.Alavere:None.L. Devriendt: None.J.R. Vermeesch:None. Leitsalu: None. E.T. Dermitzakis: None. I. Xenarios: None. M. Metspalu: None. A. Reymond: None. S. Girirajan: None. N. Tõnisson:None. K. Männik: None. C05.2 A single center’s experience with genome-wide non- invasive prenatal screening: Results of a large unselected C05Reproduction ishot! consecutive series ofcasesin Luxembourg C05.1 Outcome of publicly funded nationwide first-tier non- Christian Müller, Guillaume Jouret, Arthur Sorlin, Philippe Theis, invasiveprenatal screening Christophe Olinger, Daniel Stieber, Thierry Streng, Sabine Wagner, Valery Leduc, Lorene Fidanza, Kenza Benkirane, Jacqueline Hertges, Kris Van Den Bogaert1, Lore Lannoo2, Nathalie Brison1, Vincent Arantzazu De Pérdigo, Didier Menzies, Barbara Klinik, Dominique Gatinois1, Machteld Baetens3, Bettina Blaumeiser4,5, François Bourgeois Boemer6, Laura Bourlard7, Vincent Bours6, Anne De Leener8, Marjan De Rademaeker5, Julie Désir7,9, Annelies Dheedene3, National Center of Genetics (NCG), Laboratoire national de santé Armelle Duquenne8, Nathalie Fieremans10, Annelies Fieuw10, (LNS),Dudelange, Luxembourg. Jean-StéphaneGatot6,BernardGrisart9,KatrienJanssens4,Sandra Janssens3, Damien Lederer9, Axel Marichal9, Björn Menten3, Introduction: In Luxembourg, the non-invasive prenatal testing Colombine Meunier9, Leonor Palmeira6, Bruno Pichon7, Eva (NIPT) is nationally implemented at a single-center and reim- Sammels10, Guillaume Smits7, Yves Sznajer8, Elise Vantroys10, bursed by the compulsory public health insurance for every Koenraad Devriendt1, Joris R. Vermeesch1 pregnantwoman.Wereportonourobtainedinsightsofextended NIPTforthegeneral population. 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven-KU Leuven, Method We utilize the VeriSeq NIPT Solution v2 (Illumina) for Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, routine NIPT. This WGS-based methodology allows for the University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Center for Medical detection of common fetal aneuploidies, but also rare autosomal Genetics,UniversityHospitalGhent,Ghent,Belgium,4CenterforMedical trisomies (RATs) and copy number variations (CNVs) ≥ 7 Mb. Genetics,UniversiteitAntwerpen,Antwerp,Belgium,5CenterforMedical Positive findings trigger a comprehensive workup, including Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 6Center for genetic counseling, pre- and postnatal follow-ups and if appro- Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Liège, Liège, priate, placental testing. Belgium, 7Center for Human Genetics, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Results: From August 2019 to December 2020 we performed Brussels,Belgium,8CenterforHumanGenetics,UniversitéCatholiquede NIPT in 9,796 pregnancies, corresponding to >95% of all Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 9Center for Medical Genetics, Institut de pregnancies in the county. We detected 60 common trisomies Pathologie et de Génétique Gosselies, Charleroi, Belgium, 10Center for (0.61%),29RATs(0.29%)and13CNVs(0.13%).PositiveNIPTresults MedicalGenetics,VrijeUniversiteitBrussel,Brussels,Belgium. were confirmed by prenatal invasive testing in 87% (46/53) of commontrisomy,6%(1/16)ofRATand20%(2/10)ofCNVcases. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8734 Postnatal placental testing was performed in 35% (10/29) of RAT D’Hauwers12, E Schaafsma13, Don Conrad14, Corinna Friedrich15, cases, confirming a confined placental mosaicism (CPM) in nine Sabine Kliesch16, Kenneth I. Aston17, Antoni Riera-Escamilla18, Csilla cases (90%). We observed adverse pregnancy outcomes in four Krausz19, Claudia Gonzaga-Jauregui20, Mauro Santibanez-Koref1, RATcases (2xT16,T9 and truefetal mosaic T15). DavidJ.Elliott1,LisenkaE.L.M.Vissers2,FrankTüttelmann15,Moira Conclusion:TheexpandeduseofNIPTleadstothedetectionof K. O’Bryan4, Liliana Ramos3, Miguel J. Xavier1, Godfried W. van der medicallyrelevantcommonandatypicalchromosomalanomalies, Heijden3,Joris A. Veltman1 but also CPM involving recurrent RATs, which are not associated with adverse outcomes. We propose the restrained reporting of 1Biosciences Institute, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, establishedRATswithoutclinicalconsequences,forthebenefitof 2Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, reducing the number of invasive testing and avoiding psycholo- Cognition and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, gicaldistressin expecting parents. 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboudumc, Nijme- C. Müller: None. G. Jouret: None. A. Sorlin: None. P. Theis: gen, Netherlands, 4School of BioSciences, Faculty of Science, The None. C. Olinger: None. D. Stieber: None. T. Streng: None. S. University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 5Department of Wagner:None.V.Leduc:None.L.Fidanza:None.K.Benkirane: GeneticMedicine, The Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHSFounda- None.J.Hertges:None.A.DePérdigo:None.D.Menzies:None. tion Trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Foundation for B.Klinik: None. D.Bourgeois: None. ResearchinGeneticsandEndocrinology,InstituteofHumanGenetics, Ahmedabad, India, 7Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, C05.3 A combined omic analysis revealed autism-linked Netherlands, 8Newcastle Fertility Centre, The Newcastle upon Tyne NLGN3 as a new candidate gene associated to GnRH neuron Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United development anddisease Kingdom, 9Department of Cellular Pathology, The Newcastle upon TyneHospitalsNHSFoundationTrust,NewcastleUponTyne,United Roberto Oleari1, Antonella Lettieri1, Stefano Manzini1, Alyssa J. J. Kingdom, 10Genomics Core Facility, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Paganoni1,PaoloGrazioli2,MarcoBusnelli1,HelenL.Storr3,Valentina Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, Massa2,Sasha R.Howard4,AnnaCariboni1 11BioinformaticsSupportUnit,FacultyofMedicalSciences,Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 12Department of 1Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Milan, Urology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 13Department of Italy, 2Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Pathology, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Milan,Italy,Milan,Italy,3QueenMaryUniversityofLondon,London, 14Department of Genetics, Washington University in St. Louis, St United Kingdom, 4Queen Mary University of London, Milan, United Louis, MO, USA, 15Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University of Kingdom. Münster, Münster, Germany, 16Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology,DepartmentofClinicalandSurgicalAndrology,University During development, gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany, 17Department of Surgery, neurons are born in the nasal placode and migrate to the DivisionofUrology,UniversityofUtahSchoolofMedicine,SaltLake hypothalamus, where they position to regulate sexual reproduc- City, UT, USA, 18Andrology Department, Fundació Puigvert, Uni- tion. Defective GnRH neuron development may lead to GnRH versitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Instituto de Investigaciones deficiency (GD) which is characterized by absent or delayed BiomédicasSantPau,Barcelona,Spain,19DepartmentofBiomedical, puberty. Several GD causative genes have been identified so far, ExperimentalandClinicalSciencesMarioSerio,UniversityofFlorence, but half of the cases are still idiopathic. The employment of Florence, Italy,20Regeneron Genetics Center, Tarrytown, NY,USA. complementary research approaches may be useful to identify additional genes implicated in GD pathogenesis. Here we Introduction: De novo mutations (DNMs) are known to play a combinedforthefirsttimeinthefieldthetranscriptomicanalysis prominent role in many sporadic disorders with reduced fitness. of GnRH neurons with exome sequencing data from GD patients We hypothesize that DNMs play an important role in male to identify novel candidate genes. As a proof-of-principle, we infertilityandexplainasignificantfractionofthegeneticcausesof identified a pathogenic variant in the autism-linked Neuroligin 3 thisunderstudied disorder. (NLGN3) gene in a patient with severe delayed puberty and MaterialsandMethods:Inthisstudy,weperformedtrio-based autistic traits. We demonstrated that NLGN3 is enriched in GnRH exome sequencing in a unique cohort of 185 males with neurons at late developmental stages. Further we found that azoospermiaor oligozoospermia and theirunaffected parents. NLGN3 overexpression in an immature model of immortalized Results: In total, 145 rare protein-altering de novo SNVs and 2 GnRH neurons promoted neurite extension whereas the novel CNVs were identified. Following a systematic analysis assessing NLGN3 mutation formed a truncated protein, thus supporting its mutationalimpactandproteinfunction,29DNMswereclassified pathogenic potential. Overall, our results highlighted how the as possibly causative of the male infertility phenotype. We combinationofgeneexpressionandexomesequencingdataisa observedasignificantenrichmentofLoss-of-Function(LoF)DNMs reliableapproachtoidentifynovelcandidategeneforGDsucha in LoF-intolerant genes (p=1.00x10−5) as well as predicted NLGN3, an autism-linked gene that we found for the first time pathogenic missense DNMs in missense-intolerant genes (p= associated toGD. 5.01x10−4). Additionally, a significant increase in protein-protein R. Oleari: None. A. Lettieri: None. S. Manzini: None. A.J.J. interactions was found amongst genes affected by predicted Paganoni:None.P.Grazioli:None.M.Busnelli:None.H.L.Storr: pathogenicDNMs,inparticularinvolvingproteinsinvolvedinRNA None.V. Massa: None.S.R.Howard: None. A.Cariboni: None. binding and mRNA splicing (p=2.35x10−2). One of the DNM C05.4A denovoparadigmfor maleinfertility genesidentifiedisRBM5,anessentialregulatorofmalegermcell pre-mRNA splicing. In a follow-up study, 5 rare pathogenic Hannah E. Smith1, Manon S. Oud2, Roos M. Smits3, Francesco K. missensemutationsaffectingthisgenewereobservedinacohort Mastrorosa1, Giles S. Holt1, Brendan J. Houston4, Petra F. de Vries2, of2,279infertilepatients,whereasnosuchmutationwasfoundin Bilal K. S. Alobaidi1, Lois Batty1, Hadeel Ismail1, Jackie Greenwood5, acohort of 5,784 fertilemen(p=0.009). Harsh Sheth6, Aneta Mikulasova1, Galuh Astuti7, Christian Gilissen7, Conclusions:Ourresultsprovidethefirstevidencefortherole Kevin McEleny8, Helen Turner9, Jonathan Coxhead10, Simon Cock- of DNMs in severe male infertility and point to many new ell11, Didi D. M. Braat3, Kathrin Fleischer3, Kathleen W. M. candidategenesaffecting fertility. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8735 H.E. Smith: None. M.S. Oud: None. R.M. Smits: None. F.K. (IVF +/− ICSI + embryo biopsy) performed at a single London Mastrorosa:None. G.S.Holt: None. B.J.Houston: None. P.F.de reproductive centre. PGT-A is not performed in the Centre. 742/ Vries: None. B.K.S. Alobaidi: None. L. Batty: None. H. Ismail: 747 children were examined at birth, 444/747 at 12 months and None. J. Greenwood: None. H. Sheth: None. A. Mikulasova: 168/747at24months.Theassessmentconsistedofthreeseparate None. G. Astuti: None. C. Gilissen: None. K. McEleny: None. H. questionnaires; the first one focused on the detection of Turner:None.J.Coxhead:None.S.Cockell:None.D.D.M.Braat: congenital anomalies in newborn babies, the latter recorded None. K. Fleischer: None. K.W.M. D’Hauwers: None. E. growth parameters and information about the baby’s health and Schaafsma: None. D. Conrad: None. C. Friedrich: None. S. development. We found no evidence that PGT-M and PGT-SR Kliesch: None. K.I. Aston: None. A. Riera-Escamilla: None. C. increased the risk of an adverse perinatal outcome when Krausz: None. C. Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. M. Santibanez- compared with children born after conventional IVF-ICSI. The Koref: None. D.J. Elliott: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. F. overall malformation rate in our cohort of liveborn infants Tüttelmann: None. M.K. O’Bryan: None. L. Ramos: None. M.J. conceived by PGT-M and PGT-SR was 3.9%, of which 2% had Xavier:None.G.W.vanderHeijden:None.J.A.Veltman:None. majormalformations.Theseproportionsarecomparablewiththe publisheddataonmalformationriskinchildrenbornafterIVF-ICSI. We observed 10% of babies with developmental delay at C05.5 2006-2018: Thirteen years of prenatal diagnosis and 24 months which is comparable with the rate of 10% given by preimplantation genetic diagnosis for single gene disorders theWHO,butmorethandoubletheincidence(4.6%)reportedin inFrance the UK by the Global Research on Developmental Disabilities in 2016.Unfortunately,thelowparticipationrateat24months(23%) Florence Fellmann, Bilal Majed, Pascale Lévy, Isabelle Evrard, significantly reduced the size of our cohort, therefore significant Philippe Jonveaux conclusionscould notbedrawnfromourstudy ontheeffectsof PGTonearlychildhooddevelopment.Furtherstudiesareneeded Agencede la biomédecine, Saint-Denis La Plaine, France. toclarify ifsimilar results canbe reproduced inlargercohorts. T. Ashraf: None. L. Trevisan: None. F. Forzano: None. Y. Over the years, preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PDG) has Khalaf:None.C.Tomlinson:None.P.Renwick:None.A.Davies: become an alternative toprenatal diagnosis (PND)for couplesat None. S. Bint: None. M. Semple: None. C. Deshpande: None. F. riskformonogenicdisorders.InFrance,thebioethicslawregulates Flinter:None. A. Lashwood:None. thepracticeofbothPGDandPND,thecostsofwhicharecovered bythenationalhealthinsurance.PGDiscarriedoutinauthorized centres, which provide an annual report to the French Biomedi- C06COVID-19Genomics cine Agency; annual reports are also drawn up by the prenatal moleculargeneticslaboratories.Wepresentthedatacollectedby C06.1Genomicsequencing andhealthcare dynamics to track the French Biomedicine Agency and compare the evolution over nosocomial SARS-CoV-2 transmission 13yearsofPGDandPNDuptakeformonogenicdiseases.Overthe period, the number of PGD centres increased from 3 to 5. The JamieM.Ellingford1,RyanGeorge2,JohnH.McDermott2,Shazaad numberofmolecularPNDlaboratoriesvariedbetween47and51. Ahmad2, Jonathan J. Edgerley2, David Gokhale2, William G. New- PGD was available for 46 diseases in 2006 and 314 diseases (345 man1, StephenBall1,Nicholas Machin3, Graeme C.M. Black1 genes) in 2018. In 2006, 134 applications were accepted (38 diseases)and462in2018.Tendiseasesaccountedfor69.4%and 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Manche- 47.6%oftheapplicationsacceptedin2006and2018respectively. sterUniversitiesNHSFoundationTrust,Manchester,UnitedKingdom, Forthemorecommonindications,therelativeproportionofPGD 3PublicHealthEnglandandManchesterUniversitiesNHSFoundation increased compared to PND. To our knowledge, this is the first Trust,Manchester, United Kingdom. attempttoanalysetheevolutionofPNDandPGDpracticesatthe levelof a country ina regulated context. This study is of interest Background:Understandingtheeffectivenessofinfectioncontrol for genetic counselling, giving an order of magnitude of the methods in reducing and preventing SARS-CoV-2 transmission in adoption of PGD or PND for the most common monogenic healthcare settings is of high importance. Infection control is diseases, as well as from a public health perspective. Acknowl- challenging in these environments due to regular contact edgements: French PGDcentres and PNDlaboratories. betweenhealthcareworkers(HCWs)andpatients.Thisisamplified F. Fellmann: None. B. Majed: None. P. Lévy: None. I. Evrard: byincreasedfrequencyofsevereadverseresponsestoSARS-CoV- None.P. Jonveaux: None. 2inpatients with underlying healthconditions. C05.6 Health outcomes at birth, 12 and 24 months of 747 Methods:WesequencedSARS-CoV-2genomesforpatientsand childrenconceivedafterPreimplantationGeneticTesting:asingle HCWs across multiple geographically distinct UK hospitals. All centre experience hospitalswereactivelyenforcingzoningapproaches(SARS-CoV-2 negative and SARS-CoV-2 positive areas) as an infection control Tazeen Ashraf1,2, Lucia Trevisan3,2, Francesca Forzano2, Yacoub measure.Weintegratedpatientmovementandstafflocationdata Khalaf2, Charlotte Tomlinson2, Pamela Renwick2, Angela Davies2, into the analysis of viral genome data in order to understand Susan Bint2, Maxine Semple2, Charu Deshpande2,4, Frances Flinter2, geographicalandtemporaldynamicsofSARS-CoV-2transmission. AlisonLashwood2, Guys Hospital PGDTeam Findings: We obtained 173 high-quality SARS-CoV-2 genomes frompatients(n=134)andHCWs(n=39).Themediannumberof 1Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, genomic variants per sample was 11 (range=0-16), with a 61.5% London, United Kingdom, 2Guys and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation average pairwise similarity in the variants (range=0-100%). Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Università degli studi di Genova, Integration of patient movement identified eight patient contact Genova, Italy, 4St Mary’s hospital, Manchester Centre for Genomic clusters (PCC) with significantly increased similarity in genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom. variantscomparedtonon-clusteredsamples(p<0.001).Incorpora- tionofHCWlocationfurtherincreasedthenumberofindividuals This is a prospective study on 747 children born between withinPCCs.PatientswithinPCCscarriedvirusesmoregenetically December 1999 and July 2016 after a cycle of PGT-M or PGT-SR identicaltoHCWs inthesame ward location(p<0.001). EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8736 Interpretation: SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing integrated Astrazeneca, Melbourn, United Kingdom. withpatient and HCW movementdataincreases identification of outbreak clusters and improved understanding of the role of TheUKBiobankpermitsstudyingtheroleofHLAonCOVID19risk patient-HCW interactions. This dynamic approach to SARS-CoV-2 andoutcomescourtesyofregularupdatesonCOVID19statusfor outbreak monitoring in a healthcare setting is able to support allparticipants,whichwerealreadyHLAtypedbyimputationfrom infection control management strategies within the healthcare SNParray data(Bycroft 2018). setting. Fivecase-controldefinitionsforsusceptibilityandseveritywere J.M. Ellingford: None. R. George: None. J.H. McDermott: assembled based on results obtained from qPCR-tests for SARS- None. S. Ahmad: None. J.J. Edgerley: None. D. Gokhale: None. CoV-2, COVID19 associated death and hospital admission data. W.G. Newman: None. S. Ball: None. N. Machin: None. G.C.M. Analysis of 11 classical HLA genes was performed for 336,046 Black:None. unrelated individuals of European ancestry. Logistic regression was used to test the association of HLA alleles at the 2-digits or 4-digitslevelcorrecting for ageandsex. C06.2Genetic landscape ofthe ACE2 coronavirus receptor COVID19 susceptibility was tested by comparing 5,027 cases with at least one positive qPCR test vs 23,453 controls with only Xia Shen1,2,3, Erin Macdonald-Dunlop3, Zhijian Yang1, Jiantao negative qPCR-tests. The lowest p-value was observed for HLA- Chen1, Zheng Ning2, Anne Richmond3, Lucija Klari3, Nicola Pirastu3, C*02:02(P-value=2.59x10−4,OR=0.86[95%CI 0.79-0.93]). TingLi1,RanranZhai1,ChenqingZheng1,YipengWang1,KejunYing4, COVID19 severity was tested by comparing 752 cases with a YazhouHe5,HuimingGuo6,theSCALLOPConsortium,theGenOMICC COVID19 cause of death or hospitalisation vs 272,594 controls Consortium, the IMI-DIRECT Consortium, Yudi Pawitan2, Peter K. with none or only negative qPCR-tests. The lowest p-value was Joshi3, J. Kenneth Baillie3, Anders Mälarstig2, Alexander P. Reiner7, observed for DRB1*04:01 (P-value=1.40x10−3, OR=0.74 [95%CI JamesF.Wilsons3 0.62-0.89]). Given the number of tests performed, with a minimal allotype 1Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China, 2Karolinska Institutet, group frequency of 0.01, these results remained above the Stockholm, Sweden, 3University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United multiplicity-adjustedsignificancethreshold,whichwassetatα= Kingdom,4HarvardUniversity,Boston,MA,USA,5SichuanUniversity, 2x10-5. Chengdu, China, 6Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital, Guangz- Further analyses were subsequently performed at the amino- hou, China, 7Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, acid residue level, revealing respectively the association of a residueatposition73inHLA-C(P-value=9.12E-04,OR=1.39[95% USA. CI 1.14-1.71]) and a residue at position 13 for DRB1 (P- value=5.85E-04, OR=0.75[95%CI0.64-0.89]). SARS-CoV-2andSARS-CoVsharethesamecellmembraneentry receptor,angiotensin-convertingenzyme2(ACE2),whichisthus Theseresults willbeupdatedastheCOVID19phenotypic data key to COVID-19 virus infection, treatment, and potentially becomesavailable fortheUK Biobank. vaccinedevelopment.ThegeneticbasisofACE2proteinlevelsis O. Chazara: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; not well understood, nor is its genetic link to COVID-19. We Astrazeneca. A. O’Neill: A. Employment (full or part-time); conducted a genome-wide association meta-analysis of plasma Significant; Astrazeneca. N. Camacho: A. Employment (full or ACE2 levels in over 28,000 individuals and identified ten loci part-time); Significant; Astrazeneca. K. Lythgow: A. Employment capturing 30% of the protein’s heritability. We detected a (full or part-time); Significant; Astrazeneca. S. Petrovski: A. positive genetic correlation (0.48; 95% confidence interval (CI), Employment (fullorpart-time); Significant;Astrazeneca. 0.12 to 0.84; P = 0.009) between soluble ACE2 and severe COVID-19 across the autosomes. A cis-pQTL-based Mendelian randomisation analysis suggests a potential causal effect of C06.4 More nature, less nurture: Longitudinal follow-up of elevatedACE2levelsonsevereCOVID-19(oddsratio(OR),1.63; mental health reveals an increasing impact of genetic 95%CI,1.10to2.42;P=0.01),whichwasvalidatedonCOVID-19 variants,associated withpersonality traits hospitalisation (OR, 1.52; 95% CI, 1.05 to 2.21; P = 0.03) and infection(OR,1.60;95%CI,1.08to2.37;P=0.02).Wealsofound Henry H. Wiersma, Robert Warmerdam, Pauline Lanting, Lifelines thatCOVID-19comorbiditiessuchascardiovascularphenotypes Corona Research Project, LifeLines Cohort Study, Patrick Deelen, are also genetically correlated with ACE2, through established LudeFranke pathways functionally linked to ACE2. Our results reveal the genetic architecture of the ACE2 protein, providing a useful University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. resource for further biological and clinical studies on this coronavirus receptor. Inthelastyearseveralgeneticriskfactorshavebeenidentifiedfor X.Shen:None.E.Macdonald-Dunlop:None.Z.Yang:None.J. COVID-19 severity, yet little is known about the role of genetic Chen: None. Z. Ning: None. A. Richmond: None. L. Klari: None. variationinmentalhealthandadherencetolockdownrestrictions. N.Pirastu:None. T.Li:None.R.Zhai:None.C.Zheng: None.Y. Here,weutilizedlongitudinalquestionnaireinformationfromthe Wang: None. K. Ying: None. Y. He: None. H. Guo: None. Y. Lifelines Corona Research project (www.coronabarometer.nl), Pawitan: None. P.K. Joshi: None. J. Baillie: None. A. Mälarstig: where since March 2020, 40,000 Lifelines participants have filled None.A.P. Reiner:None. J.F. Wilsons:None. in19extensivequestionnairesonbothphysicalandmentalhealth andon sentiments andadherence tolockdown measures. Westudiedhowdifferentpolygenicscores(PGS)arecorrelated C06.3 Role of HLA on COVID19 risk and outcomes in the UK to >100 response items and observed highly significant relation- Biobank ships for PGS for educational attainment, neuroticism and risk seeking behaviour. For instance, the PGS for risk tolerance is Olympe Chazara, Amanda O’Neill, Niedzica Camacho, Kieren negatively associated with “appreciation that people keep more Lythgow,Slave Petrovski distance”andpositivelyassociatedwith“numberofvisitorsduring thechristmas holidays”. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8737 Surprisingly, we observed that the strength of several of these processing of mitochondrial precursor tRNAs, a vital step in associations consistently have increased over time. For instance, mitochondrial RNA maturation. Biallelic variants in TRMT10C and the negative association between the PGS for neuroticism and SDR5C1 are associated with distinct infantile onset disorders, “perceivedqualityoflife”wasmeasuredat17differenttimepoints resulting from defects in mitochondrial tRNA processing. We and became significantly stronger over time (Pearson correlation reportfourunrelatedfamilieswithmultisystemdiseaseassociated R2=0.69,P=1.9x10−5),whereasonaveragethequalityoflife withbiallelicvariantsinPRORP,themetallonucleasesubunitofmt- measurement showeda different, seasonalcharacteristic. RNase P. In two families, hypomorphic variants in PRORP were These results indicate that PGS often explain a different associated with sensorineural hearing loss, accompanied by proportion of trait variances, depending on when these trait primary ovarian insufficiency in one family (Perrault syndrome). measurements are made. Moreover, our results suggest that the In two families, biallelic variants in PRORP were associated with COVID-19 pandemic, involving substantial social distancing, has developmental delay and brain white matter changes. In amplified the role that genetics plays in determining personal fibroblastsfromaffectedindividuals,weobservedreducedsteady emotions. statelevelsofPRORP,anaccumulationofunprocessedmitochon- H.H.Wiersma:None.R.Warmerdam:None.P.Lanting:None. drialtranscriptsandadecreaseinmitochondrialproteinsynthesis, P.Deelen: None.L.Franke: None. whichwascorrectedbyintroductionofthewildtypetranscript.In tRNAprocessingassaysperformedusingrecombinantmt-RNaseP proteins, the disease-associated variants resulted in reduction of C07Novelinsights in inherited metabolic diseases tRNA processing. The severity of the molecular defect in mitochondrial protein synthesis corresponded to the severity of C07.1 Biallelic variants in mitochondrial RNase P subunit the phenotype in the affected families. Our data indicate that PRORPcausemitochondrialtRNAprocessingdefectsresulting biallelic variants in all three subunits of mt-RNase P result in inpleiotropic multisystem presentations mitochondrial dysfunction, each with distinct pleiotropic clinical presentations. IritHochberg1,LeighA.M.Demain2,3,JulieRicher4,KyleThompson5, I. Hochberg: None. L.A.M. Demain: None. J. Richer: None. K. Waheeda Pagarkar6, Agustí Rodríguez-Palmero Seuma7, Edgard Thompson: None. W. Pagarkar: None. A. Rodríguez-Palmero Verdura7,AuroraPujol7,AlbertAmberger8,AndreaJ.Deutschmann8, Seuma: None. E. Verdura: None. A. Pujol: None. A. Amberger: Sandra Demetz9, James O’Sullivan2,3, Meredith Gillespie4, Inna A. None.A.J.Deutschmann:None.S.Demetz:None.J.O’Sullivan: Belyantseva9,HughJ.McMillan10,MelanieBarzik9,JillE.Urquhart2,3, None.M.Gillespie:None.I.A.Belyantseva:None.H.J.McMillan: Alessandro Rea2,3, Glenda M. Beaman2,3, Simon G. Williams2,3, None.M.Barzik:None.J.E.Urquhart:None.A.Rea:None.G.M. Sanjeev S. Bhaskar2,3, Isabella R. Lawrence5, Emma M. Jenkinson2,3, Beaman: None. S.G. Williams: None. S.S. Bhaskar: None. I.R. Jessica L. Zambonin4, Zeev Blumenfeld11, Sergey Yalonetsky12, Lawrence:None.E.M.Jenkinson:None.J.L.Zambonin:None.Z. Stephanie Oerum13, Walter Rossmanith14, Genomics England Blumenfeld: None. S. Yalonetsky: None. S. Oerum: None. W. Research Consortium, Wyatt W. Yue13, Johannes Zschocke8, Kevin Rossmanith: None. W.W. Yue: None. J. Zschocke: None. K.J. J.Munro15,BrendanJ.Battersby16,ThomasB.Friedman9,RobertW. Munro: None. B.J. Battersby: None. T.B. Friedman: None. R.W. Taylor5,Raymond T.O’Keefe2, William G. Newman2,3 Taylor: None. R.T.O’Keefe:None. W.G.Newman: None. 1Institute of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 2Division of Evolution and C07.2Clinician led analysis ofWGS data confers adiagnostic GenomicSciences,TheUniversityofManchester,Manchester,United uplift in suspected primary mitochondrial disease Kingdom, 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, William Logan Macken1,2, Caroline Mckittrick1, Chiara Pizzami- United Kingdom, 4Department of Genetics, Children’s Hospital of glio1,2, Enrico Bugiardini1,2, Cathy Woodward2, Robyn Labrum2, Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 5Wellcome Centre for Henry Houlden1, Ros Quinlivan1,2, Mike G. Hanna1,2, Jana Vandrov- Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle Uni- cova1,3, RobertD. S.Pitceathly1,2,3 versity, Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Royal National ENT & Eastman Dental Hospital, University College 1UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, United London Hospitals, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Kingdom, 2NHS England Highly Specialised Service for Rare Neuroscience, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Barcelona, Spain, Mitochondrial Disorders, National Hospital for Neurology and 8Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Neurosurgery, London, United Kingdom, 3Senior Author, London, Innsbruck, Austria, 9Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National United Kingdom. InstituteonDeafnessandOtherCommunicationDisorders,National InstitutesofHealth,Bethesda,MD,USA,10Department ofPediatrics, Introduction: Clinical whole genome sequencing (WGS) pro- Children’sHospitalofEasternOntario,UniversityofOttawa,Ottawa, mises unprecedented diagnostic rates. However, standard ON, Canada, 11Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Repro- approaches in clinical laboratories cannot harness the full ductive Endocrinology, Rambam Health Care Campus, The Rappa- power of WGS data over clinical exomes. A broader approach port Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, is especially needed in Primary Mitochondrial Diseases (PMDs), Haifa,Israel,12DepartmentofPediatricCardiology,RambamHealth where phenotypes are non-specific. Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 13Structural Genomics Consortium, Methods and Materials: Eighty-three probands attending an Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, NHSEnglandHighlySpecialisedServiceforPMDsunderwentWGS United Kingdom, 14Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical (Illumina TruSeq, HiSeq 2500) via the 100,000 Genomes project UniversityofVienna,Vienna,Austria,15ManchesterNIHRBiomedical following exclusion of common molecular causes of PMD. Research Centre, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Standard virtual panel analysis was undertaken and cases were Manchester,UnitedKingdom,16InstituteofBiotechnology,University subsequently reviewed by a clinician on a clinical interpretation ofHelsinki, Helsinki,Finland. platform. Re-analyses included expansion of gene panels applied if appropriate, and analysis for cryptic in trans variants in strong The human mitochondrial RNase P (mt-RNase P) complex is candidate genes (assisted by splice prediction scores and copy comprised of three protein subunits: TRMT10C, SDR5C1 and PRORP. The mt-RNase P complex is responsible for 5’-end EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8738 numbervariantanalysis).Additionally,asomaticvariantcallerwas Neurology, Amsterdam Leukodystrophy Center, Emma Children’s used toidentify heteroplasmic variantsin mtDNA. Hospital, Amsterdam University Medical Centers and Amsterdam Results: The standard bioinformatic pipeline with clinical Neuroscience,Amsterdam, Netherlands, 21Department ofFunctional scientist-driven interpretation yielded diagnoses in 14.3% (12/83) Genomics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, VU andapartialdiagnosisin4.7%(4/83).Expandedanalysisresulted University,, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 22Department of Translational in a diagnostic uplift in 16.8% (15/83) of cases; heteroplasmic Medicine, Federico II,Naples, Italy. mtDNA variants were identified in an additional 3/83 patients; nDNA diagnoses were confirmed in 8/83 patients; and likely KARS1encodesalysyl-transferRNAsynthetase(LysRS)thatlinks pathogenic variantsinnovel genesin3/83 patients. lysine to its cognate tRNA. Two different KARS1 isoforms exert Conclusions: To harness the full power of WGS in clinical functional effects in cytosol and mitochondria. Bi-allelic patho- services high throughput analysis by clinical scientists should be genic variants in KARS1 have been associated to sensorineural supplemented by in depth phenotype-focused analysis by a hearing and visual loss, neuropathy, seizures, and leukodystro- genomic medicine clinician. This research was made possible phy. We report the clinical, biochemical and neuroradiological throughaccesstothedataandfindingsgeneratedbythe100,000 featuresofnineindividualswithKARS1-relateddisordercarrying GenomesProject;http://www.genomicsengland.co.uk. 12 different variants with nine of them being novel. The W.L.Macken:None.C.Mckittrick:None.C.Pizzamiglio:None. consequencesofthesevariantsonthecytosoland/ormitochon- E. Bugiardini: None. C. Woodward: None. R. Labrum: None. H. drial LysRS were functionally validated in yeast mutants. Most Houlden: None. R. Quinlivan: None. M.G. Hanna: None. J. cases presented with severe neurological features including Vandrovcova: None. R.D.S.Pitceathly: None. congenital and progressive microcephaly, seizures, develop- mental delay/intellectual disability, and cerebral atrophy. Oculomotor dysfunction and immuno-hematological problems C07.3Bi-allelicKARS1pathogenicvariantsaffectingfunctions werepresentinsixandthreecases,respectively.Ayeastgrowth ofcytosolicandmitochondrialisoformsareassociatedwitha defect of variable severity was detected for most variants on progressive andmulti-system disease both cytosolic and mitochondrial isoforms. The detrimental effectsoftwovariantsonyeastgrowthwerepartiallyrescuedby Gerarda Cappuccio1,2, Camilla Ceccatelli Berti3, Enrico Baruffini3, lysine supplementation. Congenital progressive microcephaly, Jennifer Sullivan4, Vandana Shashi4, Tamison Jewett5, Tara Stam- oculo-motor dysfunction and immuno-hematological problems per5,SilviaMaitz6,FrancescoCanonico7,AnyaRevah-Politi8,Gabriel are emerging phenotypes in KARS1-related disorders. The data S. Kupchik9, Kwame Anyane-Yeboa10, Vimla Aggarwal11, Andreas inyeastemphasizetheroleofbothmitochondrialandcytosolic Benneche12, Eirik Bratland12, Siren Berland12, Felice D’Arco13, Cesar isoforms in the pathogenesis of KARS1-related disorder and Augusto Alves14, Adeline Vanderver15, Daniela Longo16, Enrico supportsthetherapeuticpotentialoflysinesupplementationat Bertini17,AnnalauraTorella2,18,VincenzoNigro2,18,TelethonUndiag- least in a subset of patients. nosed Diseases Program, Alessandra D’Amico19, Marjo S. van der G. Cappuccio: None. C. Ceccatelli Berti: None. E. Baruffini: Knaap20,21,Paola Goffrini3, Nicola Brunetti-Pierri2,22 None. J. Sullivan: None. V. Shashi: None. T. Jewett: None. T. Stamper: None. S. Maitz: None. F. Canonico: None. A. Revah- 1Federico II Univeristy, Naples, Italy, 2Telethon Institute of Genetics Politi: None. G.S. Kupchik: None. K. Anyane-Yeboa: None. V. andMedicine,Pozzuoli,Italy,3DepartmentofChemistry,LifeSciences Aggarwal: None. A. Benneche: None. E. Bratland: None. S. andEnvironmentalSustainability,University ofParma,Parma,Italy, Berland: None. F. D’Arco: None. C. Alves: None. A. Vanderver: 4Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Duke None. D. Longo: None. E. Bertini: None. A. Torella: None. V. University Medical Center, Durham, NC, NC, USA, 5Department of Nigro: None. A. D’Amico: None. M.S. van der Knaap: None. P. Pediatrics, Section on Medical Genetics, Wake Forest University Goffrini:None. N.Brunetti-Pierri: None. SchoolofMedicine,Winston-Salem,NC,NC,USA,6ClinicalPediatric Genetics Unit, Pediatrics Clinics, MBBM Foundation, Hospital San Gerardo, Monza, Italy, 7Department of Neuroradiology, Università C07.4 A Pex7 deficient mouse series correlates biochemical degliStudidiMilanoBicocca,SanGerardoHospital,ASSTdiMonza,, and neurobehavioral markers to genotype severity - implica- Monza, Italy, 8Institute for Genomic Medicine and Department of tionsforthediseasespectrumofrhizomelicchondrodysplasia Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical punctata type1(RCDP1) Center, New York, NY, NY, USA, 9Maimonides Children’s Hospital of WedadFallatah1,2,WeiCui1,ErminiaDiPietro1,FabianDorninger3, Brooklyn at Maimonides Medical Center, State University of New York, Downstate Medical Center, New York, NY, USA, 10Department Christian Pifl3, Grace Carter1, Brittany Pounder1, Ann Moser4, ofPediatricsandInstituteforGenomicMedicineColumbiaUniversity JohannesBerger3, Nancy Braverman1 MedicalCenter,NewYork,NY,USA,11DepartmentofPathologyand Cell Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, 1McGill University, Research Institute of the McGill University Health NY, USA, 12Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 13Department of Paediatric Neuroradiol- Saudi Arabia, 3Center for Brain Research, Medical University of ogy, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Vienna,Vienna,Austria,4HugoWMoserResearchInstitute,Kennedy Trust, London, United Kingdom, 14Division of Neuroradiology, KriegerInstitute, Baltimore, MD,USA. Department of Radiology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 15Division of Neurology, Children’s Hospital RCDP1 is a peroxisome biogenesis disorder caused by defects in of Philadelphia and Perelman School of Medicine, University of PEX7 leading to impaired plasmalogen (PL) biosynthesis and Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 16Department of Diagnostic phytanicacid(PA)oxidation.ThedegreeofPLdeficiencydirectly Imaging, Pediatric Hospital Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 17Depart- correlates with disease severity. Children with severe RCDP have ment of Neuroscience, Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenera- negligible PL levels, congenital cataracts, skeletal dysplasia, tiveDiseases, IRCCS, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, profoundgrowthandpsychomotordelay,andcerebralhypomye- 18Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania Luigi lination and cerebellar atrophy on brain MRI. Individuals Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy, 19Department of Advanced Biomedical with milder RCDP forms have higher PL levels, better growth Sciences, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 20Department of Child and cognitive outcomes. To better understand the human EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8739 RCDP1spectrum,wecharacterizedaseriesofPex7deficientmice MethodsandResults:WepresentthreenovelmissenseOGDH withgradedreductioninPex7transcript andPEX7protein levels, variants in four unrelated individuals identified using whole- resulting instepwise reductions in PLand docosahexaenoic acid, exome sequencing: p.P189L, p.R204Q and p.S297Y. Individuals and increases in C26:0 lysophosphatidylcholine and PA in were homozygous for rare variants (absent or MAF <0.001 in erythrocytes, plasma and brain. Clinically, body size and survival gnomAD)withhighCADDPhredscores(>20).Patientspresented were reduced in accordance to genotype severity. Neurohistolo- with neurological disease characterised by hypotonia, develop- gical examination revealed graded reduction in myelin basic mental delay, movement disorder, metabolic abnormalities and protein and quantity of cerebellar Purkinje cells. Pex7 deficient abnormal MRI findings. Measurement of urine organic acids was mice exhibited a hyperactive behavior in the open field performedfortwoindividuals(p.P189Landp.R204Q)andrevealed environment. There was significant reduction in the levels of increased levels of α-ketoglutarate. Evidence of pathogenicity of brainneurotransmittersdopamine,norepinephrine,serotoninand variants was supported by in-silico homology modelling, over- GABA that were strongly correlated with the hyperactivity expression of mutants in HEK293 cells, α-KGDH activity measure- phenotype. In conclusion, we identified several quantitative ments in patient fibroblasts and evaluation of variants in a parameters that could be used to evaluate therapeutic interven- Drosophila model. tionsinRCDP1.Furthermore,asevenrelativelylowPAlevelswere Conclusions: In summary, we have established OGDH as a associated with Purkinje cell loss over time, we suggest cause of childhood-onset neurological disease. Disease mechan- monitoringPAinPEX7deficientpatients.Lastly,ourdatasuggest ism remains unknown, however, OGDH protein instability and the interplay between PL, brain neurotransmitter levels and reductioninprotein abundancy hasbeendemonstrated invitro. hyperactivity, which could be further investigated in RCDP Grants: MRC; National Institute of General Medical Sciences patients. This project is supported by E-Rare-3 Joint (5_P20_GM103636-08). Translational Call. E. Whittle: None. M. Chilian: None. H. Progri: None. E. W. Fallatah: None. W. Cui: None. E. Di Pietro: None. F. Karimiani:None.D.Buhas:None.I.Shelihan:None.R.Colombo: Dorninger: None. C. Pifl: None. G. Carter: None. B. Pounder: None. A. Serretti: None. H. Yang: None. S. Lee: None. A.M. None.A. Moser:None. J.Berger: None. N.Braverman:None. Pittman: None. R. Maroofian: None. W. Yoon: None. C.J. Carroll: None. C07.5 Bi-allelic missense variants in oxoglutarate dehydro- genase (OGDH) lead to a neurodevelopmental disorder C07.6 Ldhd-knockout mice recapitulate human metabolomic characterised by hypotonia, developmental delay and meta- fingerprint of Gout, providing novel model organism for the bolicabnormalities disease Ella Whittle1, Madison Chilian2, Helga Progri2, Eshan Ghayoor Max Drabkin1, Ifat Abramovich2, Nadav Agam1, Eyal Gottlieb2, Karimiani1,3, Daniela Buhas4, Ivan Shelihan5, Roberto Colombo6, OhadS. Birk1,3 Alessandro Serretti7, Hui Yang8, Sukyeong Lee9, Alan M. Pittman1, RezaMaroofian1,10,Wan-Hee Yoon2, Christopher J. Carroll1 1Ben-GurionUniversity,Beer-Sheva,Israel,2Technion-IsraelInstitute ofTechnology,Haifa,Israel,3SorokaUniversityMedicalCenter,Beer- 1Genetics Research Centre, Molecular and Clinical Sciences Institute, Shava,Israel. StGeorge’s,UniversityofLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,2Aging& Metabolism Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foun- Introduction: Gout is a form of inflammatory arthritis affecting dation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA, 3Innovative Medical Research millions of people worldwide. It is caused primarily due to renal Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Islamic Azad University-Mashhad underexcretion of uric acid. We have previously demonstrated Branch, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Division of Medical thatinhumans,Goutcanbecausedbyaninactivatingmutationin Genetics, Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, LDHD encoding D-lactate dehydrogenase (D-LDH), leading to Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Division of Medical Genetics, Department excessive renal excretion of D-lactate in exchange to uric acid of Specialized Medicine, Montreal Children’s Hospital, McGill reabsorption.TostudythemetaboliceffectofD-LDHinactivation UniversityHealthCentre,Montreal,QC,Canada,6FacultyofMedicine wecreatedLdhd-knockoutmiceusingCRISPR-Cas9.Wethenused andSurgery, Catholic University -IRCCS Gemelli University Hospital, metabolome analyses to compare metabolic changes character- Rome, Italy, 7Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, isticofsporadicgoutpatientstopatientswithmutantLDHDand University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 8GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, toLdhd knockout mice. USA, 9Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Materials and Methods: chromatography-mass spectrometry Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, (LC-MS), targeted metabolomics, MetaboAnalyst, CRISPR-Cas9, 10Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Institute of Neurol- knockout mouse model Results: Targeted metabolomics and ogy,London, United Kingdom. metabolite profiling using LC-MS were performed on blood samples obtained from sporadic Gout patients and healthy Introduction: The alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex controls. After identifying all significant changes in metabolite (α-KGDH)isacriticalcitricacidcycleenzymewhichcatalysesthe levels, we created a metabolomic fingerprint characteristic of conversion α-ketoglutarate to succinyl coenzyme A in mitochon- Gout, demonstrating typical alterations in purine, glucose, and dria. Theα-KGDHcomplex is comprisedof threesubunits: OGDH amino acid metabolism. Metabolome analysis of mutant-LDHD (E1),DLST(E2)andDLD(E3).Recently,abiallelicvariant(p.N320S) Gout patients as well as of CRISPR-Cas9 Ldhd-knockout mice was inOGDHwasreportedintwosiblingswithglobaldevelopmental then performed to comprehensively phenotype the metabolic delay,elevatedlactate,hypotoniaanddystonia,linkingforthefirst changes that result from D-LDH inactivation and to determine if timerecessivevariantsinOGDHwithα-KGDHdeficiency.Here,we theyalso carrythe metabolomicfingerprint ofGout. reportanadditionalfourunrelatedindividualswithsimilarclinical Conclusion:Ldhdknockoutmicesharethesamemetabolomic presentation and homozygous missense variants in OGDH, fingerprint as sporadic human Gout patients, demonstrating confirming OGDH as a novel disease gene for childhood-onset similar alterations in key metabolites, suggesting these mice neurologicaldisease. constitute anovel disease modelfor Gout. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8740 Grant information: Supported in part by grants from the Kahn impairedimmuneregulation.ThisisnotablythecaseintheLoeys- FoundationandtheMinistryofScienceandTechnologyCenterfor Dietz syndrome (LDS), caused by heterozygous loss-of-function RareDiseases (LoF) variants in TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFB2 or TGFB3, SMAD2 or M. Drabkin: None. I. Abramovich: None. N. Agam: None. E. SMAD3, and of the Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) that Gottlieb: None.O.S. Birk: None. results from heterozygous variants in in the TGF- β repressor SKI. Importin-8belongstothekaryopherinfamilyofnucleartransport receptors and was previously shown to mediate TGF-β−depen- C08Skeletal andconnective tissue disorders dentSMADstraffickingto thenucleus invitro. MaterialsandMethods:Weusednextgenerationsequencing C08.1 Biallelic loss of function variants in IPO8 cause a con- (NGS) to study twelve individuals from nine unrelated families nectivetissuedisorderassociatedwithcardiovasculardefects, presenting with a novel syndromic association characterized by skeletal abnormalities and immunedysregulation cardio-vascular anomalies, joint hyperlaxity, various degree of dysmorphicfeaturesanddevelopmentaldelayaswellasimmune Alban Ziegler1,2, Rémi Duclaux-Loras3, Céline Revenu4, Bernadette dysregulation. CRISPR/Cas9- inactivation in zebrafish was used to Begue3, Karine Duroure4, Linda Grimaud2, Anne Laure Guihot2, modelthegenetic defect. Valérie Desquiret Dumas2, Mohammed Zarhrate5, Emmanuel Mas6, Results: NGS identified bi-allelic LoF mutations in IPO8 all the Anne Breton6, Thomas Edouard Edouard7, Clarisse Billon8, Michael tested individuals. Consistent with IPO8 role in BMP/TGF-β Frank8, Estelle Colin2, Guy Lenaers2, Daniel Henrion Henrion2, signaling, ipo8−/− zebrafish presented mild to severe dorso- Stanislas Lyonnet3, Laurence Faivre9, Yves Alembik10, Anaïs Phi- ventral patterning defects during early embryonic development. lippe10, Bruno Moulin11, Eyal Reinstein Reinstein12, Shay Tzur13, Moreover,ipo8−/−zebrafishdisplayedseverecardiovascularand Ruben Attali13, George McGillivray14, Susan M White14, Lyndon skeletaldefects that mirroredthehuman phenotype. Gallacher14, Kerstin Kutsche15, Pauline Schneeberger15, Katta M Conclusion: Our results provides the first evidence that IPO8 Girisha16,ShaliniSNayak13,LynnPais17,RezaMaroofian18,Barbara plays a critical and non-redundant role inTGF-β signaling during VonaVona19,EhsanGhayoorKarmianiKarmiani20,CarolineLekszas development and reinforces the existing link between TGF-β Lekszas19, Thomas Haaf19, Ludovic Martin1, Frank Ruemmele21, signaling andconnective tissue defects. Dominique Bonneau2, Nadine Cerf-Bensussan3, Filippo Del Bene Del A.Ziegler:None.R.Duclaux-Loras:None.C.Revenu:None.B. Bene4, Marianna Parlato3 Begue: None. K. Duroure: None. L. Grimaud: None. A. Guihot: None. V. Desquiret Dumas: None. M. Zarhrate: None. E. Mas: 1MitoVasc, UMR CNRS 6015-INSERM 1083, University of Angers, None. A. Breton: None. T. Edouard: None. C. Billon: None. M. Angers, France, 2CHU d’Angers, Angers, France, 3Institut Imagine, Frank:None.E.Colin:None.G.Lenaers:None.D.Henrion:None. Paris, France, 4Sorbonne Université, INSERM, CNRS, Institut de la S. Lyonnet: None. L. Faivre: None. Y. Alembik: None. A. Vision, Paris, France, 5Genomics Core Facility, Institut Imagine- Philippe: None. B. Moulin: None. E. Reinstein: None. S. Tzur: Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, Paris, France, 6IRSD, None. R. Attali: None. G. McGillivray: None. S. White: None. L. Université de Toulouse, INSERM, INRA, ENVT, UPS, Toulouse, France, Gallacher: None. K. Kutsche: None. P. Schneeberger: None. K. 7Reference Centre for Marfan syndrome and related disorders, Girisha: None. S. Nayak: None. L. Pais: None. R. Maroofian: Children’s Hospital, Toulouse University Hospital, RESTORE, INSERM None. B. Vona: None. E. Karmiani: None. C. Lekszas: None. T. UMR1301, Toulouse, France, 8Centre de Référence des Maladies Haaf: None. L. Martin: None. F. Ruemmele: None. D. Bonneau: Vasculaires Rares, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital None. N. Cerf-Bensussan: None. F. Del Bene: None. M. Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 9Centre de Référence Parlato:None. Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 10Département de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Hautepierre, C08.2 Bi-allelic loss-of-function variants in LTBP1cause auto- Strasbourg, France, 11Nephrology and Transplantation department, somal recessive cutis laxa syndrome Nouvel Hôpital Civil, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Stras- bourg,France,12MedicalGeneticsInstitute,MeirMedicalCenter,Kfar- LorePottie1,2,ChristinS.Adamo3,4,AudeBeyens1,2,5,SteffenLütke4,3, Saba, Israel, 13Genomic Research Department, Emedgene Technolo- Piyanoot Tapaneeyaphan1,2, Adelbert De Clercq1, Phil Salmon6, Riet gies, Tel Aviv, Israel, 14Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch DeRycke7,8,9,AlperGezdirici10,ElifYilmazGulec11,NazKhan12,13,Jill Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 15Institute of E. Urquhart14,13, William G. Newman12,13, Kay Metcalfe13, Stephanie Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Efthymiou15, Reza Maroofian15, Najwa Anwar16, Shazia Maqbool16, Hamburg, Germany, 16Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Fatima Rahman16, Ikhlass Altweijri17, Monerah Alsaleh18, Sawsan Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Mohamed Abdullah19, Mohammad Al-Owain19,20, Mais Hashem19, India, 17Broad Center for Mendelian Genomics, Program in Medical Henry Houlden15, Fowzan S. Alkuraya19,20, Patrick Sips1,2, Gerhard and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute Sengle3,21,22,23, Bert Callewaert1,2 of Technology and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA, 18Department of Neuromuscular Disorders, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 1Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 19Institute of Belgium, 2Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University HumanGenetics,JuliusMaximiliansUniversityWürzburg,Würzburg, Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Center for Biochemistry, Faculty of Germany, 20Molecular and Clinical Sciences Institute, St. George’s, Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, University of London, London, United Kingdom, 21Department of Cologne, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Pediatric Gastroenterology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris,France. UniversityofCologne,Cologne,Germany,5DepartmentofDermatol- ogy, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 6Bruker microCT, Introduction: The TGF-β/BMP cytokine family exerts pleiotropic Kontich, Belgium, 7Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, functionsduringembryonicdevelopment,tissuehomeostasisand Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 8VIB Center for Inflammation repair as well as within the immune system. Accordingly, Research, Ghent, Belgium, 9Ghent University Expertise Centre for dysregulationofTGF-βsignalingisthecauseofseverecongenital Transmission Electron Microscopy and VIB Bioimaging Core, Ghent, disorderscharacterizedbydevelopmentaldefectswithorwithout EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8741 Belgium, 10Department of Medical Genetics, Basaksehir Cam and C08.3Al-Gazaliskeletaldysplasiaconstitutesthelethalendof Sakura City Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 11Department of Medical ADAMTSL2-related disorders Genetics, Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Health Sciences University, Istanbul, Turkey, 12Division of Evolution Dominyka Batkovskyte1, Fiona McKenzie2,3, Fulya Taylan1,4, Pelin and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Ozlem Simsek-Kiper5, Sarah M. Nikkel6,7, Hirofumi Ohashi8, Hiroyuki Biology,MedicineandHealth,UniversityofManchester,Manchester, Miyahara9, Gustaw Eriksson1, Thuong Ha10,11,12, Gulen Eda Utine5, United Kingdom, 13Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Tillie Chiu13, Kenji Shimizu8, Anna Hammarsjo1,4, Koray Boduroglu5, Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Peer Arts10,12, Milena Babic10,14, Matilda R. Jackson10,14,15, Nikos Manchester, United Kingdom, 14Division of Evolution and Genomic Papadogiannakis16, Anna Lindstrand1,4, Ann Nordgren1,4, Christo- Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine pherP.Barnett15,17,HamishS.Scott10,14,15,AndreiS.Chagin18,19,Gen and Health, University of, Manchester, United Kingdom, 15Depart- Nishimura20,Giedre Grigelioniene1,4 ment of Neuromuscular Disorders, UCL Institute of Neurology, London,UnitedKingdom,16DevelopmentandBehaviouralPediatrics 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Department, Institute of Child Health and The Children Hospital, Institutet,Stockholm,Sweden,2GeneticServicesofWesternAustralia, Lahore, Pakistan, 17Department of Neurosurgery, King Khalid Perth, WA, Australia, 3School of Paediatrics and Child Health, UniversityHospital,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,18HeartCentre,KingFaisal University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia, 4Clinical Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Genetics, Karolinska University Laboratory, Karolinska University 19Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Division of Pediatric Genetics, Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty ofMedicine, Hacettepe University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 20Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, 06100, Sihhiye, Ankara, Turkey, 6Provincial Medical Genetics College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Program,BCWomen’sHospital,Vancouver,BC,Canada,7University 21Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Faculty of of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 8Division of Medical Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Genetics, Saitama Children’s Medical Center, Saitama, Japan, 22Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of 9Division of Neonatology, Kawaguchi City Medical Center, Kawa- Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 23Cologne Center for Musculoskeletal guchi,Japan,10GeneticsandMolecularPathologyResearchLabora- Biomechanics (CCMB), Cologne, Germany. tory, Centre for Cancer Biology, An alliance between SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia, 11ACRF Latent transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) binding proteins Cancer Genomics Facility, Centre for Cancer Biology, An alliance (LTBPs) are microfibril-associated proteins essential for the between SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, anchoring of TGFβ in the extracellular matrix (ECM) as well as Adelaide, SA, Australia, 12UniSA Clinical and Health Sciences, forcorrectassemblyofECMcomponents.Genevariantsaffecting University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia, 13CHEO Genetics LTBP2,LTBP3,andLTBP4havebeenidentifiedinseveralautosomal Clinic, Regional Genetics Program, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 14Depart- recessiveMendelian disorders withskeletal abnormalities with or mentofGeneticsandMolecularPathology,SAPathology, Adelaide, withoutimpaireddevelopmentofelastin-richtissues.Thusfar,the Australia, 15Australian Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, VIC, humanphenotypeassociatedwithLTBP1deficiencyhasremained Australia, 16Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Pathol- enigmatic. In this study, we report homozygous loss-of-function ogy, Karolinska Institutet, Department of Pathology, Karolinska (LOF) LTBP1 variants in eight affected individuals from four University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 17Paediatric and Reproduc- unrelated consanguineous families. Affected individuals present tive Genetics Unit, South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, with connective tissue features (cutis laxa and inguinal hernia), Women’s and Children’s Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, Australia, craniofacial dysmorphology, and variable heart defects and 18DepartmentofPhysiologyandPharmacology,KarolinskaInstitutet, prominent skeletal features (craniosynostosis, short stature, Stockholm, Sweden, 19Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Sechenov brachydactyly and syndactyly). In vitro studies on patient dermal University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 20Department of Pediatric fibroblastsindicatedistinctmolecularmechanismsdependingon Imaging, Tokyo Metropolitan Children’s Medical Center, Tokyo, the position of the LOF variant in the LTBP1 gene. C-terminal Japan. variants lead to a truncated LTBP1 loosely anchored in the microfibrillar network and cause increased ECM deposition in Lethal short-limb skeletal dysplasia, Al-Gazali type (OMIM % culturedfibroblastsassociatedwithexcessiveTGFβgrowthfactor 601356) is an ultrarare disorder which has only been previously activationandsignaling.Incontrast,N-terminaltruncationresults reported in three unrelated individuals without a known genetic alossofLTBP1thatdoesnotalterTGFβlevelsandECMassembly. cause. Through international collaborative efforts we have In vivo validation of two independent zebrafish lines carrying collectedacohortofsevenpatientswithclinicalandradiographic mutationsinltbp1induceabnormalcollagenfibrillogenesisinskin features consistent with Al-Gazali skeletal dysplasia. The affected and intervertebral ligaments and ectopic bone formation on the individualspresentwithmoderateintrauterinegrowthretardation, vertebrae. In addition, one of the mutant zebrafish lines show relativemacrocephaly,hypertrichosis,largefontanelle,shortneck, voluminousandhypo-mineralizedvertebrae.Overall,ourfindings short and stiff limbs with small hands and feet, severe in humans and zebrafish show that LTBP1 is important for skin brachydactyly, and generalized bone sclerosis with mild platy- andbone ECM assemblyand homeostasis. spondyly. Disease-causing variants in ADAMTSL2 were detected L.Pottie:None.C.S.Adamo:None.A.Beyens:None.S.Lütke: combining WGS and Sanger sequencing. Six individuals were None.P.Tapaneeyaphan:None.A.DeClercq:None.P.Salmon: compoundheterozygousandoneindividualwashomozygousfor None.R.DeRycke:None.A.Gezdirici:None.E.Y.Gulec:None.N. pathogenic variants in ADATMSL2. Three patients had variants in Khan: None. J.E. Urquhart: None. W.G. Newman: None. K. thepseudogeneregionofADAMTSL2,whichispoorlycoveredby Metcalfe: None. S. Efthymiou: None. R. Maroofian: None. N. short-read sequencing. Mutations in ADAMTSL2 have previously Anwar: None.S. Maqbool: None. F.Rahman: None. I. Altweijri: been described in geleophysic dysplasia type 1 (OMIM#231050). None. M. Alsaleh: None. S.M. Abdullah: None. M. Al-Owain: Bioinformatic analysis of the detected variants suggests a None.M.Hashem:None.H.Houlden:None.F.S.Alkuraya:None. destabilizing effect on the ADAMTSL2 protein. Protein prediction P.Sips: None. G.Sengle:None. B.Callewaert: None. analysisindicatestheexistenceofintrinsicallydisorderedregionin ADAMTSL2 between amino acids 341-557. Our preliminary functional data using primary dermal fibroblasts from one EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8742 individual suggests abnormal microfibrillar network organization Z. Mougin: None. L. Delhon: None. J. Jonquet: None. A. involving FBN1, supporting the known role of ADAMTSL2 in Bibimbou: None. J. Dubail: None. C. Bou-Chaaya: None. N. regulating the microfibrillar network of extracellular matrix. Goudin:None. W.Le Goff:None. C.Boileau:None.V. Cormier- Overall,thisstudyshedslightonthepreviouslyunknowngenetic Daire:None. C.Le Goff:None. causeofAl-Gazaliskeletaldysplasiaandidentifiesitasalethalpart of the spectrum of ADAMTSL2-related disorders. Furthermore, we highlight the importance of meticulous analysis of the pseudo- C08.5BiallelicvariantsinADAMTS15causeanovelphenotype genepartoftheADAMTSL2,wheredisease-causingvariantsmight characterized by congenital contractures of the hands and belocated. feetwithabsent palmar creases D.Batkovskyte:None.F.McKenzie:None.F.Taylan:None.P. OzlemSimsek-Kiper:None.S.M.Nikkel:None.H.Ohashi:None. Julia Schmidt1, Muhsin O. Cogulu2, Felix Boschann3, Ayca Aykut2, H. Miyahara: None. G. Eriksson: None. T. Ha: None. G.E. Utine: Jennifer E. Posey4, Kalyan C. Nannuru5, Simon Badura6, Burak None.T.Chiu:None.K.Shimizu:None.A.Hammarsjo:None.K. Durmaz2, Ferda Ozkinay2, Knut Brockmann6, Gabriele Gillessen- Boduroglu: None. P. Arts: None. M. Babic: None. M.R. Jackson: Kaesbach7, Sigmar Stricker8, Aris N. Economides5, James R. Lupski4, None. N. Papadogiannakis: None. A. Lindstrand: None. A. DavutPehlivan4,Uwe Kornak1 Nordgren: None. C.P. Barnett: None. H.S. Scott: None. A.S. Chagin: None.G. Nishimura:None. G.Grigelioniene: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Goettingen,Germany,2DepartmentofGenetics,FacultyofMedicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey, 3Institute of Medical Genetics and C08.4 Critical role of the TB5 domain of fibrillin-1 in Human Genetics, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, endochondral ossification Germany, 4Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor CollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX,USA,5RegeneronPharmaceuticals, Zakaria Mougin1, Laure Delhon2, Jérémie Jonquet1, Angélique Tarrytown, NY, USA, 6Interdisciplinary Pediatric Center for Children Bibimbou1, J Dubail2, C Bou-Chaaya2, N Goudin3, W Le Goff4, With Developmental Disabilities and Severe Chronic Disorders, Catherine Boileau1, Valérie Cormier-Daire2,5, Carine LeGoff1 UniversityMedicalCenterGöttingen,Goettingen,Germany,7Institute ofHumanGenetics,UniversityofLübeck,Lübeck,Germany,8Institute 1University of Paris, INSERM U1148, Laboratory of Vascular Transla- of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, tional Science, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France, 2University of Paris, Germany. INSERM UMR1163, Laboratory of Molecular and Physiopathological baseofOsteochondrodysplasia,ImagineInstitute,Paris,France,3SFR The ADAMTS family comprises 19 metalloproteases involved in Necker, Imaging Platform, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, the modulation of the extracellular matrix. Genes for 8 members France, 4Sorbonne University, INSERM UMR_S1166, Institute of arelinkedtodifferentautosomalrecessivedisorders.Usingexome Cardiometabolism And Nutrition (ICAN) Hôpital de la Pitié, Paris, sequencing, we detected biallelic variants in ADAMTS15 in four France, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Reference Center for affectedindividualsfromthreeunrelatedconsanguineousfamilies Skeletal Dysplasia AP-HP, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, with a distinctive, overlapping phenotype. The two affected France. members of the index family 1 carrying a homozygous early premature termination codon, c.123C>G; (p.Tyr41*), showed Introduction:Geleophysicdysplasia(GD)ischaracterizedbyshort congenital stiffness of the finger and toe joints, absent palmar stature,thickskinandcardiacdefects.Wepreviouslyidentifiedthe creases, especially in the interphalangeal region, spinal stiffness molecular basis of GD as mutations in Fibrillin-1 (FBN1) for the andscoliosisaswellasfootmalformations.Theprobandoffamily autosomaldominantform.AllFBN1mutationsinGDpatientsare 2harbors a biallelic splice site mutation, c.1903-2A>G, leading to localized in TB5 domain (TGFβ binding protein like domain). skipping of exon 7 and thereby to a C-terminal truncation of Moreover, the skeletal phenotype observed in GD suggests that essentialdomains.Shedevelopedcontracturesofthefingersand the TB5 domain might play a role in endochondral ossification toes combined with absence of the palmar creases and spinal process. stiffness at the age of 5 years. Family 3 proband has a Material and method: To address this hypothesis, we homozygous missense variant, c.2281G>A; p.(Gly761Ser). He had generated a knock-in mouse model Fbn1TB5+/−, by introducing digit contractures of fingers 3-5 with missing palmar creases, themutationp.Tyr1696CysofaGDpatientinordertounderstand stiffness of toes 2-3 and suffered two pathological fractures. the role of i) FBN1 in GD pathophysiology and ii) TB5 domain in Remarkably, the nonsense variant leads to the strongest skeletaldevelopment. phenotype, possibly indicating a null allele genotype-phenotype Results: We demonstrated that the Fbn1TB5+/− and Fbn1TB5−/− association. Radiographic investigations excluded a primary mice presented a reduced stature. The point mutation of Fbn1 involvementoftheinterphalangealjoints.HomozygousAdamts15 affectedthegrowthplateformationwithabnormaldifferentiation knockout mice show a reduced grip strength implicating of chondrocytes. Mainly the mutant chondrocytes failed to musculotendinous alterations as a possible disease mechanism. establish a network composed by fibrillin-1 fibrils. This novel In aggregate, our findings show that pathogenic variants in mouse model does not present aortic disease as observed in ADAMTS15 cause a novel autosomal recessive condition of the Marfan mouse models with Fbn1 mutations. Interestingly, the arthrogryposis spectrum characterized by joint stiffness and TGFβ signaling pathway was not impaired supporting that the missingpalmar creases. TGFβsignaling maybe not adirect pathogenic driver of GD. J. Schmidt: None. M.O. Cogulu: None. F. Boschann: None. A. Conclusions:Thisnewmodelisanoriginalmousemodelwith Aykut: None. J.E. Posey: None. K.C. Nannuru: A. Employment Fbn1mutationleadingtoGD-likephenotype.Ourfindingssuggest (full or part-time); Significant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarry- that theunderlying mechanismof GD involvesthedysregulation town, NY, USA. S. Badura: None. B. Durmaz: None. F. Ozkinay: of fibrillin microfibril deposition possibly due to the improper None. K. Brockmann: None. G. Gillessen-Kaesbach: None. S. interactions between the TB5 domain and heparan sulfates. The Stricker: None. A.N. Economides: A. Employment (full or part- propermicrofibrilcompositioningrowthplateseemsessentialfor time);Significant;RegeneronPharmaceuticals,Tarrytown,NY,USA. longbonegrowth. J.R.Lupski:None. D.Pehlivan: None. U.Kornak: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8743 C08.6 Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome - A comprehensive C09Sensorydisorders:multi-omicsandlong-readsequencing naturalhistorystudyintheDutchpatientcohort,preliminary results C09.1 NR2E3 transcription factor and photoreceptor fate: identification of gene regulatory networks causing retinal Serwet Demirdas1,2,3, Jessica Bos1,2, Rosan L. Lechner3, Eline remodelling in NR2E3-associated diseases Overwater4, Suzanne I. M. Alsters1,2, Marieke J. H. Baars1,2, Annette F.Baas5,ÖzlemBaysal6,LisavandenBersselaar3,SaskiaN.vander Izarbe Aísa-Marín1, Quirze Rovira2, Noelia Díaz2, Juan M. Vaquer- Crabben1,2,EelcoDulfer4,NoorA.A.Giesbertz5,AT.J.M.Helderman- izas3,Gemma Marfany1 van den Enden7, Yvonne Hilhorst-Hofstee8, Marlies J. E. Kempers6, Fenne L. Komdeur1,2, Bart Loeys6, D Majoor-Krakauer3, C W. 1University of Barcelona and CIBERER, Barcelona, Spain, 2Max- Ockeloen6, J P. van Tintelen5, M Voorendt6, N C. Voermans9, A Planck-InstituteforMolecularBiomedicine,Münster,Germany,3Max- Maugeri10,Ingrid M. B.H.van de Laar3,Arjan C.Houweling1,2 Planck-Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany, and MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, London, United King- 1DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,AmsterdamUMC,VrijeUniversiteit dom. Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs) are a group of diseases Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical associated with mutations in more than 330 genes. NR2E3 Centre, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Depart- encodes an orphan nuclear receptor with a dual function as ment of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, transcriptional activator and repressor, necessary for retinal Netherlands, 5Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre development and homeostasis. Mutations in NR2E3 cause two Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Department of Human Genetics, differentretinaldiseases:enhancedS-conesyndromeandretinitis RadboudUniversityMedicalCentre,Nijmegen,Netherlands,7Clinical pigmentosa. However, there is no clear phenotype-genotype Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Nether- correlationformostNR2E3mutations.Thisgeneproducesalarge lands, 8Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University protein isoform encoded in 8 exons. In addition, we found a Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 9Department of Neurology, previouslyunreportedisoformof7exons.WedissectedtheNr2e3 Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, functionbyperformingCRISPR/Cas9geneeditingofthelastexon 10Department of Clinical Genetics, Centre for Connective Tissue and generated two different mouse models. Depending on the Research, VUUniversity Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands. deleted domain, these models show two different phenotypes that correspond with the two known diseases caused by Introduction: Vascular Ehlers Danlos Syndrome (vEDS; OMIM mutations in NR2E3. We performed single cell RNA-seq in our 130050; ORPHA 286) is a rare connective tissue disorder, caused models to further investigate the gene regulatory networks by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the COL3A1 gene. The guiding differentiation of rods and cone photoreceptors in our phenotypeishighlyvariable.vEDSpatientsareatriskforarterial, two phenotypes. Our results provide insight into the molecular bowel anduterine rupture. mechanisms of the two rare diseases caused by mutations in Purpose:Toperformanationalmulti-centercohortstudyinall NR2E3 and set the basis for further epigenetic studies on the known Dutch vEDS patients, to provide further insights into the NR2E3networkimbalancesthatgiverisetoIRDs.IAMisrecipient natural history of the disease. This knowledge will allow us to of the APIF grant (Universitat de Barcelona) and Company of optimizepatient care. Biologisttravelfellowship.Thisresearchwassupportedbygrants Methods: After METC approval, all known Dutch patients PID2019-108578RB-I00(MinisteriodeCienciaeInnovación/FEDER) carrying a (likely) pathogenic variant in the COL3A1 gene were and2017-SGR-738(GeneralitatdeCatalunya)toGM,andtheMax invitedtoparticipateinthestudy(n=~130).Thephenotypewas PlanckSociety,DFGPriorityProgrammeSPP2202SpatialGenome systematicallychartedbyretrospectiveandcross-sectionalassess- Architecture in Development and Disease (VA-1456/1) and the ment ofmolecular and clinicaldata. MedicalResearch Council (UK)to JMV. Preliminaryresults:Eighty-sevenpatientshavebeenincluded I. Aísa-Marín: None. Q. Rovira: None. N. Díaz: None. J.M. thusfar(44males,meanage48years(4-94years)).Thirty-oneof Vaquerizas: None.G. Marfany: None. 85(36%)wereindexpatients(2missingdata).Ofthe87patients, 52(60%)hadasymptomatichistory.Themainreasonsforreferral were: family member with (likely) pathogenic variant (60%), C09.2 Regulatory architecture of MAB21L2: new elements arterial dissection (13%) and aneurysm (9%). In total, 30 patients unveiled by an upstream homozygous deletion in an (34%) had aneurysm(s), 29 (33%) dissection(s), 28 (32%) varicose individual withmicrophthalmia veinsand8(9%)cardiacvalveinsufficiency.Six(7%)sufferedfrom (iatrogenic) perforation ofthecolon. Twenty-two of 62(34%)did FabiolaCeroni1,2,RichardHolt2,ElenaSorokina3,SanaaMuheisen3, notmeet the2017 criteria suggestivefor vEDS. Munevver B. Cicekdal4,5, Dorine Bax2, Julie Plaisancié6,7, Nicolas Conclusion: This national multi-center natural history study of Chassaing6,7, Patrick Calvas6,7, Elfride De Baere5, Kris Vleminckx4, DutchvEDSpatientsprovidesabasisforimprovingguidelinesfor ElenaSemina3, Nicola K. Ragge2,8 diagnosing,follow-upandtreatmentofvEDSpatientsworldwide. Nodisclosures. 1DepartmentofPharmacyandBiotechnology,UniversityofBologna, S. Demirdas: None. J. Bos: None. R.L. Lechner: None. E. Bologna, Italy, 2Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes Overwater: None. S.I.M. Alsters: None. M.J.H. Baars: None. A.F. University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Division of Developmental Baas:None. Ö. Baysal: None. L.van denBersselaar: None. S.N. Biology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA, vanderCrabben:None.E.Dulfer:None.N.A.A.Giesbertz:None. 4Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, A.T.J.M.Helderman-vandenEnden:None.Y.Hilhorst-Hofstee: Ghent, Belgium, 5Center for Medical Genetics and Department of None. M.J.E. Kempers: None. F.L. Komdeur: None. B. Loeys: Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University and Ghent University None.D.Majoor-Krakauer:None.C.W.Ockeloen:None.J.P.van Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Purpan Tintelen: None. M. Voorendt: None. N.C. Voermans: None. A. University Hospital, Toulouse, France, 7Centre de Référence des Maugeri: None. I.M.B.H. van de Laar: None. A.C. Affections Rares en Génétique Ophtalmologique CARGO, Site Houweling: None. Constitutif, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 8West Midlands EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8744 Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham Health Partners, were prepared using oligo(dT) beads to enrich for poly-A mRNA BirminghamWomen’sandChildren’sFoundationTrust,Birmingham, and sequenced with standard Illumina paired-end protocols. United Kingdom. Differential gene expression was assessed via DeSeq2 (with independent hypothesis weighting), while pre-mRNA splicing Introduction:MonoallelicandbiallelicvariantsinMAB21L2cause wasanalyzedwith IsoformSwitchAnalyzeR. anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma (AMC), variably Results: In the E-FECD cohort, 1,248 out of 4,497 significantly associated with skeletal anomalies and intellectual delay. While (adj. p-value≤0.05) differentially expressed genes were identified the function of MAB21L2 is poorly described, its flanking regions whencomparedwithNE-FECD.Similarly,isoformanalysisrevealed containtissue-specificenhancers.Wereporttwolikelypathogenic 268 genes with significant differences in isoform usage between MAB21L2 variants in unrelated AMC individuals; the missense p. E-FECD and controls, 179 of which are predicted to produce a (Trp113Ser), and an upstream homozygous deletion encompass- functionaldifference. Includedwithinthis datasetare geneswith ing two tissue-specific enhancers, with evidence for additional known MBNL1 splicing regulation, suggesting that dysregulation regulatoryelements intheregion. couldbeduetosequestrationofsplicingfactorsbytheCTG18.1- Methods: MAB21L2 screening of AMC individuals was per- expandedtranscript. formed using Sanger and whole exome sequencing (single Conclusions:Acomparisonoftranscriptomicprofilesofcontrol, nucleotide variants), and SNP array genotyping (copy number E-FECDandNE-FECDprovidesadatasetofdifferentiallyexpressed variants [CNVs]). Conserved non-exonic elements were investi- transcripts and aberrantly regulated pre-mRNA splicing events gatedusing CRISPR/Cas9 inzebrafishand Xenopustropicalis. thatwereonlydetectedinE-FECD.Thesedataprovideinsightinto Results: We identified a monoallelic MAB21L2 p.(Trp113Ser) diseasemechanismsandhighlighttargetsforCTG18.1expansion- variant in two brothers with colobomatous microphthalmia and specifictranslational interventions. theirmotherwithunilateralperipapillarycoloboma.Moreover,we N. Bhattacharyya: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, detecteda113,580bphomozygousdeletioninagirlwithbilateral collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants microphthalmia, microcephaly, micrognathia and intrauterine already received);Significant; ProQR.N.J. Hafford-Tear: None. A. growth restriction. This CNV removes two regulatory sequences N.Sadan:None.C.Zarouchlioti:None.K.Muthusamy:None.P. controllingtissue-specificMab21l2expressioninmice,inaddition Liskova:None.S.J.Tuft:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator, to six other conserved elements. Recapitulation of the CNV in collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants zebrafish resulted in transient retinal and lens developmental alreadyreceived);Significant;ProQR.A.J.Hardcastle:B.Research defects. In addition, in Xenopus CRISPR/Cas9 mediated disruption Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and of a putative OTX2 transcription factor binding site contained pending grants as well as grants already received); Significant; within the deleted region induced mild coloboma in developing ProQR. A.E. Davidson: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, tadpoles. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Conclusions:WereporttwolikelypathogenicMAB21L2variants alreadyreceived); Significant; ProQR. in AMC individuals, including the first case of a homozygous deletion within the control region with support from animal models for its impact on gene regulation. This highlights the C09.4 Cas9-targeted nanopore sequencing for the repetitive importanceofincludingregulatoryregionsinAMCclinicalgenetic coding region of RPGR, a major cause of X-linked retinal testing. dystrophy F. Ceroni: None. R. Holt: None. E. Sorokina: None. S. Muheisen: None. M.B. Cicekdal: None. D. Bax: None. J. Fabiana L. Motta1,2,3, Malena Daich Varela1,4, Thales A. C. de Plaisancié: None. N. Chassaing: None. P. Calvas: None. E. De Guimaraes1,4, Samantha Malka4, Andrew R. Webster1,4, Michel Baere: None. K. Vleminckx: None. E. Semina: None. N.K. Michaelides1,4, JamieEllingford5,6, GavinArno1,4,7 Ragge:None. 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Universidade Federal de São C09.3 CTG18.1-mediated Fuchs Endothelial Corneal Dystro- Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 3Instituto de Genética Ocular, Sao Paulo, phy: defining signatures of transcriptomic dysregulation in a Brazil, 4Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5North common repeat-mediated disease West Genomic Laboratory Hub, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, St Mary’s Nihar Bhattacharyya1, Nathaniel J. Hafford-Tear1, Amanda N. Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Division of Evolution and Sadan1, Christina Zarouchlioti1, Kirithika Muthusamy1,2, Petra Genomic Sciences, Neuroscience and Mental Health Domain, Liskova3,4,StephenJ.Tuft1,2,AlisonJ.Hardcastle1,AliceE.Davidson1 School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Moorfields 7Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Charles University, Kingdom. Prague, Czech Republic, 4General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. Introduction: Despite the advent of massively parallel sequen- cing,manyrepetitive/low-complexityregionsremainintractable Purpose:Fuchsendothelialcornealdystrophy(FECD)ispredomi- to short, paired-end sequencing technologies. One clinically nantlycausedby an expanded(≥50copies)CTG repeat (termed significant example is ORF15, a 1734bp AG-rich repetitive exon CTG18.1) in an intron of the transcription factor TCF4 (E-FECD). ofRPGR,inwhichvariantscauseapproximately50%ofX-linked E-FECD is relatively common when compared to other repeat retinopathy. We established a Cas9-targeted long-read sequen- expansion diseases with a pathophysiology limited to corneal cing (LRS) assay to effectively read through ORF15 and enable endothelial cells (CECs). Here we generated transcriptome data variantdetectionwithouttheneedforcomplicatedsequencing from primary CEC cultures to identify potential key biomarkers, strategies. enhancingour understanding ofthe pathophysiology of E-FECD. Methods:Sevenconsecutivemaleswithmolecularlyconfirmed Methods: RNA was extracted from primary CEC cultures of 10 (Sanger sequencing) pathogenic variants in RPGR-ORF15 were unrelatedindividuals:4unaffectedcontrols,3CTG18.1-expansion recruited for LRS analysis. Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) negativeFECD(NE-FECD)and3E-FECDpatients.RNA-seqlibraries EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8745 librarypreparationsweretargetedtoa45kbregioncontainingthe PCR and long-range PCR, or ExomeDepth analysis on whole entire RPGR coding region by dephosphorylation and CRISPR- exome sequencing data. Targeted or whole genome long-read guided Cas9 cleavage using multiplex guides flanking RPGR. sequencing (LRS) was used to delineate breakpoint junctions at Libraries were sequenced using a MinION flowcell for approxi- the nucleotide level. Two CEP78 SVs were identified in three mately 12h. Read data was processed using the ONT Guppy, unrelated individuals with CRDHL: a heterozygous total gene Minimap2and Medakapackages. deletion (235 kb) and a partial gene deletion (15 kb) in both Results: Sequencing runs generated a median of 74 reads heterozygous and homozygous state. Assessment of the mole- (min=37,max=182[onesamplewasallowedtorunfor24h])on- cular consequences of the SVs on patient’s materials displayed a target reads, with a median read length of 7442bp, (min=242, loss-of-function effect. Delineation and characterization of the 15 max=59,677). Across the 45Kb region, a median 99.7% (min= kbdeletionusingtargetedLRSrevealedthepreviouslydescribed 89.7%,max=99.9%),andforORF15,amedian100%(min=99.9%, complex CEP78 SV, for which a founder haplotype was demon- max=100%)ofbaseswerecoveredby≥5reads.Afterfiltering,1-3 strated. The novel 235 kb deletion was delineated using whole coding variants (including indels and SNVs) were detected per genome LRS. Breakpoint analysis showed microhomology sug- individual with 100% sensitivity for pathogenic variants and a gestingareplication-basedmechanism.Moreover,dataminingof singleapparently false positivecall. bulk and single-cell transcriptional datasets and immunostaining, Conclusions:ThisstudydemonstratesthatCas9-targetedONT- linked the CEP78 expression domain with its phenotypic LRSiseffectiveforvariantdetectionwithintherepetitiveregionof manifestations. Overall, this study supports that the CEP78 locus RPGR. This represents a proof of principle for LRS approaches to is prone to SVs and suggests SV analysis in a genetic work-up of study clinically relevant and otherwise intractable genomic CRDHL. Finally, it demonstrates the power of sWGS and LRS in regions. identifyingand characterizing complex SVs. F.L. Motta: None. M. Daich Varela: None. T.A.C. de G.Ascari:None.N.D.Rendtorff:None.M.DeBruyne:None.J. Guimaraes: None. S. Malka: None. A.R. Webster: None. M. DeZaeytijd:None.M.VanLint:None.M.VanHeetvelde:None. Michaelides: None. J. Ellingford:None. G.Arno: None. G.Arno:None.J.Jacob:None.D.Creytens:None.J.VanDorpe: None. T. Van Laethem: None. T. Rosseel: None. T. De Pooter: C09.5 Long-read sequencing to unravel complex structural None.P.DeRijk:None.W.DeCoster:None.B.Menten:None.A. variants of CEP78 leading to Cone-Rod Dystrophyand Dueñas Rey: None. M. Strazisar: None. M. Bertelsen: None. L. HearingLoss Tranebjærg:None. E. DeBaere: None. GiuliaAscari1,2,NannaD.Rendtorff3,MariekeDeBruyne1,2,JulieDe Zaeytijd4,MichelVanLint5,MattiasVanHeetvelde1,2,GavinArno6,7,8, C09.6 Long-read technologies identify a hidden inverted Julie Jacob9, David Creytens10,11, Jo Van Dorpe10,11, Thalia Van duplication in afamily withchoroideremia Laethem1,2, Toon Rosseel1,2, Tim De Pooter12,13, Peter De Rijk12,13, WouterDeCoster14,15,BjörnMenten1,2,AlfredoDueñasRey1,2,Mojca Kornelia Neveling1,2, Zeinab Fadaie1,3, Tuomo Mantere1, Ronny Strazisar12,13, Mette Bertelsen3,16, Lisbeth Tranebjærg3,17, Elfride De Derks1,LonnekeHaer-Wigman1,AmberdenOuden1,MichaelKwint1, Baere1,2 Luke O’Gorman1, Dyon Valkenburg3,4, Carel B. Hoyng3,4, Christian Gilissen1,5, Lisenka E. L. M. Vissers1,3, Marcel Nelen1, Frans P. M. 1CenterforMedicalGeneticsGhent,GhentUniversityHospital,Ghent, Cremers1,3, Alexander Hoischen1,5,6, SusanneRoosing1,3 Belgium, 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen 1Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Hospital, The Kennedy Center, Copenhagen, Denmark, Institute of Health Sciences, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboudumc, Belgium, 5Department of Ophthalmology, Antwerp University Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Radbou- Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 6UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, dumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Radboud Institute of Molecular Life London, United Kingdom, 7Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, Sciences, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Department of UnitedKingdom,8MoorfieldsEyeHospital,London,UnitedKingdom, Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases (RCI), 9DepartmentofOphthalmology,LeuvenUniversityHospital,Leuven, Radboudumc, Nijmegen,Netherlands. Belgium, 10Department of Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 11Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent The lack of molecular diagnoses in rare genetic diseases can be University, Ghent, Belgium, 12Neuromics Support Facility, VIB Center explained by limitations of current standard genomic technolo- for Molecular Neurology, Antwerp, Belgium, 13Neuromics Support gies. Upcoming long-read techniques have complementary Facility, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, strengths to overcome these limitations, with a particular Antwerp, Belgium, 14Applied and Translational Neurogenomics strength in identifying structural variants (SVs). By using optical Group, VIB Center for Molecular Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, genome mapping (Bionano Genomics) and long-read HiFi 15Applied and Translational Neurogenomics Group, Department of genome sequencing (Pacific Biosciences), we aimed to identify Biomedical Sciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, thepathogenicvariantinalargefamilywithX-linkedchoroider- 16Department of Ophthalmology, Rigshospitalet-Glostrup, University emia,aprogressiveandrareformofchorioretinaldegeneration. of Copenhagen, Glostrup, Denmark, 17Institute of Clinical Medicine, In the respective family, aberrant splicing of exon 12 of the University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. choroideremia gene CHM was detected in 2003, but the underlying genomic defect remained elusive using targeted Inactivating variants as well as a missense variant in CEP78 have short-read sequencing. Optical genome mapping followed by been identified in autosomal recessive Cone-Rod Dystrophy with long-read sequencing now revealed an intragenic 1,752 bp Hearing Loss (CRDHL), a syndromic inherited retinal disease invertedduplicationincludingexon12andsurroundingintronic distinct from Usher syndrome. In addition, a complex structural regions, located downstream of the wild-type copy of exon variant (SV) implicating CEP78 has been reported in CRDHL. Here 12 (c.1510+693_1510+694ins1414-1244_1510+402inv). Both weaimedtoexpandthegeneticarchitectureoftypicalCRDHLby breakpoint junctions were confirmed with Sanger sequencing. the identification of CEP78 SVs. Approaches used are shallow The inverted duplication segregates with the X-linked inheri- whole genome sequencing (sWGS) combined with quantitative tance in the family, and is predicted to result in a hairpin- EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8746 formation of the pre-mRNA with the wild-type exon 12, leading Adrien Georges1, Min-Lee Yang2, Takiy-Eddine Berrandou1, Mark to exon skipping in the mature mRNA. This exemplifies the Bakker3, Ozan Dikilitas4, Soto Romuald Kiando1, Mengyao Yu1, Lu potential for SVs to unravel novel mutational mechanisms. We Liu1, Sergiy Kyryachenko1, Inès Sayoud1, Délia Dupré1, Aurélien believe that the identified SV represents the hidden pathogenic Lorthioir1, Laurence Amar1, Sebanti Sengupta2, Kristina L. Hunker2, cause of disease in this family, that was missed to be identified Benjamin A. Satterfield4, Lijiang Ma5, Valentina d’Escamard5, for nearly 20 years. Our study shows that optical genome Daniella Kadian-Dodov5, Jean-François Deleuze6, Chad Brummett7, mappingandlong-readsequencinghavesignificantpotentialfor Dawn M. Coleman7, Peter de Leeuw8, Marco Pappaccogli9, Witold the identification of hidden structural variants in rare genetic Smigielski10, Aleksander Prejbisz11, FEIRI investigators, International diseasesthatescapedmoleculardiagnosessofar, evenforwell- stroke genetics consortium (ISGC) intracranial aneurysm working known disease-associated genes. group, MEGASTROKE, Philippe Amouyel12, Marc L. De Buyzere13, K. Neveling: None. Z. Fadaie: None. T. Mantere: None. R. Stéphanie Debette14, Piotr Dobrowolski11, Wojciech Drygas11, Derks: None. L. Haer-Wigman: None. A. den Ouden: None. M. Heather L. Gornik15, Jeffrey W. Olin5, Jerzy Piwonski11, Ernst R. Kwint: None. L. O’Gorman: None. D. Valkenburg: None. C.B. Rietzschel13,YnteRuigrok3,MiikkaVikkula9,EwaWarcholCelinska11, Hoyng: None. C. Gilissen: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. M. Andrzej Januszewicz11, Iftikhar J. Kullo4, Michel Azizi16, Xavier Nelen: None. F.P.M. Cremers: None. A. Hoischen: None. S. Jeunemaitre1,AlexandrePersu9,JasonC.Kovacic5,SanthiK.Ganesh2, Roosing:None. NabilaBouatia-Naji1 1Université de Paris, INSERM, Paris Cardiovascular Research Center, C10Genome-wide Association Studies Paris,France,2UniversityofMichiganMedicalSchool,AnnArbor,MI, USA, 3Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Mayo Clinic, C10.1Parent-of-origin inference forbiobank scale datasets Rochester, MN, USA, 5Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA, 6CEA and Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH, Evry, Robin J. Hofmeister1,2, Simone Rubinacci1,2, Diogo M. Ribeiro1,2, France, 7University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 8Maastricht ZoltanKutalik1,2,3, Alfonso Buil4,5, Olivier Delaneau1,2 University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 9Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 10University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland, 1University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of 11National Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland, 12Université de Bioinformatics,Lausanne,Switzerland,3CenterforPrimaryCareand Lille,Inserm,CHULille,InstitutPasteurdeLille,Lille,France,13Ghent Public Health (Unisanté), Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Institute for UniversityandGhentUniversityHospital,Ghent,Belgium,14Bordeaux Biological Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark, 5Psykiatrisk Center Sct. University Hospital, Inserm U1219, Bordeaux, France, 15Cleveland Hans,Roskilde, Denmark. Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA, 16Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have shown that identical genetic variations can have different effects on a Introduction: Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a non- phenotype, depending on their parent-of-origin (PO). To deter- atheroscleroticarteriopathyofunknownetiology,affectingmostly minethePOofanindividual’shaplotypes,researchersusuallyrely middle-agedwomen.Itischaracterizedbystenoticlesionsofthe on the genome of the parents or the close relatives when the vascular wall in middle-size arteries, sometimes associated with genealogy is known. However, these informations are rarely dissection, aneurysm or tortuosity. availableinbiobanks, preventing thestudy ofPO. Methods: We report results from the first genome-wide Here, we present a novel probabilistic approach that (i) associationmeta-analysisofsixstudiesincluding1962FMDcases identifies surrogate parents regardless of genealogy using and7100controls.Weintegratedgeneticassociationwitharterial identity-by-descent sharing between individuals, (ii) uses a geneexpressionusingtranscriptome-wideassociation(TWAS).To Hidden Markov Model to represent a specific haplotype as a identify FMD associated variants located in regulatory elements, mosaic of haplotypes of its close relatives, (iii) assigns paternal wedeterminedopenchromatinregionsinartery-derivedprimary ormaternalorigintothesesharedhaplotypesegments,and(iv) cells using ATAC-Seq and estimated heritability and genetic extends the PO inference to entire chromosomes. correlationofFMDwithothervasculartraitsanddiseasesusingLD Using the UK Biobank dataset, we inferred the PO for ~25k Scoreregression. samples, increasing by 5 times the sample size compared to Results: We found an estimate of SNP-based heritability classicalapproachesonthisdataset.Weassessedtheaccuracyof compatible with a polygenic feature for FMD and report four our method using a total of 1397 duos and trios, reaching a call robustlyassociatedloci(PHACTR1,LRP1,ATP2B1,andLIMA1).TWAS rate>80%(%ofsiteswithPOassignment)andanerrorrate<1% identified one additional locus (SLC24A3). We found that FMD (% heterozygous sites with incorrect PO assignment). Using the associated variants were located in arterial-specific regulatory resulting callset, we performed association scans for PO effects elements. Target genes were broadly involved in mechanisms acrosshundredsofphenotypesanddiscoveredknownandnovel related to actin cytoskeleton and intracellular calcium home- imprinted variants, many of which reached genome-wide ostasis, central to vascular contraction. We found significant significance thanks to the large sample size offered by our geneticoverlapbetweenFMDandhypertension,oneofthemost approach. frequent consequences of FMD lesions. We also report an By leveraging relatedness in biobanks, our approach allows important genetic overlap with migraine, intracranial aneurysm, studyingPOeffectsonlargesamplesizes,increasingourabilityto coronary artery disease andLDL cholesterol. further characterize the genetic architecture of complex traits. Conclusion: We identified several loci related to vascular Grant:SNSF-PP00P3_176977 contraction, suggesting that altered vascular tonicity may play a roleinthepathogenesisofFMD.WefindthatFMDisgenetically R.J.Hofmeister:None.S.Rubinacci:None.D.M.Ribeiro:None. Z.Kutalik: None. A.Buil: None.O. Delaneau: None. close to several vascular diseases where vascular integrity is impaired.ThisworkwasfundedbyERCgrantERC-Stg-ROSALIND- 716628. C10.2 Genetic investigation of fibromuscular dysplasia iden- A. Georges: None. M. Yang: None. T. Berrandou: None. M. tifies risk loci and shared genetics with common cardiovas- Bakker:None.O.Dikilitas:None.S.Kiando:None.M.Yu:None. culardiseases L.Liu:None.S.Kyryachenko:None.I.Sayoud:None.D.Dupré: EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8747 None.A.Lorthioir:None.L.Amar:None.S.Sengupta:None.K.L. Most11, Rui Climaco Pinto12,13, Matthias Wielscher2,14, Matthias Hunker: None. B.A. Satterfield: None. L. Ma: None. V. Farlik14, Verena Zuber15, Robert J. de Knegt16, Harold Snieder11, d’Escamard: None. D. Kadian-Dodov: None. J. Deleuze: None. André G. Uitterlinden17, . Lifelines Cohort Study18, Julie A. C.Brummett:None.D.M.Coleman:None.P.deLeeuw:None.M. Lynch19,20, Xiyun Jiang21, Saredo Said15, David E. Kaplan22,23, Pappaccogli: None. W. Smigielski: None. A. Prejbisz: None. P. KyungMinLee19,24,MarinaSerper22,23,RotonyaM.Carr22,25,Philip Amouyel: None. M.L. De Buyzere: None. S. Debette: None. P. S. Tsao26,27, Stephen R. Atkinson28, Abbas Dehghan15, Ioanna Dobrowolski: None. W. Drygas: None. H.L. Gornik: None. J.W. Tzoulaki15,29, Arfan Ikram9, Karl-Heinz Herzig30,31,32, Marjo-Riitta Olin:None.J.Piwonski:None.E.R.Rietzschel:None.Y.Ruigrok: Järvelin15,33,34, Behrooz Z. Alizadeh11, Christopher J. O’Don- None. M. Vikkula: None. E. Warchol Celinska: None. A. nell35,36,37, Danish Saleheen38, Benjamin F. Voight22,39,40, Kyong- Januszewicz: None. I.J. Kullo: None. M. Azizi: None. X. Mi Chang22,25, Mark R. Thursz41, Paul Elliott42,43,44, . VA Million Jeunemaitre: None. A. Persu: None. J.C. Kovacic: None. S.K. Veteran Program22 Ganesh: None.N.Bouatia-Naji: None. 1DivisionofBiomedicalSciences,DepartmentofLifeSciences,College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel University, London, UB8 3PH, C10.3 Genome-wide association study of more than 40,000 Uxbridge,UnitedKingdom,2MRCCentreforEnvironmentandHealth, patients with bipolar disorder provides novel biological Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public insights Health, St Mary’s campus, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom,London,UnitedKingdom,3CorporalMichaelJ.CrescenzVA Andreas J. Forstner1,2,3, on behalf of the Bipolar Disorder Working Medical Center, 3900 Woodland Ave, Philadelphia, PA19104, USA, Groupof thePsychiatric Genomics Consortium Philadelphia, PA, USA, 4Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA19104, USA, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,SchoolofMedicine 5RoyalSurreyCountyHospital,EgertonRoad,Guildford,Surrey,GU2 & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Neu- 7XX, United Kingdom, London, United Kingdom, 6MRC Centre for roscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Jülich, Jülich, Environment and Health, Department of Epidemiology and Biosta- Germany, 3Centre for Human Genetics, University of Marburg, tistics, School of Public Health, St Mary’s campus, Norfolk Place, Marburg,Germany. LondonW21PG,UnitedKingdom,London,UnitedKingdom,London, United Kingdom, 7MRC Centre for Environment and Health, Bipolardisorder(BD)isacomplexmooddisordercharacterizedby Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public recurrent episodes of mania and depression. Genetic factors Health, St Mary’s campus, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, London, contributesubstantiallytoBD(estimatedheritabilityofaround60- United Kingdom, 8Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, 85%). Previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identi- University of Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina, 45110, Greece., fied a number of susceptibility loci for BD. However, thedisease- Ioannina, Greece, 9Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University relevant genes and molecular mechanisms are still largely Medical Center Rotterdam, s- Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE, Rotter- unknown. dam, Netherlands, 10Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, In the present study, the BD Working Group of the Psychiatric Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Postal code: 9177899191, GenomicsConsortium(PGC)conductedthelargestGWASofBDto Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 11Department of Epidemiology, date(Mullinsetal.,medRxiv,2020).Ourmeta-analysisincluded57 University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, cohorts comprising 41,917 BD patients and 371,549 controls of Hanzeplein 1, Postbus 30.001, 9700RB, Groningen, Netherlands, European ancestry. For PGC cohorts, quality control, imputation 12MRC Centre for Environment and Health, Department of and statistical analyses were performed using RICOPILI. Five Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, St Mary’s external cohorts were processed using comparable procedures. campus, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom, 13UK Meta-analysiswasperformedusinganinversevariance-weighted Dementia Research Institute, Imperial College London, Exhibition fixedeffects modelinMETAL. Road, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom, 14Department of Weidentified64independentgenome-wideassociatedloci.33 Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18- of these were novel including the extended MHC region on 20,1090,Vienna,Austria,15MRCCentreforEnvironmentandHealth, chromosome 6. Pathway analysis using MAGMA revealed sig- Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public nificant enrichment for four gene-sets including synaptic signal- Health, St Mary’s campus, Norfolk Place, London, United Kingdom, ing. In addition, we found significant enrichment in genes 16DepartmentofGastroenterology&Hepatology,ErasmusUniversity encoding targets of psycholeptics, antiepileptics, anesthetics and Medical Center Rotterdam, Wytemaweg 80,3015 CN, Rotterdam, calciumchannelblockers.Integrativebioinformaticanalysesusing Netherlands, 17Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University eQTLdataprovidedconvergingevidencefor15geneswhoseBD Medical Center Rotterdam, s- Gravendijkwal 230, 3015 CE, Rotter- association could be mediated by changes in gene expression dam, Netherlands, 18Lifelines Cohort Study, PO Box 50, 9300 AB, (e.g., FURIN). Subtype analyses identified one genome-wide Roden,theNetherlands.,Groningen,Netherlands,19VASaltLakeCity significant locus for BD II that did not reach significance in our Health Care System, 500 Foothill Blvd, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, mainBD GWAS. 20University ofMassachusetts, 100William TMorrisseyBlvd,Boston, Ourfindingsadvancetheunderstandingofthebiologicalbasis MA, USA, 21Division of Biomedical Sciences, Department of Life ofBD,identifynoveltherapeuticapproachesandprioritizegenes Sciences, College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel University, for subsequent functional studies. Grants: NIMH (U01 MH109528; Uxbridge, United Kingdom, 22Corporal Michael J. Crescenz VA U01MH094421). Medical Center, 3900 Woodland Ave, Philadelphia, PA, USA,23Perel- A.J.Forstner:None. manSchoolofMedicine,UniversityofPennsylvania,Philadelphia,PA, USA,24SchoolofMedicine,UniversityofUtah,30N.1900E,SaltLake City, UT, USA, 25Perelman School of Medicine, University of C10.4Genome-wideassociationstudyandreplicationofliver Pennsylvania,, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 26VA Palo Alto Health Care enzyme loci System,3801MirandaAve,PaloAlto,CA,USA,27SchoolofMedicine, StanfordUniversity,291CampusDrive,Stanford,CA,USA,28Depart- Raha Pazoki1,2, Marijana Vujkovic3,4, Joshua Elliott5,6, Evangelos ment of Surgery & Cancer, Division of Digestive Diseases, Imperial Evangelou7,8,DipenderGill2,MohsenGhanbari9,10,PeterJ.vander College London, Exhibition Road, London, United Kingdom, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8748 29Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of Ioannina R. Pazoki: None. M. Vujkovic: None. J. Elliott: None. E. MedicalSchool,Ioannina,Greece,30InstituteofBiomedicine,Medical Evangelou:None.D.Gill:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest; Research Center Oulu, Oulu University, PO Box 8000, FI90014, Oulu, D.G.declarespart-timeemploymentbyNovoNordisk..M.Ghanbari: Finland, 31Institute of Pediatrics, Poznan University of Medical None. P.J. van der Most: None. R. Pinto: None. M. Wielscher: Sciences,Poznan60512,Poznan,Poland,32OuluUniversityHospital, None. M. Farlik: None. V. Zuber: None. R.J. de Knegt: None. H. Kajaanintie50,90220,Oulu,Finland,33CenterforLifeCourseHealth Snieder:None.A.G.Uitterlinden:None...LifelinesCohortStudy: Research,FacultyofMedicine,UniversityofOulu,POBox5000,Oulu, None.J.A.Lynch:None.X.Jiang:None.S.Said:None.D.E.Kaplan: FI-90014, Finland; Unit of Primary Care, Oulu University Hospital, None.K.Lee:None.M.Serper:None.R.M.Carr:None.P.S.Tsao: Kajaanintie 50,90220,Oulu,Finland, 34Department ofLifeSciences, None.S.R.Atkinson:None.A.Dehghan:None.I.Tzoulaki:None. College of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel University London, A.Ikram:None.K.Herzig:None.M.Järvelin:None.B.Z.Alizadeh: Uxbridge,London,UnitedKingdom,35VABostonHealthcareSystem, None.C.J.O’Donnell:None.D.Saleheen:None.B.F.Voight:None. 150SHuntingdonAve,Boston,Boston,MA,USA,36HarvardMedical K.Chang:None.M.R.Thursz:None.P.Elliott:None...VAMillion School, 25 Shattuck St, Boston, MA, USA, 37Brigham Women’s VeteranProgram:None. Hospital,75FrancisSt,Boston,MA,USA,38DepartmentsofMedicine and Cardiology, Columbia University, 650 West 168th Street, New York, NY, USA, 39Department of Systems Pharmacology and C10.5 Discovery and prioritization of variants and genes for Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University kidney function in >1.2million individuals of Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Blvd; Department of Genetics, Perelman SchoolofMedicine,UniversityofPennsylvania,Philadelphia,PA,USA, Kira J. Stanzick1, Yong Li2, Pascal Schlosser2, Mathias Gorski1, 40Institute for Translational Medicine and Therapeutics, Perelman MatthiasWuttke2,LaurentF.Thomas3,4,5,HumairaRasheed3,6,Bryce School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Blvd, X. Rowan7,8, Sarah E. Graham9, Brett R. Vanderweff10,11, Snehal B. Philadelphia, PA, USA, 41DivisioDepartment of Surgery & Cancer, Patil10,11,12, Cassiane Robinson-Cohen8,13, John M. Gaziano14,15, Division of Digestive Diseases, Imperial College London, Exhibition Christopher J. O’Donnell16, Christen J. Willer9,12,17, Stein Hallan4,18, Roadn of Biomedical Sciences, Department of Life Sciences, College Bjørn Olav Åsvold3,19, Andre Gessner20, Adriana M. Hung8,13, of Health and Life Sciences, Brunel University, London, UB8 3PH, Christian Pattaro21, Anna Köttgen2,22, Klaus J. Stark1, Iris M. Heid1, London,UnitedKingdom,42MRCCentreforEnvironmentandHealth, Thomas W.Winkler1 Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, St Mary’s campus, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG, United 1Department of Genetic Epidemiology, University of Regensburg, Kingdom; British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, Regensburg,Germany,2InstituteofGeneticEpidemiology,Department Imperial College London,, London, United Kingdom, 43UK Dementia of Biometry, Epidemiology and Medical Bioinformatics, Faculty of ResearchInstitute,ImperialCollegeLondon,ExhibitionRoad,London, MedicineandMedicalCenterUniversityofFreiburg,Freiburg,Germany, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom; National Institute for Health Research, 3K. G. Jebsen Center for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Imperial Biomedical Research Centre, Imperial College London, HealthandNursing,FacultyofMedicineandHealth,NTNU,Norwegian Exhibition Road, London, United Kingdom, 44Health Data Research University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, 4Depart- UK at Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, London, United mentofClinicalandMolecularMedicine,NTNU,NorwegianUniversity Kingdom. of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, 5BioCore - Bioinfor- maticsCoreFacility,NorwegianUniversityofScienceandTechnology, Introduction:Serumconcentrationofliverenzymesarelinkedto Trondheim, Norway, 6MRC Integrative Epidemiology Unit, Population liver dysfunction, metabolic and cardiovascular diseases. To Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol, Bristol, identify and replicate genetic variations associated with serum United Kingdom, 7Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University concentration of liver enzymes, we performed genome-wide Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA, 8Department of Veteran’s Affairs, association study on serum levels of alanine transaminase (ALT), TennesseeValleyHealthcareSystem(626)/VanderbiltUniversity,Nash- alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and gamma-glutamyl ville,TN,USA,9DepartmentofInternalMedicine,DivisionofCardiology, transferase (GGT). University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 10Department of Methods: The analysis was performed using linear mixed Biostatistics,UniversityofMichiganSchoolofPublicHealth,AnnArbor, models (LMM) association testing on 437,438 participants of MI,USA,11CenterforStatisticalGenetics,UniversityofMichiganSchool European descent with the UK Biobank. We additionally sought ofPublicHealth,AnnArbor,MI,USA,12DepartmentofComputational replication of the findings in 315,572 individuals from European Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, descent from several studies including the Million Veteran USA, 13Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Division of Nephrology Program,Rotterdam Study and Lifelines study. andHypertension,VanderbiltCenterforKidneyDiseaseandIntegrated Results:Wereplicated517liverenzymevariants.Weperformed Program for Acute Kidney Injury Research, and Vanderbilt Precision several secondary analyses on the identified variants including Nephrology Program, Nashville, TN, USA, 14Massachusetts Area genetic risk score analysis which showed association with higher Veterans Epidemiology Research and Information Center (MAVERIC), fat percentage of body, trunk, and liver and body mass index. VACooperativeStudiesProgram,VABostonHealthcareSystem,150S. Additional genetic risk score analysis in two independent Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, USA, 15Department of Internal European descent studies (The Airwave Health Monitoring study Medicine,HarvardMedicalSchool,Boston,MA,USA,16VACooperative and the Northern Finland Birth Cohort 1966) confirmed strong Studies Program, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA, association with liver enzymes. We additionally performed gene- 17Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, set enrichment analysis which highlighted the role of the MI, USA, 18Department of Nephrology, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim identified variants in liver development and function, lipid University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, 19Department of Endocrinol- metabolism, insulin resistance, and vascular formation. We ogy, Clinic of Medicine, St. Olavs Hospital, Trondheim University performed Mendelian randomization analysis which showed Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, 20Institute of Clinical Microbiology and association of liver enzyme variants with coronary heart disease Hygiene, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, andischemic stroke. 21EuracResearch,InstituteforBiomedicine(affiliatedwiththeUniversity Conclusions: Our study highlighted the importance of mole- of Lübeck), Bolzano, Italy, 22Department of Epidemiology, Johns cular pathways regulated by the liver in metabolic disorders and HopkinsBloombergSchoolofPublicHealth,Baltimore,MD,USA. cardiovasculardisease. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8749 Introduction: Large genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for significant association was in the GC gene on chromosome 4, kidney function were performed in the past providing promising responsible for the VDBP protein itself, where 3 frequent alleles targets for functional studies, but systematically prioritizing thou- explainabout50%ofthephenotypicvariance.Byconditioningon sands of variants and genes remains challenging. We aimed to thesehaplotypes,wefurtheridentify8additionalloci.ApheWAS developacomprehensivetooltoperformthatprioritization. analysis of these loci revealed associations with lipid metabolism Methods: We performed large GWAS meta-analyses for (mainly cholesterol) and blood protein and cell levels. We then estimated glomerular filtration rate based on serum creatinine performed a heritability analysis where we estimated the (eGFRcrea)andcystatin(eGFRcys)andbloodureanitrogen(BUN) heritability of VDBP to be 67%, and it’s genetic correlation to using data from the CKDGen consortium and the UK Biobank vitamin D levels to be 0.4. We also performed Mendelian (total n=1,201,909, n=460,826 and n=852,678, respectively). randomisationusing GSMR(Zhuet al.,NatComm2018) tostudy Second signal analyses, fine mapping and comprehensive bio- thecausalrelationshipbetweenVDBPandvitaminDlevels,where informatic follow-up analyses (e.g. CADD score, functional wefound strong evidence for a causal effect of VDBP on 25OHD annotation, kidney-tissue eQTLs, comparison with monogenic concentration, explaining 11% of the variation. Because the SNP- kidney diseases) were performed and combined into a Gene heritabilityofvitaminDlevelsisalso11%,thisresultsuggeststhat PrioritiSation (GPS) database that can evaluate each gene under- much of the variance in 25OHD concentration may be explained neath an associated locus based on individual weighing of the byVDBP protein concentration. differentevidence. C. Albiñana: None. N. Borbye-Lorenzen: None. A.S. Cohen: Results: We identified 424 genetic loci (201 novel) including None.S.G.Boelt:None.K.Skogstrand:None.B.J.Vilhjálmsson: 634 independent signals significantly associated (P<5x10−8) with None.J.J. McGrath: None. eGFRcrea, of which 343 received support for kidney function relevance by eGFRcys or BUN analyses. Fine mapping narrowed down association signals to five or less 99% credible variants for C11Newtechnologies andbetter diagnostics 138 signals. The GPS highlighted 18 genes mapping to small credible sets containing a protein-altering or kidney-tissue C11.1 Comprehensive detection of variants in unsolved rare regulatoryvariant. diseasecaseswith PacBioHiFi reads Conclusion: We identified novel genetic loci with strong WilliamJ.Rowell1,AaronM.Wenger1,RobertoLleras2,MatthewH. evidence of relevance to kidney function that may generate newbiologicalhypotheses.ThesearchableandcustomizableGPS McLoughlin2, Benjamin M. Moskowitz2, Emily Farrow3, Neil Miller3, IsabelleThiffault3,ShreyaseeChakraborty1,ChristineLambert1,Primo databasesupportsthetranslationofGWASresultsintoactionable candidategenesand variantsfor functional studies. Baybayan1, Tomi Pastinen3 K.J.Stanzick:None.Y.Li:None.P.Schlosser:None.M.Gorski: None. M. Wuttke: None. L.F. Thomas: None. H. Rasheed: None. 1Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, USA, 2Microsoft Genomics, B.X.Rowan:None.S.E.Graham:None.B.R.Vanderweff:None.S. Microsoft Healthcare, Redmond, WA, USA, 3Center for Pediatric B.Patil:None.C.Robinson-Cohen:None.J.M.Gaziano:None.C. Genomic Medicine, Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, J.O’Donnell:None.C.J.Willer:None.S.Hallan:None.B.Åsvold: USA. None.A.Gessner:None.A.M.Hung:None.C.Pattaro:None.A. Köttgen: None. K.J. Stark: None. I.M. Heid: None. T.W. Introduction:PacBioHiFireads(99.9%accuracy,15-25kb)enable Winkler:None. comprehensive variant detection in human genomes, extending torepetitiveregionsofthegenomenotaccessiblewithshort-read WGS (srWGS). HiFi reads match or surpass srWGS for single C10.6ThegeneticrelationshipbetweentheVitaminDbinding nucleotidevariantandsmallindeldetectionwhilealsoimproving proteinandVitamin D detectionofstructuralvariants(SVs),withrecallfarexceedingthat ofsrWGS.To supportlarge-scale,reproducible application ofHiFi ClaraAlbiñana1,2,3,NisBorbye-Lorenzen4,AriehS.Cohen5,SanneG. WGS, we developed an automated workflow for variant analysis Boelt5, Kristin Skogstrand4, Bjarni J. Vilhjálmsson1,2,3, John J. from HiFi reads and applied it to 80 rare disease cases unsolved McGrath3,6,7 bysrWGS. Materials and Methods: We used the workflow management 1Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, 2iPSYCH - The Lundbeck systemSnakemaketolinktoolsfor1)sequencingqualitycontrol, Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric Research, Aarhus V, 2) sample quality control, 3) alignment and variant calling, 4) Denmark, 3The National Centrefor Register-based Research, Aarhus genomeassembly,and5)variantfilteringandprioritization.Small BSS, Aarhus V, Denmark, 4Danish Center for Neonatal Screening, variants were called with DeepVariant/GLnexus and phased with Department of Congenital Disorders, Statens Serum Institut, WhatsHap, and SVs were detected by PBSV. Variants were Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Danish Center for Neonatal Screening, annotated with population frequency from gnomAD and other Clinical Mass Spectrometry, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, publicdatasetsandwithpredictedfunctionalconsequencebased Denmark, 6Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, onEnsembl gene models. Queensland, Australia, 7Queensland Centre for Mental Health Results:Across80rarediseasecases,theworkflowidentifieda Research, Queensland, Australia. medianof4,064,900SNVs,931,879indels,and21,737SVs.Variants ofinterest wereidentified in 30cases, withconfirmeddiagnostic ThevitaminDbindingprotein(VDBP)isthemajorbloodtransport pathogenic variants including a start codon loss, a novel repeat protein for vitamin D and its metabolites. VDBP concentration expansion,andcompoundheterozygousloss-of-functionvariants. influences total 25 hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD) concentrations, Conclusions:Ouranalysisworkflowssupportbroadapplication which has been linked to a range of adverse health outcomes, ofHiFireads,whichweexpectwillcontinuetoidentifydiagnostic includingmentaldisorders.Hereweperformageneticanalysisof variants in many rare disease cases unsolved by srWGS. The neonatalVDBPbloodlevelmeasurements(n=77,509)thatwere Snakemake workflow and a WDL port for cloud execution are quantifiedfromdriedbloodspots.Weperformedagenome-wide availableon GitHub. association study (GWAS) of VDBP levels and identified 9 W.J.Rowell:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;Pacific independent genome-wide significant associations. The most Biosciences. A.M. Wenger: A. Employment (full or part-time); EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8750 Significant;PacificBiosciences.R.Lleras:A.Employment(fullorpart- LiannaG.Kyriakopoulou,KyokoYuki,HuayunHou,SierraBarnes, time);Significant;Microsoft.M.H.McLoughlin:A.Employment(full Arun Ramani, Alper Celic, Gregory Costain, Rebecca Jobling, or part-time); Significant; Microsoft. B.M. Moskowitz: A. Employ- Stephen Mayen, Dimitri Stavropoulos, Robin Hayeems, Reem ment (full or part-time); Significant; Microsoft. E. Farrow: A. Khan, Roberto Mendoza, Ronald D. Cohn, Stephen W. Scherer, Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Children’s Mercy James Dowling, Adam Shlien, Christian R. Marshall, Michael Hospital. N. Miller: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; D. Wilson Children’sMercyHospital.I.Thiffault:A.Employment(fullorpart- time); Significant; Children’s Mercy Hospital. S. Chakraborty: A. Hospitalfor Sick Children, Toronto,ON, Canada. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Pacific Biosciences. C. Lambert: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Pacific Objectives: Several studies have shown that analysis of the Biosciences. P. Baybayan: A. Employment (full or part-time); transcriptome by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) can improve our Significant; Pacific Biosciences. T. Pastinen: A. Employment (full or ability to interpret the functional and clinical importance of the part-time);Significant;Children’sMercyHospital. genetic variants identified by WES and WGS. Our aim was to develop an RNA-seq method that can be used in a clinical diagnosticlaboratoryandidentifyclinicallyrelevantRNAisoforms C11.2 Splicing noise is detectable across human tissues and andgene expression. modellingitscharacteristicsislikelytoimprovethedetection Methods: The NEBNext® Ultra™ II DNA Library Prep Kit for ofpathogenic splicingwithin patient-derived samples Illuminawasused.SequencingwasperformedusingtheNovaSeq Illuminainstrument.Thecohortconsistedof134pediatricclinical Sonia García-Ruiz1,2, David Zhang1,2, Regina H. Reynolds1,2, Ana blood samples collected through the Genome Clinic (Centre for Luisa Gil-Martínez2,3, Emil Gustavsson1,2, Aine Fairbrother- GenomicMedicine)attheHospitalforSickChildren.Thesamples Browne1,2,4, Sebastian Guelfi2, JuanA. Botia3,Mina Ryten1,2 were collected as part of a cohort of patients with a wide spectrum of undiagnosed genetic conditions and had previously 1UCLGreatOrmond StreetInstituteofChildHealth,London, United beentestedwith microarray and WGS. Kingdom,2UCLQueenSquareInstituteofNeurology,London,United Results: Our data shows that >70% of the genes associated Kingdom, 3Departamento de Ingeniería de la Información y las with these clinical indications were expressed in blood. Notably, Comunicaciones,UniversidaddeMurcia,Murcia,Spain,4Department 79.5%ofgenesinvolvedinneurologicaldisorders(N=995)were of Medical and Molecular Genetics, School of Basic and Medical expressed. We developed an approach to identify aberrant gene Biosciences, King’s CollegeLondon, London, United Kingdom. expression and clinically relevant splicing variants by comparing patient data to large sets of data from controls. After integrating Alternativesplicingisacharacteristicofmostmulti-exonichuman with WGS results, we show that RNA-seq analysis has identified genes. However, RNA-sequencing data from human tissues, several clinically relevant candidate variants even without avail- suggests that this process can be inaccurate leading to the abilityofthemost appropriate tissue type. presenceofreadswhichcannotbecompletelymappedtoknown Conclusions: We have developed an RNA-centric strategy to transcripts. Here, we characterised splicing noise using RNA- identify clinically relevant splicing and expression variants in a sequencing data from 42 human tissues, provided by the cohort of undiagnosed patients for whom WGS and microarray Genotype-Tissue Expression Consortium and processed by testinghad previously beenperformed. recount2.Wefocusedonreadsmappingwithagappedalignment L.G. Kyriakopoulou: None. K. Yuki: None. H. Hou: None. S. tothegenomethatcouldbeassignedtoagenethroughsharing Barnes:None.A.Ramani:None.A.Celic:None.G.Costain:None. of a known acceptor or donor splice site, termed partially R. Jobling: None. S. Mayen: None. D. Stavropoulos: None. R. unannotated junctions (PUJs). Using MaxEntScan to score novel Hayeems: None. R. Khan: None. R. Mendoza: None. R.D. Cohn: splice sites, we verified that PUJs contained flanking sequences None.S.W.Scherer:None.J.Dowling:None.A.Shlien:None.C. likely to be recognised by the spliceosome. We assessed the R.Marshall: None. M.D. Wilson:None. proportion of PUJs resulting from misrecognition of acceptor versus donor sites and found that this was consistently higher acrossallsamplesstudied(p-value<2.2e-16)withsignificanttissue C11.4 Practical considerations for utilising ClinVar in variant differences (p-value<2.2e-16). Furthermore, we showed that the prioritisation: evidence fromthe 100,000Genomes Project novel donor and acceptor sites implied by PUJs were located in closeproximitytoannotatedsites.However,whereasmis-splicing LiamAbrahams1,Meriel McEntagart1, Dalia Kasperaviciute1,Susan appeared to be symmetrical around known donor sites (mod- Walker1, Marta Bleda1, Antonio Rueda Martin1, Javier Lopez1, Joao e=3bp),therewasanasymmetricdistributionatknownacceptor Almeida1, Martha Imprialou1, Daniel Rhodes1, Alex Stuckey1, Ellen sites(mode=20bp/3bp),compatiblewiththewell-recognisedAG- Thomas1, Ana Lisa Taylor Tavares1, Helen Brittain1, Arianna Tucci1, exclusion-zone at acceptor sites. These findings suggested that RichardH.Scott1,ZandraDeans2,RachaelMein2,SueL.Hill2,MarkJ. mis-splicing is less tolerated at donor sites, which is consistent Caulfield1, Augusto Rendon1, Genomics England Research withthesignificantlyhigherproportionofdonorascomparedto Consortium acceptorsplicesitemutationsinClinVar(p-value=1.8e−2).Taken together, our findings imply that the detection of pathogenic 1Genomics England, London, United Kingdom, 2NHS England and splicing events in patient-derived RNA-sequencing data could be NHSImprovement, London, United Kingdom. improved by modellingsplicingnoise. S.García-Ruiz:None.D.Zhang:None.R.H.Reynolds:None.A. Background: Public archives, such as Clinvar, can be used to Gil-Martínez: None. E. Gustavsson: None. A. Fairbrother- enhance pathogenic variant prioritisation in rare disease, but Browne:None.S.Guelfi:None.J.A.Botia:None.M.Ryten:None. requires consideration of potential annotation inconsistencies, hypomorphic variantsand incidental findings. Materials and Methods: Genomic data from 29,880 families C11.3 Whole Blood RNA Sequencing in a Cohort of Patients with rare diseases from the 100,000 Genomes Project were withUndiagnosed Genetic Conditions scanned for ClinVar variants in phenotypically relevant gene panels. ClinVar variants with star rating 1-4 and at least one EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8751 “pathogenic” or “likely pathogenic” annotation were reviewed in importance of chimeric transcript formation remains unknown in the context of clinical data. The impact on the number of constitutionalgeneticdisordercontrasttocancerresearch. prioritised variants was modelled using 58 families for whom a Methods:Wescreenedforchimerictranscriptsbyre-analyzing largePaediatricDisorders gene panelwasapplied. RNA-seq data derived from peripheral blood of 153 patients Results: We identified ClinVar pathogenic variants not pre- whose diagnosis remained undetermined after standard exome viously prioritised in the 100,000 Genomes Project in 2,147 analysis. When chimeric transcripts were identified using dedi- families. 55 families carried homozygous recessive variants, of cated software ChimPipe, whole genome sequencing for char- which 17 (30.91%) likely represent a new diagnosis, while 9 acterizing structural abnormalities and the entire length of the (16.4%) were already reported as explaining the phenotype. 43 chimeric transcripts sequenced by nanopore long read sequen- furtherfamiliescarriedpotentiallydiagnosticautosomaldominant cingwereperformed. variantsandoneanX-linkedvariant.Variantsnotconsideredtobe Results: Two patients were found to harbor chimeric tran- clinicallyrelevantwereprimarilymonoallelicvariantsforrecessive scripts.1)TheRNA-seqofthefirstpatientrevealedreadsspanning conditions, variants with low evidence of pathogenicity or exon5ofZEB2andexon7ofGTDC1.Wholegenomesequencing hypomorphic variants. Modelling the prioritisation of ClinVar revealeda436-kbdeletionspanningintron4ofZEB2andintron7 variants at various levels of stringency results in an increase in of GTDC1 and the diagnosis of Mowat-Wilson syndrome was prioritised variants between 0.41 (±0.17) and 2.52 (±0.42) per made. 2) The RNA-seq of the second patient revealed reads probandwhen applyinga largegenepanel. spanning exon 21 of TRAPPC9 and exon 1 of KCNK9. Whole Conclusions: ClinVar is a useful resource for improving variant genome sequencing revealed a 186-kb deletion spanning intron prioritisation algorithms. Refining prioritisation rules for variants 20 of TRAPPC9 and intron 1 of KCNK9 and the diagnosis of Birk- with lower evidence of disease association increases specificity. Barelsyndrome was made. Inclusivecriteriaresultinonlyamodestincreaseinthenumberof Conclusions: The approach of detecting chimeric transcripts prioritisedvariants. from RNA-seq data, is unique in that the approach does not rely L. Abrahams: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; on any prior information on the presence of genomic deletion. Genomics England. M. McEntagart: A. Employment (full or part- Chimeric gene formation plays an important role in the time); Significant; Genomics England. D. Kasperaviciute: A. pathogenesis of congenital malformation syndromes. RNA-seq, Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Genomics England. S. when combined with chimera analysis, represents promising Walker: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Genomics modality to decipher genetic etiology of undiagnosed patients. England. M. Bleda: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; [JP17ek0109151,JP19K17342, JP20ek0109485] GenomicsEngland.A.RuedaMartin:A.Employment(fullorpart- M. Yamada: None. H. Suzuki: None. A. Watanabe: None. T. time); Significant; Genomics England. J. Lopez: A. Employment Uehara: None. T. Takenouchi: None. S. Mizuno: None. K. (full or part-time); Significant; Genomics England. J. Almeida: A. Kosaki:None. Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;GenomicsEngland.M. C11.6 Evaluating the performance of a clinical genome Imprialou: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Geno- sequencing programme for diagnosis of rare genetic disease, mics England. D. Rhodes: A. Employment (full or part-time); seenthrough the lensof craniosynostosis Significant;GenomicsEngland.A.Stuckey:A.Employment(fullor part-time);Significant;GenomicsEngland.E.Thomas:A.Employ- Rebecca S. Tooze1, Zerin Hyder2,3, Eduardo Calpena1, Yang Pei1, ment(fullorpart-time); Significant; Genomics England.A.Taylor Stephen R. F. Twigg1, Deirdre Cilliers4, Jenny E. V. Morton5, Emma Tavares: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Genomics McCann6, Astrid Weber6, Louise C. Wilson7, Anna Need2, Andrew England.H.Brittain:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; Bond2, Ana Lisa Taylor Tavares2, Helen Brittain2,5, Ellen Thomas2, Genomics England. A. Tucci: A. Employment (full or part-time); Genomics England Research Consortium2,8, Sue L. Hill9, Zandra C. Significant;GenomicsEngland.R.H.Scott:A.Employment(fullor Deans9,FreyaBoardman-Pretty2,MarkCaulfield2,RichardH.Scott2,7, part-time); Significant; Genomics England. Z. Deans: A. Employ- AndrewO.M. Wilkie1,4 ment (full or part-time); Significant; NHS England and NHS Improvement. R. Mein: A. Employment (full or part-time); 1Clinical Genetics Group, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Significant; NHS England and NHS Improvement. S.L. Hill: A. Medicine,UniversityofOxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,2Genomics Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;NHSEnglandandNHS England, London, United Kingdom, 3Manchester Centre for Improvement. M.J. Caulfield: A. Employment (full or part-time); Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Significant;GenomicsEngland.A.Rendon:A.Employment(fullor Manchester, Greater Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Oxford Centre part-time); Significant; Genomics England. forGenomicMedicine,OxfordUniversityHospitalsNHSFoundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5West Midlands Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham Health Partners, C11.5 Chimeric transcript formation as a new pathogenetic Birmingham Women’s and Children’s Hospitals NHS Foundation mechanism ofrareandundiagnosed diseases:Analysis using Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Department of Clinical whole genome sequencing and long-read transcriptome Genetics, Liverpool Women’s NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, sequencing United Kingdom, 7Clinical Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 8William Harvey Research Mamiko Yamada1, Hisato Suzuki1, Akiko Watanabe2, Tomoko Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Uehara3, ToshikiTakenouchi4, SeijiMizuno3, Kenjiro Kosaki1 Kingdom, 9Genomics Unit, NHS England & NHS Improvement, London, United Kingdom. 1Centerformedicalgenetics,KeioUniversity,SchoolofMedicine,Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Juntendo University Urayasu Introduction: Genome sequencing (GS) for diagnosis of rare Hospital, Chiba, Japan, 3Department of Pediatrics, Central Hospital, genetic disease is being introduced into the clinic, but the Aichi Developmental Disability Center, Aichi, Japan, 4Department of complexity ofthedataposeschallengesfordevelopingroutine Pediatrics,KeioUniversitySchoolofMedicine,Tokyo,Japan. pipelines with high diagnostic sensitivity. The UK’s 100,000 Genomes Project, delivered by NHS England through national Background:Partoftwodistinctivegenescanbetranscribedintoa GenomicMedicineCentres(GMCs)andGenomicsEngland(GE), new chimeric transcript due to chromosomal aberrations. The represents the first implementation of GS into a national EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8752 diagnostic programme at scale. We evaluated the GE/GMC post-online, 40/71, 56%; post-course, 63/71, 88%). Quantitative diagnostic rare disease triaged bioinformatics pipelines, using datawereanalysedusingdescriptivestatistics.Opencomments craniosynostosis as a test case. and interview data were analysed using inductive content Methods: GS data from 114 probands with craniosynostosis analysis. Workplace-learning participants reported improved or their relatives (314 samples), negative on routine genetic genomiccapabilityandrecognitionascrediblegenomicexperts testing, were intensively scrutinised by a specialized research within their discipline. Five clinical fellows subsequently team and compared to diagnoses identified through the GE/ contributed to curriculum design for structured learning. Work- GMC pipeline. shops included foundational concepts and discipline-specific Results: Fourteen variants classed as likely pathogenic/ cases. The blended course was cross-disciplinary, with online pathogenic were identified by the GE/GMC pipeline. Eighteen foundationalmodulesplusgenericcase-basedworkshops.Both additionallikelypathogenic/pathogenicvariantswereidentified structured learning experiences improved participants’ self- by the research team, indicating that for craniosynostosis, the rated and objective genomic knowledge, skills and confidence. GE/GMCpipeline diagnostic sensitivity was only 44%.Measures Blended learning participants showed gains from the self- that could have increased diagnostic success include compre- directed online learning, plus further gains after workshop hensiveanalysisofdenovosmallvariants(+31%sensitivity)and attendance. Contextualisation of foundational learning is sup- copy number/structural variants (+12%), improved scrutiny of ported by generic and discipline-specific cases. Immersion existing panel genes (+15%), and review of updated panels experiences develop speciality genomic experts who can (+12% sensitivity). Current consensus NHS practice, which support peer-learning and champion genomics. A workforce partially incorporates these measures, would have achieved a development strategy that incorporates both immersion and 78% sensitivity. structured approaches develops physicians with a spectrum of Conclusion:GSidentifiedlikelypathogenic/pathogenicvariants genomic expertise. in28%ofthecraniosynostosiscohort,withoverhalfofdiagnoses M.Martyn:None.E.Lynch:None.F.Maher:None.T.Charles: missed by the GE/GMC pipelines. Improved phenotype capture, None.C.McEwan:None.B.McClaren:None.M.Janinski:None. variant calling, and scrutiny of variants outside restricted gene F. Cunningham: None. R. McNeil: None. A. Niselle: None. C. panels will be essential to leverage the full potential of GS in Gaff:None. clinicaldiagnostics. R.S. Tooze: None. Z. Hyder: None. E. Calpena: None. Y. Pei: None.S.R.F.Twigg:None.D.Cilliers:None.J.E.V.Morton:None. C12.2 Genetic counselling by video consultation during E.McCann: None. A.Weber: None. L.C.Wilson: None. A.Need: COVID-19pandemic: theperceived quality None.A.Bond:None.A.L.T.Tavares:None.H.Brittain:None.E. Thomas:None.G.E.ResearchConsortium:None.S.L.Hill:None. Özlem Baysal, Sonja de Munnik, David A. Koolen, Marjolein H. Z.C. Deans: None. F. Boardman-Pretty: None. M. Caulfield: Willemsen,Nicoline Hoogerbrugge None.R.H. Scott: None. A.O.M. Wilkie:None. Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. C12Counselling, communication andservice delivery Introduction:Thenumberofvideoconsultations(VCs)ingenetic C12.1Developingagenomic-competentphysicianworkforce: counselling have increased significantly since the start of the immersive and structured experiences as part of a multi- COVID-19 pandemic. We investigated the perceived quality and facetedapproach suitabilityof geneticcounselling byVC. Methods: We sent a questionnaire (containing 31 items) to all MelissaMartyn1,2,3,EllyLynch2,4,3,FranMaher2,5,TarynCharles4,3,1, patients who were counselled via VC between May-June of 2020 Callum McEwan1,2, Belinda McClaren1,3, Monika Janinski1,2, Fiona (n=1188) and a separate questionnaire (containing 45 items) to Cunningham6,2, Robyn McNeil1,2,Amy Niselle1,2, Clara Gaff1,2,3 thegeneticcounsellors involved (n=40). Results: Patient response rate was 33% (n=387). 93% of 1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, respondentswerepositiveaboutthequalityoftheVC,concerning bothtechnicalaspectsaswellascontent,andwouldrecommend 2Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, 3The aVC to others. Patients aged below 56years weremore positive University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 4Victorian Clinical compared to older patients (p=0,033). Travel distance did not Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, 5Walter and Eliza Hall impact satisfaction consistently with both patients with a short Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 6Monash Genetics, Monash Health, (<30 minutes) and long (90-120 minutes) travel distance being Melbourne, Australia. significantly less positive about VCs compared to patient with othertraveldistances(p=0,008).Educationalleveldidnotimpact A multifaceted approach is required to ensure non-genetic satisfaction(p=0,086).Geneticcounsellorresponseratewas90% physicians have sufficient genomic expertise to adopt genomic (n=36), of which the majority was positive (75%) and indicated medicine. Our workforce development strategy for physicians, thatthequalityofVCswasequallygoodwithrespect tocontent informed by adult learning and implementation science and understanding of the information by patients compared to theories, includes immersive and structured experiences. The physical consultations. The disadvantages reported most often program aims to produce a cohort of physicians across a werelesssatisfyingdoctor-patientrelationshipsandlimitationsin spectrum of genomic expertise, from basic familiarity to physicalexamination(31%experiencedthislimitationin≥25%of speciality-expertswhocanguidechangewithintheirdiscipline. consultations). We evaluated this strategy using mixed methods. Workplace- learning participants (n=10 clinical fellows; n= 12 immersion Conclusions: VCs are well received and are a suitable alternative for physical consultations for most patients referred fellows) completed post-program interviews (RR 100%). Work- shop participants (n= 311) completed surveys (pre-workshop, forgenetic counselling. Ö.Baysal:None.S.deMunnik:None.D.A.Koolen:None.M.H. 179/265, 68%; post-workshop, 189/251, 71%). Blended course participants (n = 71) completed surveys (baseline, 64/71, 90%; Willemsen: None. N.Hoogerbrugge: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8753 C12.3 Women’s preferences for receiving uncertain results 1Vall d’Hebron Insititute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut from prenatal genomic testing: An international discrete Catalàd’Oncologia,L’HospitaletdeLlobregat,Spain,3InstitutCatalà choice experiment d’Oncologia, Girona, Spain, 4Institut Català d’Oncologia, Badalona, Spain, 5Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, Lleida, Spain, Celine Lewis1,2, James Buchanan3,4, Jennifer Hammond2,5, Sam 6FacultatdePsicologia,UniversitatRamonLlull,Barcelona,Spain. Riedijk6,JasmijnKlapwijk6,EleanorHarding1,StinaLou7,IdaVogel7, Emma Jane Szepe8,9, Lisa Hui8,9, Charlotta Ingvoldstad- Introduction: Integration of personality traits (Neuroticism, Malmgren10,11, Maria J. Soller10, Kelly E. Ormond12, Mahesh Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness) in Choolani13,14,Melissa Hill2,5 the genetic counselling of germline cancer testing is key to understandpersonalizedmedicineasanadaptationtoindividuals’ 1UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Great psychosocialneeds.Previousstudiessuggestedmoreuncertainty Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3University of incarriersofmoderateversushigh-penetrancebreastcancer(BC) Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Oxford Biomedical Research genes. We aimed to investigate the association between Centre,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,5UCLGreatOrmondStreetInstitute personality traits and the psychological impact from hereditary ofChildHealth,London,UnitedKingdom,6ErasmusMC,Rotterdam, germlinecancergenetictesting(GCGT);andcomparethepsycho- Netherlands, 7Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 8Mur- logical impact between moderate and high-penetrance patho- doch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 9University genicvariant carriers of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 10Karolinska Institutet, Stock- MaterialsandMethods:Prospectivemulticentrestudyinclud- holm,Sweden, 11Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, ing individuals who underwent GCGT. The NEO-FFI (personality) 12Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA, andtheCancerWorry(CWS)Scaleswereanalysedatbaseline;and 13National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 14National theMICRA(psychologicalimpact)andCWSscalesimmediately,3 University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. and 12 months after results disclosure. Multivariate analysis was used toevaluatepredictors of psychological impact. We conducted a survey-based discrete-choice experiment (DCE) Results:Overall,714patientswereanalysed:532(74%)female, to examine the impact of diagnostic uncertainty on women’s 394 (55%) diagnosed with cancer, 404 (56%) underwent panel preferences for advanced tests e.g. fetal exome sequencing. The testing,44%singlegenetesting,and187(26%)resultedpositive. DCEcomprisedfiveattributesidentifiedthroughliteraturereview Female sex, cancer diagnosis, and high levels of neuroticism and interviews as being important for decision-making. Respon- correlated with higher psychological impact (Table 1). Among ders were given 13 scenarios and chose between Test A, Test B mutationcarriers,nodifferencesinuncertaintybetweenhighand (bothinvasivetests)orNoTest.Womenfromeightcountrieswho moderate BC riskcarriers (p-values>0.05). delivered a baby in the previous 24 months were recruited Conclusions:Levelsofneuroticismisanindependentfactorto through a market research company to complete the survey. predict the psychological impact of GCGT. There are no Choicesweremodelledusingconditionallogitregressionanalysis. differences in uncertainty levels between high and moderate BC Surveys from 1239 women (Australia: n=178; China: n=179; risk carriers. Grants Carlos III National Health Institut and Denmark: n=88; Netherlands: n=177; Singapore: n=90; Swe- Ministerio deEducación yCiencia (PI16/01363) den: n=178; UK: n=174; USA: n=175) were analysed. Partici- LinermixedmodeltoestimateMICRAscore(n=714) pantsselectedaninvasivetest(TestAorB)in93%ofallchoices. The key attribute affecting women’s preferences was a test with Univariate Multivariate the highest diagnostic yield (p<0.0001). Women preferred tests Estimate CI(95%) P Estimate CI(95%) P value value with short turnaround times and tests where maximum results were reported (including variants of uncertain significance (VUS) Age(10-yearsincrement) 0,1 [−0.43,0.63] 0,72 – – – Gender(malevs.female) −4,01 [−5.6,−2.42] <0.001 −2,78 [−4.41,- <0.001 and secondary findings (SF)). Women from all countries except 1.15] Denmark preferred VUS to be reported (p<0.004), and women Higheducation −0,88 [−2.37,0.61] 0,25 – – – (yesvs.no) fromallcountriesexcepttheUSApreferredreceivingSF(p<0.02). Result(positivevs. 0,31 [−1.29,1.92] 0,71 – – – Women from China preferred results returned by a genetics negative) specialist, whereas in Denmark they preferred a maternity Cancerdiagnosis 3,51 [2.12,4.9] <0.001 2,62 [1.21,4.04] <0.001 specialist. Whilst most women want to receive maximum (yesvs.no) information,ourfindingsalsohighlightcountrybaseddifferences. Neuroticism(vslow) -Medium 1,78 [−0.30,3.86] 0,09 1,97 [−0.07,4.01] 0,06 Therefore, a global consensus on returning results from fetal -High 5,45 [3.67,7.27] <0.001 5,14 [3.31,6.97] <0.001 exome/genome sequencing is not necessarily realistic or desir- Extraversion(vslow) able. Funding: Wellcome Trust Small Grant in Humanities and -Medium −0,19 [−1.80,1.42] 0,81 – – – SocialScience [211288/Z/18/Z]. -High -0,8 [−2.64,1.04] 0,4 – – – C. Lewis: None. J. Buchanan: None. J. Hammond: None. S. Conscientious(vslow) Riedijk:None.J.Klapwijk:None.E.Harding:None.S.Lou:None. -Medium −1,39 [−3.13,0.35] 0,12 – – – I. Vogel: None. E. Szepe: None. L. Hui: None. C. Ingvoldstad- -High −1,74 [−3.52,0.04] 0,05 – – – Malmgren: None. M.J. Soller: None. K.E. Ormond: None. M. Openness(vslow) Choolani:None. M. Hill:None. -Medium 1,14 [−0.51,2.79] 0,18 – – – -High −0,63 [−2.37,1.11] 0,48 – – – Agreeableness(vslow) C12.4 Personality traits predict psychological impact derived -Medium −2,32 [−3.93,-0.71] 0,005 −1,66 [−3.25,- 0,04 0.07] fromgermline cancer genetic testing -High −1,79 [−3.55,-0.02] 0,05 −0,57 [−2.31,1.17] 0,52 AdriàLópez-Fernández1,GuillermoVillacampa1,EliaGrau2,Mònica Salinas2, Esther Darder3, Estela Carrasco1, Ares Solanes4, Angela Velasco3, Gisela Urgell5, Maite Torres1, Elisabet Munté2, Silvia A. López-Fernández: None. G. Villacampa: None. E. Grau: Iglesias2, Sara Torres-Esquius1, Noemí Tuset5, Sergi Corbella6, Joan None. M. Salinas: None. E. Darder: None. E. Carrasco: None. A. Brunet3,Judith Balmaña1 Solanes: None. A. Velasco: None. G. Urgell: None. M. Torres: None. E. Munté: None. S. Iglesias: None. S. Torres-Esquius: EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8754 None. N. Tuset: None. S. Corbella: None. J. Brunet: None. J. 1Amsterdam UMC, location AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Uni- Balmaña: None. versity Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen,Netherlands. C12.5 Breast cancer polygenic risk scores: A 12-month prospective study of patient reported outcomes and risk Introduction:Ifundetected,inheritedcardiacdiseasescanleadto managementbehavior suddencardiacdeath,whilepreventiveandtreatmentoptionsare available. Currently, probands are asked to inform relatives, with Tatiane Yanes1, Bettina Meiser2, Rajneesh Kaur2, Mary-Anne onlyhalfofrelativesattendinggeneticcounselling.Directcontact Young3, Philip B. Mitchell2, Maatje Scheepers-Joynt4, Simone bythegeneticcounsellormayenhanceuptake,althoughthereare McInerny4, Shelby Taylor4, Kristine Barlow-Stewart5, Yoland Antill6, legal,ethicaland psychological concerns. Lucinda Salmon7, Courtney Smyth8, Brigid Betz-Stablein1, Paul A. Methods: Current practice was compared to a tailored James4 approach, in which probands were asked to decide to (initially) informrelativesthemselvesorbythecounsellor,andfamilyletters 1University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 2University of New were sent directly by the counsellor 1 month after disclosure of South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 3Garvan Institute of Medical the patients’ test result. Outcomes were uptake of counselling in Research, Sydney, Australia, 4Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter thefirstyear,impactonpsychologicalandfamilyfunctioning,and MacCallum Cancer Centre and the Royal Melbourne Hospital, evaluationoftheapproach(measuredwithsurveysat3(T1)and9 Melbourne, Australia, 5University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, (T2)months after disclosure). 6Cabrini Health, Melbourne, Australia, 7Austin Hospital, Melbourne, Results: 96 probands were included, yielding 549 relatives Australia, 8Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia. eligible for counselling and genetic testing. We observed no significant difference in uptake of genetic counselling between Introduction: Polygenic risk scores (PRS) for breast cancer risk the current (38%) and the tailored (37%) approach. Significantly have emerged as a potential tool for informing disease risk moreprobands inthetailored groupfeltsatisfiedandsupported management.However,littleisknownaboutwomen’sresponses with the used approach, while they also felt more pressure to to receiving this information. This study aimed to prospectively inform relatives and perceived room for improvement. No assesspatientreportedoutcomesandriskmanagementbehavior differences in psychological and family functioning were of women choosing to receive (receivers) or decline (decliners) observed. their breast cancer PRS. Methods: Women either unaffected or Conclusions: Surprisingly, the tailored approach showed a affected by breast cancer and from families with no identified similaruptakeasthecurrentapproach.Therewerenodifferences pathogenic variant in a breast cancer risk gene were invited to observed in impact on psychological/family functioning, but receive their PRS. Genotyping for 62 common variants was probands in the tailored group more often felt satisfied and performed,fromwhichaPRSandrelativeriskwerecalculated.All supported.Furtherresearchisneededtoidentifythemostoptimal participants completed a questionnaire at study enrollment. approach to reach at-risk relatives. Funding: CVON 2015-12 Receivers completed questionnaires at two-weeks and 12- eDETECT months after receiving their PRS, and decliners a second L.M.VandenHeuvel: None.Y.M.Hoedemaekers:None.A.F. questionnaireat 12-monthspost study enrollment. Baas: None. M.J.H. Baars: None. E.M.A. Smets: None. J. Van Results: Of the 208 participants, 165 (79%) received their PRS. Tintelen: None. I.Christiaans: None. Among receivers there were no changes in anxiety or distress following testing. Receiving a low PRS was associated with C13Cancersusceptibility: From mechanisms to clinic reduced perceived breast cancer risk at 12-months (p=0.030). At 12-months, breast screening and uptake of risk-reducing C13.1 Dissecting mutational mechanisms underpinning sig- strategies were consistent with current Australian guidelines of natures caused by replication errors and endogenous breastcancerriskmanagement.Comparedtoreceivers,decliners reportedsignificantlyhigherdecisionalregretregardingreceiptof DNAdamage their PRS (p<0.001). Reasons for declining PRS included being Xueqing Zou1, Gene Koh1, Scott Nanda1, Andrea Degasperi1, Katie unable to attend the appointment in person and concerns over Urgo2,TheodorosI.Roumeliotis3,ChukwumaA.Agu2,CherifBadja1, potential emotionalresponse. Conclusion: Our findings provide additional support for the Sophie Momen1, Jamie Young1, Tauanne D. Amarante1, Lucy Side4, Glen Brice5, Vanesa Perez-Alonso6, Daniel Rueda6, Celine Gomez2, suitabilityofPRSinclinicalpractice,whilehighlightingtheissues Wendy Bushell2, Rebecca Harris1, Jyoti S. Choudhary3, Genomics thatneed tobe addressedwhen providing this information. England Research Consortium, Josef Jiricny7, William C. Skarnes8, T. Yanes: None. B. Meiser: B. Research Grant (principal SerenaNik-Zainal1 investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Astra Zeneca. R. Kaur: 1UniversityofCambridge,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom,2Wellcome None.M.Young:None.P.B.Mitchell:None.M.Scheepers-Joynt: SangerInstitute,Hinxton,UnitedKingdom,3TheInstituteofCancer None. S. McInerny: None. S. Taylor: None. K. Barlow-Stewart: None.Y.Antill:None.L.Salmon:None.C.Smyth:None.B.Betz- Research, London, United Kingdom, 4UCL Institute for Women’s Stablein: None. P.A.James: None. Health, London, United Kingdom, 5St George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 6Doce de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 7University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, C12.6Atailoredapproachtowardsinformingrelativesatrisk 8The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, of inherited cardiac diseases: results of a randomised USA. controlledtrial Mutational signatures are imprints of pathophysiological pro- LiekeM.VandenHeuvel1,2,3,YvonneM.Hoedemaekers4,AnnetteF. cesses arising through tumorigenesis. Here, we generate Baas2,MariekeJ.H.Baars1,EllenM.A.Smets1,J.PeterVanTintelen2, isogenic CRISPR-Cas9 knockouts (Δ) of 43 genes in human ImkeChristiaans3 induced pluripotent stem cells, culture them in the absence of addedDNAdamage,andperformwhole-genomesequencingof EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8755 173 daughter subclones. ΔOGG1, ΔUNG, ΔEXO1, ΔRNF168, C13.3InterpretingTP53variantsidentifiedinHBOCpanels: ΔMLH1, ΔMSH2, ΔMSH6, ΔPMS1, and ΔPMS2 produce marked achallenge forgeneticists andamajorissue forpatients mutational signatures indicative of being critical mitigators of endogenousDNAchanges.Detailed analyses revealthat8-oxo- Edwige Kasper1, Stéphanie Baert-Desurmont1, Florence Coulet2, dG removal by different repair proteins is sequence-context- NoémieBasset2,LisaGolmard3,JessicaLeGall3,NadiaBoutry-Kryza4, specificwhileuracilclearanceissequence-context-independent. Juliette Albuisson5, Sarab Lizard6, Christine Toulas7, Céline Garrec8, Signatures of mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency show compo- Mathilde Gay-Belille9, Nicolas Sévenet10, Paul Vilquin11, Marie nents of C>A transversions due to oxidative damage, T>C and Bidart12, Hélène Larbre13, Gaëlle Bougeard1, Thierry Frebourg1, C>T transitions due to differential misincorporation by replica- ClaudeHoudayer1 tivepolymerases,andT>Atransversionsforwhichweproposea ‘reverse template slippage’ model. ΔMLH1, ΔMSH6, and ΔMSH2 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, CHU Rouen, Depart- signaturesaresimilartoeachotherbutdistinctfromΔPMS2.We ment of Genetics and reference center for developmental disorders, validate these gene-specificities in cells from patients with FHU G4 Génomique, F-76000 Rouen, France, Rouen, France, Constitutive Mismatch Repair Deficiency Syndrome. Based on 2Department of Genetics, Hôpitaux Universitaires Pitié Salpêtrière- theseexperimentalinsights,wedevelopaclassifier,MMRDetect, CharlesFoix,Paris,France,Paris,France,3InstitutCurie,Department for improved clinical detection of MMR-deficient tumors. of Genetics and Paris Sciences, Lettres Research University, Paris, X. Zou: None. G. Koh: None. S. Nanda: None. A. Degasperi: France, Paris, France, 4Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, Lyon, None.K.Urgo:None.T.I.Roumeliotis:None.C.A.Agu:None.C. France, 5Platform of Transfer in Cancer Biology, Georges François Badja: None.S.Momen: None.J.Young: None.T.D.Amarante: Leclerc Cancer Center - UNICANCER, Dijon, France; Genomic and None. L. Side: None. G. Brice: None. V. Perez-Alonso: None. D. Immunotherapy Medical Institute, Dijon, France; Department of Rueda: None. C. Gomez: None. W. Bushell: None. R. Harris: Tumour Biology and Pathology, Georges François Leclerc Cancer None. J.S. Choudhary: None. J. Jiricny: None. W.C. Skarnes: Center, Dijon, France, 6Department of Genetics, Nancy University None. S. Nik-Zainal: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Hospital, Nancy, France, Nancy, France, 7Institut Claudius Regaud, Zeneca,Artios PharmaLtd, Scottish Genome Project. IUCT-O, 31059 Toulouse, France, Toulouse, France, 8Service de C13.2 CCNF (Cyclin F) as a candidate gene for familial GénétiqueMédicale,CentreHospitalierUniversitaire(CHU)deNantes, Hodgkinlymphoma Nantes, France., Nantes, France, 9Département d’Oncogénétique, Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France, Clermont-Ferrand, ElsaKhoury1,HibaMaalouf1,AntonellaMendola1,SylvainChoquet2, France, 10Inserm U916, Department of Genetics, Institut Bergonié, Caroline Besson3, Judith Landman Parker4, Vincenzo D’Angiolella5, Bordeaux, France, Bordeaux, France, 11Département de Pharmaco- HélèneA. Poirel6, NishaLimaye1 logie et de Génomique des Tumeurs Solides, Hôpital Saint Louis, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, Paris, France, 1deDuveInstitute,Brussels,Belgium,2CHULaPitiéSalpétrière,Paris, 12Clinatec, Pôle Recherche, Inserm UMR 1205, Centre Hospitalier France,3CentreHospitalierdeVersailles,LeChesnay,France,4Hôpital Universitaire Grenoble, Alpes, Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 5University of Oxford, Oxford, 38000, France, Grenoble, France, 13Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique United Kingdom, 6Belgian CancerRegistry, Brussels, Belgium. Moléculaire, Institut Godinot, Reims, France,Reims, France. Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a hematological malignancy that Since2017,alargegenepanelincludingtheTP53genehasbeen affects 2.7 individuals per 100,000 per year. It is characterized by validated by the French Genetic and Cancer Group to explore the presence of rare, morphologically distinctive tumor cells patients suggestive of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer surrounded by reactive immune cells. We assessed for rare predisposition (HBOC). As breast cancer belongs to the tumour variantswiththepotentialtoconferpredispositiontofamilialHL, spectrum of the Li-Fraumeni or heritable TP53-related cancer in whole exome sequencing (WES) data from a series of 22 syndrome, we embarked upon a large scale collection and affected members from 11 families. Genes with rare, predicted- classification of TP53 variants found in a HBOC context. Sequen- pathogenic, disease-cosegregating variants in two or more cing of 22,500 HBOC panels in France led to the detection, after families were considered candidates. Intriguingly, a significant exclusionofcirculatingtumourDNAandclonalhaematopoiesisof fraction of the 35 genes identified act in mitosis, mitotic 232 heterozygous TP53 variants (1%). Most of them remained checkpoints and DNA repair, with a second fraction acting in unclassifiedbyClinGenExpertPanelandthereforewereclassified metabolic processes. CCNF (Cyclin F), a widely-expressed cell accordingtoTP53specificationsadaptedfromACMG.Thirtythree cycle-regulatedE3ubiquitinligasecomponent,belongstothefirst percentweredeleterious(classes4and5)andtherestwereVUS category and was prioritized for in vitro functional testing. The requiring further investigations. Interestingly, 45% of deleterious ubiquitination targets of the Skp1-Cul1-F boxCyclin F (SCFCyclinF) variantshaveneverbeendescribedinLFS,suggestingadifferent complex function at precise points during mitosis and are then mutationalspectruminHBOCpatients.Unexpectedly,similarrates degraded; inappropriate persistence of these proteins can cause ofdeleteriousvariantswerefoundbetweenthegroupofpatients genomic instability, focal DNA damage, micronuclei, and forma- fulfilling the Chompret diagnosis criteria for LFS and the group tionofmultinuclearcells,ahallmarkofcertainHLtumors.Wefind who did not fulfil these criteria (33% and 29% of detected TP53 thatbothofthevariantsidentifiedinfamilialHLdisruptbindingof variants,respectively).Wealsoidentifiedinlatebreast orovarian CCNF to three different ubiquitination targets tested: RRM2 cancer(medianages46and79years,respectively)severalloss-of- (Ribonucleotide Reductase Regulatory Subunit M2), involved in function or dominant negative missense TP53 variants, already deoxyribonucleotide production and homeostasis), CDC6 (Cell described in childhood cancers. Identification of pathogenic, Division Cycle 6, involved in regulation of DNA replication) and childhood cancer-prone TP53 variants in HBOC adult patients EXO1 (Exonuclease 1, involved in DNA repair, telomere main- suggeststheexistenceofmodifyingfactorsandobviouslycastsa tenance). CRISPR/Cas9-mediated disruption of CCNF in lympho- shadowofcomplexityovergeneticcounsellingandclinicalfollow blasts is being used to confirm the induction of HL-like cellular upofthese patients and theirfamilies. phenotypes, supporting a tumor-suppressor role for CCNF. E.Kasper:None. S.Baert-Desurmont: None. F.Coulet: None. E. Khoury: None. H. Maalouf: None. A. Mendola: None. S. N.Basset:None.L.Golmard:None.J.LeGall:None.N.Boutry- Choquet: None. C. Besson: None. J. Landman Parker: None. V. Kryza: None. J. Albuisson: None. S. Lizard: None. C. Toulas: D’Angiolella: None. H.A. Poirel:None. N.Limaye: None. None. C.Garrec: None. M. Gay-Belille: None. N.Sévenet: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8756 P.Vilquin:None.M.Bidart:None.H.Larbre:None.G.Bougeard: information leaflet that informs patients about potential None.T.Frebourg: None. C.Houdayer: None. symptomsofDICER1-associated tumors.The surveillance proto- colcomprisesaminimumprogramandanextendedversionfor consideration. The key recommendations of the minimum C13.4 Surveillance recommendations for DICER1 pathogenic program are: annual clinical examination from birth to age 20 variant carriers: a report from the SIOPE Host Genome years,six-monthlychestX-rayandrenalultrasoundfrombirthto Working Group and CanGene-CanVar Clinical Guideline age6years,andthyroidultrasoundevery3yearsfromage8to WorkingGroup age 40 years. The surveillance program for consideration comprises additional surveillance procedures, and recommen- Jette J. Bakhuizen1,2, Helen Hanson3, Karin van de Tuin4, Fiona dations for DICER1 pathogenic variant carriers outside the ages Lalloo5,MarcTischkowitz6,KarinWadt7,BeateB.Dörgeloh8,RoulaA. of the surveillance interval. Patients have to be supported in Farah9, Stavros Glentis10, Lisa Golmard11, Juliane Hoyer12, Kirsi choosingthe surveillance programthatbestmeetstheirneeds. Jahnukainen13, Rosalyn Jewell14, Axel Karow12, Katharina Katsi- Prospective evaluation of the efficacy and patient perspectives bardi10,MichaelaKuhlen15,AndreaMeihnhardt16,KarolinaNemes15, of proposed surveillance recommendations is required to AnnaPoluha17,TimRipperger8,NicolasWaespe18,19,JulianAdlard14, expand the evidence base for surveillance protocols. This work Munaza Ahmed20, Bernadette Brennan21, Tabib Dabir22, D Gareth was supported by Cancer Research UK C61296/A27223. Evans23, Anna Kelsey5, Kelly Kohut3, Anju Kulkarni24, Alex Murray25, J.J.Bakhuizen:None.H.Hanson:None.K.vandeTuin:None. Kai Ren Ong26, Anthony Penn21, Thomas Semple27, Emma R. F. Lalloo: None. M. Tischkowitz: None. K. Wadt: None. B.B. Woodward23, Rachel S. van Leeuwaarde2, Annemieke S. Littooij1,2, Dörgeloh:None.R.A.Farah:None.S.Glentis:None.L.Golmard: JohannesH.M.Merks1,ÅseRasmussen7,HannekeM.vanSanten1,28, None.J.Hoyer:None.K.Jahnukainen:None.R.Jewell:None.A. Stephanie E. Smetsers1, Marjolijn C.J. Jongmans1,2 Karow: None. K. Katsibardi: None. M. Kuhlen: None. A. Meihnhardt: None. K. Nemes: None. A. Poluha: None. T. 1Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Nether- Ripperger:None.N.Waespe:None.J.Adlard:None.M.Ahmed: lands, 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3St None. B. Brennan: None. T. Dabir: None. D.G. Evans: None. A. George’sUniversityHospitalsNHSFoundationTrust,London,United Kelsey: None. K. Kohut: None. A. Kulkarni: None. A. Murray: Kingdom, 4Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, None. K. Ong: None. A. Penn: None. T. Semple: None. E.R. 5Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Woodward: None. R.S. van Leeuwaarde: None. A.S. Littooij: Kingdom, 6National Institute for Health Research Cambridge None. J.H.M. Merks: None. Å. Rasmussen: None. H.M. van Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge University Hospital NHS Santen: None.S.E. Smetsers: None. M.C.J. Jongmans: None. Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7Copenhagen University Hospital Righospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 8Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 9LAU Medical Center, Rizk Hospital, C13.5 APC mosaicism testing in milder polyposis phenotypes Beirut, Lebanon, 10National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, reveals pks+ E.coli bacteria as a possible additional explana- Aghia Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 11Institut Curie, tion forthe development ofcolorectal adenomas Paris, France, 12Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 13University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Diantha Terlouw1, Manon Suerink1, Arnoud Boot2, Alexandra M. J. Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 14Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Langers1, Dina Ruano1, Carli M. Tops1, Tom van Wezel1, Maartje Yorkshire, United Kingdom, 15University Medical Center Augsburg, Nielsen1, HansMorreau1 Augsburg, Germany, 16Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany, 17UppsalaUniversityHospital,Uppsala,Sweden,18UniversityofBern, 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Duke-NUS Bern, Switzerland, 19University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. 20Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 21Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital, Introduction: Mosaic mutations in the APC gene have been Manchester University Foundation trust UK, Manchester, United identifiedasacommoncause(25%)forunexplainedpolyposisin Kingdom, 22Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 23Uni- patients with >20 adenomas. The frequency of APC mosaicism versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 24Guy’s and St remainsunknownin milder phenotypes. Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 25Uni- Materials and Methods: To test for APC mosaicism, we versity Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 26Birmingham analyzed the APC gene in multiple lesions of patients with Women’sandChildren’sNHSFoundationTrust,Birmingham,United unexplainedcolonicpolyposisusingNextGenerationSequencing. Kingdom, 27Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, Additionally,patientswithmilderphenotypes,e.g.>20adenomas London, United Kingdom, 28Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, Uni- atage>70,wereincluded. versityMedical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,Netherlands. Results:Themosaicismdetectionratewas12%(27/232)inthe entirecohort,5.7%inpatientswith<10adenomas(2/35)and7.7% DICER1syndromeisararegeneticdisorderthatpredisposestoa inthosewith10-20adenomas(8/104).Stratifiedforage,2.8%(1/ widespectrumoftumors.Developingsurveillanceprotocolsfor 36)ofpatientsaged>70showedwithamosaicism.Besidesthese this syndrome is challenging because uncertainty exists about “true” mosaicism cases, 21% (50/232) of patients showed a so- the clinical efficacy of surveillance, and appraisal of potential calledhybridmosaicism,wheremultiple,butnotalllesionsshare benefits and harms vary. In addition, there is increasing an identical variant. Interestingly, 46% (23/50) of hybrids have a evidence that germline DICER1 pathogenic variants are asso- specific APC splice variant c.835-8A>G in multiple lesions. ciated with lower penetrance for cancer than previously Together with 7 other recurring APC variants, this variant was assumed. To address these issues and to harmonize compatible with the recently described mutational signature DICER1 syndrome surveillance programs within Europe, the caused by colibactin, a compound produced by pks+ E.coli. The Host Genome Working Group of the European branch of the possible influence of colibactin needs further exploration. There- International Society of Pediatric Oncology and Clinical Guide- fore, we are now performing additional analyses like Whole line Working Group of the CanGene-CanVar project reviewed GenomeSequencing. current surveillance strategies and evaluated literature. Con- Conclusions:OurresultsindicatethatAPCmosaicismalsoplays sensus was achieved for a new surveillance protocol and aroleinmilderpolyposisphenotypes.Furthermore, asubstantial EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8757 proportion of our cohort had a hybrid mosaicism of which the Jennifer Kerkhof1,2, Gabriella M. Squeo3, Haley McConkey4,2, clinical consequences are not yet clear. In some patients, the Michael A. Levy1,5, Maria R. Piemontese6, Marco Castori6, Maria presence of pks+ E.coli might be the explanation for the Accadia7, Elisa Biamino8, Matteo Della Monica9, Marilena C. Di developmentof polyps.Grant: DCS Giacomo10, Cristina Gervasini11, Silvia Maitz12, Daniela Melis13, D. Terlouw: None. M. Suerink: None. A. Boot: None. A.M.J. Donatella Milani14, Donatella Milani14, Maria Piccione15, Paolo Langers:None.D.Ruano:None.C.M.Tops:None.T.vanWezel: Prontera16, Angelo Selicorni17, Bekim Sadikovic1,2, Giuseppe None.M. Nielsen: None. H.Morreau: None. Merla18,19 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western C13.6 Germline chromothripsis of the APC locus in a patient University, London, ON, Canada, 2Verspeeten Cilnical Genome withadenomatous polyposis Centre,, London, ON, Canada, 3Laboratory of Regulatory and Functional Genomics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Soffer- FlorentineScharf1,RafaelaMagalhaesLealSilva1,MonikaMorak1,2, enza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Department of Pathology and Alex Hastie3, Georg Papoutsoglou3, Julia M. A. Pickl1, Kai Sendel- Laboratory Medicine, Western University and Verspeeten Cilnical bach1, Tanja Haeusser1, Christian Gebhard1, Melanie Locher1, Genome Centre, London, ON, Canada, 5Verspeeten Cilnical Genome Andreas Laner1, Verena Steinke-Lange1,2, Udo Koehler1, Elke Centre, London, ON, Canada, 6Division of Medical Genetics, Holinski-Feder1,2,Dieter A. Wolf1 Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 7Medical Genetics Service, Hospital "Cardinale G. 1Medical Genetics Center MGZ, Munich, Germany, 2Medizinische Panico",Tricase,Lecce,Italy,8DepartmentofPediatrics,Universityof KlinikundPoliklinik IV,CampusInnenstadt,KlinikumderUniversität Turin,Turin,Italy,9MedicalGeneticsUnit,CardarelliHospital,Naples, München, Munich, Germany, 3Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, Italy, 10UOC Anatomia Patologica, AOR "San Carlo", Hospital, USA. Potenza,Italy,11DivisionofMedicalGenetics,DepartmentofHealth Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 12Clinical Many patients with clinical attenuated adenomatous polyposis PediatricGeneticsUnit,PediatricsClinics,MBBMFoundation,Hospital coliremain undiagnosed after standard genetic testing. Here,we San Gerardo, Monza, Italy, 13Medical, Surgical, and Dental Depart- describe a patient with normal results for Sanger sequencing ment, Università degli Studi di Salerno, Salerno, Italy, 14Pediatric and NGS finally carrying complex structural rearrangements of Highly Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale the APC locus apparently arisen from rare localized germline MaggiorePoliclinico,Milan,Italy,15DepartmentofHealthPromotion, chromothripsis. Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties, By short-read sequencing (Agilent SureSelectXT, Illumina), University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 16Medical Genetics Unit, benign heterozygous variants were identified in APC exons 11, University of Perugia Hospital SM della Misericordia, Perugia, Italy, 13and15,whichwereusedtodeterminetheallelicexpressionof 17Pediatric Department, ASST Lariana, Sant’Anna General Hospital, APC mRNA. RT-PCR and targeted long-read RNA-Seq (Oxford Como, Italy, 18Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Nanopore Technologies, ONT) showed an allelic imbalance with Biotechnology,University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy, ratiosof20:80and30:70,suggestinganallelicreductionofmRNA 19Laboratory of Regulatory and Functional Genomics, Fondazione expression.Adeletionof~105kbupstreamofAPCwasfoundby IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, S, San Giovanni Rotondo, chromosomal microarray but deemed too distant (~990 kb) to Italy. disrupt APCmRNA expression. WGS with ONT identified several genomic rearrangements Chromatinopathies define genetic neurodevelopmental condi- indicative of an insertion of APC from chr.5q22 into chr.10q21.3, tions caused by genetic alterations of components of the whichwasconfirmedbyFISH.Ultimately,opticalmappingandde epigenetic machinery. Majority of these disorders exhibit highly novoassembly(BionanoGenomics)wascombinedwithlong-read specific genome wide DNA methylation profiles detectable in WGS data to reconstruct both APC loci. Whereas one allele was peripheralblood,referredtoasepisignaturesorEpiSigns.Herewe retained in a normal configuration presumably transcribing assessed the DNA methylation episignatures in a cohort of physiological levels of APC mRNA, the second allele was deleted patientswithclinicalfeaturesofachromatinopathydisorder.The from chromosome chr.5q22.1-q22.3 and inserted into chr.10q21 129 patients were grouped in: i) the discovery cohort included (CTNNA3). The inserted fragment harbored multiple complex patients with a certain clinical diagnosis associated with a deletions, duplications, and inversions separating the APC pathogenic variant, ii) the validation cohort consisted of patients promoter/exon 1B from the remaining exons and attenuating carryingpathogenicorlikelypathogenicvariantwithnodefinitive transcription. clinicaldiagnosis,iii)theuncertaincohortincludedpatientswitha Combining Bionano optical mapping, ONT WGS, and RNA-seq clinical diagnosis carrying VUS, and iv) negative cohort consisted provides a powerful tool set for the diagnosis of hitherto of patients with no definitive clinical diagnosis and no genetic genetically unresolved patientswith rare mutation mechanisms. findings. EpiSign analysis was concordant with sequencing F. Scharf: None. R. Magalhaes Leal Silva: None. M. Morak: findings in 98/101 samples. For 3 cases without previous genetic None. A. Hastie: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; findings, EpiSign analysis identified a unique DNA methylation Bionano Genomics, San Diego, CA, USA. G. Papoutsoglou: A. profile, as a sole molecular diagnostic finding explaining their Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;BionanoGenomics,San clinicalpresentation.Intheuncertaincohort,twenty-fivesamples Diego, CA, USA. J.M.A. Pickl: None. K. Sendelbach: None. T. hadnoknownepisignaturesuggestingthattheidentifiedVUShas Haeusser: None. C. Gebhard: None. M. Locher: None. A. Laner: likely no clinical relevance and that those patients need to be None. V. Steinke-Lange: None. U. Koehler: None. E. Holinski- clinically and molecularly reconsidered. Two KDM6A VUSs were Feder:None. D.A. Wolf:None. reclassifiedaslikelypathogenicafterEpiSignanalysis,whileinone patient with a Kabuki VUS, an alternate episignature associated C14Advancesinneurogenetics:Fromdiagnosistotreatment with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome was detected and subsequently confirmed. We demonstrated that DNA methylation episignature C14.1 DNA methylation episignature testing improves mole- provides an effective diagnostic modality in Chromatinopathies, culardiagnosis ofmendelian chromatinopathies helping establish, improve, and correct molecular diagnosis achievedby standard DNA sequencing. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8758 J.Kerkhof:None.G.M.Squeo:None.H.McConkey:None.M. HumanNeuroscience,SapienzaUniversityofRome,Rome,Italy,4Unit A. Levy: None. M.R. Piemontese: None. M. Castori: None. M. of Neuromuscolar and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Dept. of Accadia: None. E. Biamino: None. M. Della Monica: None. M.C. Neurosciences, IRCCS Bambin Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, DiGiacomo:None.C.Gervasini:None.S.Maitz:None.D.Melis: 5Dept.ofNeurosciencesandNeurorehabilitation,IRCCSBambinGesù None. D. Milani: None. D. Milani: None. M. Piccione: None. P. Children Hospital, Rome, Italy, 6Developmental Neurology Unit, Prontera: None. A. Selicorni: None. B. Sadikovic: None. G. Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy, Merla:None. 7Department of Pediatric Neurology, University Children’s Hospital ZurichDept. ofMolecular Medicine, Zurich, Switzerland. C14.2 Integrative approach to interpret DYRK1A variants, Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited ciliopathy leading to afrequent neurodevelopmental disorder characterizedbyauniquecerebellarandbrainstemmalformation, the “molar tooth sign” (MTS), associated to ataxia, oculo-motor Jérémie Courraud1, Eric Chater-Diehl2, Benjamin Durand1, Marie apraxia(OMA),developmentaldelay/intellectualdisability(DD/ID) Vincent3,MariaDelMarMunizMoreno1,ImèneBoujelbene1,Nahalie and variable multiorgan involvement. Over 40 JS genes are Drouot1, Loreline Genschik1, All French and danish geneticists and known,accounting for~60% cases. clinicians4, Yann Hérault1, Julie Thompson5, Marjolaine Willems6, In 2018, we reported homozygous hypomorphic missense Jean-LouisMandel1,Rosanna Weksberg2,Amélie Piton1 variants of the SUFU gene in 2 families with mild JS and polydactyly. A recent study identified heterozygous loss of 1IGBMC,Strasbourg,France,2GeneticsandGenomeBiology,Hospital function(LOF)SUFUvariantsinfamilieswithdominantlyinherited for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Service de Génétique OMA occasionally associated with mild cerebellar hypoplasia Médicale,CHUdeNantes,Nantes,France,4FranceandDenmark,All, andDD/ID. France, 5CSTB, Icube, Strasbourg, France, 6Hôpital Arnaud de To test the hypothesis that SUFU haploinsufficiency may be Villeneuve, Montpellier, France. responsibleforaneurodevelopmentaldisorderatthemildestend of the JS spectrum, we reanalyzed NGS data in a large cohort of 442JSpatients,andidentifiedSUFUheterozygousLOFvariantsin Introduction:Intellectualdisability(ID)isahighlyheterogeneous group of neurodevelopmental disorders with substantial genetic 6 patients (1.4%). This frequency is significantly higher than that contributions which overlap strongly both at the clinical and reported in GnomAD (0.002%, p<0.00001). The phenotype was genetic levels. DYRK1A-related ID is among the most frequent characterizedbymild,purelyneurologicalJS,withOMAandmild monogenic form of ID. We refined the molecular and clinical DD/ID.Whilemost variantswere descriptionofthisdisorderanddevelopedtoolstobetterinterpret de novo, two variants were inherited inherited from mothers, missense variants, which remains a major challenge in human which reported mild DD, clumsiness and learning difficulties in genetics. childhood. Methods: We reported clinical and molecular data of WeproposeSUFUheterozygousLOFvariantsasresponsibleof forty individuals with ID harboring DYRK1A variants and a spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders ranging from developed i) a specific DYRK1A clinical score, ii) amino acid isolatedOMA toa mild,purelyneurological formof JS. conservation data generated from one hundred of DYRK1A Given the overall “benignity” of the phenotype, this condition sequences across different taxa, iii) in vitro overexpression can be transmitted from a carrier parent unaware of being assays to study level, cellular localization, and kinase activity of affected. Awareness of this genetic condition will increase the DYRK1A mutant proteins, and iv) a specific blood DNA diagnosticyieldofmildJS,allowingappropriategeneticcounsel- methylation signature. lingand risk estimates. Results: This integrative approach was successful to reclassify V. Serpieri: None. F. D’Abrusco: None. S. Nuovo: None. E. several variants as pathogenic. However, we questioned the Bertini: None. G. Vasco: None. V. Leuzzi: None. S. D’Arrigo: involvementofsomeothers,suchasp.Thr588Asn,yetreportedas None.G. Zanni:None. E.Boltshauser: None. E.Valente: None. pathogenic,andshoweditdoesnotcauseproteinimpairmentor obvious phenotype inmice. Conclusion: Our study demonstrated the need for caution C14.4 Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress may when interpreting variants in DYRK1A, even those occurring de explaincognitiveandmuscleimpairmentinFOXP1syndrome novo.Thetoolsdevelopedwillbeusefultointerpretaccuratelythe variantsidentified inthefuture in this gene. HenningFröhlich1, Jing Wang1,Amit Agarwal2, GudrunRappold1 J. Courraud: None. E. Chater-Diehl: None. B. Durand: None. M. Vincent: None. M.D. Muniz Moreno: None. I. Boujelbene: 1Institut für Humangenetik, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Institute for None. N. Drouot: None. L. Genschik: None. A. French and Anatomyand Cell Biology, Heidelberg, Germany. danish geneticists and clinicians: None. Y. Hérault: None. J. Thompson: None. M. Willems: None. J. Mandel: None. R. Impaired mitochondrial function can affect cognitive and motor Weksberg:None. A.Piton: None. performance in people with neurodevelopmental disorders. FOXP1syndromeisaneurocognitivedisorderthatincludesmotor malfunction,aswellasintellectualdisability,autismandlanguage C14.3 SUFU heterozygous loss of function variants cause a impairment. In this study, we used a Foxp1+/− mouse model to dominantly inherited neurodevelopmental disorder at the investigate whether cognitive and motor deficits in mildestend ofJoubert Syndrome FOXP1 syndrome are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress. Here we show that several genes that Valentina Serpieri1,2, Fulvio D’Abrusco1, Sara Nuovo3, Enrico regulatemitochondrialbiogenesisanddynamics(e.g.Foxo1,Pgc- Bertini4,GessicaVasco5,VincenzoLeuzzi3,StefanoD’Arrigo6,Ginevra 1α, Tfam, Opa1, and Drp1) were dysregulated in the striatum of Zanni4, EugenBoltshauser7,Enza Maria Valente1,2 Foxp1+/− mice at different postnatal stages. Furthermore, in the striatumof Foxp1+/−animals,mitochondrial membranepotential 1Dept. of Molecular Medicine, Pavia, Italy, 2Neurogenetics Research wasdisrupted, and reactiveoxygen species, lipid peroxidation and Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of cytochromecreleaseweresignificantlyelevated.Thesefeaturescan EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8759 explain the reduced neurite branching, learning and memory, Despiteincreasingevidenceforamajorcontributionofgenetics endurance, and motor coordination that we observed in these to cerebral palsy etiology, genetic testing is not performed animals.Takentogether,we providestrongevidenceof mitochon- systematically. We assessed the diagnostic rate of genome drial dysfunction in Foxp1+/− mice, suggesting that insufficient sequencing(GS)inaheterogeneouscohortofsingletoncerebral energy supply and excessive oxidative stress may underlie the palsy patients without prior genetic testing. 150 participants cognitiveandmuscleimpairmentinpatientswithFOXP1deficiency. wereretrospectivelyrecruitedafterformaldiagnosisofcerebral H. Fröhlich: None. J. Wang: None. A. Agarwal: None. G. palsy at >4 years of age, with parents also recruited where Rappold: None. possible. Cases were clinically unselected, except for exclusion of post-neonatal causes of CP, and diagnosis confirmed by a paediatric rehabilitation specialist. PCR-free GS was performed C14.5 Antisense oligonucleotides targeting SNCA reduce on the proband, and single nucleotide, indel and copy number alpha-synuclein and associated cellular pathology in Parkin- variants called. Variants were filtered, and classified according son’spatientiPSC-derived midbrain dopaminergic neurons to American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics- Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG-AMP) guidelines. James R. Evans1,2, Gurvir S. Virdi1,2, Minee L. Choi1,2, Emil K. Variants classified as ACMG pathogenic or likely pathogenic (P/ Gustavsson3,4, MinaRyten3,4, SoniaGandhi1,2 LP) were assessed for their contribution to the reported clinical presentation.Clinicallyrelevantgeneticvariantswereidentified 1The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom, 2Department inaheterogeneousgroupofgenes,includinggenesassociated ofClinicalandMovementNeurosciences,UCLQueenSquareInstitute with hereditary spastic paraplegia, clotting and thrombophilic of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 3Genetics and Genomic disorders, small vessel disease, and other neurodevelopmental Medicine, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University disorders. In total, 24.7% of individuals carried a variant College London, London, United Kingdom, 4NIHR Great Ormond considered to cause or increase risk of cerebral palsy, with Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, University College 4.7%ofthecohortresolvedbycopynumbervariantanalysisand London, London,United Kingdom. 20% carrying single nucleotide or indel variants. A further 34% of probands carried one or more rare, high impact variants of Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the most common neurodegenerative uncertainsignificance(VUS)invariationintolerantgenes.Future movement disorder and the fastest growing neurological disease, reanalysisofGSdatawillincreasediagnosticyield,largelydueto withaprevalenceinthegeneralpopulationaged≥65yearsof2-3 increasing associations of emerging genes with CP etiology % already. With no approved curative or disease-modifying enabling reclassification of high impact VUS. therapies currently available, PD presents a major unmet clinical C.L.vanEyk:None.D.L.Webber:None.A.Minoche:None.L. need.Overwhelmingevidencesuggeststhattheabnormalaggrega- Perez-Jurado: None. M. Corbett: None. A. Gardner: None. J.G. tion of the protein α-synuclein, encoded by the SNCA gene, is the Berry: None. K. Harper: None. A.H. MacLennan: None. J. causative agent of PD, driving the neuronal death and cellular Gecz:None. dysfunctioncharacteristicofthedisorder.Giventhatmultiplications oftheSNCAgeneareknowntocausefamilialPD,andthatPDrisk C15Pleiotropic diseases:diagnosis andmechanisms lociidentifiedthroughgenome-wideassociationstudieshavebeen showntoregulateSNCAexpression,therehasbeengrowinginterest C15.2 Evaluating positive and negative predictive values of innoveltherapiesdirectlytargetingα-synuclein.Here,weusenovel expanded carrier screening: lessons learned from the antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) targeted to human SNCA to ciliopathies reduce α-synuclein expression in midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons generated from PD patient-derived induced pluripotent Ella Vintschger, Pascal Joset, Dennis Kraemer, Anita Rauch, stem cells. We demonstrate that an ASO-induced reduction in α- RuxandraBachmann-Gagescu synucleinexpressionreversesestablishedα-synucleinpathologyand rescues cell death in these neurons. We further demonstrate that University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland. thisimprovementinneuronalhealthmaybemediatedthroughan amelioration of mitochondrial function. In summary, our data Nextgenerationsequencingallowsdeterminationofcarrierstatus supportsthecontinuedexplorationofASOtechnologytargetedto for rare recessive disorders, informing couples about their SNCAasanoveldisease-modifyingtherapyforPDandotherrelated reproductive risk. To justify its broad application, any screening synucleinopathies. testmustdemonstratesufficientpositiveandnegativepredictive J.R. Evans: None. G.S. Virdi: None. M.L. Choi: None. E.K. values (PPV/NPV). Predicting the clinical significance of identified Gustavsson:None. M. Ryten: None. S.Gandhi: None. variants represents a challenge for expanded carrier screening (ECS),sincevariantpathogenicityinterpretationrelyingonACMG criteria is limited in healthy individuals because criteria like C14.6Yieldofclinicallyreportablegeneticvariantsincerebral “phenotypicmatch”or“familialsegregation”areunapplicable.To palsyby whole genomesequencing evaluate PPV and NPV of ECS, we focused on the ciliopathies, a well-studied group of recessive disorders with ~130 associated Clare L. van Eyk1, Dani L. Webber1, Andre Minoche2, Luis Perez- genes causing severe pediatric phenotypes. Performing WES on Jurado3,4, Mark Corbett1, Alison Gardner1, Jesia G. Berry1, Kelly 397 healthy individuals, we found 37% to be carriers of ≥1 Harper1, Alastair H.MacLennan1, JozefGecz1,5 “reportable” ciliopathy variant. In 5/177 couples, both partners carried variants in the same gene. However, classifications 1University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 2Garvin Institute of frequently differed between databases, questioning the patho- Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 3Universitat Pompeu Fabra, genicityofidentifiedvariantsandlimitingthePPV.Novelmissense Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital del Mar Research Institute, Barcelona, variants are typically classified as VUS and not reported. They Spain, 5South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, represent however putative false negatives, increasing the Adelaide, Australia. residual risk of being a carrier after a “negative” test. How much this decreases the NPV is unclear. Including rare novel missense EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8760 variants predicted as deleterious by multiple algorithms, the Research Consortium, Patrick Yu-Wai-Man1,2,14, Anthony T. carrier rate rose to 71% with 11/177 couples at potential risk. Moore1,2,15,Andrew R.Webster1,2,Gavin Arno1,2,16 Ciliopathies being rare disorders, the majority of variants cannot be disease alleles; To identify disease-causing variants, we 1Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, included gene-specific and structural information to prioritize United Kingdom, 2Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, variantsforfunctionalevaluation.Inconclusion,currentlimitations London, United Kingdom, 3Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, invariantpathogenicitypredictionsubstantiallydecreasePPVand United Kingdom, 4Liverpool Women’s Hospital, Liverpool, United NPVof ECS.Funding:KFSP-UZH Praeclare Kingdom, 5Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, United E. Vintschger: None. P. Joset: None. D. Kraemer: None. A. Kingdom, 6Royal Hospital for Children, Glasgow, United Kingdom, Rauch:None. R.Bachmann-Gagescu: None. 7Reference Center for Lysosomal Diseases, Neuro-Genetic and Metabolism Unit, Paris, France, 8Groupe Hospitalier La Pitié Salpêtrière-Charles Foix, DHU Vision Et Handicaps, Paris, France, C15.3TheBardet-BiedlproteinBbs1controlproteinandlipid 9UniversitéAngers,MitoLabteam,UMRCNRS6015-INSERMU1083, composition ofzebrafish photoreceptor outer segments Angers,France,10NationalHospitalforNeurologyandNeurosurgery, University College London Hospitals NHS trust, London, United Markus Masek1, Christelle Etard2, Claudia Hoffmann1, Andreas Kingdom,11NIHRBioResource-RareDiseases,Cambridge University Hülsmeier3, Thorsten Hornemann3, Uwe Strähle2, Ruxandra Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Bachmann-Gagescu1 Cambridge, United Kingdom, 12Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, 1University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 2Karlsruhe Institute of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 13MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Technology, Karlsruhe,Germany, 3University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Diseases, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery and Switzerland. UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 14John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair and MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a ciliopathy characterized by Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, retinal dystrophy, intellectual disability, polydactyly, obesity and Cambridge, United Kingdom, 15Department of Ophthalmology, renal anomalies. In photoreceptors (PR), light sensation occurs in University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA, 16Great Ormond outersegments(OSs),whicharespecializedprimarycilia.BBS1,the Street Hospitalfor Children, London, United Kingdom. major BBS gene, is part of a protein complex called “BBSome”, which is involved in intracellular protein transport. However, the Introduction:BiallelicFDXR(ferredoxinreductase)variantswere precise function of BBS1/BBSome in controlling trafficking of recently identified to lead to a novel mitochondrial disorder ciliary proteinsin PRsremainsunclear. characterised by sensorineural hearing loss, visual impairment Inzebrafishbbs1mutants,weobservedimpairedvisualfunction and systemic manifestations. Since the first reports in 2017, startingat5dayspostfertilization(dpf),beforeappearanceofany other researchers identified further individuals diagnosed with morphological changes. With time, progressive PR-cell layer variable severity mitochondrial disorder consequent upon disorganizationanddysmorphicOSsappeared.PRsdifferentiated pathogenic biallelicFDXRvariantstotalling34 cases worldwide. normally,indicatingthatBbs1ispredominantlyrequiredfortheir ThisstudyreportsnovelpathogenicvariantsinFDXRanddetails functionand/ormaintenance.Eye-specifictranscriptomicanalyses the association of FDXR variants with retinal dystrophy in an showednodifferentially expressedgenesat5dpf,indicatingthat expanded spectrum of mitochondrial iron-sulfur synthesis developmental signaling is not affected by Bbs1 loss. At 10dpf, disease. mostly non-specific degenerative signatures were present in the Methods: Patients carrying biallelic FDXR variants were transcriptome.ProteomicsonisolatedadultOSsrevealedtheloss identified by genome sequencing (GS) as part of the National oftheentireBBSomefrommutantOSsandanoverallaccumula- Institute for Health Research BioResource rare-disease and the tion of non-ciliary proteins. Membrane-associated proteins were UK’s 100,000 Genomes Project with an additional case identified overrepresented in our dataset, supporting the role of BBS1/the by exome sequencing. Retrospective clinical data was collected BBSome in controlling ciliary transport of membrane-associated from the medical records. Haplotype reconstruction was per- proteins. Interestingly, lipid binding/transport proteins were formedinfamilies harboringthesame missense variant. significantly enriched in mutant OSs. LC-MS lipidomics revealed Results: 10 individuals (8 unrelated families) with biallelic an increase of unesterified cholesterol in mutant OSs. Given the variants in FDXR were identified. In addition to bilateral optic exquisitely controlled lipid composition of OSs, this disruption is atrophyandvariableextra-ocularfindings,7/10(70%)individuals expectedtointerferewithvisualfunction.Inconclusion,wehave had retinal dystrophy, not well characterised in previous reports. identified a novel putative function for Bbs1/BBsome in lipid The previously unreported missense variant (c.1115C>A) was homeostasis, which suggests a new mechanism underlying found in 5/8 (62.5%) study families. Haplotype reconstruction decreased visual function. Grant: SNF:_PP00P3_170681 usingGS datademonstrated alikely ancestralhaplotype. M. Masek: None. C. Etard: None. C. Hoffmann: None. A. Conclusions: FDXR-associated disease is a phenotypically Hülsmeier: None. T. Hornemann: None. U. Strähle: None. R. heterogeneous disorder with retinal dystrophy as a frequent Bachmann-Gagescu: None. clinical feature observed in this cohort. In addition, we hypothe- sise that multiple factors may drive the pathogenesis of optic atrophy, retinal degeneration and perhaps the systemic C15.4Beyondsyndromicopticatrophy:expandingtheocular manifestations. phenotype caused by biallelicvariants in FDXR and reporting Funding:Supported by Moorfields EyeCharity (GR001203). retinal dystrophyas anovel feature N.Jurkute:None.P.D.Shanmugarajah:None.M.Hadjivassi- liou:None.J.Higgs:None.M.Vojcic:None.I.Horrocks:None.Y. Neringa Jurkute1,2, Priya D. Shanmugarajah3, Marios Hadjivassi- Nadjar: None. V. Touitou: None. G. Lenaers: None. J. Acheson: liou3, Jenny Higgs4, Miodrag Vojcic5, Iain Horrocks6, Yann Nadjar7, None. A.G. Robson: None. F.L. Raymond: None. M.M. Reilly: Valerie Touitou8, Guy Lenaers9, James Acheson2,10, Anthony G. None. P. Yu-Wai-Man: None. A.T. Moore: None. A.R. Webster: Robson1,2,FLucyRaymond11,12,MaryM.Reilly13,GenomicsEngland None.G. Arno:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8761 C15.5AMouseModelofBrittleCorneaSyndromecausedby and their parents (when available). Sanger sequencing was used mutationin Zfp469 for segregation analysis of disease-causing mutations in the families. Chloe M. Stanton, Amy Findlay, Camilla Drake, Zuhair Mustafa, Results:UsingWES,amoleculardiagnosiswasreachedfor16of Veronique Vitart the 28 probands (57%). Genes known to be associated with heterotaxyand/orprimaryciliarydyskinesiainwhichhomozygous MRCHumanGenetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. pathogenicorlikely-pathogenicvariantsweredetected,included: CFAP53 (CCDC11), CFAP298 (C21orf59), CFAP300, LRRC6, GDF1, The collagen-rich corneal stroma accounts for 90% of corneal DNAAF1, DNAH5, CCDC39, CCDC40 and TTC25. Additionally, we thicknessinhumans,andisamajor determinantofvisualacuity. detectedahomozygousdiseasecausingmutationinDAND5,asa Brittle Cornea Syndrome (BCS) is a rare recessive condition novelrecessivemonogeniccauseforheterotaxyinhumans.Three characterised by extreme thinning of the cornea and sclera. BCS additional probands were found to harbor variants of uncertain significance.TheseincludedvariantsinDNAH6,HYDIN,CELSR1and results from loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in the poorly understoodgenesZNF469orPRDM5.Wecreatedamousemodel CFAP46. Conclusions:Ourfindingscontributetothecurrentknowledge ofBCSinordertodeterminethefunctionofZfp469inthecornea, and to elucidate pathogenic mechanisms in BCS. CRISPR-Cas9 regarding monogenic causes of heterotaxy and its associated genome editing was used to recapitulate a human ZNF469 BCS congenital heart defects and underscore the role of next mutationintheorthologousgeneinmouse,Zfp469.Theresulting generation sequencing techniques in the diagnostic workup of mouse line has been subject to ophthalmic phenotyping, such patients, andespecially among consanguineousfamilies. including anterior segment optical coherence tomography, Y. Bolkier: None. O. Barel: None. D. Marek-Yagel: None. D. histology, immunohistochemistry and transmission electron Atias-Varon:None.M.Kagan:None.A.Vardi:None.D.Mishali: microscopy(TEM),alongsidetranscriptomicandproteomicprofil- None. U. Katz: None. Y. Salem: None. T. Tirosh: None. J.M. ing of stromal keratocytes. Homozygous Zfp469 LOF causes Jacobson: None. A. Raas-Rothschild: None. Y. Sarouf: None. O. significant corneal thinning, arising from reduced stromal thick- Shlomovitz: None. A. Veber: None. N. Shalva: None. Y. Ben ness, established during corneal development. The expression of Moshe: None. O. Staretz-Chacham: None. G. Rechavi: None. S. genes with important roles in keratocytes was altered in M. Mane: None. Y. Anikster: None. A. Vivante: None. B. Pode- homozygous mutant lines, changing the composition of ECM Shakked:None. in vivo and in vitro. Primary keratocytes show a proliferation defect,suggestingpossiblemechanismsthatcontributetodisease C16Monogenic neurodevelopmental disorders pathologyinBCS.AmousemodelofZfp469dysfunctionoffers a uniqueentrypointforinvestigatingregulatoryprocessesshaping C16.1 Pathogenic variants in SMARCA5, a chromatin remo- the stroma in health and disease, and highlight pathways deler, causeasyndromic neurodevelopmental disorder contributing to the development and maintenance of a healthy corneal stroma. Work remains to determine whether these Dong Li1, Qin Wang1, Naihua Gong2, Alina Kurolap3, Hagit Baris pathwaysmaybemodulatedfordiagnosticortherapeuticbenefit Feldman3, Nikolas Boy4, Melanie Brugger5, Katheryn Grand6, Kirsty inBCSorconditionssuchaskeratoconuswherethecorneathins McWalter7, Maria Guillen Sacoto7, Emma Wakeling8, Małgorzata progressively overtime. Nowaczyk9, Claudia Gonzaga-Jauregui10, Mariam Mathew11, Yue C.M. Stanton: None. A. Findlay: None. C. Drake: None. Z. Huang12, Theresa Brunet5, Daniela Choukair4, Dana Brown13, Mustafa:None. V. Vitart:None. Theresa Grebe13, Dov Tiosano14, Matthew Kayser2, Tiong Tan15, Matthew Deardorff16,Yuanquan Song1, Hakon Hakonarson1 C15.6Wholeexomesequencingrevealsamonogeniccausein 1Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2Uni- 57% of individuals with laterality disorders and associated versity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 3Tel Aviv Sourasky congenitalheart defects Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Technical University Munich, Munich, Ger- Yoav Bolkier1,2, Ortal Barel1,2, Dina Marek-Yagel1,2, Danit Atias- many, 6Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, PhiladelphiaLos Angeles, CA, Varon1,2, Maayan Kagan1,2, Amir Vardi1,2, David Mishali1,2, Uriel USA, 7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 8Great Ormond Street Katz1,2, Yishay Salem1,2, Tal Tirosh1,2, Jeffrey M. Jacobson1,2, Annick Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Raas-Rothschild1,2, Yarden Sarouf1,2, Omer Shlomovitz1,2, Alvit Kingdom,9McMasterUniversity,Hamilton,ON,Canada,10Regeneron Veber1, Nechama Shalva1, Yishay Ben Moshe1,2, Orna Staretz- Genetics Center, PhiladelphiaTarrytown, NY, USA, 11Nationwide Chacham3,4, Gideon Rechavi1,2, Shrikant M. Mane5, Yair Anikster1,2, Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA, 12University of California, AsafVivante1,2, BenPode-Shakked1,2 Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 13Phoenix Children’s Hospital, Phoenix,AZ,USA,14RuthRappaportChildren’sHospital,Haifa,Israel, 1Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of 15Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, Medicine,Tel-AvivUniversity,Tel-Aviv,Israel,3SorokaMedicalCenter, 16Children’sHospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,CA, USA. Beer-Sheva, Israel, 4Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 5Yale Schoolof Medicine, New Haven,CT,USA. Chromatin remodelers regulate chromatin states and DNA accessibility, to achieve precise gene transcription. We describe Introduction: The molecular basis of heterotaxy and congenital pathogenic variants in SMARCA5, encoding the ATPase motor of heart malformations associated with disruption of left-right (L-R) the ISWI chromatin remodeler, as a cause of a novel neurodeve- asymmetry is broad and heterogenous, with over 25 genes lopmental disorder. By exome sequencing and international implicated in its pathogenesis thus far. Objective: We sought to matchmaking,weidentifiedtwelveindividualsfromtenunrelated elucidatethemolecularbasisoflateralitydisordersandassociated families with nine de novo or dominantly inherited variants in congenital heart defects in a cohort of 28 unrelated probands of SMARCA5.Allofthevariantswereabsentinpopulationgenomics Arab-Muslim descent, using next generation sequencing techni- resources.Accompanying phenotypesincludevaryingdegreesof ques. Methods: Detailed clinical phenotyping followed by Whole developmental delay, frequent postnatal short stature and Exome Sequencing (WES) was pursued for each of the probands microcephaly, and recurrent dysmorphic features. Three- EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8762 dimensionalmodellingsuggestedthatalloftheidentifiedamino- Institute of Genomic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 19EA481 acid substitutions may disrupt interactions of SMARCA5 with the Integrative and Cognitive Neuroscience Research Unit, University nucleosome and in turn affect ATPase binding. Loss-of-function of Franche-Comte, Besancon, France. mutation of its Drosophila orthologue Iswi leads to decreased larvalbodysizeandsensorydendritecomplexity,togetherwitha Telomere maintenance 2 (TELO2 or Tel2), Tel2 interacting tilingdefect.Moreover,neural-specificknockdownofIswiinadult protein 2 (TTI2) andTel2 interacting protein 1 (TTI1) are the fliesexhibitsmallerbrain,mushroombodypatterningdefectsand threecomponentsofthe conservedTriple T(TTT)complexthat impaired locomotion. These phenotypes mimic the salient regulates activities of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-related features observed in this patient cohort. Remarkably, these protein kinases (PIKKs), including mTOR, ATM and ATR, by phenotypes seen in flies can be rescued by wild type human regulating the assembly of mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) and is SMARCA5butnot thevariantsidentified inhumans,highlighting essentialfortheexpression,maturationandstabilityofATMand the pathogenic nature of the identified variants in patients. Our ATR in response to DNA damage. TELO2 and TTI2-related findings in a fly in vivo model highlight the important and autosomal recessive encephalopathies have been recently previously underappreciated role of the ISWI family proteins in described in 8 and 10 patients respectively, presenting with dendrite morphogenesis, neural circuit formation, and diverse moderate to severe intellectual disability and postnatal micro- behaviors.Inconclusion,thisstudyexpandsthespectrumofISWI- cephaly, associated to a movement disorder for TELO2 patients related disorders and extends the tally of causative genes in and short stature for TTI1 patients. We present clinical and neurodevelopmental disorders. functional data in a series of seven patients belonging to five D. Li: None. Q. Wang: None. N. Gong: None. A. Kurolap: unrelated families. All harbor TTI1 biallelic variants and present None. H. Baris Feldman: None. N. Boy: None. M. Brugger: withintellectualdeficiency,microcephaly,ashortstature,anda None. K. Grand: None. K. McWalter: A. Employment (full or movement disorder. Functional studies were conducted. We part-time); Significant; GeneDx. M. Guillen Sacoto: A. Employ- evaluated the activity of TTI1 clinical mutants, Leu767Ser, ment(fullorpart-time);Significant;GeneDx.E.Wakeling:None. Ser838Leu and Asp921Asn, and of 3 additional TTI1 variants, M.Nowaczyk:None.C.Gonzaga-Jauregui:A.Employment(full Val123Glu, Ser402Pro and Asp887Glu in HEK293T cell lines. We or part-time); Significant; Regeneron. M. Mathew: None. Y. also showed functional impairment of TTT complex and mTor Huang: None. T. Brunet: None. D. Choukair: None. D. Brown: pathway activity in cells derived from 4 patients. With these None. T. Grebe: None. D. Tiosano: None. M. Kayser: None. results, we describe TTI1-related encephalopathy for the first T. Tan: None. M. Deardorff: None. Y. Song: None. H. time and introduce the concept of TTT-pathy.This work was Hakonarson: None. supported by UM1 HG006542 (JRL) from the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI)/National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) to the Baylor Hopkins Center for C16.2BiallelicTTI1pathogenicvariantscauseamicrocephalic Mendelian Genomics (BHCMG). SEA was partially supported by neurodevelopmental disorder the ChildCare Foundation and an ERC grant. M. Serey-Gaut: None. G.K. Essien-Umanah: None. P. Mak- Margaux Serey-Gaut1, George K. Essien-Umanah2,3, Periklis Mak- rythanasis:None.M.Suri:None.A.M.Taylor:None.J.Sullivan: rythanasis4,5,MohnishSuri6,AlexanderM.Taylor7,JenniferSullivan8, None. V. Shashi: None. X. Song: None. J.A. Rosenfeld: None. C. Vandana Shashi8, Xiaofeng Song9, Jill A. Rosenfeld9,10, Christelle Cabrol:None.D.Pehlivan:None.Z.CobanAkdemir:None.B.B. Cabrol1, Davut Pehlivan9, Zeynep Coban Akdemir9, Bilgen B. Geckinli: None. J. Eason: None. R. Sachdev: None. C. Evans: Geckinli11, Jacqueline Eason6, Rani Sachdev12, Carey-Anne Evans13, None. M. Buckley: None. C. Nixon: None. J. Piard: None. T. Michael Buckley14, Cheng Yee Nixon13, Juliette Piard1,15, Toni Roscioli: None. J.R. Lupski: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. V. Roscioli12,13, James R. Lupski9,16,17, Stylianos E. Antonarakis4,5,18, Dawson:None. T.Dawson:None. L.VanMaldergem: None. ValinaDawson2,3, Ted Dawson2,3,Lionel VanMaldergem1,15,19 1Centre de génétique humaine, Université de Franche-Comté, C16.3 Monoallelic variants in TFAP2E cause central nervous Besancon, France, 2Neuroregeneration and Stem Cell Programs, systemandcraniofacial anomalies Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA, 3Department of Neurology, Johns Jeshurun Chiaran Kalanithy1,2,3, Gabriel Clemens Dworschak1,2,3, HopkinsUniversity SchoolofMedicine, Baltimore,MD,USA,4Service JillA.Rosenfeld4,5,EnricoMingardo1,2,JilDeboraStegmann1,2,3,Alina ChristineHilger1,2,3,Wen-HannTan6,StephanieA.Coury6,AudreyC. of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Woerner7,JessicaSebastian7,PaulA.Levy8,AlbertBecker9,TobiasT. University of Geneva Medical Faculty, Geneva, Switzerland, 6Clinical Lindenberg2, Öznur Yilmaz2, Holger Thiele10, Jennifer E. Posey4, Genetics Service, Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, James R. Lupski4,11,12, Waltraut M. Merz13, Benjamin Odermatt2, United Kingdom, 7Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, Heiko Reutter1,14 University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 8Depart- ment of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, USA,9DepartmentofMolecularandHumanGenetics,BaylorCollege 2Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Depart- ofMedicine,Houston,TX,USA,10HumanGenomeSequencingCenter, ment of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital Medical Center, University Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 11Department of Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Molecular and MedicalGenetics,MarmaraUniversitySchoolofMedicine,Istanbul, Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, Turkey, 12Centre for Clinical Genetics, Sydney Children’s Hospital, 5BaylorGeneticsLaboratories,Houston,TX,USA,6DivisionofGenetics Sydney, Australia, 13Neuroscience Research Australia (NeuRA) andGenomics,BostonChildren’sHospital,Boston,MA,USA,7Division Institute, Sydney, Australia, 14New South Wales Health Pathology, of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, UPMC Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 15Clinical Investiga- Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 8Department tion Center 1431, National Institute of Health and Medical of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY, USA, Research (INSERM), Besancon, France, 16Department of Pediatric 9Section for Translational Epilepsy Research, Department of Neuro- Genetics,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,SanAntonio,TX,USA,17Texas pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 10Cologne Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA, 18Medigenome, Swiss CenterforGenomics(CCG),UniversityofCologne,Cologne,Germany, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8763 11Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, stature, severe intellectual disability, prominent speech delay, Houston, TX, USA, 12Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA, hypotonia, seizures, pervasive behavioural abnormalities and 13Department of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medicine, University reduced white matter volume including thinning of the corpus Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 14Department of Neonatology and callosum.TheclinicalfeaturesofTRAPPC10-relateddisorderdisplay Pediatric Intensive Care, Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Uni- notable overlap with those associated with biallelic TRAPPC9 versityHospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. variants, and other ‘TRAPPopathies’. Studies of Trappc10−/− mice revealed significant neuroanatomical brain defects and micro- TFAP2Eencodes the transcriptionfactor AP-2.This transcription cephaly, paralleling those seen in the human condition and in a factor’sroleintheformationofthecentralnervoussystem(CNS) Trappc9−/−mousemodel.WhilebothTrappc10−/−andTrappc9−/− andcraniofacialstructuresinhumanshasnotbeeninvestigated. mice display increased BMI (particularly notable in females), only Here,wereport4individualswithnovelheterozygousmissense ~60%ofindividualswithbiallelicTRAPPC9variantsareoverweight, variants in TFAP2E, all presenting with CNS malformations and and no TRAPPC10 patientsidentified todate display a raisedBMI. craniofacial anomalies. For one family, parental samples were Yeast two hybrid and membrane trafficking assays in HEK293 availabletoconfirmdenovooccurrenceofthemissensevariant. TRAPPC10−/− and patient lymphoblastoid cell lines revealed an All variants were identified by exome sequencing. We initiated absence of TRAPPC10 alongside an unexpected concomitant functional characterisation in zebrafish larvae including splice absenceofTRAPPC9,andaweakenedinteractionbetweenmutant and translational blocking morpholinos (MO) in different TRAPPC10anditsputativeadaptorproteinTRAPPC2L,inaddition transgenic zebrafish lines. Fluorescent signals of neuronal, glial to membrane trafficking defects. Taken together our studies andneuralcrestcellsat2dpfwereanalysedinvivousingatwo‐ confirm biallelic TRAPPC10 variants as causative of a human photon point scanning microscope and subsequent 3D model- ‘TRAPPopathy’ disorder, and define TRAPP-mediated pathomole- lingwithIMARISanalysissoftware.Alcianbluecartilagestaining cular outcomes of importance to TRAPPC9 and TRAPPC10 was done at 3 dpf. Shared phenotypic features among patients mediated neurodevelopmental disorders in humans and mice. comprised malformations of the CNS (4/4) and craniofacial (WellcomeTrust:209083/Z/17/Z;MRC:G1002279,G1001931) anomalies (4/4). MO knockdown of tfap2e in zebrafish larvae L.E. Rawlins: None. H. Almousa: None. S. Khan: None. S.C. recapitulatedthehumanCNSandcraniofacialphenotype.Major Collins: None. M.P. Milev: None. J.S. Leslie: None. D. Saint-Dic: effects on vasculogenesis were excluded after MO injections None.A.M.Hincapie:None.G.V.Harlalka:None.V.E.Vancollie: into vascular reporter lines, suggesting the tissue specificity of None. C.J. Lelliott: None. A. Gul: None. B. Yalcin: None. A.H. the observed effects. Immunohistochemistry showed the Crosby:None. M. Sacher:None. E.L.Baple: None. expression of Tfap2e in the developing CNS of zebrafish and mice. Ourfindingsindicate that TFAP2E plays animportant role in CNS and neural crest development and suggest TFAP2E as a C16.5 A clustering of missense variants in the crucial novel candidate gene for human CNS malformations and chromatinmodifierWDR5definesanewneurodevelopmental craniofacialanomalies.Grant:J.C.K:BonnNIQ614.0754,BONFOR disorder O-167.0023.HR,HT:DFGRE1723/5-1,TH1327/2-1.J.R.L:NHGRI and NHLBI grant to the Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Lot Snijders Blok1,2,3, Jolijn Verseput1, Dmitrijs Rots1,3, Hanka Genomics [UM1 HG006542] Venselaar4, A. M. Innes5, Connie Stumpel6, Katrin Ounap7,8, Karit J.C. Kalanithy: None. G.C. Dworschak: None. J.A. Rosenfeld: Reinson7,8, Eleanor G. Seaby9,10, Shane McKee11, Barbara Burton12, None. E. Mingardo: None. J.D. Stegmann: None. A.C. Hilger: Johanna M. van Hagen13, Quinten Waisfisz13, Pascal Joset14, None. W. Tan: None. S.A. Coury: None. A.C. Woerner: None. J. Katharina Steindl14, Anita Rauch14, Dong Li15, Elaine Zackai15,16, Sebastian: None. P.A. Levy: None. A. Becker: None. T.T. SarahSheppard15,BethKeena15,HakonHakonarson15,16,16,Andreas Lindenberg:None.Ö.Yilmaz:None.H.Thiele:None.J.E.Posey: Roos17,18, Nicolai Kohlschmidt19, Anna Cereda20, Maria Iascone20, None. J.R. Lupski: None. W.M. Merz: None. B. Odermatt: None. Erika Rebessi21, Kristin D. Kernohan22, Philippe M. Campeau23,24, H.Reutter:None. Francisca Millan25, Jesse A. Taylor15, Birgitta Bernhard26, Simon E. Fisher2,3,Han G. Brunner1,3,6, TjitskeKleefstra1,3 C16.4 Biallelic TRAPPC10 variants are associated with a 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Max microcephalic TRAPPopathy disorderin humans andmice Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Don- dersInstituteforBrain,CognitionandBehaviour, Nijmegen,Nether- LettieEleanorRawlins1,HashemAlmousa2,ShaziaKhan3,Stephan lands, 4Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, C. Collins4, Miroslav P. Milev2, Joseph S. Leslie1, Djenann Saint-Dic2, Netherlands,5UniversityofCalgary,Calgary,AB,Canada,6Maastricht Ana Maria Hincapie2, Gaurav V. Harlalka1, Valerie E. Vancollie5, UMC+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, ChristopherJ.Lelliott5,AsmaGul3,BinnazYalcin4,AndrewH.Crosby1, Estonia, 8University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 9Broad Institute of MIT MichaelSacher2,Emma L. Baple1 and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA, 10University Hospital South- ampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 11Belfast City Hospital, 1UniversityofExeter,Exeter,UnitedKingdom,2ConcordiaUniversity, BelfastHSCTrust,Belfast,UnitedKingdom,12AnnandRobertH.Lurie Montreal, QC, Canada, 3International Islamic University, Islamabad, Children’s Hospital and Northwestern University Feinberg School of Pakistan, 4University of Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA, 13Amsterdam UMC, VU University 5Wellcome Sanger Institute,Cambridge, United Kingdom. Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 14University of Zurich, Schlie- ren, Switzerland, 15The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadel- The highly evolutionarily conserved transport protein particle phia, PA, USA, 16University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, (TRAPP)complexes(TRAPPIIandIII)performfundamentalrolesin 17University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany, secretoryandendocyticsubcellulartraffickingpathways.TRAPPC9 18Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, and TRAPPC10 are subunits specific to the mammalian TRAPP II ON, Canada, 19Institute of Clinical Genetics and Tumor Genetics, complex. Our genomic studies confirmed biallelic TRAPPC10 Bonn, Germany, 20ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy, variants as the cause of disease in ten individuals from two 21Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Milan, Italy, 22Children’s Hospital of families affected by an autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental EasternOntarioandChildren’sHospitalofEasternOntarioResearch disorder.Thecardinalclinicalfeaturesincludemicrocephaly,short Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 23Children’s Hospital of Eastern EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8764 OntarioandChildren’sHospitalofEasternOntarioResearchInstitute, Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain, 17Vall d’Hebron University Montreal, QC, Canada, 24Sainte-Justine Hospital, University of Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 18Catalan Institution of Research and Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 25GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. USA,26NorthWestThamesRegionalGeneticsService,Harrow,United Kingdom. Introduction: Phosphoinositides (PIPs) are lipids that play a critical role in processes such as cellular signalling, ion channel WDR5isabroadlystudied,highlyconservedproteininvolvedina activityandmembranetraffic. Whenmutated, severalgenesthat widearrayof biologicalfunctions. Amongthese functions,WDR5 encodeproteinsthatparticipateinthemetabolismoftheselipids isapartofseveralproteincomplexesthataffectgeneregulation giverisetoneurologicalordevelopmentalphenotypes.PI4KAisa via post-translational modification of histones. We collected data PIP kinase that is highly expressed in the brain and is essential from ten unrelated individuals with six different rare de novo forlife. missensevariantsinWDR5;oneidenticalvariantwasidentifiedin Materials and Methods: We used whole exome or genome four individuals, and another variant in two individuals. All ten sequencing to identify biallelic PI4KA variants in 10 independent individuals had neurodevelopmental disorders including speech/ patients. Western Blot, Immunofluorescence and targeted lipido- languagedelays(N=10),intellectualdisability(N=8),epilepsy(N mics to test for PI4KA activity were performed on PBMC (n=4) =6)andautismspectrumdisorder(N=4).Additionalphenotypic andfibroblast samples(n=5). features included abnormal growth parameters (N=6), heart Results:ThemutationsdiscoveredinPI4KAcausedaspectrum anomalies (N=2) and hearing loss (N=2). All six missense of conditions ranging from severe global neurodevelopmental variants occurred in regions of the WDR5 locus known to be delay with hypomyelination to pure spastic paraplegia. Some extremely intolerant to variation. Three-dimensional structure patients presented immunological deficits or genito-urinary analyses indicate that all the residues affected by these variants abnormalities. Functional analyses showed decreased PI4KA and are located at the surface of one side of the WDR5 protein. Five phosphoinositol-4-phosphate levels in the patients’ fibroblasts out of the six amino acid substitutions are predicted to disrupt and a diminished PI4KA activity was found in fibroblasts and interactionsofWDR5withRbBP5and/orKMT2A/C,aspartofthe peripheralbloodmononuclear cells. COMPASS family complexes. Thus, we define a new neurodeve- Conclusions:Wereportanovelsevereneurometabolicdisorder lopmental disorder associated with missense variants in WDR5 caused by PI4KA malfunction, highlighting the importance of characterized by a broad range of associated features including phosphoinositide (PIP) signalling in human brain development intellectual disability, speech/language impairments, epilepsy and the myelin sheath. Acknowledgements: This study was and autism spectrum disorders. This finding highlights the supported by URD-Cat SLT002/16/00174, theCenter for Biomedi- important role of COMPASS family proteins in neurodevelop- calResearchonRareDiseases(CIBERERACCI19-759),theInstituto mentaldisorders. de Salud Carlos III FIS PI20/00758, the Hesperia Foundation, and L. Snijders Blok: None. J. Verseput: None. D. Rots: None. H. the Asociación Española contra las Leucodistrofias (ALE-ELA Venselaar:None.A.M.Innes:None.C.Stumpel:None.K.Ounap: España). None. K. Reinson: None. E.G. Seaby: None. S. McKee: None. B. I.delaCalle:None.E.Verdura:None.A.Rodríguez-Palmero: Burton:None.J.M.vanHagen:None.Q.Waisfisz:None.P.Joset: None. V. Vélez-Santamaria: None. L. Planas-Serra: None. M. None. K. Steindl: None. A. Rauch: None. D. Li: None. E. Zackai: Benkirane: None. F. Saettini: None. L. Pavinato: None. M. None.S.Sheppard:None.B.Keena:None.H.Hakonarson:None. O’Learly: None. E. Barredo: None. V. Michaud: None. D.R. A. Roos: None. N. Kohlschmidt: None. A. Cereda: None. M. Adams: None. C. Casasnovas: None. H.C. Mefford: None. L. Iascone: None. E. Rebessi: None. K.D. Kernohan: None. P.M. González Gutiérrez-Solana: None. A. Brusco: None. M. Koenig: Campeau:None.F.Millan:None.J.A.Taylor:None.B.Bernhard: None.A. Macaya: None.A. Pujol: None. None.S.E.Fisher:None.H.G.Brunner:None.T.Kleefstra:None. C17Population geneticsand genetic epidemiology C16.6 Biallelic PI4KA variants cause a novel neurodevelop- mental syndrome withhypomyelinating leukodystrophy C17.1 Estimation of penetrance for known gene-phenotype relationships using large-scale exome sequencing data in Irene de la Calle1, Edgard Verdura1,2, Agustí Rodríguez-Palmero1,3, 394KUKBiobank participants Valentina Vélez-Santamaria1,4, Laura Planas-Serra1,2, Mehdi Benkir- ane5,FrancescoSaettini6,LisaPavinato7,MelanieO’Learly8,Estibaliz Abhishek Nag, Andrew Harper, Quanli Wang, Sophia Cameron- Barredo9, Vincent Michaud10,11, David R. Adams12, Carlos Casasno- Christie, Keren Carss, SlavéPetrovski vas1,2,4, Heather C. Mefford13, Luis González Gutiérrez-Solana2,14, Alfredo Brusco7,15, Michel Koenig5, Alfons Macaya16,17, Aurora AstraZeneca, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Pujol1,2,18 Penetranceestimatesforcausalvariantsimplicatedinmonogenic 1Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain, human diseases have traditionally relied on small, family-based 2Centre for Biomedical Research in Network on Rare Diseases caseseriesandareacknowledged tobesusceptible toascertain- (CIBERER),Madrid,Spain,3HospitalUniversitariGermansTriasiPujol, ment bias. As such, the population-based nature of the UK Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Biobank (UKB) cohort study reduces this ascertainment bias and Spain, 5Institut Universitaire de Recherche Clinique, Montpellier, couldenablebetterestimatesofthepopulation-levelpenetrance France, 6Fondazione MBBM, Monza, Italy, 7University of Torino, for some of the well-known gene-phenotype relationships. We Torino, Italy, 8Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, estimated penetrance for certain well-established gene-pheno- USA, 9Hospital Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, type relationships using the exome sequence data from ~394K 10University of Bordeaux, Talence, France, 11Bordeaux University unrelatedUKBparticipantsofEuropeanancestry.UKBparticipants Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 12National Human Genome Research were recruited at age 40-80 years and detailed medical history Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA, 13University of Washington, Seattle, was obtained from self-report data, general practitioner, hospital WA,USA,14HospitalInfantilUniversitario NiñoJesús, Madrid,Spain, and death records. Gene-level penetrance was generated by 15Città della Salute e della Scienza, Turin, Italy, 16Vall d’Hebron calculating the proportion of carriers of a specific class of variant EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8765 (e.g.,rare[MAF<0.1%]protein-truncatingvariants[PTVs])inagene 1CenterforIntegrativeGenomics,UniversityofLausanne, Lausanne, thathaveaparticulardisease.Forinstance,thepenetranceofrare Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzer- PTVsinMYBPC3,apredominantcauseofhypertrophiccardiomyo- land,Lausanne,Switzerland,3UniversityCenterforPrimaryCareand pathy, is estimated to be 10.5% (11/105 carriers) [95% CI: 5.4%- PublicHealth,Lausanne,Switzerland,4InstituteofComputerScience, 18%] in the UKB dataset. In comparison, the penetrance for rare UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,5EstonianGenomeCentre,Institute PTVs in PKD1 and polycystic kidney disease is 50.4% (61/121 ofGenomics,UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,6GeneticsofComplex carriers)[95%CI:41.2%-59.6%],andthatforrarePTVsinHBBand Traits, College of Medicine and Health, University of Exeter, Exeter, thalassemia is 71.1% (59/83 carriers) [95% CI: 60.1%-80.5%]. The United Kingdom, 7Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, UKB can thus provide a complementary resource to assess the UniversityMedicineGreifswald,Greifswald,Germany,8Departmentof population-level penetrance for established gene-phenotype Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzer- relationships, which may be further optimised through careful land, 9Local Health Unit Toscana Centro, Florance, Italy, 10Clinical variantcurationandphenotypicrefinementbeyondICD-10codes. Res Branch, National Institute of Aging, Baltimore, MD, USA, Thiscouldalsohelpbroadenourunderstandingoftheunderlying 11Institute ofClinical Chemistry andLaboratory Medicine, University geneticarchitectureandimproveriskpredictionfor“monogenic” Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 12DZHK (German Centre diseases. for Cardiovascular Research), partner site Greifswald, Greifswald, A.Nag:None.A.Harper:None.Q.Wang:None.S.Cameron- Germany, 13Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Christie:None. K. Carss: None. S.Petrovski: None. Genomics, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 14Estonian Biobank, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 15Institute forCommunityMedicine,UniversityMedicineGreifswald,Greifswald, C17.2Public healthimpact ofgenetic variants Germany,16UniversityofExeterMedicalSchool,UniversityofExeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 1717Endocrine, Diabetes, and Metabolism SakariJukarainen,TuomoKiiskinen,JuhaKarjalainen,SinaRüeger, Service, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland. MattiaCordioli, HannaM.Ollila, Matti Pirinen, AndreaGanna Comparingtranscriptlevelsbetweencasesandcontrolsallowsthe University of Helsinki,Helsinki, Finland. identification of differentially expressed genes, which may be causes, consequences or mere correlates of the disease under Ingenome wideassociation studies attention istypically focused scrutiny. Whereas we have previously integrated summary-level on measures of relative risk that do not inform us of the total data from GWAS and eQTLs in a Transcriptome-Wide Mendelian healthburdenassociatedwithcarryingriskalleles.Wedeveloped Randomization(TWMR)approachtoelucidategeneexpressionto anewframeworkforestimatingtheattributablediseaseburdenof traitcausaleffects,hereweproposeareverseTWMR(revTMWR)to genetic variants based on disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) shedlightoncausalimprintsofcomplextraitsontranscriptlevels. from the Global Burden of Disease 2019 Study, which depict the Combining TWMR and revTWMR results revealed that whole- amount of healthy life years lost due to premature death and bloodgeneexpression-traitcorrelationismainlydrivenbycausal livingwith disability. effect from the phenotype on the expression rather than the WeuseinformationfromtheFinnGenstudy(n=260391)and reverse. For example, BMI- and triglycerides-gene expression UKBiobank(n=426464).Wemeta-analyzehazardratioestimates correlation coefficients robustly correlate with trait-to-expression fromthecohorts,applyaBayesianspike-and-slabtypeprior,and causal effects (r=0.09, P=1.54x10−39 and r=0.09, P=1.19x10−34, estimate the attributable DALYs for each variant or polygenic respectively), but not detectably with expression-to-trait effects. score. We consider 2580 fine-mapped disease or risk factor Genes implicated by revTWMR confirmed known associations, suchasrheumatoidarthritisandCrohn’sdiseaseinducedchanges associated variants. Additionally, we consider 80 HLA region variantsand57selectedpolygenicscoresinFinnGen.Weestimate in expression of TRBV and GBP2, respectively. They also revealed the DALYs attributable for 72 major diseases from the Global intricate feedback loops controlling the levels of clinical biomar- BurdenofDisease 2019 Study. kers.Forinstance,weobservedthathighlevelsofHDLcholesterol Rs3798220(LPA)hadthehighesteffectonlossofhealthylife lowertheexpressionofgenesinvolvedincholesterolbiosynthesis years quantified as DALYs at 1.249 (95% CI: 1.090 - 1.407) (SQLE,FDFT1)andincreasetheexpressionofgenesresponsiblefor cholesterolefflux(ABCA1,ABCG1),twokeymolecularpathwaysin throughincreasingriskofischemicheartdisease(1.151DALYs), valvular heart disease (0.047 DALYs), aortic aneurysm (0.035 determining HDL levels. In conclusion, our method disentangles DALYs), and peripheral artery disease (0.016 DALYs). The top 3 the gene expression-phenotype relationship and reveals that polygenic scores with highest number of attributable DALYs complextraitshavemorepronouncedimpactongeneexpression when comparing top 10% vs bottom 90% individuals were 1) than the reverse, demonstrating that studies comparing the coronary artery disease (3.90), type 2 diabetes (3.29), and transcriptome of cases and controls are more prone to reveal educational attainment (-2.76). disease-induced gene expression changes rather than disease S.Jukarainen:None.T.Kiiskinen:None.J.Karjalainen:None. causingones. S. Rüeger: None. M. Cordioli: None. H.M. Ollila: None. M. E.Porcu:None.M.C.Sadler:None.K.Lepik:None.C.Auwerx: Pirinen:None. A.Ganna: None. None.A.R.Wood:None.A.Weihs:None.D.M.Ribeiro:None.S. Bandinelli: None. T. Tanaka: None. M. Nauck: None. U. Volker: None.O.Delaneau:None.A.Metspalu:None.A.Teumer:None. C17.3 Differentially expressed genes reflect disease-induced T. Frayling: None. F.A. Santoni: None. A. Reymond: None. Z. rather thandisease-causing changes in the transcriptome Kutalik:None. Eleonora Porcu1,2,3, Marie C. Sadler3,2, Kaido Lepik4,5, Chiara Auwerx1,2,3, Andrew R. Wood6, Antoine Weihs7, Diogo M. Ribeiro8,2, C17.4 The penetrance of age-dependent monogenic disease Stefania Bandinelli9, Toshiko Tanaka10, Matthias Nauck11,12, Uwe variants depends onascertainment context Volker12,13, Olivier Delaneau8,2, Andres Metspalu14, Alexander Teu- mer12,15, Timothy Frayling16, Federico A. Santoni17, Alexandre Uyenlinh L. Mirshahi1, Kevin Colclough2, Caroline Wright2, Tom Reymond1,Zoltan Kutalik3,2,6 Laver2,RichardStahl1,AliciaGolden1,JessicaGoehringer1,AndrewT. Hattersley2, David J. Carey1,Michael Weedon2, KashyapA. Patel2 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8766 1Geisinger Health, Danville, PA, USA, 2University of Exeter, Exeter, (rg=0.23, P=1.6x10-3) and a lower risk tolerance (rg=-0.41, P= United Kingdom. 1x10-4),whileself-ratedhealthshowedapositivecorrelationwith adherencetobloodpressuremedications(rg=0.24,P=3.7x10-3). Aim: Accurate penetrance of monogenic disorders is often This study provides better insights into the factors affecting unknown due to a phenotype-first approach to genetic testing. adherenceandallowsforabetteridentificationofpatientsathigh Weuseagenotype-firstapproachinlarge-scaleexome-sequenced riskof non-adherence indrug taking. cohortstoaccuratelyestimatepenetranceofmonogenicdiabetes M.Cordioli:None.S.Jukarainen:None.T.Kiiskinen:None.S. variants. We contrast the two commonest causes of monogenic Ripatti:None. A.Ganna: None. diabetes, HNF1A-MODY which causes an age-related progressive diabetes and GCK-MODY, which causes life-long mild hyperglycaemia. C17.6RevealingtherecentdemographichistoryofEuropevia Method: We identified HNF1A and GCK pathogenic variants in haplotypesharing in the UKBiobank clinically-selected probands (N=1742) and three clinically- unselected cohorts with different background rates of diabetes: EdmundH.Gilbert1,2, Gianpiero L. Cavalleri1,2 family members of the proband (N=2192;51% diabetes), a hospital-based Geisinger cohort, (N=132,194;24% diabetes) and 1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 2FutureNeuro apopulation-basedUKBiobankcohort(N=198,748;6%diabetes). SFIResearch Centre, RCSI, Dublin, Ireland. We used age of diabetes-onset as disease outcome for HNF1A- MODYandraisedglucose(HbA1c≥6%/fastingglucose≥6mmol/L) Haplotype-sharing has recently been successfully leveraged to forGCK-MODY. interrogate fine-scale genetic structure - revealing the impact of Results:ForHNF1A-MODY,thepenetranceofdiabeteswas98% specific historical events on the human genetic landscape, in the probands at age 40. This reduced to 86% in family particularlyinEurope.However,thestudyofpopulationstructure members,49%intheGeisingerstudy,and32%intheUKBiobank inEuropehasbeenlargelylimitedtowestern-Europe-restricting (allP<3x10−9vs. proband). The consistency of hazardratios across our understanding of the genetic landscape and demographic studies suggested that the variation in background rate of historyofthewiderEuropeancontinent.Utilisinghaplotypesfrom diabetes could explain the variation in penetrance (family ~5,000individualswithintheUKBiobankwithselectedEuropean members: 11 [95%CI:8-14]; Geisinger: 7.6 [4-16]; UK Biobank 15.6 birthplace and ancestry phenotypes, we sought to apply [8-24,],P=0.4). In contrast, for GCK-MODY, penetrance of mild haplotype and Identity-by-Descent (IBD) analyses to investigate hyperglycaemia was similar in all four cohorts (94%, 93%, 86%, thelandscapeofrecentdemographichistoryacrossEurope,from 89% respectively,P>0.05) and showed remarkably similar HbA1c Portugalinthewest, to Russiain theeast. (6.4% [95%CI:6.3-6.4], 6.6 [6.5-6.7], 6.6 [6.2-6.9], 6.5 [6.4-6.6] We report analysis of the broad genetic structure of Europe respectively) despite the substantial variation in background rate using haplotype-based methods. We highlight novel results from ofdiabetesand HbA1c across cohorts. easternEurope,theBalkans,andMalta-findingeasternEuropea Conclusion:Ascertainmentcontextiscrucialwheninterpreting crossroadsofdifferentEuropeanancestryclines,andfootprintsof theconsequencesofmonogenicdisordersvariantsforage-related genetic isolation in Malta. Obtaining genetically homogenous variablypenetrant disorders. groupswithclusteringanalysis,wedetectedIBD-segmentsharing U.L.Mirshahi: None. K.Colclough: None. C.Wright:None. T. within and between genetic regions of Europe. We demonstrate Laver: None. R. Stahl: None. A. Golden: None. J. Goehringer: region-specificdemographictrajectoriescapturedbyIBD-sharing, None. A.T. Hattersley: None. D.J. Carey: None. M. Weedon: showing a demographically heterogenous landscape across None.K.A. Patel: None. Europe. Finally, we further investigate the ancestry of previously under-reported populations using haplotype-based modelling methodology, further quantifying ancestral components with C17.5 Genetic and environmental determinants of drug IBD-sharingpatterns toinvestigate demographic histories. adherenceanddrug purchasing behaviour Our work aids the understanding of the general haplotypic landscape of Europe, identifying regions with sharing patternsof MattiaCordioli,SakariJukarainen,TuomoKiiskinen,SamuliRipatti, interest to gene-mapping efforts, describing the varied demo- AndreaGanna graphic history across the continent, and finally highlighting the potential use of the UK Biobank as a reference of European Institutefor Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki,Finland. variationbeyond Britain. E.H.Gilbert: None. G.L. Cavalleri: None. One of the major factors behind the efficacy of pharmacological treatments is patients adherence to the prescribed therapy C18Functional genomicsand transcriptomics regimen.Manydemographicandsocioeconomicfactorsmayplay a role in determining adherence, however, there have been few C18.1 An epigenome-wide view of osteoarthritis in primary investigationsonthepotentialeffectsofgeneticvariationondrug tissues adherence.ByleveraginggeneticdatafromtheFinnGenstudy(N =260,405), data from Finnish nation-wide health registries and Peter Kreitmaier1, Matthew Suderman2, Lorraine Southam1, the drug purchase registry (59,605,493 total purchases), we Rodrigo Coutinho de Almeida3, Konstantinos Hatzikotoulas1, Ingrid provide a systematic investigation of adherence determinants Meulenbelt3,JuliaSteinberg1,4,5,CarolineRelton2,JMarkWilkinson6, across multiple medications. Eleftheria Zeggini1,7 For each individual drug-trajectory, we defined adherence as theratiobetweenthetotalpurchasedquantityandthetotaldays 1Institute of Translational Genomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, ofpurchasing.Foreachmedication,werunaGWASofadherence Neuherberg,Germany,2MRCIntegrativeEpidemiology Unit,Popula- andestimateditsgeneticcorrelation(rg)with27publiclyavailable tion Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, traits. Overall, these results suggest that adherence is related to 3Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, Section Molecular behavioural aspects. For example, higher adherence to statins Epidemiology,LeidenUniversityMedicalCenter,Leiden,Netherlands, resultedinassociationwithahighereducationalattainmentlevel 4Cancer Research Division, Cancer Council NSW, Sydney, Australia, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8767 5SchoolofPublicHealth,FacultyofMedicine andHealth, University HospitalsTrust,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,11MedicalResearchCouncil of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 6Department of Oncology & Metabo- Biostatistics Unit,Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. lism,TheUniversityofSheffield,Sheffield,Germany,7TUMSchoolof Medicine, Technical University of Munich and Klinikum Rechts der Thehumangenomecanbepartitionedintodomainsofregulatory Isar,Munich,Germany. elements necessary to control gene expression. Previously, we identifiedcis-regulatorydomainsbasedoncoordinatedchromatin Osteoarthritisisacomplexdegenerativejointdisease.Topromote activity,offeringagreatinsightintotheregulatoryorganizationof the development of novel, efficient therapeutic approaches, it is the human genome. However, chromatin data are not available first necessary to unravel the genomic architecture of osteoar- formosthumangenetics’datasets.Therefore,tocharacterizecis- thritis. Here, we investigate genome-wide DNA methylation from regulatoryorganizationbasedongeneexpressionandgenotypes, macroscopically intact (low-grade) and degraded (high-grade) we used whole-blood RNA-seq from 335 twins (MultiMuTHER osteoarthritis cartilage, as well as synovium tissue from a total of study, TwinsUK). The longitudinal study design also permits 98 knee osteoarthritis patients undergoing joint replacement exploration of the temporal dynamics of cis-coordinated expres- surgery. We conducted an epigenome-wide association study sionpatterns.Weidentified3,979dynamicco-expressedcis-gene (EWAS) comparing matched low-grade and high-grade osteoar- pairs(COPs)inwhole-bloodwithasignificantlongitudinalchange thritiscartilagewithinthesameindividualtoidentifymethylation in correlation. The majority of pairs (51%) shows decreasing markersofcartilagedegeneration.Wefurtherconstructedrandom positive correlation and only 6% decreasing negative correlation forest-based classifiers of cartilage degeneration. We generated over time,while 32% show longitudinal increase in negative and genome-widecis-methylationQTL(mQTL)mapsinsynovium,low- 11%inpositivecorrelation.DynamicCOPsinvolved3,335unique grade,andhigh-gradeosteoarthritiscartilage.WeusedMendelian genes, of which one third were differentially expressed (DE) over randomization (MR) and colocalisation to identify epigenetic time.However,45%ofdynamicCOPsdonotcontainanyDEgene, mechanisms mediating the effects of genotype on disease risk. suggesting that their correlation dynamics is due to change of The EWAS discovered 15,328 differentially methylated sites and varianceratherthanofmeangeneexpression.Weobservedthat 2,477regionslinkedtocartilagedegeneration.Theseregionswere decreasing/increasingcorrelationoftencoincideswithdecreasing/ mappedtogenesenrichedin76GeneOntologytermsincludinga increasing variance of expression over time, respectively. More- potential novel process linked to epithelium development. over,weassessedthetemporal changesingeneticregulationby Machine learning models distinguished low-grade from high- identifying longitudinal-eQTLs, i.e., SNPs associated with gene gradeosteoarthritiscartilagewithhighaccuracy(90%).ThemQTL expression change. The longitudinal eQTL-genes were signifi- analysis revealed widespread associations between genetic cantly enriched in dynamic COPs, identifying genetic regulatory variants and methylation in all three examined tissues. Further- elementsmodulating dynamics of coordinated cis-regulation. more,mQTLscolocalisedwith20osteoarthritis-associatedgenetic WeplantoassessthegeneticcorrelationofourdynamicCOPs loci, potentially elucidating their regulatory targets. Applying MR using the twin relatedness to disentangle genetic from environ- identified19methylationlociwithaputativecausalinfluenceon mental regulatoryfactors. osteoarthritis. This study presents the largest EWAS for knee A. Ramisch: None. J.S. El-Sayed Moustafa: None. D. Ribeiro: cartilagedegeneration,thefirstgenome-widemQTLmapinknee None. G. Leday: None. Y. Jiao: None. G. Nicholson: None. M. OA affected tissues, and evidence for a role of epigenetic Stevens: None. M. Abdalla: None. C. Menni: None. A. Viñuela: mechanisms inosteoarthritis. None. C. Holmes: None. T.D. Spector: None. M.I. McCarthy: P. Kreitmaier: None. M.Suderman: None. L.Southam: None. None. S. Richardson: None. O. Delaneau: None. E.D. Dermitza- R. Coutinho de Almeida: None. K. Hatzikotoulas: None. I. kis:F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Hybridtstat LTD. Meulenbelt: None. J. Steinberg: None. C. Relton: None. J.M. Wilkinson: None.E. Zeggini:None. C18.3 Repeated genomic elements characterization at the single-cell levelalong normal braindevelopment C18.2 Dynamics of gene regulatory organization in long- itudinal twinRNA-seq data Marie Coutelier1,2, Selin Jessa1,2, Nisha Kabir1,2, Steven Hébert2, DamienFaury1,3, NadaJabado1,3, ClaudiaL. Kleinman1,2 Anna Ramisch1,2, Julia S. El-Sayed Moustafa3, Diogo Ribeiro4, Gwenaël Leday5, Yunlong Jiao6,7,8, George Nicholson8, Michael 1McGilll University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Lady Davis Institute for Stevens1,2, Moustafa Abdalla6,7,8, Cristina Menni3, Ana Viñuela9, Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, Chris Holmes8, Timothy D. Spector3, Mark I. McCarthy6,7,10, Sylvia 3The Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center, Richardson11, Olivier Delaneau4, Emmanouil D.Dermitzakis1,2 Montreal, QC,Canada. 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Faculty of Introduction: Repeated genomic elements (RGE) make up more Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute of than half of the human genome, yet the understanding of their Genetics and Genomics in Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Depart- biological function and behavior is still elusive. Some of them ment of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King’s College however have been shown to play major roles in coding genes London,London,UnitedKingdom,4SystemsandPopulationGenetics regulation, especially during development and cell type Group, Department of Computational Biology, University of Lau- differentiation. sanne,Lausanne,Switzerland,5MedicalResearchCouncilBiostatistics Material and methods: We used single-cell or single-nuclei Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Wellcome Centre Human sequencing,followedbyourin-houseprotocolforRGEquantifica- Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, tion,tocharacterizetheirexpressioninadevelopmentalatlasthat Oxford,UnitedKingdom,7OxfordCentreforDiabetes,Endocrinology includes multiple time points from E10 to P6 in the mouse and Metabolism, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of forebrain andhindbrain, aswell asseveralhuman fetal samples. Oxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,8DepartmentofStatistics,University Results: Our approach allowed us to identify repeats families ofOxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,9BiosciencesInstitute,Newcastle with defined expression dynamics in some cell types and University, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle, United Kingdom, developmentalwindows.Forexample,LongInterspersedNuclear 10Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford University Elements1(LINE1)retrotransposonsshowaconsistentincreaseof EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8768 expression along differentiation of neuronal lineages. This Overthelastdecade,RNA-seqtechnologieshavevastlyincreased dynamic is specific, since Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements, our knowledge of gene expression and transcript isoform whicharecomparablefromthetechnicalpointofview,displaya signatures. However, current short-read RNA-seq methods show rather constant profileofexpression. limitations in identifying complex transcript isoforms, as full- Conclusions: Our pipeline for RGE quantification allows us to lengthtranscriptsandmodificationsarenotretained.Inthisstudy, reliably detect repeat families in single-cell data across develop- we address these limitations exploiting the advantages of long ment.OurresultsareconsistentwiththeknownroleofsomeRGE reads native poly(A) RNA-seq using the Oxford Nanopore in cell type differentiation. We will discuss potential biological Technologies (ONT) platform and created a dataset of direct processthatmaybedrivingthedynamicsweobserveandexplore RNA-seq from 60 lymphoblastoid cell lines from European the technical feasibility of pinpointing specific roles for given ancestry.A pilot analysis on 42 samples generated ~3.5 million elements. Our strategy builds up promising avenues towards a aligned sequencing reads per sample with a read N50 length of betterunderstandingofthefunctionalconsequencesofthislarge, 1,350bases.Weidentified10,882proteincodinggenesexpressed unexplored fractionof thegenome atthe single-celllevel. inatleast90%ofthesamples,96%overlapwiththoseidentified Funding:Genome Canada, CIHR, NSERC forthesamesampleswithIlluminaplatform.Geneexpressionwas M.Coutelier:None.S.Jessa:None.N.Kabir:None.S.Hébert: highly concordant between ONT and Illumina (median R2=0.68) None.D.Faury: None.N.Jabado: None. C.L.Kleinman: None. showing good reproducibility. Preliminary isoforms analysis was C18.4 A global map of the impact of deletion of post- performed using FLAIR. We identified 18,355 isoforms represent- translational modification sitesin genetic diseases ing 10,882 genes with 6,987 non-annotated transcripts, the majority of them being linked to genes with more than one PabloMínguez1, Perceval Vellosillo2 annotated transcript.Ongoing allele-specific expression analysis willyieldnovelinsightsontheeffectofcommonandraregenetic 1Genetics and Genomics Department, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, variantsintothespecifictranscriptalterationswiththeadvantage CenterforBiomedicalNetworkResearchonRareDiseases(CIBERER), of high resolution given by long-read sequence technology. ISCIII,Madrid,Spain,2IIS-FundaciónJimenezDíaz,Madrid,Spain. Moreover, we plan to identify RNA modifications from our Nanopore direct RNA-sequencing, and combine these with ChIP- Thereare>200proteinpost-translationalmodifications(PTM)types seq data from our previous work to dissect the contribution of describedineukaryotes,havingdiversespeciesconservationlevels, RNAandhistone modifications to generegulation. proteome coverage, number of high-throughput experiments and A. Réal: None. C. Borel: None. A. Ramisch: None. N. functional roles. From a clinical perspective, a number of diseases Lykoskoufis: None. J. Seebach: None. E.Dermitzakis:None. have been associated to deregulated PTM sites and missense rare variants are globally enriched in PTMs. We hypothesize that some genetic diseases may be caused by deregulation of particular C18.6Substantialsomaticgenomicvariationandselectionfor functions produced by the removal of specific PTM types by BCORmutations inhuman induced pluripotent stem cells genomicvariants.Wecollected>320,000humanPTMsof59types and cross them with >4M missense DNA variants annotated with Foad J. Rouhani1,2, Xueqing Zou3,4, Petr Danecek2, Tauanne Dias pathogenicpredictionsanddiseaseassociations.Wereport>1.74M Amarante4, Gene Koh4,3, Qianxin Wu2, Yasin Memari4, Richard PTM-variant concurrences in >16,500 proteins that an enrichment Durbin5, Inigo Martincorena2, Andrew R. Bassett2, Daniel Gaffney2, analysisdistributedin217pairwisesignificantassociationsbetween SerenaNik-Zainal3,4 18 PTM types and 150 genetic diseases. Around 23% of these associationsarealreadydescribedintheliterature,34%havepartial 1DepartmentofSurgery,UniversityofCambridge,Cambridge,United evidences based on single variants, related diseases or regulatory Kingdom, 2Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, evidences,and43%arenovel.Removalofacetylationpresentsthe 3Academic Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United highesteffect,stilllowstudiedPTMtypeslikeS-glutathionylationor Kingdom, 4MRC Cancer Unit, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Depart- S-nytrosylation show relevance. A network of PTM types and ment of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United phenotypes associations is also discussed. Using pathogenicity Kingdom. predictions we identified potential PTM sites to produce particular diseases if genomic variants remove them. Our results show an HumanInducedPluripotentStemCells(hiPSC)areanestablished important impact of PTM removal producing genetic diseases and patient-specific model system where opportunities are emerging phenotypesthatisPTMtypespecific.Wedescribeforthefirsttimea for cell-based therapies. We compared and contrasted hiPSCs general scenario of PTM types and genetic diseases direct derived from skin and blood from the same individual. We show associations, >40% novel, that provides new capacities to under- extensive single-nucleotide mutagenesis in all hiPSC lines, standanddiagnosethesedisorders. although fibroblast-derived hiPSCs (F-hiPSCs) are particularly P. Mínguez: None.P. Vellosillo: None. heavily mutagenized by ultraviolet (UV)-related damage. We utilized genome sequencing data on 454 F-hiPSCs and 44 blood-derived hiPSCs (B-hiPSCs) to gain further insights. Across C18.5 Transcriptome profiling using long-read sequence to 324 whole genome sequenced F-hiPSCs derived by the Human dissect the interplay between genetic variant and transcript Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Initiative (HipSci), UV-related variations damage is present in ~72% of cell lines, sometimes causing substantial mutagenesis (0.25-15 per Mb). Furthermore, we find AlineRéal1,ChristelleBorel1,AnnaRamisch1,NikolaosLykoskoufis1, remarkablegenomicheterogeneitybetweenindependentF-hiPSC JörgSeebach1,2, Emmanouil Dermitzakis1,3,4 clones derived from the same reprogramming process, due to oligoclonal populations within fibroblasts. In all, we identify 272 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospitals predictedpathogenicmutationsincancer-relatedgenes,ofwhich Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3iGE3 Institute of Genetics and 21 genes were hit recurrently three or more times, involving 77 Genomics of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 4SIB, Swiss Institute of (17%)lines.Notably,151of272mutationswerepresentinstarting fibroblastpopulationssuggestingthatmorethanhalfofputative Bioinformatics, Geneva, Switzerland. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8769 driver events in F-hiPSCs were acquired in vivo. In contrast, funding stream (PB-PG-1014-35016) and the NIHR Great Ormond B-hiPSCs reprogrammed from erythroblasts show lower levels of StreetHospital (GOSH) Biomedical Research Centre (BRC). genome-wide mutations (0.28-1.4 per Mb), no UV damage, but a M.Peter:None.J.Hammond:None.S.C.Sanderson:None.J. strikinglyhighprevalenceofacquiredBCORmutationsin~57%of Gurasashvili:None. A.Hunter: None.B.Searle:None.C.Patch: lines, indicative of strong selection pressure. All hiPSCs had None.L.S. Chitty: None. M.Hill: None.C. Lewis:None. otherwise stable, diploid genomes, highlighting how copy- number-based approaches do not have the required resolution todetectwidespreadnucleotide mutagenesis.Funding:Thiswork C19.2 Changing a single word in prenatal microarray agree- was funded by Cancer Research UK (CRUK) Advanced Clinician ment form significantly decreases the rate of reported ScientistAward(C60100/A23916), variants ofquestionable significance F.J. Rouhani: None. X. Zou: None. P. Danecek: None. T. Dias Amarante:None.G.Koh:None.Q.Wu:None.Y.Memari:None. Lena Sagi-Dain, Moran Echar, Amalia Harari-Shaham, Shirley R. Durbin: None. I. Martincorena: None. A.R. Bassett: None. D. Polager-Modan, Rawan Zaatry, Olga Krivoruk, Jumana Haddad- Gaffney: None.S. Nik-Zainal: None. Halloun,Amir Peleg Carmel Medical Center,Haifa, Israel. C19ELSI in genomics Objective: To examine the effect of patient selected opt-in vs. C19.1Participantexperiencesofgenomesequencingforrare opt-outchoiceontherateofreportedvariantsofuncertainclinical diseases in the 100,000 Genomes Project: A mixed significance (VOUS) and high-frequency low-penetrant (HFLP) methods study findings in prenatal microarray. Methods: A standard microarray agreement form in Israel includes requirement to note patients’ MichellePeter1,2,JenniferHammond1,2,SaskiaC.Sanderson1,3,Jana choicetobeornottobeinformedofVOUSandHFLPvariants.The Gurasashvili1,AmyHunter4,BeverlySearle5,ChristinePatch6,7,LynS. original form was built as an opting-out method, i.e. the women Chitty1,2,Melissa Hill1,2, Celine Lewis1,8 had to actively mark if they did not want to be informed about such findings. Since October 2019, the form was changed into 1NHSNorthThamesGenomicLaboratoryHub,GreatOrmondStreet opting-in option. In this study we have compared the rates of Hospital,London,UnitedKingdom,2GeneticsandGenomicMedicine, reportedVOUSand HFLP variantsbetween thesetwo periods. UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United Results: Of the 1014 prenatal CMA tests, 590 (58.2%) were Kingdom,3InstituteofHealthInformatics,UniversityCollegeLondon, performedintheopt-outperiod.Adecreaseof49.2%intherateof London, United Kingdom, 4Genetic Alliance UK, London, United women requesting to be informed of VOUS findings was noted Kingdom, 5Unique - Rare Chromosome Disorder Support Group, (66.8% in opt-out period vs. 34.0% in opt-in period), yielding a Oxted,UnitedKingdom,6GenomicsEngland,QueenMaryUniversity relative risk (RR) of 0.46 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.39-0.53), of London, Dawson Hall, London, United Kingdom, 7Society and p<0.0001.RateofwomenpreferringtobeinformedofHFLPvariants Ethics Research, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, United decreased by 36.1% (from 75.3% to 48.1%, RR 0.52 (95% CI 0.45- Kingdom, 8Population, Policy and Practice Department, UCL Great 0.60),p=0.0002.Moresignificantdecreasewasnotedincounselling OrmondStreetInstituteofChildHealth,London,UnitedKingdom. conductedbydoctorscomparedtogeneticcounsellors. Discussion: In this study we present a simple and effective methodtodecreasetherateofreportedfindingsofquestionable Background: The 100,000 Genomes Project (100kGP) delivered significance.Varyingratesofdecreasebetweendoctorsvs.genetic wholegenomesequencing(WGS)forrarediseaseandcancerina hybrid research-clinical setting. In this mixed-methods long- counsellors imply differing levels of communication and under- itudinal study, we assessed the attitudes, understanding and standing,yieldingpotential points that needtobe improved. experiences of participants consenting for WGS for rare disease L.Sagi-Dain:None.M.Echar:None.A.Harari-Shaham:None. diagnosis. S.Polager-Modan:None.R.Zaatry:None.O.Krivoruk:None.J. Methods:Participants(patients,parents,relatives)takingpartin Haddad-Halloun: None. A. Peleg:None. the 100kGP at six hospitals were recruited. A survey at time 1 measuredparticipants’(n=504)knowledge,attitudeanddecisio- nal conflict about WGS. At time 2 (at least 12 months later), a C19.3 Healthcare professionals’ views about responsibility in survey measured knowledge, attitude, decisional regret and the sharingofgenetic information to patients’relatives psychologicaloutcomes.Participantswhoreceivedamainfinding wereinvitedto aqualitative interview. Álvaro Mendes,Milena Paneque, JorgeSequeiros Results:Of296surveyparticipants,attitudesremainedpositive and knowledge remained stable over time. Few reported i3S,UnIGENe andCGPP, University ofPorto, Porto,Portugal. decisional regret and 26% had received main findings with minimal negative psychological impacts. Interviews from 38 Although the sharing of information about genetic risks with participantsfurthersubstantiatedthis,thoughdistresswasgreater patients’relativesiskeyingenetichealthcare,researchexploring forparentsthanpatients. Resultscouldbringreliefandgratitude healthcare professionals’ views on this topic is still limited. We aswellasdisappointmentandworry,andthoughadiagnosisdid conducted 10 focus groups with 34 healthcare professionals not impact clinical care for many, social, practical, and emotional working in Portuguese genetic services. We aimed at exploring benefits wereobserved. their views and reasoning about the sharing of genetic informa- Conclusions:Whilstageneticdiagnosiscanbetransformative, tion with patients’ relatives, their perceived responsibilities to it is not the ultimate endpoint for patients and families: patients and their families, confidentiality of genetic information, Appropriatemeasuresshouldbedevelopedtosupportthevaried and how those considerations relate to their practice. Data were emotionalandpsychologicalneedsofpatientsirrespectiveofthe analysed thematically. Discussions centred mostly on conditions outcomeofWGS results. withaclinicalintervention.Mostparticipantsperceivedtobetheir Funding:ThisworkwassupportedbytheNationalInstitutefor professional responsibility to provide objective information on Health Research (NIHR) under the Research for Patient Benefit genetic risks to their patients, their patients having a moral EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8770 responsibility to share relevant information with relatives at risk. Leffler2,LucindaMurray2,RadhikaRajkumar3,MorganRice4,5,Robert They did not consider having a direct responsibility to patients’ Tanton6, Jinjing Li6, TonyRoscioli7,8,9, MikeField2 relatives; but, when identifying barriers to communication, they actually used several strategies to encourage disclosure. Direct 1GenIMPACT: Centre for Economic Impacts of Genomic Medicine, contactfromgeneticserviceswithat-riskrelativeswasrecognised Macquarie Business School, Macquarie University, North Ryde, aspotentially“moreproductive”,butdifficulttoimplementdueto Australia, 2Genetics of Learning Disability (GoLD) Service, New- insufficient multidisciplinary professionals in genetic services and castle, Australia, 3Garvan Institute for Medical Research, Darlin- lackofinfrastructuralresources.Participants,however,hadastrict ghurst, Australia, 4Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool, Australia, 5Royal individual approach to confidentiality. They observed that a Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, Australia, 6National Centre familial approach to confidentiality - treating personal genetic for Social and Economic Modelling (NATSEM), Institute for information and familial information differently - would be GovernanceandPolicyAnalysis,UniversityofCanberra,Canberra, problematic. Some demanded for broader discussion and clear Australia, 7Neuroscience Research Australia, University of New national guidelines. These are relevant results, as a growing South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 8Sydney Children’s Hospital, number of individuals are being identified at-risk for hereditary Randwick, Australia, 9NSW Health Pathology Genetics Laboratory, diseases, and the need for healthcare professionals to commu- Randwick, Australia. nicate thisinformation to patientsgrows accordingly. Á.Mendes: None. M. Paneque:None. J.Sequeiros: None. Introduction: Given financial pressures on governments world- wide, robust evidence of the cost of genetic disorders and cost- effectiveness of genomic testing is important when seeking public C19.4 The impact of the GDPR on genomic medicine and funding. We collected data on the cost of familial Intellectual research Disability (ID) to be subsequently used in assessment of the cost effectivenessofWholeGenomeSequencing(WGS)fordiagnosisof ColinMitchell,JohanOrdish,EmmaJohnson,TanyaBrigden,Alison patientsoftheGeneticsofLearningDisabilitystate-wideservice. Hall Materials and methods: As part of the Economic and PsychosocialImpactsofCaringforFamiliesAffectedbyIntellectual PHG Foundation, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Disability(EPIC-ID)study,economicmodellingusingmicrosimula- Kingdom. tionmethodswasdevelopedtoassessthelifetimecostoffamilial ID. Carer surveys were used to obtain data on health and social Introduction: The COVID-19 pandemic has powerfully illustrated costs (e.g. education, employment, aids and appliances, and that collecting and sharing genomic data is now essential to welfare payments) as well as linked medical, pharmaceutical and improve population and individual health. However, reconciling hospitaldata. this with the EU’s comprehensive data protection law—the Results:FamilialIDwasfoundtohavealifetimecostofabout General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)—is complex. Funded AU$11.6 million per household. A total of about $AU3.7 million by the UK’s data protection authority, the Information Commis- was borne by private households with about AU$2.5 million per sioner’sOffice,ourresearchidentifiesandevaluatesaspectsofthe household being due to lost income for patients and carers. GDPRthatarechallengingforusesofgenomicdatainhealthcare Governmentboretheremainderofthecosts,withthelargestcost orhealthresearch,aswellasmeasuresthatcouldbeadoptedto beingforsupportedaccommodationataboutAU$2.7millionper mitigateorreduce negativeimpacts. household.Thesefindingshaveinfluencedseveralpublicfunding Methods: We conducted comprehensive legal analysis, inter- decisions tosupport accessto genomicsfor patientswith ID. views with key stakeholders and convened a multidisciplinary Conclusions: The cost of familial ID is very substantial for workshop of clinical/scientific professionals, policy makers, reg- households and for government. Robust economic data such as ulatorsand academic experts. that collected in the EPIC-ID study can play an important role in Results:Weidentifiedawiderangeofchallengesforgenomic publicfunding allocationdecisions. healthcareandresearchdetermining:whenandwheretheGDPR Funding:NHMRC Partnership Grant (APP1113895). applies; when genetic data are ‘personal data’; appropriate legal D.Schofield:None.O.Tan:None.R.Shrestha:None.S.West: basesforprocessinggenomicdata;howdatasubjectrightsshould None. J. Boyle: None. L. Christie: None. N. Hart: None. K. Lim: befulfilled,and;legalmechanismsfortransferofdataoutsidethe None.M.Leffler:None.L.Murray:None.R.Rajkumar:None.M. EU/EEA.Wealsoidentifiedsomepromisingmitigations,including Rice: None. R. Tanton: None. J. Li: None. T. Roscioli: None. M. technical measures to safeguard data while facilitating analysis Field:None. (suchashomomorphicencryption)andsector-ledinitiativessuch as the development of legally recognised codes of conduct (art 40)or certification mechanisms (art 42). C19.6 Genomics in society: Engaging children in dialogue Conclusions:Thegenomicscommunity,regulatorsandpolicy- abouthuman germlineediting makersmustworktogethertoestablishdataprotectionstandards that are appropriate for genomic medicine and research. Both FrancesBorneman1,BoyVijlbrief1,Diewertje Houtman1,ViviBuijs2, informal methods and more formal codes of conduct or SamRiedijk1 certification schemes should be pursued to reach consensus and crystallise bestpractice asquickly aspossible. 1ErasmusMedicalCenter,Rotterdam,Netherlands,2SophiaChildren’s C. Mitchell: None. J. Ordish: None. E. Johnson: None. T. Hospital,Rotterdam, Netherlands. Brigden: None.A. Hall: None. Introduction: Dialogic communication with children is a novel field of study and seems a promising method to engage and C19.5Looseningthepursestrings:Influencingpublicfunders acknowledge children as stakeholders in complex social issues, aboutthe value ofgenomictesting forintellectual disability such as the question what to do with human germline editing technology (HGGE). As part of the Dutch DNA dialogues, we DeborahSchofield1,OwenTan1,RupendraShrestha1,SarahWest1, organized two dialogues to enable formation and assembly of JackieBoyle2,LouiseChristie2,NatalieHart1,KatherineLim1,Melanie children’sopinions onHGGE. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8771 Methods: Twenty-two healthy, and 12 children affected by samecelltypesintumorandnormalbreastorganoidsandidentified (hereditary) disease took part in two dialogues (age 8-12 years). cell-type-specific genes and pathways involved in tumorigenesis. Psychological safety was established by involving play and Pseudotemporal algorithms revealed trajectories and lineage including attachment figures, such as peers. Furthermore, hierarchy among populations, thus allowing to identify precursor connection with the children was established by an introduction cellsandtheirspecificexpressionprofile. game. The adult moderator pretended not to know anything Conclusions: Single-cell transcriptomics of breast cancer about the particular subject and adopted an interested and organoids revealed pathways active in specific cancer cells that curious attitude, to stimulate children’s critical thinking. Dialogue play pivotal roles in tumor progression, providing candidate was fueled by age-appropriate scenarios, fitting the concept of targetsfor moreaccurate therapeutic approaches. ‘let’spretend’play. Funding: MIUR-CNR InterOmics, MIUR-CNR Epigen, MIUR- Results: Children highly appreciated the acknowledgement FIRBNewton thattheiropinionsmatteredandstatedperceivingthemselvesas P.Pelucchi:None.E.Mosca:None.C.Cocola:None.E.Piscitelli: essential stakeholders of this topic. Whereas parents often None.N.DiNanni:None.E.Abeni:None.I.Cifola:None.V.Nale: stressedfeelingresponsibleforgivingtheirchildthebestpossible None. A. Chiodi: None. F.A. Cupaioli: None. T. Karnavas: None. health, children put more emphasis on their right to self- A.Gritzapis:None.I.Missitzis:None.M.Götte:None.M.Palizban: determination. Most children expressed that HGGE was accep- None. B. Greve: None. G. Bertalot: None. A. Mezzelani: None. tableonlyforseveregeneticdisease.Mostchildrenalsoexpressed L.Milanesi:None.R.A.Reinbold:None.I.Zucchi:None. resistance against theideaof parentshaving altered theirDNA. Discussion: Children are essential yet often overlooked stakeholders in many facets of the HGE debate. Despite the C20.2 Identifying and characterizing EZH2 as a druggable relatively small groups, we found that child perspectives differ dependency factor for desmoid tumors in a genetic Xenopus from adult perspectives, thus contributing important insights for tropicalis modelforGardner’s Syndrome societal alignment ofHGGE. F.Borneman:None.B.Vijlbrief:None.D.Houtman:None.V. ThomasNaert1,DieterTulkens1,TomVanNieuwenhuysen1,Joanna Buijs:None. S.Riedijk: None. Przybyl2,SuzanDemuynck1,MushriqAl-Jazrawe3,MattvandeRijn2, BenjaminAlman3,KimDeLeenheer4,PaulCoucke4,DavidCreytens5, Kris Vleminckx1 C20From mechanisms to therapeutic insights in cancer 1Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, C20.1 Decrypting the breast cancer cellular complexity by Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Pathology, Stanford University single-cell transcriptomics oftumor-derived organoids Schoolof Medicine, Stanford,CA,USA,3Department ofCellBiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA, 4Center for ParidePelucchi1,EttoreMosca1,CinziaCocola1,EleonoraPiscitelli1, MedicalGenetics,Ghent,Belgium,5DepartmentofPathology,Ghent Noemi Di Nanni1, Edoardo Abeni1, Ingrid Cifola1, Valentina Nale1, University andGhent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Alice Chiodi1, Francesca A. Cupaioli1, Theodoros Karnavas2, Angelos Gritzapis3,IoannisMissitzis3,MartinGötte4,MiraPalizban4,Burkhard Introduction: Desmoid tumors are soft-tissue neoplasms strictly Greve5,GiovanniBertalot6,AlessandraMezzelani1,LucianoMilanesi1, driven by Wnt signaling network hyperactivation and can occur Rolland A. Reinbold1, Ileana Zucchi1 sporadic(harboringactivatingmissensemutationsintheCTNNB1 gene), or can be associated with Gardner’s syndrome due to 1Institute of Biomedical Technologies ITB - CNR, Segrate, Italy, germlineloss-of-functionmutationsinthetumorsuppressorgene 2Department of Neurosurgery, School of Medicine, New York APC.Despitetheclearlydefinedgeneticetiologyandthestrictand University, New York, NY, USA, 3Department of Breast Cancer unique implication of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, no systemic Surgery, Hospital Agios Savvas, Athens, Greece, 4Department of specificmolecular therapy for thetumorsexists. Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital, Münster, Germany, Materials and Methods: We developed a fast and semi-high 5Department of Radiotherapy - Radiooncology, University Hospital, throughput genetic Xenopus tropicalis model for identifying and/ Münster, Germany,6European Institute ofOncology, Milan, Italy. or characterizing drug targets for desmoid tumors. The platform also permits pre-clinical assessment of candidate therapeutic Introduction:Organoidsareavaluablemodelforcancerresearch compounds. The methodology uses multiplexed CRISPR/Cas9 and drug screening since they incorporate environmental condi- based genome editing by simultaneously targeting a tumor tions (hypoxia and lack of nutrients in the tumor core respect to suppressor gene (apc) and a candidate dependency gene. It areas close to blood vessels) and comprise a heterogeneous cell thereby exploits the fact that for a genetic dependency biallelic population differently responding to the tumor micro-niche. To frameshift mutations in this gene will never be recovered from studythiscomplexmodel,theSingleCellAnalysis(SCA)approach sampled tumors. fortranscriptomic profiling hasbecome mandatory. Results:Usinganinvivonegative-selectionscreenweidentified Materials and Methods: Organoids were obtained from 4 theepigeneticregulatorEZH2andthetranscriptionfactorCREB3L1 breasttumorcasesbypartialmechanic/enzymatictissuedissocia- as genetic dependencies for desmoid tumors. Interestingly, tion, resulting in small portions recapitulating the parental organ inhibition of the enzymatic activity of EZH2 by the compound structure. Organoids were separated from original tissue by Tazemetostat (Tazverik) reduced the size of established desmoid filtration,dissociatedintosinglecellsandprocessedforSCAusing tumorsintheXenopusmodelasmonitoredbyMRI.Usinginvitro 10X Genomics technology. SC data were analysed with 10xGe- models of patient derived desmoid cells, the mode of action of nomics CellRanger, Seurat, Monocle and our developed tool Tazemetostatwasfurtherinvestigated,indicatingadirecteffecton scMUFFIN, whichincludes CNVestimation. Wnt pathway activity. Since Tazemetostat is well-tolerated and Results: SCAapproachsortedoutthecellular complexityof the FDA-approved for treatment of epithelioid carcinomas, it could breast cancer organoids revealing the existence of different offer prospects for treating patients with desmoid tumors. populations related to specific cell sub-types of the normal Researchsupport:DTRFandSOSDesmoïde. mammary gland (basal,secretory luminaland hormone-responsive T. Naert: None. D. Tulkens: None. T. Van Nieuwenhuysen: luminalcells)andtumorpeculiarpopulations,showingdistinctCNV None. J. Przybyl: None. S. Demuynck: None. M. Al-Jazrawe: profile.Weperformeddifferentialexpressionanalysiscomparingthe EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8772 None. M. van de Rijn: None. B. Alman: None. K. De Leenheer: hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The extent and complexity of None.P.Coucke:None.D.Creytens:None.K.Vleminckx:None. chr8plossofheterozygosity(8pLOH)suggeststhatmultiplegenes with tumor suppressive properties can be affected by this large- scale deletion. Co-suppression of multiple genes might synergis- C20.3 Neuroblastoma somatic mutations enriched in cis- tically promote tumor growth. Exploiting the CRISPR-Cas9 regulatory elements collectively affect genes involved in technology, we introduced genomic deletions of chr8p into HCC embryonic development andimmune systemresponse cells resulting in distinct 8pLOH clones. Successful chromosome editing was confirmed by PCR, Sanger sequencing and fluores- VitoAlessandroLasorsa1,2,SuevaCantalupo1,2,CarmendeTorres3, cence in situ hybridization. The gene expression in wildtype and Sanja Aveic4,5, Gian Paolo Tonini4, Achille Iolascon1,2, Mario 8pLOHcellswasdeterminedbyRT-qPCRandRNA-seq.Agenome- Capasso1,2 wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screen substantiated gene depen- dencies specific for 8pLOH harboring tumors. Gene set enrich- 1CEINGE - Biotecnologie Avanzate, Napoli, Italy, 2Department of mentanalysisofdifferentiallyexpressedgenesinRNA-seqaswell Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Università degli as TCGA data identified major deregulations in migration and StudidiNapoliFedericoII,Napoli,Italy,3HospitalSantJoandeDéu, extracellular matrix signaling upon chr8p loss. Subsequent Developmental Tumor Biology Laboratory and Department of functional assays revealed increased metastasizing potential in Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, 4Neuroblastoma Laboratory, Istituto di 8pLOHcellswhichmayaccountforpoorprognosis.Investigation Ricerca Pediatrica Fondazione Città della Speranza, Padova, Italy, of gene dependencies specific for 8pLOH tumors unveiled the 5Department of Dental Materials and Biomaterials Research, RWTH tight junction aPKC-PAR3-PAR6 complex as novel synthetic AachenUniversity Hospital,Aachen, Germany. lethality making 8p deleted tumors strongly susceptible for inhibition of these proteins. We established a model system to The ever-growing interest towards noncoding cis-regulatory studylarge-scalegenomicdeletionsandlossofheterozygosityin variants as cancer drivers is currently hampered by numerous liver cancer. By integrating RNA-seq and CRISPR-Cas9 screening challengesandlimitationsofvariantprioritizationandinterpreta- data, we showed that 8pLOH may increase patient mortality and tion methods and tools. To overcome these limitations, we inhibition of the aPKC-PAR3-PAR6 complex may be a new focused on active cis regulatory elements (aCREs) to design a therapeutic option in patients with 8pLOH. Funded by German customized panel for deep sequencing of 56 neuroblastoma Research Foundation (DFG)-Project-ID 314905040 - TRR209 tumor and normal DNA sample pairs. CREs were defined by a T. Huth: None. E.C. Dreher: None. S. Luiken: None. R.N. reanalysis of H3K27ac ChiP-seq peaks of 25 neuroblastoma cell Sugiyanto:None.A.Jauch:None.P.Schirmacher:F.Consultant/ lines. This provided a small subset of genomic regions with AdvisoryBoard; Modest; Novartis, Incyte. S.Roessler: None. evident regulatory functions in which to search for driver mutations. We tested these regions for an excess of somatic mutations and assessed the statistical significance with a global C20.5 tRNASer overexpression induces adaptive mutations in approach accounting for chromatin accessibility and replication NSCLCtumors timing. Additional validation was provided by analyzing whole genome sequences of 151 neuroblastomas. For the mutated Mafalda R. Santos1, Miguel Pinheiro2, Andreia Reis2, Ana André1, SaraRocha1,JoanaCarvalho1,ManuelA.S.Santos2,CarlaOliveira1 regions,wedeterminedtheircandidatetargetgenesthroughHiC data analysis. We identified a significant excess of somatic mutations in aCREs of diverse genes including IPO7, HAND2, and 1i3S-InstitutodeInvesticaçãoeInovaçãoemSaúde,Porto,Portugal, ARID3A.Ageneexpressionsignaturebuiltonbasisofthesethree, 2Dept. of Medical Sciences and Institute of Biomedicine, Aveiro, and nearby, interacting genes strongly correlated with negative Portugal. prognostic markers andlow survivalratesofpatients affectedby neuroblastoma. Moreover, we observed a convergence of Introduction: tRNA deregulation causes Protein Synthesis Errors biological functions of the target genes of mutated aCREs and (PSEs) and is associated to worse patient prognosis. In yeast, PSE transcription factors with binding motifs altered by mutations levels, driven by tRNA deregulation increase genomic alterations. towards processes related to embryonic development and PSEarenaturallyincreasedintumorsandcanfostertumorgrowth. immunesystemresponse.Ourstrategyledustoidentifysomatic Therefore,wehypothesizedthattRNAderegulationmaycontribute mutations in regulatory elements that collectively can drive totheincreasedgenomeinstabilityobservedintumors. neuroblastoma onset. Materials and Methods: H460 cells with tRNASer overexpres- V. Lasorsa: None. S. Cantalupo: None. C. de Torres: None. S. sion(tRNASerOE)andMock(control)wereinoculatednudemiceas Aveic: None. G. Tonini: None. A. Iolascon: None. M. described in the following table to study the effect of tRNASerOE Capasso:None. aloneand inthepresence of atrigger: Time- Time- Time- point1 point2 point3 C20.4 Investigation of tumor suppressor gene loss on Naive Vehicle Cisplatin Vehicle Cisplatin chromosome 8p in hepatocellular carcinoma using chromo- Mock tRNASerOE Mock tRNASer tRNASer Mock Mock tRNASer Mock tRNASer OE OE OE OE someediting 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 Thorben Huth1, Emely C. Dreher1, Sarah Luiken1, Raisatun Nisa Sugiyanto1,Anna Jauch2, PeterSchirmacher1, Stephanie Roessler1 DNAand protein wereextracted for WES and proteomics. 1Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Results: The tumor mutation burden remained unchanged Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidel- along time, however, tumors with tRNASerOE treated twice with cisplatin, showed a higher mutation burden. Although in Time- berg,Heidelberg, Germany. point1 tumors have a similar number of variants, in Timepoints 2&3,tRNASerOEtumorsdisplaytwotimesmorevariantsthanMock Chromosome 8p (chr8p) is frequently deleted in a variety of tumors regardless of treatment. These variants are mostly low cancer entities and correlates with poor patient survival in impactvariants but theyare predicted to have impactin distinct EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8773 pathways. For instance, tRNASerOE exclusive variants will favor 1RadboudUniversityMedicalCenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands,2Maas- proliferation and therapy resistance, which is in line with the trichtUniversity Medical Center+, Maastricht, Netherlands. phenotypesobserved and theproteomics data. Conclusion: tRNASerOE increases the tumor mutation burden Introduction:TlymphocytesrequireintactTcellantigenreceptor and the variants detected favor tumor growth, proving tRNA (TCR) signalling to successfully activate and eliminate pathogens. deregulation is enough to induce adaptive mutations in the ThetyrosinekinaseZAP70playsacrucialroleinrelayingproximal genome.Acknowledgments: PTDC/MED-ONC/28834/2017 TCR signalling. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in ZAP-70 M.R. Santos: None. M. Pinheiro: None. A. Reis: None. A. thereforecauseaseverecombinedimmunodeficiency(SCID)with André:None.S.Rocha:None.J.Carvalho:None.M.A.S.Santos: early-onset recurrent infections caused by defective CD4+ T cell None.C. Oliveira: None. functioning and CD8+ T cell lymphopenia. In addition, there has been a single report of a patient with a severe autoimmune syndrome that carried a heterozygous hypermorphic variant C20.6 Characterization of fusion-circRNAs in childhood acute (Arg360Pro). lymphoblastic leukemia: f-circMLL-AF4 Materials and Methods: An exome-wide research-based reanalysis was performed in three unrelated index patients with AngelaGutierrez-Camino1,ChantalRicher1,LucasPoncelet1,Claire various,partlyoverlappingautoimmunedisorders.Segregationof Fuchs1, Alain Bataille1,Daniel Sinnett1,2 rare, non-synonymous candidate genes in affected family members was investigated using Sanger sequencing. Tailored 1Division of Hematology-Oncology, Research Center, Sainte-Justine functional tests were conducted to test pathogenicity and University Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Department of encompassed the isolation of patient peripheral blood mono- Pediatrics,University ofMontreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. nuclearcells(PBMCs),includingexvivostimulationandphospho- flow cytometry analysis. Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (cALL), the most Results:Intheindexpatientoffamily1,aprivate,heterozygous frequentcauseofdeathbydiseaseinchildren,isaheterogeneous missensevariantinZAP-70(NM_001079.3:c.340G>T;p.(Val114Phe), disease comprising multiple molecular subtypes defined by CADD score 23.1) was discovered with complete segregation in specific genetic alterations. Gene fusions arising from chromoso- the affected family members. In both index patients of family 2 malrearrangementsrepresentmorethan50%ofcommondriver and3,anidenticalheterozygousmissensevariant(NM_001079.3: events in cALL. As recently discovered, these fusion genes can c.973C>T;p.(Leu325Phe);allelefrequency0.00004243,CADDscore generate linear RNA or fusion-circularRNAs (f-circRNAs) via back- 25.7)wasidentified,alsoshowingcompletesegregation.InPBMCs splicing of exons. These f-circRNAs are implicated in malignant isolated from the patients, hyperphosphorylation of ZAP70 was transformation, cell survival, and therapeutic resistance. Apart observed, indicative for constitutive activation and consequently from their relevance for cancer biology, f-circRNAs are also suggestivefora loss ofautoinhibition ofZAP-70. promising biomarkers for liquid biopsies due to their increased Conclusion: In three families of patients with autoimmune stability relative to linear transcripts. Therefore, we propose to diseasenovelheterozygousvariantsinZAP-70wereidentifiedthat characterizef-circRNAsincALL,whichmightallowamoreprecise led to augmented T-cell signalling, thereby acting as diagnosisand prognosis. hypermorphs. Here,weidentifiedanovel f-circRNA generatedfromtheMLL- C.I. van der Made: None. R.L. Smeets: None. J. Potjewijd: AF4 fusion gene (f-circMLL-AF4) by screening leukemia cell lines None. A. Simons: None. E.E. Vorsteveld: None. J.H.M. Schuurs- carrying common rearrangements using primers diverging from Hoeijmakers:None.S.A.DeMunnik:None.M.Vreeburg:None. thebreakpointoftranslocations.Functionalstudiesthroughgain- H.J.P.M.Koenen:None.M.G.Netea:E.OwnershipInterest(stock, of-function strategy showed that f-circMLL-AF4 promotes cell stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; migration in leukemia cells, but has little effect on cell TTxD. G.T.J. van Well: None. F.L. van de Veerdonk: None. A. proliferation. We also found that it confers resistance to Hoischen:None. chemotherapeuticdrugscommonlyusedtotreatleukemia.Using a bead-based multiplexed immunoassay system, we determined that f-circMLL-AF4 overexpression decreased phosphorylation of C21.2 Gene therapy in a novel large animal model of p38 protein, involved in apoptosis Interestingly, we also demon- Stargardtdisease strate the presence of f-circMLL-AF4 in extracellular vesicles, pointingto abiomarker potential. Eugenio Nahuel Pugni1, Mariangela Lupo1, Carolina Iodice1, Carlo Inconclusion,ourstudynotonlyexpandthecurrentknowledge Gesualdo2,SettimioRossi2,FrancescaSimonelli2,MariaLauraBacci3, of molecular mechanisms underlying leukemia progression, but Cesare Galli4, AlbertoAuricchio1,5,Ivana Trapani1,6 also provides potential diagnosticand therapeutic newtargets. AGC wassupported byCIHR postdoctoral fellowship program 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy, 2Eye A. Gutierrez-Camino: None. C. Richer: None. L. Poncelet: Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental None.C. Fuchs:None. A.Bataille: None. D.Sinnett: None. Sciences, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy, 3Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Bologna, C21Clinical immunology andnovel therapies ofgenetic Ozzano dell’Emilia, Italy, 4Avantea, Laboratory of Reproductive diseases Technologies, Cremona, Italy, 5Department of Advanced Biomedi- cine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 6Medical Genetics, Depart- C21.1 Hypermorphic heterozygous variants in the tyrosine mentofTranslationalmedicine,FedericoIIUniversity,Naples,Italy. kinaseZAP-70 underlie autoimmune disease Stargardt disease type 1 (STGD1), due to bi-allelic mutations in CasparI.vanderMade1,RubenL.Smeets1,JudithPotjewijd2,Annet ABCA4,isthemostcommonformofinheritedmaculardegenera- Simons1, Emil E. Vorsteveld1, Janneke H. M. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers1, tion,forwhichnotherapeuticoptionsarecurrentlyavailable.We SonjaA.DeMunnik1,MaaikeVreeburg2,HansJ.P.M.Koenen1,Mihai have recently developed a gene therapy approach for STGD1 G.Netea1,GijsT.J.vanWell2,FrankL.vandeVeerdonk1,Alexander which relies on the use of two adeno-associated viral vectors Hoischen1 (AAV) each encoding for one of the two halves of the ABCA4 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8774 protein flanked by split-inteins, which catalyze trans-splicing of Lukas Nollet1,2,3, Matthias Van Gils1,2,3, Andy Willaert1,2, Paul J. the two ABCA4 half proteins following AAV administration. We Coucke1,2, Olivier M.Vanakker1,2,3 have shown that subretinal administration of the AAV intein vectors results in precise reconstitution of the full-length ABCA4 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, protein and in therapeutic efficacy in Abca4−/− mice. However, Belgium, 2Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, themouseretinalargelydiffersfromthatofhumansbothinterms Ghent, Belgium, 3Ectopic Mineralization Research Group, Ghent, of size and retinal architecture. Given the similarity between the Belgium. swineandhumanretina,wehaverecentlygeneratedpigsthrough somatic cell nuclear transfer from primary fibroblasts in which Aim: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a hereditary ectopic ABCA4 has been knock-out (KO) using CRISPR/Cas9. We have calcification disorder characterized by deposition of calcium foundthatABCA4KOpigshaveincreasedlipofuscinaccumulation crystalsinskin,eyesandbloodvessels.Recently,theDNAdamage in the retinal pigmented epithelium region, as it also occurs in response (DDR), in particular poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 STGD1 patients macula, up to 36 months, the longest time-point (PARP1) activation, was shown to be involved in aberrant evaluated. In addition, subretinal delivery of AAV-ABCA4 intein mineralization raising the hypothesis that dysfunctional DDR/ vectorsinABCA4KOpigsresultsinefficientreconstitutionofthe PARP1 signaling contributes to PXE pathogenesis. Methods: ABCA4proteinat2monthspost-injection.Furtheranalysisofthe Expression analysis of DDR targets, PARP1 effectors and calcifica- impact of subretinal delivery of AAV intein on lipofuscin tion markers was performed on PXE patient-derived and healthy accumulation will provide important insights towards the clinical control fibroblasts using qPCR, western blot and enzyme activity translationofthisplatformforgenetherapyofSTGD1.Thisproject assays; before and after treatment with the PARP1 inhibitor was supported by European Union’s Horizon 2020 (grant minocycline. Effect of minocycline treatment on calcium deposi- No.813490) tion wasevaluated invitro andin abcc6a−/−zebrafish. E.N. Pugni: None. M. Lupo: None. C. Iodice: None. C. Results: DDR targets PARP1, p21, p53 and ATM were Gesualdo: None. S. Rossi: None. F. Simonelli: None. M.L. Bacci: significantly upregulated in PXE while the DDR inhibitor SIRT1 None.C.Galli: None.A. Auricchio: None. I. Trapani: None. was suppressed. PARP1 effectors STAT1/3, IL-6, TET1 and RUNX2 were also upregulated with decreased expression of the RUNX2 antagonist microRNA-204. Minocycline significantly attenuated C21.3 Tasimelteon Safely and Effectively Improves Sleep in p21, p53, ATM and the PARP1-STAT1/3-TET1-RUNX2 axis leading Smith Magenis Syndrome: a Double-Blind Randomized Trial to reduced levels of ALPL, MSX2, CTGF, MMP2 and BMP2 and Followedby an Open-LabelExtension preventing aberrant mineralization in vitro. Minocycline-treated abcc6a−/− zebrafish showed a 60% reduction in ectopic Christos Polymeropoulos calcificationcompared to untreatedcontrols. Conclusion: We demonstrated for the first time the involve- VandaPharmaceuticals, Washington DC,DC,USA. ment of dysfunctional DDR and PARP1 signaling in PXE showing that excessive activation of DDR/PARP1 evokes a STAT-driven Smith-Magenis Syndrome (SMS; OMIM #182290) is a rare genetic cascade with upregulation of the epigenetic modifier TET1 and disorderthatresultsfromaninterstitialdeletionof17p11.2and,in pro-calcifyingtranscriptionfactorRUNX2.Minocyclineattenuated rare cases, from a retinoic acid induced 1 (RAI1) gene variant this deleterious molecular mechanism and reduced ectopic (Slager et al 2003). Individuals with SMS present with a distinct calcification in vitro and in vivo, fueling the exciting prospect of patternofmildtomoderateintellectualdisability,delayedspeech anovel therapeutic compoundfor PXE. and language skills and, almost uniformly, significant sleep L. Nollet: None. M. Van Gils: None. A. Willaert: None. P.J. disturbances. Patients exhibit low overall melatonin concentra- Coucke: None.O.M. Vanakker:None. tions and abnormal timing of peak plasma melatonin concentra- tions. To assess the efficacy of tasimelteon, a melatonin receptor agonist, to improve sleep in SMS, a 9-week, double-blind, C21.5 New uses for old drugs: Added value of celiprolol and randomized, two-period crossover study was conducted at four pravastatin in vascularEDS clinicalcenters.Genetically-confirmedSMSpatients,aged3to39, withsleepcomplaintsparticipatedinthestudy.Overthreeyears, NicoloDubacher1,2,SylvanM.Caspar1,3,JanineMeienberg1,Gabor fifty-two patients were screened and twenty-five patients Matyas1 completed the randomized portion of the study. Improvement ofsleepquality(DDSQ50)significantlyimprovedoverplacebo(0.4, 1CenterforCardiovascularGeneticsandGeneDiagnostics,Schlieren- p=0.0139) and total sleep time (DDTST50) also improved Zurich, Switzerland, 2Translational Cardiovascular Technologies, (18.5 min, p=0.0556). Average sleep quality (0.3, p=0.0155) Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH, Zurich, and actigraphy-based total sleep time (21.1 min, p=0.0134) Switzerland, Zurich, Switzerland, 3Laboratory of Translational Nutri- improvedsignificantly.Patientstreatedfor≥90daysintheopen tion Biology, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH, label study showed persistent efficacy. Tasimelteon safely and Schwerzenbach, Zurich, Switzerland, Zurich, Switzerland. effectively improved sleep in SMS. The 17p11.2 deletion encompasses RAI1, leading to haploinsufficiency, which is Introduction: Patients affected by the rare connective tissue consideredtheprimarycauseformostfeaturesofSMS,including disordervascularEhlers-Danlossyndrome(vEDS)areatincreased dysregulation of the molecular clock via its effect on CLOCK risk for fatal aortic ruptures. Recently, we have established an expression.Theresultsofthisstudysuggestthattreatmentwitha objective read-out system for measuring the biomechanical circadianregulatorcan,inpart,amelioratethecircadiandeficien- integrity of the murine thoracic aorta, allowing us to identify ciescaused byRAI1 haploinsufficiency. new uses for market-approved drugs (cheap with high level of C.Polymeropoulos:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest; knowledge)inthemedical treatment ofvEDS. VandaPharmaceuticals Inc.. Materials and Methods: Mice modelling vEDS were treated C21.4AttenuationofdysfunctionalDNAdamageresponseand with the beta-blockers celiprolol or bisoprolol, the angiotensin-II- PARP1 signaling by minocycline reduces ectopic calcification in type-1-receptor-blocker losartan, or the HMG-CoA-reductase- pseudoxanthomaelasticum inhibitor pravastatin for 4 weeks. 1.5-mm-long sections of the EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8775 ascending and descending murine thoracic aorta were mounted People livingwithhumanimmunodeficiency virus(PLWH)have on a tissue puller and uniaxially stretched until rupture. For the accelerated biologic aging and significantly increased risk for tested drugs, we considered pharmacogenetic information from cardiovascular disease. Clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate thePharmGKB website andDPWG/CPIC guidelines. potential (CHIP), the age-related acquisition and expansion of Results: The rupture force (mN) was significantly lower in hematopoieticstemcellsduetoleukemogenicdrivermutations, untreated heterozygous compared to wild-type mice, while increases risk for both hematologic malignancy and coronary celiprolol and pravastatin but neither bisoprolol nor losartan artery disease (CAD). Since increased inflammation is hypothe- increased the thoracic aortic rupture force in heterozygous mice. sized to be both a cause and consequence of CHIP, we While losartan and bisoprolol undergo cytochrome-P450- hypothesized that PLWH have a greater prevalence of CHIP. mediatedmetabolism and theplasma concentration of pravasta- Here,wesearchedforCHIPinmulti-ethniccasesfromtheSwiss tin may be affected by SLCO1B1, celiprolol is secreted HIV Cohort Study (SHCS, n=600) and controls from the unmetabolized. Atherosclerosis Risk in the Communities study (ARIC, n= Conclusions: Unlike losartan and bisoprolol, celiprolol and 8,111) from blood DNA-derived exome sequences. First, we pravastatinhaveaddedvalueregardingthestrengtheningofthe observedthatHIVisassociatedwithincreasedCHIPprevalence, weakenedmurine vEDSaorta. Despitethispotential addedvalue bothinthewholestudypopulationandinasubsetof230cases ofpravastatin, celiprololprevailsduetoitsfavourablepharmaco- and1002controlswithsimilarsequencecoverageandmatched kineticprofileand,hence,shouldcurrentlybethemedicaltherapy byage,sexandethnicity(SHCS7%,ARIC3%,p=0.005).Second, of choice for vEDS, until further evidence emerges. Our results unlikeincontrols,ASXL1wasthemostcommonlymutatedCHIP exemplifythatdrugrepositioning/repurposingcanbeapowerful geneamongPLWH.Third,weobservedapositiveassociationof source to identify old drugs for potential new therapeutic duration of antiretroviral therapy (ART) with CHIP prevalence. applications inrare diseases. Among people with HIV, the rate of somatic mutagenesis may N. Dubacher: None. S.M. Caspar: None. J. Meienberg: None. be increased, the fitness landscape of hematopoietic stem cells G.Matyas: None. changed or the effective population size of blood cells decreased. Whether other mechanisms are responsible for increasedCHIPprevalenceamongPLWHrequiresfurtherstudy. C21.6 Increased CHIP prevalence amongst people living Altogether, we propose that CHIP may be one mechanism withHIV through which PLWH are at increased biological aging and risk for CAD. KonstantinPopadin1,2,AlexanderG.Bick3,ChristianW.Thorball1,4, K. Popadin: None. A.G. Bick: None. C.W. Thorball: None. M. MdMesbahUddin5,Markella Zanni6,BingYu7,Matthias Cavassini8, Uddin:None.M. Zanni:None. B.Yu:None. M.Cavassini:None. Andri Rauch9, Philip Tarr10, Patrick Schmid11, Enos Bernasconi12, A.Rauch:None.P.Tarr: None.P. Schmid:None. E.Bernasconi: Huldrych F. Günthard13,14, Peter Libby15, Eric Boerwinkle16, Paul J. None. H.F. Günthard: None. P. Libby: None. E. Boerwinkle: McLaren17,18, Christie M. Ballantyne19, Steven Grinspoon6, Pradeep None.P.J.McLaren:None.C.M.Ballantyne:None.S.Grinspoon: Natarajan5,20,Jacques Fellay1,2,4 None.P. Natarajan: None. J. Fellay: None. 1School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, C22Developmental disorders & syndromesII Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland,3DivisionofGeneticMedicine,DepartmentofMedicine, C22.1 Expanding the genotypic spectrum of TXNL4A variants Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA, 4PrecisionMedicineUnit,LausanneUniversityHospitalandUniversity inBurn-McKeown syndrome of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA, 6Metabolism Unit, Massachusetts Katherine Wood1,2, Jamie Ellingford1,2, Huw Thomas1, Genomics EnglandResearchConsortium,SofiaDouzgou1,2,GlendaBeaman1,2, General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 7Human Genetics Center, University of Texas Health Science Center, Emma Hobson3, Katrina Prescott3, Raymond O’Keefe1, William Newman1,2 USA Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 8Service of Infectious Diseases, Lausanne University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 9Department of Infectious Dis- 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Manche- eases,BernUniversityHospital,UniversityofBern,Bern,Switzerland, ster Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University NHS 10Department of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, FoundationTrust,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,3YorkshireRegional University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, Genetics Service, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United 11Division ofInfectious Diseases, Cantonal Hospital ofSt. Gallen, St. Kingdom. Gallen, Switzerland, 12Division of Infectious Diseases, Regional HospitalofLugano,Lugano,Switzerland,13DepartmentofInfectious The ultra-rare developmental disorder Burn-McKeown Syndrome Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University Hospital Zurich, (BMKS) is characterised by choanal atresia and characteristic Zurich, Switzerland, 14Institute of Medical Virology, University of craniofacial features. BMKS is caused by biallelic variants in the Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 15Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, pre-mRNA splicing factor TXNL4A. Most patients have a loss-of- Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard functionvariantononealleleintranswitha34bpdeletion(type Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 16Human Genetics Center, 1Δ34)inthepromoterregion.Somepatientsarehomozygousfor University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX, USA Baylor a different 34bp promoter deletion (type 2 Δ34). Here, we College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 17JC Wilt Infectious Diseases identified two new BMKS patients ascertained through the Research Centre, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Genomics England 100,000 Genomes Project (100K). Neither AgencyofCanada,Winnipeg,MB,Canada,18DepartmentofMedical patient was initially diagnosed through the tiering system as the Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Manitoba, non-codingTXNL4Apromoterregionwasnotincludedinstandard Winnipeg, MB, Canada, 19Department of Medicine, Baylor College 100K variant filtering/prioritization pipelines. One patient has a of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 20Cardiovascular Research Center, TXNL4A c.93_94delCC, p.His32Argfs*21 variant combined with a Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. type 1 Δ34. The other has an intronic TXNL4A splice site variant EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8776 (c.258-3C>G)withatype1Δ34.Weshowthec.258-3C>Gvariant, M. Ort: None. M. Schwestka: None. E. Flex: None. M. and a previously reported c.258-2A>G variant, cause skipping of Delledonne: None. G.B. Ferrero: None. G. Carperntieri: None. the final exon of TXNL4A in a minigene assay. Furthermore, we M. Tartaglia: None. A. Brusco: None. S. Stricker: None. M. identify transcription factor binding sites within the 56bp of the Gossen: None. S. Geißler: None. L. Bernardini: None. A. Ciolfi: TXNL4A promoter affected by the type 1 and type 2 Δ34, and None. P. Knaus: None. S. Mundlos: None. E. Giorgio: None. M. luciferase assays identified a 22bp repeated motif essential for Spielmann: None. TXNL4Aexpressionwithinthisregion.Weproposethatadditional variants affecting critical transcription factor binding nucleotides within the 22bp repeated motif could be relevant to BMKS C22.3PathogenicMYCNgain-of-functionvariantsarerespon- etiology. Overall, we have expanded the genotypic spectrum of sible for a mirror phenotype of the Feingold syndrome, BMKSandhighlightedtheimportanceofconsideringnon-coding resulting in a novel megalencephaly-polydactyly- variation in analysis of whole-genome sequencing data to hydrocephalus syndrome improvediagnosticyield. Funding:MRC (1916606), BBSRC (BB/N000258/1), NIHR BRC (IS- Frédéric Tran Mau-Them1, Chloé Quelin2, Yannis Duffourd3, BRC-1215-20007) Laura Mary4, Victor Couturier1, Valentin Bourgeois1, Christophe K. Wood: None. J. Ellingford: None. H. Thomas: None. S. Philippe1,ChristelThauvin-Robinet1,YosukeNishio5,ShinjiSaitoh5, Douzgou: None. G. Beaman: None. E. Hobson: None. K. Kohji Kato5 Prescott:None. R. O’Keefe: None.W. Newman:None. C22.2MesenchymalenhanceradoptionattheARHGAP36locus 1Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique des maladies causes connective tissueto bone transformation rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 2Service de Génétique Clinique, CLAD Ouest, CHU Rennes, Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, UiraMelo1,JeromeJatzlau2,CesarPrada1,SalaheddineAli1,Robert Rennes, France, 3Inserm UB UMR 1231 GAD « Génétique des Schöpflin1, Marius-Konstantin Klever1, Pedro Vallecillo-Garcia1, Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, Melanie-Jasmin Ort3, Marko Schwestka4, Elisabetta Flex5, Massimo 4Service de Cytogénétique et Biologie Cellulaire, Hôpital Pontch- Delledonne5, Giovanni Battista Ferrero5, Giovanna Carperntieri5, aillou, CHU de Rennes, Rennes, France, Rennes, France, 5Depart- MarcoTartaglia5,AlfredoBrusco5,SigmarStricker6,ManfredGossen4, ment of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University SvenGeißler4,LauraBernardini5,AndreaCiolfi5,PetraKnaus6,Stefan Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan, Nagoya, Mundlos1, Elisa Giorgio5,Malte Spielmann1 Japan. 1MPI, Berlin, Germany, 23Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany, Introduction: Loss-of-function variants in MYCN have been 3Berlin Institute of Health Center for Regenerative Therapies, Berlin, associatedtotheFeingoldsyndromecharacterizedby,amongst Germany, 4Charite, Berlin, Germany, 5University of Torino, Torino, other signs: microcephaly and absent/hypoplastic middle Italy,6Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. phalanx. MYCN function relies on two sequential phosphoryla- tions, in position 62 (Serine) and then 58 (Threonine). Depho- Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva is characterized by early- sphorylationofSer62andsubsequentphosphorylationofThr58 onsetheterotopicossification(HO),spontaneousorprecipitated leads to proteasomal degradation. We report two patients with bytrauma,andiscausedbymutationsinACVR1.Herewereport de novo missense variants in MYCN and ventriculomegaly, onagirlpresentingwithanovelprogressiveHOphenotype.At macrocephaly and postaxial polydactyly. 5 months, whole body imaging showed progressive calcifica- Materials and methods: We performed trio exome- tions affecting exclusively the muscle tissues surrounding the sequencinganddatasharing.WesternBlotandphosphorylation joints. At 5 years, imaging analysis demonstrated calcifications assay were performed on HEK293 cells transfected with progression,withmanyofherskeletalmusclestransformedinto plasmids, after site-directed mutagenesis of the patients bone. Array CGH, FISH and WGS analyses revealed a de novo variants. A knock-in mouse was generated to assess and ~820kbduplicationonchromosome2thatwasinsertedintothe compare the phenotype. Xchromosome,withinatopologicallyassociatingdomain(TAD) Results: Trio exome-sequencing combined with data sharing containing two genes, ARHGAP36 and IGSF1. We performed allowed the identification of 2 patients harboring rare de novo chromosome confirmation capture analysis (Hi-C) in fibroblasts missense variant in MYCN. The core phenotype included: of the proband and observed a new chromatin domain (neo- ventriculomegaly, macrocephaly and postaxial polydactyly. In TAD)ontheder(X)containingARHGAP36andpartofthe820kb cellular analysis, the level of phosphorylation of Thr58 was duplication.Thisneo-TADcontainedseveralpredictedmesench- drasticallyreducedcomparedtowildtypeandthelevelofMYCN ymal enhancers that could potentially drive ectopic ARHGAP36 wasincreasedinbothmutantMYCNproteins.Theknock-inmouse expression. Indeed, RNA-sequencing and Western blot analysis also displayed the same biological anomalies. In addition, the inprobandfibroblastsrevealedectopicactivationofARHGAP36. knock-in mouse presented with postaxialpolydactyly aswith the RNA-seq also showed dysregulation of signalling pathways case oftwo patients. relatedtoboneformationintheHOprobandsuchasTGF-beta, Conclusions: We report 2 patients with ventriculomegaly, Hedgehog and WNT signalling. Osteogenic differentiation of macrocephaly, postaxial polydactyly and a concordant knock-in fibroblasts revealed a faster and stronger calcification in mousemodel.ThemolecularmechanismisunderlinedbyaThr58 proband cells in comparison to cells from healthy controls. phosphorylationdefectleadingtoanaccumulationofMYCN.This Finally, ARHGAP36 overexpression in C2C12 and NIH/3T3 cells novel phenotype, caused by GoF variants in MYCN, leads to a wassufficienttoreduceTGF-betaactivityuponTGFβ1induction. mirror syndrome (at the phenotypic and molecular level) of the In summary, here we report on a rare HO case caused by an Feingoldsyndrome. insertional duplication causing enhancer adoption at the F.TranMau-Them:None.C.Quelin:None.Y.Duffourd:None. ARHGAP36 locus and subsequent connective tissue to bone L. Mary: None. V. Couturier: None. V. Bourgeois: None. C. transformation. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. Y. Nishio: None. S. U.Melo:None.J.Jatzlau:None.C.Prada:None.S.Ali:None. Saitoh:None. K. Kato:None. R.Schöpflin:None. M. Klever: None. P. Vallecillo-Garcia: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8777 C22.4Ahomozygoushypomorphic BNIP1variantresultsin Introduction: Primary or idiopathic Osteoporosis (IO) is a rare disproportionate short stature and skeletal dysplasia and bone disease with an increased risk of fractures. Several genes causes an increase in autophagosomes and reduced were identified as involved in IO, but many cases are still autophagic flux unexplained.Therefore,ouraimistoidentifynewgenesrelatedto IOand toanalyze thefunction ofthe variants. Tess Holling1, Gandham S. Bhavani2, Leonie von Elsner1, Hitesh H. MaterialsandMethods:ACRISPR/Cas9approachwasusedto Shah2, Neethu Krishna2, Shaila Bhattacharyya3, Anju Shukla2, Geert generate mutated osteosarcoma cells (U2OS) for functional Mortier4,Kerstin Kutsche1,Katta M. Girisha2 analysis. Results: Exome sequencing revealed variants in WNT11 in two 1UniversityMedicalCenterHamburg-Eppendorf,Hamburg,Germany, IOpatientswithfractures.Heterozygousvariantswerefoundina 2Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India, 3Manipal 4-year-old boy with a loss-of-function de novo mutation Hospital, Bengaluru, India, 4University of Antwerp and Antwerp (NM_004626.2:c.677_678dup p.Leu227Glyfs*22) and in a 48-year- University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium. oldwomanwithamissensemutation(NM_004626.2:c.217G>Ap. Ala73Thr).HeterozygousWNT11mutant(32bpdeletion)osteosar- Weinvestigatedtwoapparentlyunrelatedprobands,a6-year-old comacells,expressingboththewildtypeandthemutantprotein, girl and a 10-month-old boy, both with normal neuromotor showeda~30%decreaseinproliferationanda~80%decreasein development and disproportionate short stature. Radiographs osteoblast differentiation. The mutant cells displayed reduced showed ovoid vertebrae, small and squared ilia, narrow sciatic expression of genes within the Wnt non-canonical and canonical notches,veryshortfemoralnecks,mildmetaphysealdysplasiaand pathways. When mutated cells were treated with the WNT11 delayed epiphyseal ossification. Exome sequencing identified the recombinant protein, we obtained a recovery in the proliferation homozygous intronic variant c.84+3A>T in BNIP1 in both and in several target gene’s expressions. Results from RNAseq probands. BNIP1 is a member of the proapoptotic BH3-only using the patient’s primary fibroblast allowed us to identify new protein family located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). WNT11 targets involved in bone remodeling. Among those, we Fibroblasts of the girl were available for further investigations. identified genes involved in the extracellular matrix synthesis BNIP1transcript analysisusingfibroblast-derived RNArevealed(i) (MMPs), osteoblast function (SNX10, RSPOs, SOST, MEOX1, wild-typemRNAs,(ii)mRNAswithanin-framedeletionofthelast SMOC1)and activation(FGFR2 andFGF10). 18bpofexon1,and(iii)mRNAswithinsertionofthefirst55bpof Conclusions: this is the first time that variants in WNT11 are intron1causingaframeshiftandintroductionofaprematurestop described as related to any disease, most specially osteoporosis, codon.Immunoblottingdemonstrateda52%to59%reductionof by inhibiting the canonical and non-canonical pathways. Eur- BNIP1 in patient compared to control cells. BNIP1 showed the opeanUnion’sHorizon 2020No766347 typical ER staining in patient fibroblasts and ER morphology was C. Caetano da Silva: None. T. Edouard: None. M. Ricque- apparentlynormal.Wealsoidentifiedlysosomalalterationsasthe bourg: None. M. Aubert-Mucca: None. M. Muller: None. M. levels of lysosomal enzymes were increased and lysosomal Fradin:None.J.Salles:None.P.Guggenbuhl:None.M.Cohen- localizations were changed with ~77% of patient cells showing Solal:None. C.Collet: None. scattered lysosomes throughout the cytoplasm and ~23% showing clustered lysosomes in the perinuclear region. Immuno- cytochemistry and LC3B turnover assay revealed an increase in C22.6 Impact of glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis defects on autophagosomes and reduced autophagic flux. These data the endochondral ossification in a Slc10a7−/− mouse model suggest a block at the terminal stage of autolysosome formation withskeletal dysplasia and/orclearanceinpatientcellsanddemonstratetheimportance ofBNIP1inregulating lysosomal degradation and autophagy. Alessandra Guasto, Céline Huber, Valérie Cormier-Daire, Johanne T.Holling:None.G.S.Bhavani:None.L.vonElsner:None.H. Dubail H. Shah: None. N. Krishna: None. S. Bhattacharyya: None. A. Shukla: None. G. Mortier: None. K. Kutsche: None. K.M. Imagine Institute,Paris, France. Girisha:None. Introduction:Chondrodysplasiawithmultipledislocationsarea group of rare disorders characterized by severe growth C22.5 WNT11 is associated to idiopathic osteoporosis by retardation, joint dislocations and scoliosis. Most of these inhibiting the Wnt canonicaland non-canonical pathways disorders have been linked to pathogenic variants in genes encoding proteins required for glycosaminoglycan (GAG) Caroline Caetano da Silva1, Thomas Edouard2, Manon Ricque- biosynthesis. We identified homozygous mutations in SLC10A7 bourg1,3, Marion Aubert-Mucca2, Marc Muller4, Melanie Fradin5, in six individualswitha skeletaldysplasia withdislocations and Jean-Pierre Salles2, Pascal Guggenbuhl6, Martine Cohen-Solal1,3, amelogenesisimperfecta.Theaimoftheprojectistoclarifythe Corinne Collet1,7 impact of the GAG biosynthesis impairment on the endochon- dralossificationprocessusingaSlc10a7deficient mousemodel 1Inserm U1132 and Université de Paris, Paris, France, 2Endocrine, that mimics the human bone phenotype. Methods: Exome BoneDiseasesandGeneticsUnit,ReferenceCentreforRareDiseases sequencing, PCR, immunohistology. ofCalciumandPhosphateMetabolism,ERNBOND,OSCARNetwork, Results: Analyzing mouse femurs, we showed a significant Children’s Hospital, INSERM U1301, Toulouse University Hospital, reduction of the growth plate length associated with a reduced Toulouse,France,3Rheumatology,HôpitalLariboisière,AP-,HP,Paris, SafraninOstaininginembryonicandjuvenilenullmicecompared France, 4Laboratory for Organogenesis and Regeneration (LOR), to controls. In particular, null mice showed a significant and GIGA-Research, Liège University, Liege, Belgium, 5Service de génét- progressive reduction of the hypertrophic zone during develop- ique clinique, centre de référence des anomalies du développement ment and a significantly reduced type X collagen expression, de l’Ouest, hôpital Sud de Rennes, Rennes, France, 6Rheumatology, specificformaturechondrocytes.TypeIIcollagenexpressionwas CHUdeRennes,Rennes,France,7UFdeBiologieMoléculaire,Hôpital unchanged throughout the growth plate of null mice at all ages, Lariboisière, AP-, HP,Paris, France. but was reduced, as type I collagen expression, in the trabecular EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8778 bone. We did not find any significant difference in chondrocyte Brummelhuis:None.M.Rookmaaker:None.B.vanderZwaag: proliferation but the apoptosis was significantly increased in null None. T.Q. Nguyen: None. R. Broekhuizen: None. L. Mesnard: hypertrophic chondrocytes compared tocontrols. None. A. Karras: None. O. Sadeghi-Alavijeh: None. D.P. Gale: Conclusion: Slc10a7 is involved in GAG biosynthesis and None. M. Elferink: None. M.M. Oud: None. S. Faber: None. R. suggests an impairment of chondrocyte differentiation and Roepman:None.F.Hildebrandt:None.V.Klämbt:None.N.V.A. maturation processes responsible for an advanced ossification in M. Knoers: None. F. Tessadori: None. G.W. van Haaften: None. our model. Further in vitro experiments are required to confirm A.M.van Eerde:None. this defect and to better characterize the affected signaling pathwaysinvolved inbone development. A. Guasto: None. C. Huber: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. J. C23.2 Rare variant burden influences the rate of disease Dubail: None. progression inPolycystic KidneyDisease Katherine A. Benson1, Elhussein Elhassan2, Stephen Madden1, C23Internal organs -Kidney,bowel, fat Susan Murray2, Omid Sadeghi-Alavijeh3, Daniel Gale3, Claire Kennedy4, Matthew Griffin5, Liam Casserly6, Paul O’Hara6, Jorge C23.1 Biallelic TMEM72 variants in patients with Abboud2, Kevin Cronin2, Declan O’Sullivan2, Amali Mallawaarach- nephronophthisis-like phenotype chi7, Irene Capelli8, Gaetano LaManna8, Claudio Graziano9, Ria Schönauer10,JanHalbritter10, Gianpiero L. Cavalleri1,Peter Conlon2 RozemarijnSnoek1,LauraR.Claus1,EdithD.J.Peters1,SanneM.C. Savelberg1, Karen Duran1, Suzanne W. van der Veen1, Walter J. 1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 2Beaumont Brummelhuis1, Maarten Rookmaaker1, Bert van der Zwaag1, Tri Q. Hospital,Dublin,Ireland,3UniversityCollegeLondon,London,United Nguyen1, Roel Broekhuizen1, Laurent Mesnard2, Alexandre Karras2, Kingdom,4KingstonGeneralHospital&Queen’sUniversity,Kingston, OmidSadeghi-Alavijeh3,DanielP.Gale3,GenomicsEnglandResearch ON,Canada,5NationalUniversityofIrelandGalway,Galway,Ireland, Consortium, Martin Elferink1, Machteld M. Oud4, Siebren Faber4, 6University Hospital Limerick, Limerick, Ireland, 7Garvan Institute of RonaldRoepman4,FriedhelmHildebrandt5,VerenaKlämbt5,NineV. MedicalResearchandRoyalPrinceAlfredHospital,Sydney,Australia, A.M.Knoers6,FedericoTessadori1,GijsW.vanHaaften1,AlbertienM. 8University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 9S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, vanEerde1 Bologna, Ireland, 10University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany. 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 3University College London, London, United Kingdom, Introduction: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease 4RadboudUMC,Nijmegen,Netherlands,5BostonChildren’sHospital, (ADPKD)iscausedprimarilybyvariantsinPKD1,andPKD2.Disease Boston, MA,USA,6UMCGroningen, Groningen, Netherlands. severity ranges from in-utero onset to preserved kidney function into old age. It is well established that the type of diagnostic Introduction: Causes for monogenic kidney diseases are hetero- ADPKD variant can influence disease severity and variants have genous and distinguishing the different causes based on been identified which modify disease severity or can cause phenotype can be challenging. Nephronophthisis, an autosomal autosomal recessive disease. Here we demonstrate, using robust recessive kidney disease resulting from primary cilium defects, is statistical analyses, that rare variant burden in the gene PKD1 hard to diagnose due to unspecific and variable symptoms. contributes toADPKD phenotypic variability. Currently, <50% of cases can be diagnosed by assessing Methods: Patients (n=449) with an established genetic knowngenes. diagnosis of ADPKD due to a pathogenic variant in PKD1 or Material and Methods: We performed genetic testing in PKD2 were recruited from five international centres (Dublin patients with a phenotype suggestive for nephronophthisis. We Ireland, Genomics England/ Royal Free Hospital London UK, carried out immunohistochemistry, in silico, in vitro and in vivo Leipzig Germany, Bologna Spain, Sydney Australia). The associa- experimentstofurther interpret our findings. tion between the presence of rare, additional PKD1 variants and Results:Wepresenteightpatientsfromfivefamiliescarrying age at end-stage renal disease (ESRD) was tested using a Cox biallelic TMEM72 variants. Four families presented with kidney mixedeffect regressionmodel. failure at a young adult age. One family had a more severe Results: The presence of rare, additional bioinformatically- phenotype with prenatal onset of kidney failure and neurolo- inferreddamagingPKD1variantswasassociatedwithalowerage gicalsymptoms.Weshowthatthetruncatingvariantresultsina atESRD,inpatientswithanestablishedgeneticdiagnosis(hazard short TMEM72 isoform. With immunohistochemistry staining in ratio:1.61(1.14-2.27), p=5.9x10−3). kidney biopsy material we show that TMEM72 is localized and Conclusions: Rare, additional bioinformatically-inferred dama- expressed differently in cases compared to controls, in cells gingPKD1variantsimpactdiseaseseverityinADPKD.Furtherwork known to be affected in nephronophthisis. Furthermore, using is required to evaluate the impact of rare variation in other PKD- mass-spectrometry we found significant and altered binding related genes. These findings have important implications for of TMEM72 with proteins known to be involved in renal patientcounsellingandtheassessmentofvariantpathogenicityin ciliopathies. clinicalgenetics services. Conclusion: We present the first genomic evidence and Acknowledgement: This research was made possible through functional work that link TMEM72 variants to kidney disease. access to the data and findings generated by the 100,000 Based on our patients’ phenotype, immunohistochemistry find- GenomesProject;http://www.genomicsengland.co.uk. ingsandmass-spectrometryresultswecanlinkTMEM72tociliary K.A. Benson: None. E. Elhassan: None. S. Madden: None. S. function. Murray: None. O. Sadeghi-Alavijeh: None. D. Gale: None. C. Acknowledgments: This research was supported by the Dutch Kennedy: None. M. Griffin: None. L. Casserly: None. P. O’Hara: Kidney Foundation (AMvE:18OKG19/15OP14) and Medical None.J.Abboud:None.K.Cronin:None.D.O’Sullivan:None.A. ResearchCouncil(OSA:MR/S021329/1)andmadepossiblethrough Mallawaarachchi: None. I. Capelli: None. G. LaManna: None. C. access to the data and findings generated by the 100,000 Graziano: None. R. Schönauer: None. J. Halbritter: None. G.L. GenomesProject;http://www.genomicsengland.co.uk. Cavalleri: None. P. Conlon:None. R. Snoek: None. L.R. Claus: None. E.D.J. Peters: None. S.M.C. Savelberg:None.K.Duran:None.S.W.vanderVeen:None.W.J. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8779 C23.3 Diagnostic yield and benefits of whole-exome Introduction:Hirschsprung disease(HSCR) isacongenitaldefect sequencing in patients with congenital anomalies of the characterizedbytheabsenceoftheentericnervoussystem(ENS) kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) diagnosed in the first inthedistalcolon.TheENSwaslongbelievedtobesolelyderived thousanddays oflife fromthevagalneuralcrest,howevertrunkcrestderivedSchwann cell progenitors (SCPs) were found to have enteric neurogenic LinaWerfel1,2,HelgeMartens1,ImkeHennies2,AnneChristians1,Ann potential as well. The role of SCPs in HSCR remains unexplored, Christin Gjerstad3, Kerstin Fröde2, Barbara M. Ludwikowski4, Robert thereforeweaimedtodeterminetheeffectofmutationsinret,the Geffers5, Heiko Billing6, Martin Kirschstein7, Alejandro D. Hofmann8, majorgene involved inHSCR, on theENS. Anna Bjerre3,Dieter Haffner2,Ruthild G. Weber1 Methods: We optimized and performed single cell (sc)RNA sequencingonintestinesisolatedfrom5-day-oldwildtypeandret 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hann- mutant zebrafish to analyze their ENS. We validated our findings over,Germany,2DepartmentofPediatricKidney,LiverandMetabolic by live-imaging in zebrafish and by immunohistochemistry using Diseases,HannoverMedicalSchool,Hannover,Germany,3Divisionof humanintestinal material. Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Results:BasedonthescRNAsequencingdata,wewereableto Norway,4DepartmentofPediatricSurgeryandUrology,AufderBult identifyclusterswith“differentiatedneurons”,clustersofcellsthat Kinder- und Jugendkrankenhaus, Hannover, Germany, 5Genome undergo neuronal commitment or differentiation and clusters of “progenitorcells”,includingSCPs.Asexpected,wefoundthatret Analytics Research Group, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany, 6Department of Paediatrics I, University mutantlarvaelackthemajorityoftheseclusters.However,theSCP Children’s Hospital, Tübingen, Germany, 7Department of Pediatrics, cluster was selectively persevered. We are currently investigating General Hospital, Celle, Germany, 8Department of Pediatric Surgery, whether SCPs remain present in the aganglionic bowel of HSCR Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. patients. Conclusion:OurdatashowthatSCPsintheintestine,develop Introduction: Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary independentlyofRetexpression.Therefore,thepresenceofthese tract (CAKUT) are the predominant cause of chronic kidney cells brings new insights that could be used to develop novel disease(CKD)inchildrenandadolescents.CAKUTcanoccurinan interventionoptions forentericneuropathies, such asHSCR. isolated form or with extrarenal comorbidities. Although over 50 Funding:Stichting Vrienden vanhetSophia (WAR20-63) genesareknowntocauseCAKUTifmutated,thediagnosticyield L. Kuil: None. N. Kakiailatu: None. J. Windster: None. E. of whole-exomesequencing (WES) studies is typically lower than Bindels: None. J. Peulen-Zink: None. V. Melotte: None. R. 15%. Here, we asked for the diagnostic yield in young CAKUT Hofstra: None.M. Alves: None. patients and whether an early genetic diagnosis may impact patient management. MaterialsandMethods:In100patientsdiagnosedwithCAKUT C23.5TheOSMRgeneisinvolvedinHirschsprungAssociated inthe first 1,000 daysof life, WES wasperformed and variants in Enterocolitis susceptibility through an altered downstream 58 established CAKUT-associated genes were extracted and signaling classified according to the ACMG guidelines. The translational valueofthegenetic findings wasassessed. Francesca Rosamilia1, Tiziana Bachetti1, Giuseppe Santamaria2, Results:In26%ofpatientsdiagnosedwithCAKUTearlyinlife,we Martina Bartolucci2, Manuela Mosconi2, Serenella Sartori3, Maria identified a likely pathogenic (LP) or pathogenic (P) rare variant in Rosaria De Filippo3, Marco Di Duca2, Valentina Obino1, Stefano one or two of 17 CAKUT-associated genes, including HNF1B, LIFR, Avanzini2, Domenico Mavilio4, Simona Candiani1, Andrea Petretto2, SALL1andUMOD.Ofthe24differentvariantsdetected,12wereloss- Alessio Pini Prato5,Isabella Ceccherini2,Francesca Lantieri1 of-functionandfivedenovovariants.Thirteenoftheaffectedgenes werepotentiallyassociatedwithextrarenalmorbidities,e.g.diabetes 1University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 2IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, mellitus or hyperuricemia. Patients with LP/P variants were Genoa, Italy, 3IRCCS Hospital San Raffaele, Milan, Italy, 4Humanitas significantly more likely to have end-stage CKD under three years Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano-Milan, Italy, 5Ospedale ofageandextrarenalmanifestationsthanthosewithout. Infantile AON SS Antonio e Biagio e Cesare Arrigo, Alessandria, Conclusions:Ourdatademonstratearelativelyhighdiagnostic Italy. yield of WES in children diagnosed with CAKUT early in life, particularly with end-stage CKD and extrarenal manifestations, Hirschsprung(HSCR)AssociatedEnterocolitis(HAEC)isacommon and suggest a benefit for managing comorbidities (Else Kröner- life-threatening complication in HSCR, a congenital intestinal Fresenius-Stiftung, grantno. 2018_Kolleg.12). aganglionosis.Thelossofguthomeostasiscausedbyanimpaired L. Werfel: None. H. Martens: None. I. Hennies: None. A. immune system hypothesised for HAEC and the susceptibility to Christians: None. A. Gjerstad: None. K. Fröde: None. B.M. HAEC in HSCR patients suggest a genetic background. Yet, no Ludwikowski: None. R. Geffers: None. H. Billing: None. M. gene has been claimed to contribute to HAEC. We investigated Kirschstein: None. A.D. Hofmann: None. A. Bjerre: None. D. the genetics of HAEC by omics approaches: Whole Exome Haffner:None. R.G.Weber: None. Sequencing (WES) and proteomics analysis. WES on 12 HSCR patientswithenterocolitis(HAEC)and12without(HSCR-only)and replication in a panel of 65 HAEC and 105 HSCR-only patients, C23.4 Single cell RNA sequencing of the enteric nervous identified a susceptibility variant in the Oncostatin-M receptor system shows selective preservation of schwann cell (OSMR) gene, finding allelic frequencies of 14.6% in HAEC and progenitor-like cells inretmutantzebrafish 5.1% in HSCR-only patients, p=0.0024. The Transmission Dis- equilibriumTeston38HAECand26HSCR-onlytriossupportedan Laura Kuil1, Naomi Kakiailatu1, Jonathan Windster1, Eric Bindels1, overtransmissionofthevariantalleletotheaffectedpatients,p= JokePeulen-Zink1,Veerle Melotte2, RobertHofstra1,Maria Alves1 0.01255. Proteomic analysis on lymphoblastoid cells from one HAEC patient homozygote and one HAEC patient wt for this 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Maastricht University variant pointed out two well distinct clusters of proteins Medical Center,Maastricht, Netherlands. significantly up or downregulated upon OSM stimulation. Path- waysanalysisshowedanenrichmentinimmuneresponserelated EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8780 proteinsintheHAECOSMRwtcellsthatwascompletelylostinthe presented clinically with partial lipodystrophy, severe insulin OSMR variant cells, where proteins related to pathogen infection resistance and hyperlipidemia. Demyelinating neuropathy and and inflammation pathways were instead over-expressed. In chronic pain were additional disabling features. PLAAT3-deficient conclusion,OSMRisimplicatedinthesusceptibilitytoHAEClikely WAT showed inflammation, irregular adipocyte morphology and perturbatingthedownstreamsignallingcascadenecessaryforthe an abnormal lipidomic profile indicative of a failure to liberate gut immune response and homeostasis maintenance. (Italian arachidonic acid (AA) from membrane phosphatidylcholines (PC) Ministry ofHealthgrant GR-2011-02347381). resulting inincreased levelsof AA containinglyso-PCs (LPC). F. Rosamilia: None. T. Bachetti: None. G. Santamaria: None. Conclusions: Genetic PLAAT3 deficiency in humans causes a M.Bartolucci:None.M.Mosconi:None.S.Sartori:None.M.De novel type of autosomal recessive familial partial lipodystrophy. Filippo: None. M. Di Duca: None. V. Obino: None. S. Avanzini: This finding introduces an important caveat when considering None.D.Mavilio:None.S.Candiani:None.A.Petretto:None.A. PLAAT3 asatherapeutic target. Pini Prato:None. I. Ceccherini: None. F.Lantieri: None. N. Schuermans*: None. S. El Chehadeh*: None. D. Hemel- soet*: None. E. Bogaert: None. E. Debackere: None. P. Hilbert: None.N.VanDoninck:None.M.Taquet:None.T.Rosseel:None. C23.6Lipodystrophyduetogeneticdeficiencyofpicornavirus G.DeClercq:None.C.VanHaverbeke:None.J.Chanson:None. hostfactor and obesity regulatorPLAAT3 B. Funalot: None. F. Authier: None. S. Kaya: None. W. Terryn: None.S.Callens:None.B.Depypere:None.J.VanDorpe:None. Nika Schuermans*1,2, Salima El Chehadeh*3, Dimitri Hemelsoet*3, B.Poppe:None. C.Depienne: None. B.Dermaut: None. Elke Bogaert1,2, Elke Debackere1,2, Pascale Hilbert4, Nike Van Doninck5,Marie-CarolineTaquet6,ToonRosseel1,2,GrietDeClercq1,7, CaroleVanHaverbeke8,Jean-BaptisteChanson9,BenoitFunalot10,11, C24Genomevariation and architecture François-Jérôme Authier11,12, Sabine Kaya13, Wim Terryn14, Steven Callens15, Bernard Depypere16, Jo Van Dorpe8, Program for C24.1 What is the best solution to manage failures of chro- Undiagnosed Diseases (UD-PrOZA), Bruce Poppe1,2, Christel Depi- mosomal structural variations detection by short-read enne12,Bart Dermaut1,2, *contributed equally strategy? 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Caroline Schluth-Bolard1,2, Laïla El-Khattabi3, Nicolas Chatron1,2, Belgium,2DepartmentofBiomolecularMedicine,FacultyofMedicine Marion Beaumont1,4, Nicolas Reynaud1,5, Kevin Uguen1,6, Flavie and Health Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 3Service de Diguet1, Pierre-Antoine Rollat-Farnier1,7, Claire Bardel7, Alexandra Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 45 Afenjar8, Florence Amblard9, Jeanne Amiel10, Sophie Christin- Maître11, Françoise Devillard9, Mélanie Fradin12, Bertrand Isidor13, Institute of Pathology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Charleroi, Belgium, 5General Hospital AZ Nikolaas, Sylvie Jaillard4, Dominique Martin-Coignard14, Robert Olaso15, Massimiliano Rossi1,16, Stéphanie Valence17, Jean-Pierre Siffroi8, Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Sint-Niklaas, Bel- DamienSanlaville1,2 gium, 6Department of Internal Medicine and Nutrition, Hopitaux Universitaires Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 72 Department of 1ServicedeGénétique,HospicesCivilsdeLyon,Lyon,France,2Institut Biomolecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, GhentUniversity,Ghent,Belgium,8DepartmentofPathology,Ghent Neuromyogène, Equipe Métabolisme énergétique et développement UniversityHospital,Ghent,Belgium,9ServicedeneurologieHôpitalde neuronal, CNRS UMR 5310, INSERM U1217, Université Lyon 1, Lyon, Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 10Department of Medical Genetics, France, 3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, APHP Hôpital Cochin, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Université Paris-Est-Créteil, Créteil, France, Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin U1016, Paris, France, 11Inserm UMR955, Créteil, France, 12Centre Expert de Pathologie 4LaboratoiredeCytogénétiqueetBiologieCellulaire,CHUdeRennes, Neuromusculaire, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Université Paris-Est-Créteil, Rennes, France, 5Laboratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction, Créteil, France, 13Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum HospicesCivilsdeLyon,Lyon,France,6ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale, Essen, Essen, Germany, 14Department of Nephrology, Jan Yperman CHRU de Brest, Brest, France, 7Cellule Bio-Informatique de la Hospital,Leper,Belgium,15DepartmentofGeneralInternalMedicine, PlateformeNGS,HospicesCivilsdeLyon,Lyon,France,8Département Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 16Department of Plastic de génétique et embryologie médicale, AP-HP. Sorbonne Université, HôpitalArmandTrousseau,Paris,France,9LaboratoiredeGénétique and Reconstructive Surgery, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Chromosomique, Hôpital Couple Enfant, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 10Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Background:PLAAT3(alsoknownasPLA2G16)isaphospholipid Malades, Paris, France, 11Service d’Endocrinologie, Hôpital Saint- modifying enzyme mainly expressed in white adipose tissue Antoine, APHP, Paris, France, 12Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU (WAT).PLAAT3representsanimportantpotentialdrugtargetasits Rennes, Rennes, France, 13Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU deficiencyinmiceprotectsagainstpicornavirusinfectionanddiet- Nantes, Nantes, France, 14Service de Génétique Médicale, CH Le induced obesity. The consequences of PLAAT3 deficiency in Mans, Le Mans, France, 15Centre National de Recherche en humansarenot known. Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), CEA, Evry, France, 16Centre de Methods:Unbiasedgenome-wideapproachesincludinghomo- Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, GENDEV Team, INSERM zygosity mapping, whole exome and genome sequencing were U1028, CNRS UMR5292, UCBL1, Bron, France, 17Service de Neuropé- applied to identify the causal mutation in 4 patients from two diatrie,AP-HP.SorbonneUniversité,HôpitalArmandTrousseau,Paris, consanguineous families with unexplained partial lipodystrophy. France. Lipidomics and histopathological analysis of patient WAT were Short-readWholeGenomesequencing(WGS)affordstheefficient performed. Results:Inthefirstfamilyweidentifiedahomozygous5092bp and accurate characterization of balanced chromosomal rearran- deletionencompassingexon2ofthePLAAT3gene(c.16-4823_118 gement (BCR) breakpoints. However, in 9 to 11% of cases, the +167del, p.Pro6ValfsTer15) within a shared ~43 Mb homozygous rearrangement cannot be detected by this strategy. Among the regionat11q12.3.Inthesecondfamilyahomozygousduplication 117 BCR we studied in patients with abnormal phenotype, of a single base leading to a frameshift in exon 3 of PLAAT3 fourteen (11.9%) could not be detected by our current strategy (c.286dupG, p.Ala96GlyfsTer16) was observed. The patients thatincludesshort-readWGS,alignmentagainstGRCh38genome EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8781 andSVdetectionusingBreakdancerv1.4.5.TheseBCRswereall correlation between experimental values of protein reduction reciprocal translocations, 10 of which implicated constitutive and computational measures of codon usage, indicating the heterochromatin of chromosomes 1, 9 or 16, acrocentric short relevance of our in silico predictions. Our findings underline the armsorpericentromericregions.ThedataoftheseBCRswerere- clinical relevance of sSNVs and the necessity to investigate their analyzed using 3 others bio-informatic tools (GRIDDS, LUMPY impact on translation. This study was supported by Fondation and SvABA). In parallel, eleven BCRs were further characterized MaladieRares (PMO1201204) and theAgence de laBiomedecine using different techniques, either isolated or combined, includ- (AMP2016). ing FISH, linked-read sequencing (10X Genomics), long-read A.Kim:None.J.LeDouce:None.F.Diab:None.M.Ferorova: sequencing (PacBio, Nanopore sequencing) or optical mapping None. C. Dubourg: None. S. Odent: None. V. Dupe: None. V. (Bionano). We were able to characterize the breakpoints at the David: None. L. Diambra: None. E. Watrin: None. M. de base-pair level for 11 translocations. For 10 translocations, at Tayrac: None. leastonebreakpointinvolvedhighlyrepetitiveelementssuchas alpha-satellites, segmental duplications, satellite repeats or other poorly mapped regions. For 5/11 patients, one of the C24.3Denovoalphasatelliteinsertionsandtheevolutionary breakpoints could explain the phenotype either by gene landscape ofcentromeres disruption (NLGN4, DYRK1A, CAMTA1) or position effect (BMP2, SIX3). In conclusion, failure of the short read strategy is due to Giuliana Giannuzzi1,2,3, Glennis Logsdon4, Nicolas Chatron5,6, the implication of highly repetitive genomic regions, either Danny E. Miller4,7, Julie Reversat5, Katherine M. Munson4, Kendra absentfromthereferencegenomeornotattributedtoaunique Hoekzema4, Carl A. Baker4, Damien Sanlaville5,6, Evan E. Eichler4,8, position. The resolution of these cases are of essential for Caroline Schluth-Bolard5,6, Alexandre Reymond1 patients’ care since we concluded to a pathogenic variant in 45% of the patients. 1CenterforIntegrativeGenomics,UniversityofLausanne, Lausanne, C. Schluth-Bolard: None. L. El-Khattabi: None. N. Chatron: Switzerland, 2Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, Milan, None.M.Beaumont:None.N.Reynaud:None.K.Uguen:None. Italy, 3Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research F. Diguet: None. P. Rollat-Farnier: None. C. Bardel: None. A. Council, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Genome Sciences, University Afenjar: None. F. Amblard: None. J. Amiel: None. S. Christin- of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 5Service de génétique, Hospices Maître: None. F. Devillard: None. M. Fradin: None. B. Isidor: Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 6Institut NeuroMyoGène, University of None. S. Jaillard: None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. R. Olaso: Lyon, Lyon, France, 7Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetic None. M. Rossi: None. S. Valence: None. J. Siffroi: None. D. Medicine, University of Washington and Seattle Children’s Hospital, Sanlaville: None. Seattle, WA, USA, 8Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,USA. C24.2 How silence shapes the brain: synonymous variants Human centromeres are composed of alpha satellite DNA alter codon usage and translation of Sonic Hedgehog in hierarchically organized as higher-order repeats and epigeneti- holoprosencephaly cally specified by CENP-A binding. Current evolutionary models assert that new centromeres are first epigenetically established Artem KIM1, Jerome Le Douce1, Farah Diab1, Monika Ferorova1, and subsequently acquire an alphoid array. Differently, we Christele Dubourg1, Sylvie Odent1, Valerie Dupe1, Veronique David1, identified during routine aneuploidy FISH testing a de novo LuisDiambra2, Erwan Watrin1, Mariede Tayrac1 insertion of alpha satellite DNA array (~100-200 kbp) from the centromereofchromosome18(D18Z1)intochromosome15q26 1UnivRennes,CNRS,IGDR(Institutdegénétiqueetdéveloppementde euchromatin. Although bound by CENP-B, this locus did not Rennes)-UMR6290,F-35000Ren,Rennes,France,2CREG,CONICET- acquire centromeric functionality as demonstrated by lack of Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, CP 1900, Argentina, La constriction and absence of CENP-A binding. We characterized Plata,Argentina. the rearrangement by FISH and sequencing using Illumina, PacBio, and Nanopore adaptive sampling which revealed that Despite their clinical relevance, synonymous Single Nucleotide the insertion was associated with a 2.8-kbp deletion and Variants (sSNVs) are still largely ignored in clinical studies, unless occurredinthepaternalgermline.Notably,thesitewaslocated directlyassociatedwithsplicingdefects.Inparticular,theirimpact ~10Mbpdistalfromthelocationwhereanancestralcentromere oncodon usageandprotein translationremainsunelucidated. In was seeded ~25 million years ago in the common ancestor of thiswork,weexploretheclinicalsignificanceofsSNVsintheSonic Old World monkeys and apes. Long reads spanning either Hedgehog gene (SHH) identified in patients affected by holopro- junction showed that the D18Z1 higher-order repeat structure sencephaly - a developmental defect resulting from incomplete was more homogeneous at the proximal end and more forebrain cleavage. Genetic screening was performed in 931 divergent at the distal one. The rearrangement did not disrupt patients and revealed 8 different SHH sSNVs, selectively enriched anygeneorregulatoryelementanddidnotaltertheepigenetic inourcohortascomparedtohealthyindividuals,suggestingtheir statusofthesurroundingregion,consistentwiththeabsenceof role in disease etiology. We systematically assessed their phenotypicconsequencesinthecarrier.Thiscasedemonstrates deleterious impactatbothtranscriptional andtranslationallevels a likely rare but new class of structural variation that we name using a series of in silico and in vitro approaches. Although no alpha satellite insertion. It also expands our knowledge about evidenceofimpactofthesesSNVsonsplicing,mRNAstructureor the evolutionary life cycle of centromeres, suggesting that miRNAregulationwasfound,fivesSNVswerepredictedtoimpact alphoid arrays can relocate near vestigial centromeric sites. protein translation by introducing significant changes in codon SNSF_31003A_182632, NIH_HG010169 usage. Cell assays demonstrated that these five sSNVs result in a G.Giannuzzi:None.G.Logsdon:None.N.Chatron:None.D.E. significantly reduced expression of the SHH protein (up to 23%, Miller: None. J. Reversat: None. K.M. Munson: None. K. p<1e^-9).Inhibitionoftheproteasomerescuedtheproteinlevels Hoekzema: None. C.A. Baker: None. D. Sanlaville: None. E.E. for four out of five sSNVs, confirming their impact on protein Eichler:None. C.Schluth-Bolard: None. A.Reymond: None. stability and folding. Remarkably, we found a significant EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8782 C24.4IntegrationofHi-Candlong-readsequencingreveals significantexpressiondifferencesbetweenthealleles,whichare the structure of highly rearranged chromosomes in patients partly associated with gene disruptions. The fraction of genes withgermline-chromothripsis with expression differences decreases quickly with increasing distance to the breakpoint. This indicates that the genome can Robert Schöpflin1,2,3, Uirá Souto Melo1,2, Hossein Moeinzadeh3, be relatively resistant against the effects of SVs and that even DavidHeller3,VerenaHeinrich3,JakobHerztberg3,MichaelRobson1, large-scalegenomicrearrangementsappeartobetoleratedtoa Alessa Ringel1, Konrad Chudzik1, Manuel Holtgrewe4,5, Nico Alavi3, surprising extend. Marius-KonstantinKlever1,2,JuliusJungnitsch1,2,EmelComak3,Seval Supported by a grant (MU 880/16-1) from Deutsche For- Türkmen2, Yannis Duffourd6, Laurence Faivre6,7, Orsetta Zuffardi8, schungsgemeinschaft (DFG) andBMBF toSM. Romano Tenconi9, Nehir Edibe Kurtas10, Sabrina Giglio11, Volkmar R.Schöpflin:None.U.S.Melo:None.H.Moeinzadeh:None.D. Beensen12, Gotthold Barbi13, Bettina Prager14, Anna Latos- Heller:None.V.Heinrich:None.J.Herztberg:None.M.Robson: Bielenska15, Ida Vogel16, Merete Bugge17, Niels Tommerup17, Malte None. A. Ringel: None. K. Chudzik: None. M. Holtgrewe: None. Spielmann1,2,18, Vera M. Kalscheuer1, Antonio Vitobello6,19, Martin N.Alavi:None.M.Klever:None.J.Jungnitsch:None.E.Comak: Vingron3, StefanMundlos1,2 None.S.Türkmen:None.Y.Duffourd:None.L.Faivre:None.O. Zuffardi: None. R. Tenconi: None. N.E. Kurtas: None. S. Giglio: 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development & None. V. Beensen: None. G. Barbi: None. B. Prager: None. A. Disease, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute for Medical and Human Latos-Bielenska: None. I. Vogel: None. M. Bugge: None. N. Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, Tommerup:None.M.Spielmann:None.V.M.Kalscheuer:None. 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of A.Vitobello: None. M. Vingron: None. S.Mundlos: None. Computational Molecular Biology, Berlin, Germany, 4CUBI - Core Unit Bioinformatics, Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany, 5Charité - University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6UFR Des C24.622q11.2inversioninamosaic22q11.2deletionpatient SciencesdeSanté,INSERM-UniversitédeBourgogneUMR1231GAD provides insights in LCR22-mediated rearrangements « Génétique des Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 7Dept of Genetics and Centres of Reference for rare Lisanne Vervoort1, Greet Peeters1, Nicolas Dierckxsens1, Luc disorders, developmental abnormalities and intellectual disabil- Dehaspe2, Leen Vancoillie2, Kris Van Den Bogaert2, Cindy Melotte2, ities, FHU TRANSLAD and GIMI Institute, University Hospital Dijon, HildeVan Esch2, Joris Vermeesch1 Dijon, France, 8Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 9Genetica Clinica, 1Laboratory for Cytogenetics and Genome Research, Leuven, Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy, Belgium,2Centrefor HumanGenetics, Leuven, Belgium. 10Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, Florence, Italy, 11Medical Genetics Unit, University of Cagliari, Introduction: The 22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome (22q11.2DS), the Cagliari, Italy, 12Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, mostcommongenomicdisorder,isthoughttobecausedbynon- Friedrich-Schiller University, Jena, Germany, 13Institut für Human- allelic homologous recombination between low copy repeats on genetik, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 14Praxis für chromosome 22 (LCR22s). Due to their complexity, LCR22s have Humangenetik, Kinderzentrum Dresden-Friedrichstadt, Dresden, remained elusive for sequencing and as a consequence, the Germany,15DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,UniversityofMedical mechanisticoriginhasneverbeencharted.Theidentificationofa Sciences in Poznan, Poznan, Poland, 16Department of Clinical mosaic 22q11.2DS individual provides a unique opportunity to Medicine - Department for Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University, infer the deletion origin since both non-rearranged and rear- Aarhus, Denmark, 17Wilhelm Johannsen Center for Functional rangedalleles arepresent. GenomeResearch,DepartmentofCellularandMolecularMedicine, Materials and Methods: cfDNA analysis, arrayCGH, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 18Institute of SNParray,and22q11.2delFISHuncoveredanaberrantmaternal Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 19Unité profile in the 22q11.2 locus. An LCR22-specific fiber-FISH test Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique des maladies rares, FHU- was performed to assemble the haplotypes and results were TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France. validatedbyBionanoopticalmappingandtargetedinterphase- FISH. Family members were tested for the presence of Chromothripsiscommonlyobservedincancermayalsooccuras rearrangements. Nanopore sequencing is used to map the arareeventinthegermline.Animportantsteptowardsamore (rearranged) LCR22s. thorough understanding, which rearrangements have a patho- Results: Genetic testing detected a LCR22-A/B deletion genic effect, is the precise mapping of breakpoints and the (1.5Mb) in 50% of the white blood cells. Haplotype assembly reconstruction of the shattered chromosomes. and interphase-FISH uncovered an inversion between LCR22-A/ Here, we investigated 12 cases with complex genomic B in the cells without the deletion. The inversion occurred rearrangements in the germline, including chromothripsis, by de novo and was not transmitted to the fetus. Long read combining short-read and long-read PacBio WGS with Hi-C. sequencingisappliedtomaptheLCR22s,currentlystillgapsin Large-scale genomic rearrangements were readily identified in thehumanreference genome,andpinpoint therearrangement Hi-Cinteractionsmaps,allowingforanindependentassessment breakpoints. of breakpoint calls from the WGS methods. This resulted in the Conclusions: Inversions have never been described in detectionof>300large-scalegenomicjunctionsintotal(4to62 22q11.2DSandsomaticmosaicismisrare.Thisinversionprobably per sample). Additionally, Hi-C was effective in guiding the rendersthelocusunstable,drivingthesomaticdeletion.Presence reconstruction of rearranged chromosomes telomere to telo- oftheinversionanddeletionalleleinthesameindividualprovides mere. The Hi-C derived 3D chromatin structure of the mutant a unique opportunity to map the LCR22s and identify the cis chromosomes showed in more than 2/3 of the instances a acting elements driving 22q11 deletions. Funding: FWO reshuffling of topologically associated domains (TADs). To GOE1117N investigate the effect of these rearrangements on gene L.Vervoort:None.G.Peeters:None.N.Dierckxsens:None.L. regulation, we used phased RNA-seq data generated from Dehaspe:None.L.Vancoillie:None.K.VanDenBogaert:None. patients’lymphoblastoidcells.Formostofthecases,lessthan1/ C.Melotte: None. H.VanEsch: None. J.Vermeesch: None. 4 of the detectable genes +-500kb around breakpoints show EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8783 C25Usinggenomics to personalise medicine 1InstituteforMolecularMedicineFinland(FIMM),HiLIFE,Universityof Helsinki,Helsinki,Finland,2DepartmentofPublicHealth,Universityof C25.1PharmacogeneticstoAvoidLossofHearing(PALOH):A Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, ProspectiveObservationalTrialtoAssesstheImplementation Cambridge, MA,USA. of Rapid Genotyping to Avoid Aminoglycoside Induced Oto- toxicity in Newborns Family history (FH) is a risk factor for most common diseases, capturing both genetic and other familial risk. Polygenic risk John H. McDermott1, Rachel Mahood1, Duncan Stoddard2, Shaun scores (PRS) identify individuals at substantially increased risk of Ainsworth3,GinoMiele3,IainBruce4,FionaUlph5,NicolaBooth6,Karen disease,butwhetherthesetwomeasuresofgeneticsusceptibility Harvey7, Richard Body8, Paul Wilson9, Rhona MacLeod1, Mark Turner7, areinterchangeable remains unclear. Westudied theinterplay of AjitMahaveer7,ThePALOHInvestigators,WilliamG.Newman1 FHandPRSfor20commondiseases,includingcommoncancers, cardiometabolicdiseases,andmentaldisorders.FromFinnGen(N 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United =260,405), we identified 30,517 individuals with a first-degree Kingdom, 2DS Analytics and Machine Learning Ltd, London, United relativeinthedataset,andevaluatedtheeffectofFHbylinkageto Kingdom,3GenedrivePLC,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,4Manchester nationwide healthcare registries. For each disease, we system- atically constructed genome-wide PRSs. For the majority of Centre for Audiology and Deafness, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Division of Psychology & Mental Health, Manchester, United diseases, adjusting the FH effect size with PRS resulted in Kingdom, 6Newborn Intensive Care Unit, Manchester University moderate decreases (mean decrease -10.9%;s.d. 6.7%). Similarly, NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Newborn adjustingthePRSeffectwithFHhadnegligibleimpactonthePRS Intensive Care Unit, Liverpool Women’s Hospital, Liverpool, United (-2.9%;1.3%).Examplesforthreediseasesareinthetable.Noneof Kingdom, 8Emergency Department, Manchester University NHS the 20 diseases showed evidence of interaction between FH and Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 9Alliance Manche- PRS (p-value range 0.07-0.87). For 5/20 diseases, PRS showed larger improvements in risk prediction than FH. In none did FH ster Business School, Manchester, United Kingdom. andPRSjointlyperformbetterthanPRSalone.Resultsweresimilar forparentalcausesofdeath(N=163,973,outofwhom61.3%had Introduction: Aminoglycosides are first-choice antibiotics for a dead parent). For a wide range of diseases, this systematic empirical treatment of neonatal sepsis. The m.1555A>G variant comparison demonstrates that family history and polygenic risk predisposes to profound ototoxicity after aminoglycoside admin- provide complementary information in risk assessment, support- istration.Currentgenotypingtakesdays,anunacceptabledelayin ingtheclinical utility ofpolygenic risk scores. acute settings. We aimed to develop and implement a point of caretest(POCT)togenotypethem.1555A>Gvariantinaclinically Effectsizesforfamilyhistoryandpolygenicriskscores relevant timeframe, facilitatingtailored prescribing. Methods:Aloop-mediatedisothermalamplificationreactionwas Family Family PRS PRS designed to amplify the target region before genotyping via melt- history history adjusted adjusted withfamily curveanalysis.ThiswaspackagedintotheGenedrivePOCTsystem withPRS history and integrated into clinical pathways at two major UK neonatal centresover11-months.Alladmissionswereeligibleforrecruitment. OR OR(95%CI) ORper ORperSD (95%CI) SD (95%CI) The primary outcome was the number of neonates successfully (95%CI) tested for the variant out of all babies prescribed antibiotics. Secondaryoutcomesinclude measuresof clinicaltimingstoassess Breastcancer 2.46 2.06(1.68- 1.76 1.71(1.58- whetherimplementationnegativelyimpactednormalcare. (2.01- 2.54) (1.63- 1.85) Results: The POCT identifies the m.1555A>G genotype in 3.00) 1.91) 26 minutes with performance comparable to gold standard Venous 1.80 1.70(1.38- 1.40 1.39(1.31- genotyping. 81% of admissions receiving antibiotics were thromboemolism (1.46- 2.09) (1.32- 1.47) 2.21) 1.48) successfully tested for the variant and other clinical timings, includingtime-to-antibiotic,wereequivalenttopreviouspractice. Glaucoma 2.50 2.25(1.84- 1.64 1.61(1.50- Three babies with m.1555A>G were identified, all of whom (2.05- 2.76) (1.53- 1.74) received an alternative antibiotic regimen. A failure rate of 15% 3.06) 1.77) persistedthroughoutthestudy,howeverthisratecouldbealmost eliminatedafter adjustments to assaychemistry. Conclusions: We can identify the m.1555A>G variant in a N.Mars:None.P.dellaBriottaParolo:None.S.Ripatti:None. practice-changingtimeframeanddemonstratetheimportanceof C25.3Breastandprostatecancerrisk:theinterplayofpolygenic implementation trials in genomics. To our knowledge, this risk, high-impactmonogenic variants,and family history represents the first example of a pharmacogenetic assay employedinthe acute neonatalsetting toalter management. Emadeldin Hassanin1,2, Rana Aldisi1, Patrick May3, Peter Krawitz1, J.H.McDermott:None.R.Mahood:None.D.Stoddard:None. DheerajReddy Bobbili2, CarloMaj1 S. Ainsworth: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Employee of Genedrive. G. Miele: A. Employment (full or part- 1InstituteforGenomicStatisticsandBioinformatics,Bonn,Germany, time);Significant;EmployeeofGenedrive.I.Bruce:None.F.Ulph: 2MeGenoS.A,Esch-sur-Alzette,Luxembourg,3LuxembourgCentrefor None. N. Booth: None. K. Harvey: None. R. Body: None. P. SystemsBiomedicine, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg. Wilson:None.R.MacLeod:None.M.Turner:None.A.Mahaveer: None.W.G.Newman: None. Genetic predisposition to breast cancer (BC) has been associated with both high-impact monogenic variants across susceptibility genes,andthepolygenicriskduetotheadditiveeffectsofmany C25.2 Family history and polygenic risk scores are not common variants. While the two types of genetic risks are well- interchangeable measures ofgenetic susceptibility established, few studies have explored the extent to which NinaMars1,PietrodellaBriottaParolo1,FinnGen,SamuliRipatti1,2,3 polygenic background can modify the risk of high-impact monogenic variants in BC. Here, we show that among 96,344 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8784 womenwith3,654BCcases(datafromUKBiobank),polygenicrisk consent form, Individual consent, Clinical, Material, Sample score(PRS)modifiesthepenetranceofmonogenicvariantsacross preparation, Sequencing, Analysis), all linked to common 12 BC susceptibility genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, PALB2, CHEK2, ontologies such as NCIT, DUO, and EDAM. The schema is RAD51, TP53, RAD51D, RAD51C, BRIP1, RAD54L, BARD1). A representedbyaYAMLfileandistransformedintotemplatesfor polygenicriskscoreforBCwascalculatedandusedtocategorise EDCssoyoucaneasilyimplementFAIRgenomesintoyourEPD, individualsinto low, intermediate,and highrisk groups. We then MOLGENIS,Castor,OpenClinica and REDCap systems.Currently, compared how the PRS stratification among carriers of high- we are writing a guideline to help institutes implement FAIR impact variants influence the BC risk. The prevalence of BC is Genomes in practice. By providing guidelines and practical significantlyhigherincarriersofhigh-impactvariantswithahigh resources, FAIR Genomes expects to increase reuse of genomic PRS(>90% percentile) [(Odds ratio (95% CI), 4.41 (3.19-5.97), P= data for healthcare and research while addressing ELSI issues, 3.96×10−21)and(Hazardratio(95%CI),3.76(2.84-4.98),P=2×10 providingagreatbasisforparticipationine.g.Europe’sBeyond −16)], compared to carriers with low PRS (<10% percentile) [(OR 1+MillionGenomes.Joinusat:https://github.com/fairgenomes. (95% CI), 1.98 (1.05-3.41), P=2×10−2) and (HR (95% CI), 2.23 K.J.vanderVelde*:None.G.Singh*:None.X.Liao:None.R. (1.34-4.00), P=3×10−3)]. Kaliyaperumal: None. D. Stemkens: None. E. van Enckevort: These findings highlight the potential benefit of including PRS None. S. Rebers: None. K. Wolstencroft: None. S. de Ridder: intherisk assessment offamilialBC. None. T. Vrijenhoek: None. F. de Andrade: None. A. Niehues: E.Hassanin: None. R.Aldisi: None. P. May:None. P.Krawitz: None.H.H.D.Kerstens:None.A.Jacobsen:None.B.deKoning: None.D.Bobbili: None. C.Maj: None. None.J.vanReeuwijk:None.K.Elsink:None.C.Staiger:None.J. vanMontfrans:None.E.vanIperen:None.N.Knoers:None.S. Willems: None. W. van Zelst-Stams: None. H.Ijntema: None. E. C25.4 FAIR Genomes: a metadata model and guidelines for Cuppen: None. L. Steeghs: None. S. Scholtens: None. L. Mei: reuseofNGS data None.P.Kemmeren:None.M.Roos:None.C.Oosterwijk:None. M.Weiss:None.A.Stubbs:None.P.A.C.tHoen:None.J.Laros: Kasper Joeri van der Velde1*, Gurnoor Singh2*, XiaoFeng Liao2, None. J.A.M. Beliën*: None. M.E. van Gijn*: None. M.A. Rajaram Kaliyaperumal3, Daphne Stemkens4, Esther van Encke- Swertz*: None. vort1, Susanne Rebers5, Katy Wolstencroft3, Sander de Ridder6, Terry Vrijenhoek7, Fernanda de Andrade1, Anna Niehues2, Hindrik H. D. Kerstens8, Annika Jacobsen3, Bart de Koning9, Jeroen van C25.5 Analysis of medically actionable variants in the 59 Reeuwijk2, Kim Elsink7, Christine Staiger10, Joris van Montfrans7, ACMG genes using 6045 whole genomes from the Qatar ErikvanIperen11,NineKnoers1,StefanWillems2,WendyvanZelst- GenomeProgram Stams2, Helger Ijntema2, Edwin Cuppen12, Lieneke Steeghs2, Salome Scholtens1, Leon Mei3, Patrick Kemmeren8, Marco Roos3, Amal Elfatih1,2, Sahar I. Da’as2,1, Doua Abdelrahman2, Idris Cor Oosterwijk4, Marjan Weiss2, Andrew Stubbs13, Peter A. C. t Mohammed1,WaseemHasan2,NajeebSyed2,RaminBadii3,Fatemeh Hoen2,JeroenLaros3,JeroenA.M.Beliën6*,MariëlleE.vanGijn1*, Abbaszadeh3, Khalid Fakhro2,1, Hamdi Mbarek4, Xavier Estivill1,5, Morris A. Swertz1* BorbalaMifsud1,6,TheQatarGenomeProgramResearchConsortium 1UMC Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University 1College of Health and Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, MedicalCenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands,3LeidenUniversityMedical Doha, Qatar, 2Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar, 3Molecular Genetics Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4VSOP - Dutch Patient Alliance for Laboratory, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 4Qatar Rare and Genetic Diseases, Soest, Netherlands, 5Netherlands Genome Program, Doha, Qatar, 5Quantitative Genomic Medicine CancerInstitute,Amsterdam,Netherlands,6AmsterdamUMC,Vrije Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain, 6William Harvey Research Institute, Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7University Queen MaryUniversity London, London,United Kingdom. Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, Netherlands, 9Maastricht Introduction: TheAmerican College ofMedical Genetics (ACMG) University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 10Dutch identified 59 genes in which incidental findings of medically Techcentre for Life Sciences, Utrecht, Netherlands, 11Durrer Center actionable pathogenic variants is recommended. The prevalence for Cardiovascular Research, Utrecht, Netherlands, 12Hartwig ofthesevariantsfromArabandotherMiddleEasternpopulations Medical Foundation, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 13Erasmus Medical isstilllacking.TheQatarGenomeProgram(QGP),whichisalarge, Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. population-based whole genome sequencing project with com- prehensive phenotypic information, allowed us to identify and ThegenomesofthousandsofDutchindividualsarenowprofiled analyzethemedicallyactionablevariantsintheQataripopulation. annually in healthcare and research. However, this valuable Materials and Methods: We used data from 6,045 whole genomic and associated clinical data is captured in different genomes from the QGP and integrated it with phenotypic data ways and fragmented across many organizations. Discovering collected by the Qatar Biobank. We identified known pathogenic additional rare patient cases is difficult and reusing data for and likely pathogenic variants based on ClinVar and the Human personalizedmedicineisnearlyimpossible.Moreover,establish- Gene Mutation Database professional entries. Additionally, ing research cohorts based on specific parameters is extremely we identified novel variants, assessed their phenotypic associa- time-consuming. FAIR Genomes aims to unlock genomes data tions, and functionally characterized two novel variants in full potential for everyone’s health benefit. Together with zebrafish model. clinicians, laboratory specialists, patient organizations and Results: We identified a total of 64 pathogenic and likely bioinformaticians we defined which meta data are essential to pathogenicvariantsin27ACMGgenesin170individuals.Overall, find,shareandreuseNGSdata.Weevolvedasemanticschema 2.8% of the QGP-sequenced participants carried a pathogenic or ofessentialdataelementsreusingexistingontologieswhenever likelypathogenicvariantinoneofthe59ACMGgenes.Wefound possible and focussed on being harmonized with international 75novel,potentiallypathogenicvariants.Weprioritizedtwonovel initiatives such as EJP, RD3, PhenoPackets, X-omics, BBMRI, cardiovascular variants, DSP c.1841A>G (p.Asp614Gly) and LMNA ELIXIR, Solve-RD and EJP-RD. Currently FAIR genomes schema c.326T>G(p.Val109Gly)forfunctionalcharacterization.Ourresults has 107 elements in 9 modules (Study, Personal, Leaflet and EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8785 showed that both variants resulted in abnormal zebrafish heart 1MPI EVA, Leipzig, Germany, 2UCM-ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3University development, heartrate and rhythm. ofWollongong,NewSouthWales,Australia,4UPV/EHU,Leioa,Spain, Conclusion: The prevalence of known medically actionable 5CENIEH, Burgos, Spain, 6IBHES, Tarragona, Spain, 7University of variants in the Qatari population is slightly higher than in other Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia, 8Polish Academy of Sciences, populations. There is a comparable number of predicted Warsaw, Poland, 9Russian Academy of Sciencs, Novosibirsk, Russian pathogenic novel variants. We confirmed the pathogenicity of Federation, 10University ofToronto, Toronto, ON,Canada. twonovel variantsin zebrafish. A. Elfatih: None. S. I. Da’as: None. D. Abdelrahman: None. I. The study of hominin history has progressed through both Mohammed: None. W. Hasan: None. N. Syed: None. R. Badii: archaeological and genetic insights. However, many archaeologi- None.F.Abbaszadeh:None.K.Fakhro:None.H.Mbarek:None. cal sites lack associated hominin fossils, frustrating genetic X.Estivill: None. B.Mifsud: None. analyses. Even when fossils are found, they often do not cover thefulltime-spanofasite,orsamplingthemforDNAmaynotbe possible.Herewepresenttargetedenrichmentandsequencingof C25.6 Genetic testing and its impact on therapeutic decision hominin nuclear DNA from sediments, and insights into human making in childhood-onset epilepsies - a study in a tertiary historyderivedfromthisDNA.Wedevelopedmethodstocapture referral centre hominin DNA even in the presence of homologous faunal DNA, andevaluatetheextentofmicrobialandfaunalDNAinourdata. AllanBayat, Christina D. Fenger,Guido Rubboli, Rikke S. Møller We applied these methods to sediment samples from Galería de las Estatuas, a site in northern Spain, and Denisova and DanishEpilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark. Chagyrskaya caves, in the Altai Mountains in southern Siberia, and identified and sequenced Neandertal nuclear DNA in Introduction:Toassessthedistributionofgeneticepilepsiesand stratigraphic layers spanning 55k - 200 thousand years ago. We accordingly adjusted medical treatment at the only tertiary then placed each sample on the Neandertal phylogenetic tree, epilepsy referral centre inDenmark. inferring the most likely divergence date from a lineage. In MaterialandMethods:Therecordsofchildrenbornbetween Estatuas we demonstrate a population transition, and associate 2006-2011andfollowedatthecentrein2015weresystematically this change with specific layers. In Chagyrskaya, all layers are analysed. Genetic approaches used were karyotyping, array and associated with a single Neandertal lineage, suggesting a more next-generation sequencing (NGS) approaches such as gene homogenous occupation. This work demonstrates that detailed panelsand whole-exomesequencing. geneticanalysesmaybepossiblefrommanymorearchaeological Results:357childrenwereidentified,however7%didnothave sitesthanwaspreviouslythought,andisparticularlyencouraging epilepsy,and 11%hadepilepsy duetoanacquired brain lesion. for time-series studies of single sites, or for sites with a sparse Thesepatientswereexcludedfromfurtheranalysis.Theremaining fossil record. 290childrenweremostfrequentlydiagnosedwithdevelopmental B.Vernot:None.E.I.Zavala:None.A.Gómez-Olivencia:None. andepilepticencephalopathies(35%),focalormultifocalepilepsy Z.Jacobs:None.V.Slon:None.F.Mafessoni:None.F.Romagné: (41 %), and generalized epilepsy (8 %). 211/290 patients None.A.Pearson:None.M.Petr:None.N.Sala:None.A.Pablos: consentedforgenetictestingaimingtofindageneticexplanation None. A. Aranburu: None. J. Bermúdez de Castro: None. E. for their illness. A genetic cause was found in half of the Carbonell: None. B. Li: None. M.T. Krajcarz: None. A.I. consented patients across 36 different genes encompassing 14 Krivoshapkin:None.K.A.Kolobova:None.M.B.Kozlikin:None. copy-number variants and 86 single-nucleotide variants. Com- M.V.Shunkov:None.A.P.Derevianko:None.B.Viola: None.S. monly affected genes affected were SCN1A and TSC1/2. Tailored Grote:None.E.Essel:None.D.L.Herráez:None.S.Nagel:None. treatment approaches were possible in half of patients with a B. Nickel: None. J. Richter: None. A. Schmidt: None. B. Peter: molecular diagnosis. Exome sequencing led to molecular diag- None. J. Kelso: None. R.G. Roberts: None. J. Arsuaga: None. M. nosis in several genetically unexplained children and identified Meyer: None. threenewcandidate genes. Conclusions: Almost 50% reached a genetic diagnose. NGS approacheshavemuchhigheryieldthananarray(detectionrate C26.2 Comprehensive PGT for patients with de novo patho- of 40% vs 7%). We shows that 1 out of 4 patients referred to a genic variants following single-molecule long read amplicon tertiary epilepsy centre can benefit from early genetic testing in sequencingbased haplotyping ordertoreceivetailored treatmentand prevent unnecessaryand potentiallyharmful diagnosticprocedures and managements. Eftychia Dimitriadou1, Yassmine Ayeb1, Tatjana Jatsenko1, Cindy A. Bayat: None. C.D. Fenger: None. G. Rubboli: None. R.S. Melotte1, Olga Tsuiko1, Hilde Brems1, Joke Allemeersch1, Silke Møller:None. Hollants1, Silke Hollants1, Sophie Debrock2, Karen Peeraer2, Ellen Denayer1,Eric Legius1, JorisRobert Vermeesch1 C26Late Breaking 1Department of Human Genetics, Centre for Human Genetics, C26.1Sediment DNAreveals Neandertal population history University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University Hospitals Leuven,Leuven University Fertility Center,Leuven, Belgium. Benjamin Vernot1, Elena I. Zavala1, Asier Gómez-Olivencia2, Zenobia Jacobs3, Viviane Slon1, Fabrizio Mafessoni1, Frédéric Preimplantationgenetictestingformonogenicdisorders(PGT-M) Romagné1, Alice Pearson1, Martin Petr1, Nohemi Sala2, Adrián aimstoselectembryos devoidof pathogenic inheritable variants Pablos2,ArantzaAranburu4,JoséMaríaBermúdezdeCastro5,Eudald from parents to the offspring. Different generic PGT methods, Carbonell6, Bo Li7, Maciej T. Krajcarz8, Andrey I. Krivoshapkin9, such as Karyomapping, haplarithmisis and OnePGT, cannot be Kseniya A. Kolobova9, Maxim B. Kozlikin9, Michael V. Shunkov9, applied for couples where one of the partners is carrying a de Anatoly P. Derevianko9, Bence Viola10, Steffi Grote1, Elena Essel1, novo pathogenic. The absence of affected close relatives David López Herráez1, Sarah Nagel1, Birgit Nickel1, Julia Richter1, entangles the process of constructing accurate haplotype using Anna Schmidt1, Benjamin Peter1, Janet Kelso1, Richard G. Roberts7, linkage analysis by Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) Juan-Luis Arsuaga2, Matthias Meyer1 located upstream and downstream of the pathogenic variant. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8786 Currentpracticesforthehandlingofcoupleswithdenovovariants as candidate mediating genes. Our study provides a roadmap to aremostlytargeted,requirethecombinationofdirectandindirect understand GWAS networks and the underlying mechanism of approachesandoftenrequiremultiplebiopsies.Toovercomethis action of GWAS variants as DNA information is passed across limitation, we developed a new method: long-range PCR and molecular processes. subsequent long read sequencing of the pathogenic variant A. Viñuela: None. A.A. Brown: None. J. Fernandez: None. M. region enabled haplotype reconstruction and imputation in the Hong:None.C.Brorsson:None.R.W.Koivula:None.S.Sharma: genome-wide haplotypes. From January 2017 until December None. D. Davtian: None. T. Dupuis: None. S. Brunak: None. P. 2019, twenty-two couples with one of the partners carrying a Franks: None. M.I. McCarthy: None. J. Adamski: None. J. pathogenic de novo variant causing a Mendelian disorder were Schwenk: None. E.Pearson: None. E.T.Dermitzakis: None. enrolledforPGT-MintheCentreforHumanGenetics,UZLeuven. Genomic DNA from the partner carrying the variant and his/her parentswasused for targeted long-readsequencing on aPacBio C26.4 Mutational bias in human spermatogonia impacts the RSII/Oxford Nanopore to impute the disease-carrying allele. anatomy ofenhancers active in neuraldevelopment Subsequently, genotyping of the prospective parents and both grandparents, and DNA amplified from blastomere or trophecto- Vera Kaiser, Lana Talmane, Yatendra Kumar, Fiona Semple, Marie derm biopsies via Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1 beadchips MacLennan, Deciphering Developmental Disorders Study, David enabled genome-wide haplotyping using haplarithmisis. Unaf- FitzPatrick,Martin Taylor, ColinSemple fected embryos were transferred. Hence, our novel approach consequentlyallowscomprehensivePGTfordenovovariantsina MRCHumanGenetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. singleworkflow. E. Dimitriadou: None. Y. Ayeb: None. T. Jatsenko: None. C. Mutation in the germline is the ultimate source of genetic Melotte:None.O.Tsuiko:None.H.Brems:None.J.Allemeersch: variation, but little is known about the influence of germline None.S.Hollants:None.S.Hollants:None.S.Debrock:None.K. chromatin structure on mutational processes. Using ATAC-seq, Peeraer: None. E. Denayer: None. E. Legius: None. J.R. we profile the open chromatin landscape of human spermato- Vermeesch:None. gonia, the most proliferative cell-type of the germline, identify- ing transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) and PRDM9- bindingsites,a subsetof whichwillinitiate meiotic recombina- C26.3Geneticanalysisofbloodmolecularphenotypesreveals tion. As expected we observe an increase in rare structural regulatory networksaffecting complex traits: aDIRECTstudy variant (SV) breakpoints at PRDM9-bound sites, implicating meiotic recombination in the generation of structural variation. Ana Viñuela1,2, Andrew A. Brown3, Juan Fernandez4, Mun-Gwan However, many germline TFBSs, such as NRF1, are also Hong5, Caroline Brorsson6, Robert W. Koivula4, Sapna Sharma7, associated with increased rates of SV breakpoints, apparently David Davtian3, Théo Dupuis3, Søren Brunak6, Paul Franks8, Mark I. independent of recombination. In addition, singleton short McCarthy4, The DIRECT Consortium, Jerzy Adamski7, Jochen insertions (>=5bp)are highly enrichedat TFBSs,particularly at Schwenk5, EwanPearson3, Emmanouil T.Dermitzakis2 sites bound by testis active TFs, and their rates correlate with those of structural variant breakpoints. Short insertions often 1University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, duplicatetheTFBSmotif,leadingtoclusteringofmotifsitesnear 2University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3University of Dundee, regulatory regions in this male-driven evolutionary process. Dundee, United Kingdom, 4University of Oxford, Oxford, United Increased mutation loads at germline TFBSs disproportionately Kingdom, 5SciLifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden, 6DTU, Copenhagen, affect neural enhancers with activity in spermatogonia, poten- Denmark, 7Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 8Lund tiallyalteringneurodevelopmentalregulatoryarchitecture.Local University, Lund,Sweden. chromatin structure in spermatogonia is thus pervasive in shaping both evolution and disease. To investigate the interplay between molecular intermediaries V. Kaiser: None. L. Talmane: None. Y. Kumar: None. F. that define the pathways from genetic variation to disease, we Semple: None. M. MacLennan: None. D. FitzPatrick: None. M. evaluated the shared genetic regulation of mRNA molecules, Taylor: None. C.Semple: None. proteins and metabolites derived from whole blood from 3,029 humandonors.Weobservedextensiveallelicheterogeneity,with 94.4% genes, 97.3% proteins and 49.2% metabolites associated C26.5 C2orf69 mutations disrupt mitochondrial function and with two or more variants, and pleiotropy, where variants were cause a multisystem human disorder with recurring associated with multiple local (cis) and distal (trans) molecular autoinflammation phenotypes. Estimates of the proportion of shared genetic regulation ranged from 66.6% for expression and proteins, Eva Lausberg1, Sebastian Gießelmann1, Joseph P. Dewulf2, Elsa 33.3% for expression and metabolites, to 27% for proteins and Wiame2, Anja Holz3, Ramona Salvarinova4, Clara Van Karnebeek5, metabolites. Compared to gene expression in a diverse set of 44 Patricia Klemm6, Kim Ohl6, Michael Mull7, Till Braunschweig8, tissues, the highest proportion of sharing of genetic regulation Joachim Weis9, Clemens Sommer10, Stephanie Demuth11, Claudia was observed for gene expression (from 81% in testis to 98% in Haase12, Claudia Stollbrink-Peschgens6, François-Guillaume Deb- brain);followedbyplasmaproteins(from20.5%spleento100%in ray13, Cecile Libioulle13, Daniela Choukair14, Prasad T. Oommen15, liverorskeletalmuscle)andplasmametabolites(from0%brainto Arndt Borkhardt15, Harald Surowy16, Dagmar Wieczorek16, Norbert 16.88% testis). Wagner6,RobertMeyer1,ThomasEggermann1,MatthiasBegemann1, To define pathways from genetic variation to disease, we Emile Van Schaftingen2, Martin Häusler6, Klaus Tenbrock6, Lambert constructed networks of genetic variants and molecular pheno- VanDenHeuvel17, MiriamElbracht1, Ingo Kurth1,Florian Kraft1 types connected by significant QTL associations. The complete network included 79,733 nodes: 15,254 genes, 373 proteins, 172 1Institute of Human Genetics, Uniklinik RWTH Aachen, Aachen, metabolites and 63,795 SNPs, of which 2,828 were known GWAS Germany,2Laboratory ofPhysiological Chemistry, de DuveInstitute, variants. One sub-network included the trans relationship UC Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3CeGaT GmbH, and Praxis für between rs149007767 and RETN, and identified GRB10 and IKZF1 Humangenetik, Tübingen, Germany, 4Division of Biochemical EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–8787 Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, British Columbia Children’s Eggermann: None. M. Begemann: None. E. Van Schaftingen: Hospital Vancouver, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 5Department of None.M.Häusler:None.K.Tenbrock:None.L.VanDenHeuvel: Pediatrics, Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, UBC, None.M. Elbracht: None. I. Kurth:None. F. Kraft: None. Vancouver, BC, Canada, 6Department of Pediatrics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 7Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen C26.6 High-throughput screening identifies suppressors of University, Aachen, Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, Medical mitochondrial fragmentation in OPA1fibroblasts Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 9Institute of Neuropathology,MedicalFaculty,RWTHUniversityHospital,Aachen, Emma Cretin1,2, Priscilla Lopes1, Elodie Vimont1, Takashi Tatsuta3,4, Germany,10InstituteofNeuropathology,UniversityMedicalCenterof Thomas Langer3,4, Anastasia Gazi5, Martin Sachse5, Patrick Yu-Wai- theJohannesGutenbergUniversityMainz,Mainz,Germany,11Praxis Man6,7,8,9, PascalReynier10,11,Timothy Wai1,2 für Humangenetik Erfurt, Erfurt, Germany, 12HELIOS Klinikum Erfurt, Ambulanz für angeborene Stoffwechselerkrankungen, Sozialpädia- 1Mitochondrial Biology Group, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UMR 3691, trischesZentrum,Erfurt,Germany,13DepartmentofHumanGenetics Paris,France,2UniversitédeParis,Paris,France,3Max-Planck-Institute - CHU de Liège, Liege, Belgium, 14Department of General Pediatrics, forBiologyofAgeing,Cologne,Germany,4CologneExcellenceCluster University Children’s Hospital, University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), Germany, 15Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and UniversityofCologne,Cologne,Germany,5UTechSUltrastructuralBio ClinicalImmunology,UniversityChildren’sHospital,MedicalFaculty, Imaging,InstitutPasteur,Paris,France,6CambridgeCentreforBrain Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 16Insti- Repair and MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Department of Clinical tute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United King- Düsseldorf, Germany, 17Department of Pediatrics, Translational dom, 7Cambridge Eye Unit, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge Metabolic Laboratory at Department of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospitals, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Moorfields Eye Radboudumc, Nijmegen,Netherlands. Hospital,London,UnitedKingdom,9UCLInstituteofOphthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 10Laboratoire Background: Deciphering the function of the many genes deBiochimieetbiologiemoléculaire,CentreHospitalierUniversitaire, previously classified as uncharacterized “open reading frame” Angers, France, 11Unité Mixte de Recherche MITOVASC, CNRS 6015, (orf) completes our understanding of cell function and its INSERMU1083, Université d’Angers, Angers,Angers, France. pathophysiology. Methods: Whole-exome sequencing, yeast 2-hybrid and Mutations in OPA1 cause autosomal dominant optic atrophy transcriptome analyses together with molecular characterization (DOA) as well as DOA+, a phenotype characterized by more areused hereto uncover thefunction oftheC2orf69 gene. severeneurologicaldeficits.OPA1deficiencycausesmitochondrial Results: We identified loss-of-function mutations in the fragmentationandalsodisruptscristae,respiration,mitochondrial uncharacterized C2orf69 gene in eight individuals with brain DNA(mtDNA)maintenance,andcellviability.Ithasnotyetbeen abnormalities involving hypomyelination and microcephaly, liver established whether phenotypic severity can be modulated by dysfunctionandrecurrentautoinflammation.C2orf69containsan genetic modifiers of OPA1. We screened the entire known N-terminal signal peptide that is required and sufficient for mitochondrial proteome (1531 genes) to identify genes that mitochondriallocalization.Consistentwithmitochondrialdysfunc- control mitochondrial morphology using a first-in-kind imaging tion, patients showed signs of respiratory chain defect and a pipeline. We identified 145 known and novel candidate genes CRISPR-Cas9 knockout cell model of C2orf69 had similar respira- whose depletion promoted elongation or fragmentation of the tory chain defects. Patient-derived cells revealed alterations in mitochondrial network in control fibroblasts and 91 In DOA+ immunological signaling pathways. Deposits of PAS-positive patient fibroblasts that prevented mitochondrial fragmentation, material in tissues from affected individuals together with including Phosphatidyl Glycerophosphate Synthase (PGS1). PGS1 decreasedglycogenbranchingenzyme1(GBE1)activityindicated depletion reduces CL content in mitochondria and rebalances anadditional impact ofC2orf69 on glycogenmetabolism. mitochondrialdynamicsinOPA1-deficientfibroblastsbyinhibiting Conclusion: Our study identifies C2orf69 as an important mitochondrial fission, which improves defective respiration, but regulator of human mitochondrial function and suggests an does not rescue mtDNA depletion, cristae dysmorphology or additionalinfluence on othermetabolic pathways. apoptoticsensitivity.Ourdatarevealthatthemultifacetedrolesof E.Lausberg:None.S.Gießelmann:None.J.P.Dewulf:None.E. OPA1 in mitochondria can be functionally uncoupled by Wiame: None. A. Holz: None. R. Salvarinova: None. C. Van modulating mitochondrial lipid metabolism, providing novel Karnebeek:None.P.Klemm:None.K.Ohl:None.M.Mull:None. insights into the cellular relevance of mitochondrial T. Braunschweig: None. J. Weis: None. C. Sommer: None. S. fragmentation. Demuth:None.C.Haase:None.C.Stollbrink-Peschgens:None. E.Cretin:None.P.Lopes:None.E.Vimont:None.T.Tatsuta: F. Debray: None. C. Libioulle: None. D. Choukair: None. P.T. None. T. Langer: None. A. Gazi: None. M. Sachse: None. P. Yu- Oommen: None. A. Borkhardt: None. H. Surowy: None. D. Wai-Man:None. P. Reynier: None. T.Wai:None. Wieczorek: None. N. Wagner: None. R. Meyer: None. T. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:3–87